- THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'S FINAL LIST OF CRITICAL MINERALS FOR 2018 AND OPPORTUNITIES TO STRENGTHEN THE UNITED STATES' MINERAL SECURITY
[Senate Hearing 115-523]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-523
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'S FINAL LIST OF CRITICAL MINERALS FOR
2018 AND OPPORTUNITIES TO STRENGTHEN THE UNITED STATES' MINERAL
SECURITY
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JULY 17, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-983
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE LEE, Utah
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
STEVE DAINES, Montana
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
Brian Hughes, Staff Director
Patrick J. McCormick III, Chief Counsel
Annie Hoefler, Professional Staff Member
Mary Louise Wagner, Democratic Staff Director
Sam E. Fowler, Democratic Chief Counsel
Rebecca Bonner, Democratic Legislative Aide
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, Chairman, and a U.S. Senator from Alaska...
1
Wyden, Hon. Ron, a U.S. Senator from Oregon......................
3
WITNESSES
Fortier, Dr. Steven M., Director, National Minerals Information
Center, U.S. Geological Survey, U.S. Department of the Interior
5
Eggert, Dr. Roderick G., Viola Vestal Coulter Foundation Chair in
Mineral Economics, Colorado School of Mines, and Deputy
Director, Critical Materials Institute, an Energy Innovation
Hub funded by the Department of Energy, Advanced Manufacturing
Office.........................................................
14
Sims, Jim, Vice President of External Affairs, NioCorp
Developments Ltd...............................................
24
Mintzes, Aaron, Senior Policy Counsel, Earthworks................
43
Sayer, Laurel, President and CEO, Midas Gold Idaho, Inc..........
50
Gregory, Greg, President, Materion Natural Resources.............
64
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
Capito, Hon. Shelley Moore:
Chart of 2017 U.S. Net Import Reliance from the USGS Mineral
Commodity Summaries 2018...................................
82
Eggert, Dr. Roderick G.:
Opening Statement............................................
14
Written Testimony............................................
16
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
98
Fortier, Dr. Steven M.:
Opening Statement............................................
5
Written Testimony............................................
7
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
93
Gregory, Greg:
Opening Statement............................................
64
Written Testimony............................................
66
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
111
Mintzes, Aaron:
Opening Statement............................................
43
Written Testimony............................................
45
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
104
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa:
Opening Statement............................................
1
Sayer, Laurel:
Opening Statement............................................
50
Written Testimony............................................
52
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
108
Sims, Jim:
Opening Statement............................................
24
Written Testimony............................................
26
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
101
Wyden, Hon. Ron:
Opening Statement............................................
3
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'S FINAL LIST OF CRITICAL MINERALS FOR
2018 AND OPPORTUNITIES TO STRENGTHEN THE UNITED STATES' MINERAL
SECURITY
----------
TUESDAY, JULY 17, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m. in
Room SD-366, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa
Murkowski, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
The Chairman. Good morning, everyone. The Committee will
come to order.
We are here today to discuss our nation's mineral security
or, as I note, the continued lack of mineral security in this
country. This is not a new issue for us. In fact, this is
actually the fifth hearing that we have held on this subject in
almost as many years.
I think, Senator Wyden, you will recall, we have been
talking about this for a while. While we continue to discuss
it, the United States' dependence on foreign minerals has
continued to increase. Last year our nation imported 100
percent of our supply of 21 minerals and at least 50 percent of
50 minerals. So to, kind of, put that in perspective, in 1997
we imported 100 percent of 11 minerals and at least 50 percent
of 26 minerals. We have just about doubled our dependence in
the past two decades alone.
These trends were ignored for a long time, but I think we
are finally starting to see some positive efforts to reverse
the tide. Last December, the President took a significant step
by issuing an Executive Order that directed multiple
departments to develop a strategy to reduce our foreign
dependence. The first piece of that order directed the
Department of the Interior (DOI) to develop a list of
``critical minerals.'' Secretary Zinke published that first
annual list back in May. It includes 35 minerals deemed to be
critical because of their economic importance, but vulnerable
to potential supply disruptions. I am pleased the Secretary and
his team at the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) put that list out
for us.
As members of Congress, we also have an opportunity to pass
legislation to address this growing vulnerability. I want to
thank those Senators who co-sponsored and supported my recent
amendment to the NDAA. We were not able to add it to the bill
on a unanimous basis, but I am certainly continuing to
encourage the NDAA conferees to retain language to boost our
mineral security.
This hearing and our opportunity with NDAA are particularly
timely based on what is happening with international trade. A
few years back, China chose to cut off Japan's supply of rare
earth elements. At that time, the U.S. had a small supply from
the Mountain Pass Mine in California, but it only produced
certain rare earths. It has since closed, so we don't even have
that as a safety net anymore.
My concern is if China ultimately responds to tariffs by
restricting our supply of rare earths, or any number of other
minerals, the U.S. could be in serious trouble.
We have heard testimony in the past about the dangers of
the concentration of supply from a handful of countries that
control the supply chain. I am hopeful that we are not about to
experience those dangers firsthand and will continue to urge
action to reduce this significant vulnerability.
That is really what this is all about, a serious but, I
think, needless vulnerability. Our mineral security does not
have to be at rock bottom. Many parts of our country, including
Alaska, are rich in mineral resources. What we lack is a sense
of urgency to ensure that our policies promote their
responsible production. We have to get away from this
``immaculate conception'' theory of your iPhone, fighter jets,
solar panels, all these things just happen, they just appear
out of thin air. We have to acknowledge the fact that many of
the materials that are used to make them actually come from the
ground. We have to dig them up, and that is an inconvenient
truth for some.
I recognize that some are reluctant to address the main
driver of this problem, and I look to our broken federal
permitting system. But I believe that we can make some
improvements, that we have to make improvements, and we must do
this all while we are protecting the environment.
The U.S. has the highest safety standards for mining
anywhere in the world. We have the experience. We have the
expertise to do it right. We need to work on our workforce. We
also live in a world where permitting delays and litigation
deter investment in our country, so we want to speak to that.
We have a very distinguished panel with us this morning to
help us understand the latest trends and what we can do about
them. We will hear from technical experts from the USGS and the
Critical Materials Institute who are following markets and
working to develop alternatives to the many minerals, which is
an important part of the conversation is, what else is out
there. We will also hear from companies who want to produce
minerals in states that strongly support their efforts. And we
will hear from material manufacturers who take minerals and
turn them into alloys for medical imaging equipment, defense
applications, and more.
So I thank you all for being here. Some days, I feel like
this is Groundhog Day all over again, we are back again, we are
talking about the same thing.
Perhaps that is just the role of this Committee. We will
continue to push on it, because it is an issue that deserves,
demands the attention and the focus that this Committee is
giving it.
With that, I turn to my friend from Oregon, Senator Wyden.
It is good to have you back here.
STATEMENT OF HON. RON WYDEN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM OREGON
Senator Wyden. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I very much
appreciate your holding this hearing. I think we both know that
reminiscing around here can just be insufferable.
I do just briefly want to note that you and I have a
history on this topic. When I was Chair, we held a hearing to
discuss our comprehensive, bipartisan bill, the Murkowski-Wyden
Critical Minerals Policy Act. That bill was smart minerals
policy because it demonstrated that efficient, predictable
management of U.S. mineral supplies and protecting America's
land and water are not mutually exclusive. That bill showed it
is possible to do both.
Now today's hearing is especially important because, in my
view, the President has embarked on an about-face on both
fronts. The Trump Administration is now promoting an unfair
policy on tariffs that means that because of his approach with
respect to tariffs on critical minerals, U.S. companies will be
needlessly hurt in their ability to compete. This is going on
while simultaneously there is an effort to gut the
environmental laws. That is a real combination. Hurting family-
wage jobs and clean air and water is, in my view, foolish even
by Washington, DC, beltway standards. Here's why: The U.S.
imports most of these key minerals, including 100 percent of
rare earth metals. The imports come mostly from China. Critical
minerals are at the heart of technologies like solar cells,
wind turbines and batteries that are moving our country to a
more efficient, lower carbon energy future. They are essential
to creating more red, white and blue jobs as the clean energy
economy already supports 6.4 million jobs across the country.
Now, as the Chair just noted, it is especially important
this morning to also talk about trade issues. As the Ranking
Democrat on the Senate Finance Committee with jurisdiction over
trade, my trade philosophy has been really simple. Make it in
America, grow it in America, add value to it in America, and
then ship it somewhere. One sentence.
Instead of that kind of approach, which means you have to
have a level playing field for our red, white and blue
manufacturers, the President is now taking a bad situation and
making it worse. Our manufacturers are already heavily
dependent on Chinese supplies and China has made it difficult
for them to obtain raw materials. Now the President wishes to
make it even harder for U.S. manufacturers with a flawed tariff
approach that would impose new U.S. tariffs on the raw
materials import, making it yet more expensive and potentially
prohibitive for U.S. tech manufacturers to make products here
at home.
In 2010, China tried to restrict the export of critical
rare earth minerals, causing both price spikes and supply
shortages across the tech sector. The United States
successfully challenged China before the World Trade
Organization and we were able to restore a measure of stability
in the market. But now, thanks to the Trump Administration,
U.S. manufacturers that depend on China for these and other
critical materials are once again in great jeopardy.
To basically have that trade policy that I just outlined,
growing things here, making things here, American manufacturers
have to have access to critical minerals. The President's trade
strategy is almost impossible to determine, but what I know for
sure is that we get a daily dose of trade chaos and that kind
of chaos, particularly here, threatens access to minerals, and
it will be American workers and American companies who suffer
for it.
Our country has come a long way in efficiently locating,
extracting, processing and using critical minerals. And I want
to come back, just as we wrap up because I see Senator Manchin
is here. I enjoyed going to West Virginia and talking about
energy policy with him.
Colleagues, this does not have to be an either/or choice.
Making sure we have markets for our companies while not harming
our land, air and water--those things are not mutually
exclusive. We can have smart policies that do both.
I think I remember, Mr. Eggert, we talked about this
already once here in this Committee.
I am very much in favor, as I know the Chair is, of
developing domestic supplies of rare earth and critical
minerals. The two of us showed, back in 2013, how to go about
doing it. We also called for a review of federal hard rock
mining regulations and permitting, which the Chair noted, and
leasing procedures.
I really look forward to this morning's discussion. We
should not have to wait another six years to come out with the
kind of smart policy that I thought the Chair and I were
striving for back in 2013.
Madam Chair, thank you and I look forward to tackling this
issue, and I know a number of others do, with you.
The Chairman. Senator Wyden, thank you and thanks for, kind
of, outlining some of the history there. You have reiterated
that there has been a multiyear effort to direct a focus on
this as a problem, recognizing that there is a level of
urgency. When there are other policies that then come on top of
what we might be seeking to do, that conflict and confound it,
we have our work cut out for us.
Senator Wyden. Sounds like a law firm, conflict and
confound.
The Chairman. Conflict and confound, yes. I am not going
there.
[Laughter.]
I want to welcome our panel this morning. I think we
recognize that we have a good group to help educate us further
on these issues, so I welcome each of you.
I would ask you to try to keep your comments to about five
minutes. Your full statements will be included as part of the
record.
I do believe that we have a couple votes that are scheduled
around 11:45 or noon, so we will be on the lookout for that. We
are going to try to get through all of your opening statements
and all of our questions.
We are joined this morning by Dr. Steven Fortier. He is the
Director at the National Minerals Information Center at USGS.
We are pleased to have you here this morning.
As Senator Wyden has noted, Dr. Eggert has been with us
before. He is with the Viola Vestal Coulter Foundation. He is
the Chair in Mineral Economics at the Colorado School of Mines
and the Deputy Director for the Critical Materials Institute.
Mr. Jim Sims is the Vice President for External Affairs at
Nio Corporation Developments Limited. We are pleased to have
you.
Aaron Mintzes is the Senior Policy Counsel at Earthworks.
We welcome you.
Ms. Laurel Sayer is the President and CEO for Midas Gold
Idaho. Welcome.
And Mr. Greg Gregory is the President for Materion Natural
Resources Incorporated.
We are pleased to have all of you with us this morning.
Dr. Fortier, if you would like to lead off the panel?
Again, thank you.
STATEMENT OF DR. STEVEN M. FORTIER, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL MINERALS
INFORMATION CENTER, U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
THE INTERIOR
Dr. Fortier. Good morning, Chairman Murkowski, Ranking, or
Senator Wyden and members of the Committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the U.S.
Geological Survey's efforts related to critical minerals.
The U.S. Geological Survey conducts scientific research on
minerals, assesses subsurface mineral resources in geological
deposits and provides statistics on the worldwide supply and
demand for minerals commodities essential to the U.S. economy
and national security.
USGS data show that domestic and global demand for mineral
commodities continues to increase. An increasingly broad range
of mineral commodities is used in consumer and national
security applications, especially those involving advanced
technologies.
While the United States remains a major mineral producer
with an estimated total of non-fuel mineral resources of $75.2
billion in 2017, our country is increasingly reliant on foreign
sources for many sources of raw and processed mineral
materials.
As the Chair noted, in 2017 the U.S. was 100 percent import
reliant for 21 mineral commodities and at least 50 percent
import reliant for 50 mineral commodities. This dependency of
the United States on foreign sources creates the potential for
strategic vulnerabilities for our economic and national
security interests as a result of adverse foreign government
actions, natural disasters or other events that can disrupt
supply of important minerals.
On September 20, 2017, President Trump issued Executive
Order 13817, a federal strategy to ensure secure and reliable
supplies of critical minerals. The Executive Order directed the
Federal Government to deliver an interagency report to include:
(1) a strategy to reduce the nation's reliance on critical
minerals; (2) an assessment of progress toward developing
critical minerals recycling and reprocessing technologies and
technological alternatives to critical minerals; (3) options
for accessing and developing critical minerals through
investment and trade with our allies and partners; (4) a plan
to improve the topographic, geologic and geophysical mapping of
the United States; and (5) recommendations to streamline
permitting and review processes related to critical minerals.
The Executive Order directed the Secretary of the Interior,
in coordination with the Department of Defense (DoD) and in
consultation with other Executive Branch agencies, to produce a
list of critical minerals. The USGS, in coordination with the
Bureau of Land Management and with broad federal interagency
input, led the development of the critical minerals list.
The Secretary of Interior published a final list of 35
critical minerals in the Federal Register on May 18, 2018. This
list was developed using multiple sources of data but started
with a screening methodology developed by the National Science
and Technology Council. Following this methodology, the U.S.
applied two principle quantitative criteria to evaluate
minerals for inclusion on the list of critical minerals: a
quantitative metric to measure country concentration of
production and a net import reliance metric which measures the
extent to which the U.S. is dependent on other countries for
its supply of the material. Both metrics are based on USGS
data.
The list of critical minerals does not include a number of
important minerals that are produced domestically in large
quantities. The U.S. is not highly reliant on imports for these
minerals and typically has a combination of domestic reserves
and reliable foreign sources adequate to meet foreseeable
domestic consumption requirements.
Pursuant to the Executive Order, the USGS is also leading
development of a plan to greatly enhance the nation's
understanding of its subsurface geological endowment of
critical mineral resources. The plan would lead to the creation
of a new generation of geological, geophysical and topographic
maps based on the newest technologies in science. The analysis
and interpretation of these new maps will also improve our
understanding of groundwater resources, energy resources,
geologic hazards and other societal needs.
Thank you for the opportunity to present on the important
subject of critical minerals. We appreciate the strong
engagement of Congress, other federal agencies and of the
coordinating roles played by the White House Office of Science
and Technology Policy, the Council on Environmental Quality and
the National Economic Council.
I will be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Fortier follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.001
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.002
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.003
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.004
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.005
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.006
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.007
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Fortier.
Dr. Eggert, welcome.
STATEMENT OF DR. RODERICK G. EGGERT, VIOLA VESTAL COULTER
FOUNDATION CHAIR IN MINERAL ECONOMICS, COLORADO SCHOOL OF
MINES, AND DEPUTY DIRECTOR, CRITICAL MATERIALS INSTITUTE, AN
ENERGY INNOVATION HUB FUNDED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY,
ADVANCED MANUFACTURING OFFICE
Dr. Eggert. Good morning, Chairman Murkowski, Senator
Wyden, members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify once again before this Committee.
As you noted in your introduction, I wear two hats this
morning. I'm a mineral economist at Colorado School of Mines,
and I also am Deputy Director of something called the Critical
Materials Institute, an existing federal initiative related to
mineral security.
This morning I will devote my oral testimony to two aspects
of the second theme of the hearing, not the critical minerals
list, but rather, opportunities for enhancing U.S. mineral
security.
I begin by talking about what I think of are five essential
roles for the Federal Government in this space and then second,
I will talk about the Critical Materials Institute.
So with respect to five roles for government. First,
there's ensuring raw materials for military needs. Second,
facilitating undistorted international trade. Third,
establishing a regulatory framework for efficient, domestic
development of mineral resources that appropriately balances
national needs for minerals with environmental protection,
worker health and safety and the interests of local
communities. Fourth, collecting and disseminating information
and conducting strategic analysis on which both private and
public decisions can be made. And fifth and finally, fostering
technological innovation through education and research
throughout the material supply chain which, in turn, leads me
to the second topic of my written and oral testimony, the
Critical Materials Institute, an existing federal initiative in
this area.
The Critical Materials Institute, or CMI, is a multi-
institutional, multi-disciplinary consortium funded through
Department of Energy's (DOE) Advanced Manufacturing Office and
led by the DOE's Ames Laboratory. We're a consortium of
national labs, universities and companies. Our mission at CMI
is to create technological options for assuring material supply
chains through three types of complimentary research, research
aimed at diversifying and enhancing primary production,
research aimed at reducing wastes through improved
manufacturing efficiency, recycling and reuse and research
aimed at using less by developing substitute materials for the
critical minerals. CMI is active in all three areas. I should
note that we are not involved in the upstream activities of
geoscience research or mining, so we really start with mineral
processing and extractive metallurgy.
We just completed our first five years of activity. We grew
out of the 2010 and 2011 DOE Critical Materials Strategy
document. To date, our principal focus has been on rare earths
with a modest amount of activity focused on lithium. We have
filed 78 invention disclosures, filed 50 patent applications,
received six patents and received two R&D 100 awards.
We've had 12 innovations adopted by U.S. industry through
licenses or other mechanisms. Examples include membrane solvent
extraction for rare earth separations, 3D printing of magnets,
rare earth magnets, cost-effective process for recycling rare
earth magnets from hard disk drives and developing replacement
materials for the rare earths, europium and terbium in
florescent lighting. So a combination of, in effect,
technological innovations to produce more, waste less and use
less.
As we enter our sixth year, we're excited to continue our
work in linking early stage, applied research with industrial
and societal needs. We're expanding our set of materials. We're
engaging with a wider range of industrial partners. We're
working to enhance our activities in education and training.
In closing, let me cite, go back to a point I raised at the
beginning, technology development is one of government's
essential roles and the Critical Materials Institute is one
existing federal initiative that has accelerated delivery of
technological solutions to the marketplace.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Eggert follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.008
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.009
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.010
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.011
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.012
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.013
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.014
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.015
The Chairman. Dr. Eggert, thank you.
Mr. Sims, welcome.
STATEMENT OF JIM SIMS, VICE PRESIDENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS,
NIOCORP DEVELOPMENTS LTD.
Mr. Sims. Chair Murkowski, Ranking Member Cantwell and
other members of the Committee, thank you.
I'm Jim Sims with NioCorp Developments.
NioCorp, we're a small business, but we're on a very large
mission. That mission is to bring into commercial operation a
breakthrough critical minerals mine and processing facility in
the State of Nebraska.
Why do I use the word breakthrough in this project? Well,
because it's very unique. We're going to produce multiple
critical minerals, and we're going to produce only critical
minerals at this mine in Nebraska.
The niobium and scandium and titanium that we're going to
make, in addition to being critical minerals, are all used in a
variety of commercial applications and a number of defense and
military applications. All of those, the U.S. is overwhelmingly
reliant on foreign nations for the supplies of each of those
three elements.
I would also note, I think this project is unique because
of the way in which we've designed it to minimize and limit
and, in some cases, eliminate planned impacts to the
environment. I'll talk briefly about those, Madam Chair.
Our flagship mineral is niobium. Many of you remember
niobium, I think, on your period table from your high school
chemistry classes. Well, you will soon.
[Laughter.]
Almost everybody who came to this hearing today, whether
you came in a car or a cab or a truck or a bus or a train or
like me, in a commercial jetliner, you experienced some of the
benefits of niobium in the super alloys and the high strength
steel that now goes into almost all of those vehicles and
systems today.
How much of that niobium that you experienced today, was
made in the U.S.? Zero. We're 100 percent reliant on foreign
nations for niobium. The Elk Creek project will turn that
around. We're going to put the U.S. in a position of being a
producer of niobium for the first time in U.S. history.
Our second critical mineral is called scandium. It's also
an element on the periodic table. What niobium does for steel,
scandium does for aluminum, strengthens aluminum to a great
degree. Scandium has applications, a variety of applications,
in both commercial and defense. The U.S. uses it in a number of
different military technologies.
How much of the scandium that we use today is made in the
U.S.? Zero. One hundred percent reliant on foreign imports. The
U.S. will not only emerge as a scandium producer with the
Nebraska project, the Elk Creek project, we will emerge as a
scandium superpower. And I say that because there's only 15
metric tons made everywhere in the world today for scandium.
Nebraska is going to come online and make 100 metric tons per
year.
I think our third mineral is also important. That's
titanium. We are about 91 percent reliant on titanium mineral
concentrates. So we're going to help the U.S. increase our
production of that as well.
This is also a breakthrough of a very unique project
because of how we've worked on the front end of the project. We
spent a little more money, we spent a little more time to try
to limit the environmental impacts of this project. Most mines
of this type have to go through a number of federal permits,
with NEPA processes. We've been able to limit our, the need for
us to go through a lot of these because we have limited impacts
on the front end.
For example, we have avoided the need to go through a full
NEPA analysis for the 404 permit that we have now in hand from
the Army Corps of Engineers. And we did that by avoiding any
permanent impacts to waters of the U.S. It was not easy to do.
We had to do some metallurgical innovations that reduce the
amount of chemicals we had to bring in. That then reduced our
expected waste stream. It reduced the size of our tailings
basin. It did a lot of things. It allowed us to avoid those
impacts in the first place.
Now not all projects are similarly situated and can do what
we did. It makes us a little unusual. But that helps us move
forward faster. It also reduces the risk, the permitting risk,
that investors look at when they look to capitalize these
projects. That helps our project go forward a lot faster.
Finally, I just want to note in summary, Madam Chair, that
scandium in particular, I think, is a very exciting element. It
represents or it presents revolutionary opportunities to
decrease the weight of automobiles, commercial airliners, in
particular. That will increase fuel efficiency pretty
dramatically and, of course, reduce emissions as well. We need
more scandium. We don't have it. It's critical and strategic to
the U.S.
I also just want to note quickly that this project enjoys
tremendous ``local support'' in Nebraska. That's largely due to
our local landowners with whom we have partnerships. We're all
on private land. We have agreements with all them for this
project. That's usually helpful.
Governor Ricketts has been very, very helpful, all the
members of the Nebraska Congressional delegation, folks in the
legislature. We just--we're gratified by that support.
I'll also mention finally, that not only is that support
just nice to have, it really is a requirement for a mine like
ours to get up and running, to have that local support and
we're glad we have it.
Madam Chair, thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sims follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.016
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.017
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.018
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.019
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.020
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.021
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.022
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.023
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.024
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.025
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.026
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.027
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.028
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.029
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.030
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.031
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.032
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Sims.
Mr. Mintzes, welcome.
STATEMENT OF AARON MINTZES, SENIOR POLICY COUNSEL, EARTHWORKS
Mr. Mintzes. Good morning. Thank you, Madam Chair, Ranking
Member Wyden and members of the Committee for the opportunity
to testify before you on opportunities to strengthen the United
States' mineral security.
My name is Aaron Mintzes. I'm with Earthworks. We're a non-
profit dedicated to protecting communities and the environment
from the impacts of mineral and energy development while
seeking sustainable solutions.
In December 2017 President Trump issued his critical
minerals Executive Order (EO). The policy recommendations
flowing from that EO are due on the President's desk this
November.
We are deeply concerned about any critical minerals policy
that attempts to limit the scope of environmental reviews or
undermines public input in our government's mining decisions.
We understand the metals are important and used in the
manufacture of items we use every day, including minerals
needed for renewable energies. Yet, simply because we designate
a mineral as critical does not mean we need more mining. This
is particularly important given the harms and costs mining has
on communities and the environment, extracting these minerals
from mines damages water quality frequently, forever.
Securing our supply of critical minerals, as Mr. Wyden
noted, often has little to do with domestic mining. Supply
chains, refining and product manufacturing occur globally. A
number of our allied countries have both critical mineral
supply and refining capacity. The best way to ensure a reliable
supply of critical minerals is for Dr. Eggert's job, public and
private partnerships, the sectors divest and research,
conservation, recycling and substitution.
DoD has a national defense stockpile and, of course, the
Committee, as the Chairman noted, has passed legislation with
provisions improving critical minerals research, recycling,
workforce training and supply chain management.
Securing our critical mineral supply does not require
weakening of any of our environmental laws. Section 3(d) of the
President's EO directs agencies toward, ``streamlining leasing
and permitting processes.'' Permit streamlining is tantamount
to removing environmental and community protections. We worry
the Administration may justify limiting public comment, tribal
consultation, environmental study and judicial review because
critical minerals have defense or other important applications.
The Administration has added to these concerns with the
Critical Minerals Secretarial Order and CEQ's proposed NEPA
regulations revisions. For nearly 50 years, NEPA, the National
Environmental Policy Act, has provided certainty and
predictability through a transparent process well understood by
governments, permit applicants and affected communities. It
ensures that Americans can take part in the review and
development of projects affecting our social, economic and
environmental health and it works. That's what Mr. Sims just
said, it works. Public input has improved agency consideration
of project alternatives and resulted in better environmental
outcomes. Ultimately, NEPA is a source of strength and
predictability. It helps lay the foundation for a mining
company's social license to operate which gives domestic mining
a distinct competitive advantage.
Other nations like China, without this longstanding
commitment to public input in mining decisions, remain
relatively undesirable destinations for mining investment. NEPA
lowers investment risk as compared to jurisdictions without a
similar public outreach process. Limiting NEPA or reducing
meaningful public participation could actually undermine
investment by revoking the industry's social license to
operate.
Existing law already creates the kind of regulatory
certainty mining companies seek. Mining is risky and mining
companies crave that certainty. The 1872 Mining Law statute is
still on the books from our Manifest Destiny era of westward
expansion, still governs domestic mining. Under the 1872 law
Americans have no choice in balancing mining with any competing
land use. Federal land managers have little or no discretion
with whether to permit a mine. And so, if a permittee seeks
certainty on public lands, it doesn't get much more certain
than that.
Besides, any critical mineral policy must also link with
our rapid transition to 100 percent renewable energy. Critical
minerals play an important role in our nation's emerging
renewable energy industry and responsible sourcing of these
minerals means clean energy can truly be clean.
Mining companies interested in getting on the ground floor
and making clean energy clean may seek certification with the
Initiative Responsible Mining Assurance, or IRMA, a multi-
stakeholder mining certification that improves social and
environmental performance and creates value for mines. The
voluntary IRMA process provides investors, governments and
mining impacted communities with a seal of approval that
follows responsible practices. The standard is iterative, can
be adapted to incentivize from the waste management practices
that capture some of the byproducts on the critical minerals
list. The private sector can help drive innovation. Honda
expects to recycle 80 percent of their rare earths from some of
their batteries, Siemens plans to recycle rare earths from some
of their electric motor vehicles, and Congress and the
Administration should focus their efforts on increasing funding
research for the Critical Materials Institute. West Virginia
has developed a pilot project that designed to harvest rare
earth minerals from waste piles generated during abandoned coal
mine reclamation.
Finally, conservation, efficiency, recycling, substitution
will each do more to ensure available supply of critical
minerals than any policy that limits community input in mining
decisions. The United States should embrace innovation, demand
best practices and lead the world in responsibly securing our
critical mineral supply while protecting our precious water
resources.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mintzes follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.033
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.034
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.035
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.036
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.037
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Mintzes.
Ms. Sayer, welcome.
STATEMENT OF LAUREL SAYER, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
MIDAS GOLD IDAHO, INC.
Ms. Sayer. Chairman Murkowski and Senator Wyden and
distinguished members of the Committee, my name is Laurel Sayer
and I am President and CEO of Midas Gold Idaho. I appreciate
the chance to come before you today to talk about our project,
the Stibnite Gold Project.
Once permitted Stibnite will be a producer of both critical
minerals and precious metals. We will also restore a historic
mining legacy site and provide jobs in rural Idaho.
During World War II, Stibnite was essential for the war
effort and produced more tungsten and antimony than any other
mine in the U.S. and through on until the end of the Korean
War. Both were critical minerals for defense. Ninety percent of
the domestic antimony output and 40 percent of the domestic
tungsten came from Stibnite, Idaho. However, operations at
Stibnite did not go through the rigorous regulatory oversight
and the site was left abandoned and in need of repair. This is
where we come in.
Midas Gold has identified 4.5 million ounces of gold and
100 million pounds of antimony reserves remaining at Stibnite.
In September of 2016 we delivered a Plan of Restoration and
Operations, or PRO, to the Forest Service, our lead agency, to
begin the NEPA permitting process. We designed the PRO with
final closure in mind to ensure that the ESA-listed fish are
reconnected to native spawning grounds that have been blocked
for 80 years.
The PRO will remove, reprocess, repurpose and safely store
millions of tons of spent ore and tailings left by prior
operators and also repair the largest source of sedimentation
in the East Fork of the South Fork of the Salmon River. The PRO
laid out this radical idea that mining could be used to restore
the environment.
We spent well over $20 million developing this plan right
here which was summarized in a 486-page PRO and provided the
regulators 21,564 pages, or 2.3 gigabytes, of data. Our initial
planning was exhaustive.
The Forest Service must approve our plan of restoration and
operations and review the project impacts pursuant to NEPA. And
as you can see from our visual, we must receive over 50 permits
and approvals before we can begin construction and operation.
My testimony is not to be misunderstood as advocacy for any
weakening of environmental laws that play a part in permitting
our project; however, since delivering our plan to the
regulatory agencies almost two years ago, we have spent an
additional $4 million paying for a Forest Service project
manager and their third-party contractor. And in the last two
years we spent $11 million on meeting those additional demands
related to permitting.
The Committee can see from this visual, how far we have
gone under NEPA and where we have left to go. Our NEPA schedule
has slipped three times.
Each quarter that we fail to meet our deadline costs us
$1.5 million in permitting costs payable to the Forest Service
and their contractor and another $2.6 million for our personnel
and consultants. To date, we have invested $36 million in
presenting our project to regulators and responding to their
queries. And yet, we are still two years away from publication
of a Record of Decision (ROD). At the current rate of
expenditure, the amount will almost double before a ROD is
issued. These are substantial costs to incur even before a
shovel goes in the ground.
Neither Congress in the original Act nor courts which have
reviewed NEPA challenges require perfection. The hallmark of
NEPA review is that federal agency decision-makers should have
before them a reasonable amount of information to make a
reasonably informed decision. There are steps that can be taken
to make this process work better.
The Federal Government should bring everyone around the
same permitting table, including the applicant, but often this
is not the case and a simple example illustrates this. Our
regulators wanted us to analyze an alternative location for our
tailing storage facility which request the Forest Service
communicated to us. We spent considerable time and dollars
internally and externally with consultants to evaluate the
alternate location, prepare a written report and analysis and
then submitted it to the agencies. We later found out that the
original requesting regulator was talking about a different
location and the whole process had to be repeated. If we are in
the same room working together many unrealistic, uneconomic or
technically infeasible project alternatives can be quickly
eliminated saving everyone time and money.
The same holds true with ESA. The earlier project
proponents and federal agencies can resolve issues before they
become a problem. We are, as a Fish and Wildlife official told
me, would be smart from the start.
Madam Chairman and distinguished members of this Committee,
we will clean up the Stibnite site as we execute our PRO and
leave this magnificent part of our state better off. It's the
right thing to do because we are blessed to live and work in
our beautiful home State of Idaho, and we want to keep it that
way, so does our state legislature and a joint resolution
supporting our project is attached to my testimony.
Again, I do not advocate for overlooking any required legal
element of environmental review or reducing standards but
future employment of Idahoans and environmental restoration
hinges in the balance with each passing day while our project
is undergoing environmental review.
Permitting can always be more efficient which is what we in
the mining industry believe Congress intended in the first
place through its environmental laws.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sayer follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.038
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.039
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.040
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.041
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.042
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.043
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.044
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.045
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.046
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.047
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.048
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.049
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Sayer.
Mr. Gregory.
STATEMENT OF GREG GREGORY, PRESIDENT,
MATERION NATURAL RESOURCES
Mr. Gregory. Good morning, Chairman Murkowski, Senator
Wyden and distinguished members of the Committee.
Thank you for inviting me to participate in this hearing on
the Department of the Interior's Final List of Critical
Minerals.
My name is Greg Gregory. I am President of Materion Natural
Resources, and I work in Utah at the only domestic mine for
production of beryllium.
My parent company, Materion Corporation, is a publicly
traded company founded in 1931 and headquartered in Cleveland,
Ohio, with 2,600 employees and 33 locations worldwide. In
addition to mining and refining beryllium, Materion works with
25 of the 35 critical minerals listed by the Department of
Interior.
Materion products are used in everything from delicate
sensors found in medical devices and implants to the harsh
environments found in mining and oil and gas exploration.
The product we're known for, beryllium, is the only mineral
listed by the Department of Defense as both strategic and
critical.
Materion strongly urges a whole of government policy
approach to the issue of minerals and material security. We
also recommend that the government encourage production from
domestic sources by buying American critical minerals and
components made from American critical minerals, especially in
the defense and nuclear supply chains.
These policies broadly align with initiatives already
approved or under consideration within the Executive Branch.
Senior government officials consistently understand the need
for a secure, affordable supply chain for strategic and
critical minerals such as beryllium but the lack of a clear
governmentwide policy concerning critical minerals has, at
times, led to mistakes at the operational levels that have
threatened success of the broader strategy.
Beryllium, a space-age metal that is very strong and light
with unique properties, enables high-tech military sensors,
nuclear devices, mammography imaging and computers to name a
few.
My company operates the only mine-to-mill supply chain for
beryllium in the world and is the only company that can say its
beryllium products are fully made in America.
For beryllium metal or high beryllium content materials,
the market is driven primarily by government-funded
applications. For low beryllium content materials such as
copper-beryllium alloys, the markets are driven primarily by
commercial applications. The two sides of our businesses are
closely related.
Materion is glad the government has taken steps to secure
beryllium supplies including the creation of the Pebble Plant
in Ohio.
Between 2005 and 2011, Materion partnered with the
government through the Defense Production Act Title III Office
to build the first beryllium metal production facility in the
United States in more than 50 years. Materion continues to work
with the government, especially within the Departments of
Defense and Energy, to ensure that beryllium remains available
for government needs.
The successful mine-to-market strategy shows how a
government program can successfully identify and address a
materials vulnerability and turn it into a source of strength
for the American military and for American industry.
With that being said, we see several challenges in critical
minerals policies, especially for beryllium. Regulatory
initiatives in Europe and the U.S., such as the 2017 OSHA
standard, continue to threaten Materion's ability to produce
beryllium. The OSHA standard was recently revised pending final
rulemaking following litigation brought by Materion and other
groups, but we remain concerned until the rule is completed.
Within the Department of Defense, which generally
recognizes the importance of a secure beryllium supply chain,
there are individual program offices that undermine the
Department's overall strategy by trying to source beryllium
from non-allied, foreign sources. These regulations and
procurement decisions do little or nothing to improve safety,
but they will have significant effects on security for the U.S.
military and the wider U.S. industrial base.
Critical minerals, such as beryllium, are key to both
economic and military strength. A whole of government approach
to security of supply, including a review of regulatory
policies, domestic sourcing legislation, investment in critical
in item uses and industrial technologies should be considered
to ensure access to these minerals in the future.
Materion is glad to see that both Congress and the
Administration are engaging with these concerns in a realistic
and forthright manner and we look forward to supplying the U.S.
Government and consumer needs for years to come.
Thank you and I look forward to your question.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gregory follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.050
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.051
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.052
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Gregory, and thank you, each
of you for your comments this morning. Good panel.
Dr. Fortier, let me begin with you.
You have indicated that when the list was put together that
it was a cooperative collaborative. You had, obviously it is
USGS, BLM, you have the interagency which, I think, is
important. I further understand that there is to be a report,
basically an action report, that will be delivered to the
President in August. Is that correct?
Dr. Fortier. I believe the date is now September.
The Chairman. September.
Dr. Fortier. Yes.
The Chairman. Okay, so we are pushing the date back.
My question to you is, we now have a list.
Dr. Fortier. Yes.
The Chairman. There are some who argue that the list isn't
comprehensive enough. They did not get their mineral on. Some
have generated a little bit of controversy. Uranium is clearly
in that category.
But a couple questions. Is this a list that will evolve? In
other words, will we see updates to the list? What can we
expect out of this action report?
Because it is one thing to have a list, and I want to talk
about whether or not there is an advantage to being on the list
if you are designated as a critical mineral, but what is the
process going forward and what might we expect in September in
terms of action plan?
Dr. Fortier. Yes. Well, to address your first question
about whether the list is final. It is not our intention to put
out a list that is final. It's final for this first phase, but
the intention is to revisit this periodically. The mineral
criticality is----
The Chairman. Like annually or----
Dr. Fortier. We haven't decided on the exact timing yet.
So, we update the NSTC screening methodology annually. The
Europeans update their critical mineral list every three years.
So there are different schools of thoughts about how you should
approach this.
The Chairman. Yes.
Dr. Fortier. We haven't agreed on that yet.
But this is an issue that does evolve as our import
reliance changes, as country concentration changes. We need to
take those factors into account as well as additional, new
applications. So it's not a static process. It will be renewed
periodically.
You know, in terms of the next steps and what is to come
out of this effort. The Department of Commerce is leading the
effort to develop a full report to comply with the different
directives in the Executive Order that will address all the
different aspects of critical mineral issues and strategies,
including trade with reliable partners, options for
substitution, needs for improved recycling, the improvement of
the U.S. mapping of the geology and geophysics and topography
of the United States, as well as addressing permitting issues.
So the report is intended to lay out options for the
Administration to consider to address these perceived strategic
vulnerabilities that are at risk.
The Chairman. Let me ask then about that and recognizing
that it is not just identifying the minerals, it is looking to
those technologies that can allow for a level of reuse or
alternatives. It is the whole package.
The Critical Minerals Institute that Dr. Eggert is involved
with, do you derive good benefit from the research that comes
from them?
Dr. Fortier. Yes, they clearly are focused on a different
part of the supply chain than the USGS is. We're more focused
on mining and mineral processing, but it's complementary.
The Chairman. And that is, I mean, looking at what the
mission and Dr. Eggert, what you have outlined, it seems that
within DOI there is a clear understanding. We have a
vulnerability when it comes to our critical minerals. We need
to identify them. We need to have an action plan. We need to
work on certain aspects of permitting and you have that view.
Within the Department of Energy, here is a very real role,
and yet I understand that in the 2019 budget request the
Administration intends to eliminate the funding and ultimately
close the Critical Minerals Institute at DOE. Do we have a
disconnect between what is going on in DOI and DOE, Dr. Eggert?
Dr. Eggert. There are competing proposals, I think it's
fair to say.
As I understand it, as you say, the President's request
zeros out the Critical Materials Institute but my understanding
also is that both versions of the Energy et cetera minibus,
both the House and the Senate, include another year of funding
for the Critical Materials Institute----
The Chairman. I appreciate that. It sounds like a very
politically correct answer.
But I guess I want to know that we are doing this on all
fronts because as we develop this strategy and really a whole
of government approach, which I think is the right approach,
involve everybody because it goes across agencies. Ms. Sayer
has indicated the issues that she has working with Forest
Service. Mr. Gregory, you are with the Department of Defense.
We all have to be in this together.
Senator Wyden is very concerned on the trade in the
commerce side of it. But it seems to me that we clearly have an
application for the research and development that will go on.
We will not be able to produce everything on our own. So, how
we can reuse, how we can just be smarter with that, I think, is
something that we should focus on.
Let me turn to Senator Wyden.
Senator Wyden. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Dr. Eggert, let me start with you.
As I indicated, a few years ago, Senator Murkowski and I
had a bipartisan bill and it was good for industry, it was good
for companies as it related to supply, and it didn't unravel,
for example, protection for water and communities and places
that would get hurt by reckless policies. Right now, the
Administration is looking at policies that move us away from
both of those objectives, particularly on the issue of tariffs.
What I have always said is they ought to be part of the
trade tool kit, but they have to make sense. It seems to me the
President now is embarking on shooting American manufacturers
in the foot by arbitrarily imposing tariffs on the raw
materials that our companies need. For example, this month the
Administration proposed $200 billion in tariffs on China,
including virtually all critical materials. In your view, what
kind of effect would that have on the ability of our companies
to get access to the materials they need to be in the
manufacturing business?
Dr. Eggert. Clearly, imposing tariffs on imported
intermediate products containing critical materials will
increase costs for U.S. manufacturers which, for those that
compete in international markets, will reduce their
competitiveness.
Senator Wyden. So it would be your view, having looked at
this, and you are an economist so you do this for a living,
that the Trump approach is going to harm the ability of
American manufacturers to compete against others around the
world who do not have tariffs imposed on their raw materials?
Dr. Eggert. As I've testified previously and again today,
I'm a strong proponent of undistorted international trade and
multilateral approaches toward reducing tariffs.
Senator Wyden. So, is that a yes?
I mean, I am talking about being able to tell an American
company, and I have consistently been for trade. One out of
five jobs in my state revolves around trade. The trade jobs
often pay better.
But I am not for ill-advised policies. I think these
tariffs are. Yes or no, will these tariffs hurt the ability of
our U.S. companies to compete with people around the world who
do not have tariffs imposed on their raw materials? I think
that is a yes or no.
Dr. Eggert. Well, the answer is yes.
Senator Wyden. Okay, thank you.
Let me ask you one other question with respect to Chinese
market manipulation of the market for rare earths, because this
has already been shown to wreak havoc on our production.
Mountain Pass, a rare earth mine in California with the
potential to reinvigorate U.S. rare earth production, had to
declare bankruptcy in 2015 and they were basically put out of
business because of Chinese market manipulation. This was a
mine that was relicensed. It met the Murkowski-Wyden objective,
our lodestar. It met the U.S. environmental standards, and we
showed production and environmental protection are not mutually
exclusive. Now Mountain Pass has been bought by a Chinese
company which is going to control production.
What effect would a mine like Mountain Pass have on U.S.
domestic production if it really got to operate in a free and
undistorted market?
Dr. Eggert. Two quick responses.
One, Mountain Pass could be an important starting point to
reestablishing a U.S., or at least North American, supply chain
for rare earths.
Second, I think it's incorrect to say that it was purchased
by a Chinese company. That Chinese company has, I think, eight
or nine percent ownership of the equity in the company, but
it's a non-voting----
Senator Wyden. So who is going to control production?
Dr. Eggert. It will be the owners overall, the vast
majority of which is non-Chinese.
Senator Wyden. Alright.
So you think Mountain Pass though, from the standpoint of
the U.S. domestic market, really could make a difference in
terms of rejuvenating a free and undistorted market?
That is my basic, kind of----
Dr. Eggert. It could be a very important starting point,
yes, for an extensive supply chain of rare earths.
Senator Wyden. Well, I want it understood that I also
consider Chinese market manipulation to be a serious problem,
and I will look forward to continuing that discussion with you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Wyden.
Senator Daines.
Senator Daines. Chair Murkowski, Senator Wyden, thank you
for holding this hearing.
I am going to start this conversation by showing you my
iPhone. Many of the minerals that we are talking about here
today can be found in everyday devices like an iPhone. In fact,
many of them we are 100 percent dependent on.
For example, manganese, tantalum, vanadium, gallium, all
100 percent dependent on imports; bismuth, 96 percent;
tungsten, 50 percent. The point is these minerals are critical
for our consumer economy. They are also critical for our
defense industry. I will talk about that more later.
In fact, when we talk about renewable energy, we often
forget what it takes to develop energy storage for renewables.
Critical minerals in battery storage technology: manganese, 100
percent dependent on imports; indium, 100 percent; cobalt, 72
percent; aluminum even, 61 percent.
We talk in this Committee a lot about reducing our
dependence and our allies' dependence on Russia and other
countries for oil and natural gas, but I believe we are not
focusing enough on our dependence on critical minerals.
I gave the examples of my phone and energy storage, but it
also affects our defense infrastructure. In fact, missile
defense, aircraft, communications technology, even ammunition,
all contain these critical minerals. It is important that we do
not have to rely on Russia and on China for minerals and
materials, that we can produce them right here in the United
States, including my home State of Montana.
This is not only a major national security issue but also
has environmental consequences. Many states in the U.S., like
Montana, have tough, and rightfully so, environmental standards
leading to the cleanest and safest mining industry in the
world. However, other countries do not have these same
standards. I lived in China for five and a half years working
for Proctor and Gamble. I saw it firsthand. These countries are
not known for their regard for the environment. In fact, I have
a chart right here that shows globally-sourced mineral
commodities used in the Navy Seal gear. Whether it is night
vision goggles or there are global positioning systems, whether
it is their M4 carbine, they are all right here. In fact, it
takes me back to my days studying as a chemical engineer. It
gives you the periodic charts here again. It is kind of nice.
Let me start by asking Mr. Sims a question.
Do you agree the U.S. has better mining practices than
countries like China, India, Rwanda, Russia and South Africa?
Mr. Sims. Senator, I haven't done mineral development in
any of those countries. I focus my efforts here in the states.
I think it would be hard to argue, however, that the U.S.
generally does not have stricter environmental laws, stricter
environmental practices and processes that we have to go
through to get permits.
And it's also important, as I mentioned in my testimony, to
have support from the local community in which you intend to
operate. If you don't have, sometimes we call it a social
license to operate, if you don't have that, you've got a lot of
problems.
So I think the U.S. is the best place in the world to do
mineral development in terms of the resources we have. It is
difficult and it does take probably longer to go through the
permitting processes for some mines. It's not the case for us,
but for many it is.
There's another side of that coin and that is that you have
to go to a really high level in order to earn those permits.
That's probably a good thing.
Senator Daines. So we are going to talk about the other
side of that coin here next.
I have a question of Ms. Sayer.
As you describe, the lengthy permitting battle your company
is going through, it reminds of projects in Montana like Rock
Creek and Mountain Ore that have invested millions of dollars,
a decade of work and are still are not approved to begin
mining. These are locally supported. I can't tell you how much
the local community is pleading for this permitting to be over
with. This is up in the northwest corner of my state.
In fact, I had dinner with a family several years ago that
said, Steve, this is poverty with a view. It is beautiful
country, but we lack the jobs. High unemployment rates, lost
our tax base, can't fund our teachers, schools and
infrastructure. These are locally supported, scientifically
driven, and would bring huge economic benefits while also
making the United States more secure. However, we are seeing
huge delays. And even when the permits are given, we have to
deal with lengthy litigation from these fringe, extreme
environmental groups.
Ms. Sayer, what could Congress or the Administration do
today to speed up safe, locally supported mining projects?
Ms. Sayer. Thank you, Senator.
Yes, I believe that the single most thing that we could do
would be to let the applicant proponent in the room.
I testified earlier that we have gone through mountains and
piles of money as we have one, as we have stood outside the
door and slipped notes underneath the door to our federal
agencies answering their questions, where if we could be in the
room, if we could, if they could give us a phone call, if we
could discuss issues and we could sit around a table and
discuss the issues, answer their questions, we would be much,
it would move the process forward much quicker.
We have gone through a process of RFAIs, which is Requests
For Additional Information. We have--the Forest Service has
sent us requests, over 100 of them. I have a whole list of them
right here. They have sent us these requests. They send it. It
takes a week to get the request in writing. We respond and then
they say, no, that really isn't the question we asked. Could
you answer it this way or this way? And then we respond. Where
if we were in the same room, instead of outside the door, and
we could be there and talk directly with them and answer the
questions. We're not asking for a decision. We're not asking
for collusion or anything like that. We just need to answer the
questions. We're the ones that have invested the $20 million in
the project, we have gone and analyzed every possible
alternative we could, so we're the experts on our project. So
being able to be in the room because we, as well in Idaho, have
a strong social license.
Senator Daines. That sounds like a pretty reasonable ask,
Ms. Sayer.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and thanks to
all of you for being here today.
I was very pleased to see last December when President
Trump issued Executive Order 13817, which is a federal strategy
to secure monopoly supplies of critical minerals. The fact that
China maintains a near monopoly on the critical components
needed for our defense system is beyond comprehension, and the
ramifications of their dominance of this industry could have
widespread implications.
Let me give you a few figures that I have and see if you
all have any comments on them.
The nation experienced the danger of such extensive foreign
dependence when China began reducing its exports in 2006. The
average cost of rare earth imports from China rose 2,432
percent from 2002 to 2011 and by 723 percent in 2011 alone, and
demand is still increasing. In 2017, the value of rare earth
compounds and metals imported by the United States increased by
27 percent.
What I am getting to is that we have been, for the last
seven, eight years at WVU, NETL, the National Energy Technology
Lab, have been--we have already mined the coal. We already have
the waste products and all the responsibilities we have
environmentally to clean this up. Knowing that we can extract
these rare earth minerals from something we have already done
is what they have been testing.
Today or tomorrow, they are going to host a ribbon cutting
ceremony to commission its pilot scale separation plant for
rare earth elements from coal and coal byproducts such as acid
mine drainage from the Appalachian Basin.
There is so much more that we can be doing and, speaking
hypothetically, can you describe for the Committee what we
could expect to happen should the Chinese decide to place a
choke hold, not even wanting to sell it to us, just basically
through these so-called trade wars we might be entering into,
how that would impact everyday consumers across the country and
in my State of West Virginia?
Whoever wants to start can start, and we will chime right
in.
Dr. Eggert.
Dr. Eggert. A trade war would be unfortunate to say the
least.
Senator Manchin. I mean, they have a big chunk of a
bargaining tool right now if they want to use it. Correct?
Dr. Eggert. Absolutely.
Senator Manchin. What does it do to the tax?
Dr. Eggert. More tariffs or a cutoff would have significant
negative consequences for U.S. users. One hopes that U.S. users
have working inventories that appropriately reflect the supply
chain risks that they face at the moment.
In the private sector, there would be negative----
Senator Manchin. Would it be devastating to our defense,
for our Defense Department? We rely on so much of this.
Dr. Eggert. Clearly, there could be implications for our
military and essential civilian needs. I know there is a
portion, there are people within DoD, that focus on raw
material security and I have to say, I don't know the details.
Senator Manchin. Okay. Dr. Eggert, maybe, Mr. Gregory, I am
sorry.
Mr. Gregory. Thank you for the opportunity. You could see
me sit up.
I come from a family with a long history of military
service and, in fact, I have family members in the service
today. Since the conflict started in Afghanistan and Iran, I
can't remember a time when we didn't have family members on the
ground.
I feel very passionately that those soldiers that are
representing us overseas and protecting us, who deserve the
best systems possible, and when the ability to provide those
systems to our soldiers is jeopardized, that's a travesty. We
need to secure the supply of critical minerals so our soldiers
have the best systems available to keep them out of harm's way.
Thank you.
Senator Manchin. Mr. Mintzes, is it Mintzes?
We might not always agree on a lot of things coming from
our backgrounds.
[Laughter.]
But with that----
Mr. Mintzes. We might agree on one thing.
Senator Manchin. Yes, I am sure.
But with that being said, since we mined the coal, we have
the deposits. We have the ability to clean up the environment.
Would you all be supportive of doing everything that we can
to utilize this to try to produce our own minerals, our own
rare earth minerals?
Mr. Mintzes. Thank you for that question, Mr. Manchin.
So I want to be agnostic about any particular kind of--on a
case-by-case analysis.
Senator Manchin. Sure.
Mr. Mintzes. But the principle that you talk about,
absolutely.
I'd like to just make a quick distinction because in the
coal context the statute of the government's coal, this SMCRA,
has a dedicated funding stream that provides resources for
Reclamation.
We don't have that in the hard rock mining industry. The
1872 mining law has no Reclamation fee.
And so, we in principle without----
Senator Manchin. Western states were better at lobbying
than we were.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Mintzes. I can imagine that.
So my point is that we, in principle and on a case-by-case
basis, the idea that we could use, for example, SMCRA funds in
partnership with DOE and come up with these public-private
partnerships that we've been discussing in order to reclaim
some of the rare earth minerals or critical minerals from the
coal is----
Senator Manchin. The environmental community would be open
to trying to work in collaboration?
Mr. Mintzes. I want to be very careful, and it's possible,
yes. We can work together on this.
Senator Manchin. That is a positive.
Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. I think you have a possible there. There you
go.
Senator Lee.
Senator Lee. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Thanks to
all of you for being here.
Mr. Gregory, it is good to see you. I want to thank you for
all you do in Delta, Utah, where you provide the only domestic
source of beryllium which is important for so many different
reasons and so many different applications.
It seems to me that there are so many minerals on the list,
not just beryllium but including beryllium, that happen to be
found disproportionately in rural areas of the country. But we
have seen intense regulation from Washington suffocating many
of these same rural communities where a lot of these minerals
are found. And we have seen a lot of industries, including
mining, including logging, that depend on federal land, being
hurt.
Can you explain the impact of your operation in Delta and
on the surrounding communities and how they have come to depend
on you?
Mr. Gregory. Thank you.
The leverage of mining and job creation in small rural
communities is truly amazing.
Our mine in Delta is a small mine. It provides 80 full-time
jobs, good-paying jobs with good benefits, that are very
important to a rural community such as those found in Millard
and Judd Counties where we operate.
On top of that, depending on the development effort going
on at the mine, we may have as many as 100 additional
contractors working. So you're talking 180 contractors.
The material we mine is shipped to our plant in Ohio,
another plant with 600 employees that converts that to
additional materials. Materials from that plant support plants
in Arizona, in Pennsylvania, California and multiple other
locations, eventually supporting 2,500 jobs within our company.
We have partners that we work with that have capabilities
or help us to expand our capacity which easily doubles that
number to, now you're talking 5,000 people. We have our
customers, and our customers take that material, convert them
to parts. We're third tier suppliers, so our material goes to
an additional customer who makes a part. Again, you're doubling
that number. And then, that number goes to a final manufacturer
who is going to assemble that. If a person, if a company, is
going to buy material sourced outside of the United States,
they're not going to import that mineral and produce it in the
United States. They're going to buy the finished product from
overseas. And so all those jobs would be outside the United
States.
Thank you.
Senator Lee. Right.
So there may be more than meets the eye, a lot more than
meets the eye, in this case and so many like it.
Mr. Gregory. Yeah, right.
Senator Lee. Is there a type of regulatory reform that you
would like to see that would help to facilitate the
exploration, development, and mining of things like beryllium
to provide sustainable economic opportunities for communities
like yours?
Mr. Gregory. Yeah, we are very fortunate in Materion that
we own our own property. We were able to obtain that property
through a mutually beneficial land swap with the Federal
Government, the state and we own our surface rights.
We also, the state maintains the mineral rights. We pay
royalties that go to the state investment land trust which
basically ends up in the school systems and education in Utah.
Married to a teacher, that's very important to me.
A fair and stable permitting process is all the mining
industry really asks for. The difficulty we have as an industry
is when the rules keep changing. And so, that would be my main
request is a fair, stable process.
Senator Lee. So you don't have a moving target. That
doesn't seem like too much to ask.
Dr. Fortier, at a hearing before this Committee in March of
last year, Dr. Murray Hitzman from USGS testified that much of
the United States has not been mapped to a scale that is useful
for potential mineral development. The President's Executive
Order specifically tasks agencies to develop a plan to improve
geologic mapping of the U.S. to support mineral exploration.
Can you give us a progress report on that?
Dr. Fortier. Yes, the Mineral Resources Program at USGS has
written a report for Secretary Zinke and submitted that to the
Department.
That plan would detail the process by which we would
implement the plan to improve our topographic, geologic, and
geophysical survey of the United States at the appropriate
scale that would support the exploration for critical minerals
as well as the development of other important natural resources
such as groundwater and energy and other societal needs.
So that plan is well advanced and has gotten interagency
input from the agencies involved in offshore resources and is
also part of the report that will be submitted in response to
the Executive Order of which it is an important piece.
Senator Lee. Thank you.
I see my time has expired. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Lee.
Senator King.
Senator King. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Fortier, how did we get here?
In 1978, we had 7 critical minerals that we were totally
dependent upon other sources and now we are at 21. What forces
made that change over the last 40 years-50 years? 40 years?
Dr. Fortier. I'm not sure I can comment directly on the
societal forces that resulted in this. Our role at USGS is
simply to document this process, and we have been doing that
for more than 100 years.
USGS----
Senator King. Perhaps I should direct the question to Dr.
Eggert then.
What made us triple the number of 100 percent dependent
minerals? Do you have any ideas?
Dr. Eggert. Well clearly, multiple forces are at work.
There's no single explanation.
A significant factor is simply globalization and increase
in demand for many of these materials, often significant
increases in demand and significant demand in many parts of the
world and opportunities outside of the United States that would
have been off limits previously, became attractive because of
changing political circumstances----
Senator King. So there is no single factor.
It is interesting you haven't mentioned regulation in the
United States as one of the factors.
Let me follow up. Your testimony said something, and I
think it is very important--and I apologize for missing the
beginning of the meeting. I don't know if it has come up. You
make a distinction between imports from any source and risky
sources. Expand on that.
In other words, it is not imports that are necessarily the
problem. It is imports from places that are at some risk of
either price gouging or cutting off our supply. Is that
correct?
Dr. Eggert. That's absolutely correct.
And I didn't talk about it in my oral remarks, but in my
written comments I make the statement, something like, import
dependence by itself is an incomplete, and many times,
misleading or sometimes misleading indicator of vulnerability.
Senator King. So if we are talking about legislative
solutions to this problem, we should really narrow the focus to
those minerals, not all import dependent materials, minerals,
but those minerals that come from a source that is at risk for
some reason. Is that correct?
Dr. Eggert. If I were able to dictate policy, yes, I'd have
a narrower focus and import dependence would be one of several
factors I would consider.
Senator King. Thank you.
Mr. Mintzes, we have not talked about mining recyclables.
Isn't that an opportunity here? All these materials that we are
talking about are in objects that end up in the waste stream at
some point. Is this an opportunity to, in effect, mine the
materials that were already here in the country?
Mr. Mintzes. Thank you, Mr. King for that question.
Yes, we believe that one of the main solutions to this is
not necessarily more mining, but really is reusing or recycling
or substituting for many of the materials we already have.
Senator King. So that is an opportunity that also has to be
considered as we are looking for options here.
Ms. Sayer, you were talking about regulatory impediments
like time and money. I agree with that, having been a developer
myself in a former life. On the other hand, if we are going to
relieve regulatory burdens in the case of particular minerals,
it should be narrowly focused, should it not?
In other words, I think that what some folks are concerned
about is that this will be, kind of, a Trojan horse for opening
up regulation of mining, generally, of any mineral, not
necessarily a critical mineral. I just see from your testimony
a way to narrow this (a) from risky sources--that eliminates a
significant portion--and then (b) those that are truly
critical, that we can't get from other sources. Your thoughts
on that?
Ms. Sayer. You know, I can only speak to what we do on our
project here in Idaho.
I think, I mentioned several times in my testimony that we
are not seeking to change any regulatory reform and in the NEPA
process than what it is today.
I think the biggest concern is that the interpretation and
the inefficiencies with federal agencies and their
inconsistencies on how they interpret NEPA and how they allow,
as they go through the process, are entirely different from
forest to forest, from project to project and to have a
consistency in how the interpretation is and how to implement
it would be valuable.
Senator King. I think that is a very important point.
I used to say, when I was Governor of Maine, I wanted Maine
to have the most stringent environmental laws in the country
and the most predictable and timely environmental process. And
I think that is what you're saying.
Ms. Sayer. Exactly.
Senator King. It is not the rules you are talking about, it
is the process.
Ms. Sayer. Yes. And there's an extremely, a very large
problem of interpretation.
Senator King. That would vary--if you had a different mine
in a different area of the country, you would have different--
--
Ms. Sayer. Absolutely, in a different forest.
Senator King. Fine.
Ms. Sayer. And management that way.
I could be in the same State of Idaho, and it could be in a
different forest and it would be looked at differently.
Senator King. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. We hear that a lot. Thank you.
Senator Capito.
Senator Capito. Thank you.
I would like to thank the Chair for this panel, and I want
to thank the panel. It has been very interesting.
I, too, am from the State of West Virginia so I am going to
pivot off a little bit of what Senator Manchin was talking
about in terms of coal waste and coal slag and the potential
for this capturing of rare earth minerals from our acid mine
drainage.
We have Dr. ``Z'' at WVU. He has already been mentioned. He
is opening, they are having a ribbon cutting tomorrow, as
Senator Manchin mentioned, for its rare earth extraction
facility.
You can imagine in the State of West Virginia who has done
a lot of coal mining in our time, we have a lot of refuse left
over, a lot has been done with AML, but there is still work to
be done and the potential to have something of value and have
the added benefit of an environmental cleanup is very
attractive to us.
So, Dr. Eggert and Dr. Fortier, I would like to ask you if
you could share your views on the opportunities and challenges
of extracting rare earth elements from something like acid mine
drainage as opposed to, you know, free out mining where you are
actually getting the element directly.
Dr. Fortier. Certainly there is a lot of potential for
mining waste streams and then, I think, part of the directive
in the Executive Order does require us to focus on that issue.
Senator Capito. Right.
Dr. Fortier. It's one of a number of solutions that we
should, can and should be pursuing.
Any individual opportunity that way always comes down to
economics.
Senator Capito. Right.
Dr. Fortier. That's the nature of mining.
I really can't comment on whether the process to extract
from coal would be more economic than at some other process but
certainly it is something we need to look at.
Senator Capito. Thank you.
Dr. Eggert, do you have thoughts on that?
Dr. Eggert. I would simply echo the sentiment of your
question and Dr. Fortier's comment, namely that there are
significant unexploited opportunities for recovering minor
metals from the production waste streams and leftover waste
streams from not just coal, but phosphates, rock and fertilizer
production, metallic mining in the western United States, even
produced water from oil and gas production.
Senator Capito. Do you see these processes as complementary
or competitive in the future or is it still hard to predict
because we do not really know the economic model?
Dr. Fortier. I think it's quite likely that the answer to
these issues is going to require some combination of
approaches. Domestic mining, recycling, substitution, mining
legacy streams, all of these things are part of the Executive
Order and we are now required to respond with a whole of
government approach to suggest strategies with each of these in
mind.
Senator Capito. Did you have an additional comment?
Ms. Sayer, let me ask you this.
The way I am understanding your particular mine site, you
have a legacy mine, correct?
Ms. Sayer. Correct.
Senator Capito. That was unused for several years.
Are you looking at the recyclable or are you or not
recyclable but retaining it from some of the waste or are you
doing the original mining for these rare earth minerals?
Ms. Sayer. In every one of our areas that we will go in and
mine. First of all, we will take ten million tons of
unrestrained tailings and we're going to reprocess those and
reuse them and we will get minerals and metals from those.
We also will, each of the other two areas that we will be
mining, we will be going into areas that have already been
mined before. We'll just be doing it with modern mining. And
that's what is so unique about modern mining today is today we
are able to with, using modern mining, we're able to go in to
areas that we've already mined before, go deeper, be able to
re-mine those areas.
Senator Capito. Good. Good.
You know, it is interesting. I first heard of this topic at
a Rotary Club. A professor from West Virginia University came
down. I happened to be at the local Rotary Club. And he had
this very same chart that was included in our briefing
materials which is from USGS which shows the amount of the
mineral and how much of it is imported.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.002
Senator Capito. And you go down about the first 20 and 100
percent of these minerals are imported and it says the major
importer, and in most cases it is China in the top one or two
or three.
I think it was, sort of, jaw-dropping to all of us as we
sit here with all of our devices and the different things that
we realize are essential to our lives, to realize how dependent
we are.
So I guess my question would be along the lines of looking
historically where we mined these materials before, did the
economic model just drop out from under us to where it was no
longer profitable for us and it was less expensive for us to
import? I mean, how did we lose this buoyancy to our market and
begin to turn into 100 percent of this imported of the 20 top
minerals? Does anybody have an insight on to that?
Dr. Fortier. I would say one thing about that.
A lot of the materials we are most concerned about now that
are on the critical minerals list, really weren't being used in
the same amounts or in the same ways. It really, advances in
technology and material science have opened up an entirely new
realm of applications for these things.
Senator Capito. Right. That makes sense.
Dr. Fortier. So the mining of those has developed in fairly
recent history.
Senator Capito. Anybody else have perspective?
Ms. Sayer. In the Stibnite Gold project, antimony, we get
76 percent of the antimony we get is from China, 7 percent from
Russia, 6 percent from Kazakhstan and I, we, were mining that.
We use it in strategic. We use it in military grade
munitions. It's being used. We're just getting it somewhere
else. And one of the reasons I think is because, to be honest,
how difficult it is for permitting and investment in the states
because of permitting.
Senator Capito. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Risch.
Senator Risch. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank you for
holding this hearing.
Anybody who thinks this is not important just needs to look
back some years ago when the Chinese and the Japanese had a
spat and the Chinese just flat cut off Japan's access to this
material. It just flat shut things down there and particularly
in some very critical industries for them. So it is important
that we do focus on this and see what we can do about it.
Mr. Mintzes, I noticed you, kind of, smirked when you
talked about the westward expansion development of America. You
know, in Idaho we take this very seriously. We do not smirk
about it. Mining is an extremely important industry for Idaho.
Let me tell you about the Great Seal of the State of Idaho.
There are two people on it. Depicted on the left is a woman who
represents agriculture and justice and education and a number
of other things. Featured prominently in the middle are our
mountains and our streams which we cherish deeply. And on the
right-hand side is a man who is featured, the same stature as
those others, he carries a shovel and a pick. That tells you
how important this is to the great State of Idaho.
Our development was closely tied to mining. Indeed, we had
one governor assassinated and it was a result of a mining
dispute. Mining has played a prominent role in this.
I hope you listened carefully to what Ms. Sayer talked
about trying to permit this mine at Stibnite. She is ably
supported by Michael Bogart who is sitting behind her. Michael
is General Counsel to one of the best governors that Idaho ever
had.
[Laughter.]
And he had a distinguished career here in Washington, DC,
also.
Thank you for what you do. I think probably one thing that
really ought to come to everyone's, the front of everyone's,
mind here after listening to what Ms. Sayer said is this is not
a poor people's sport. Trying to do this in America today takes
tremendous amount of capital assets and not only does it take
that, it takes a board of directors and officers who will stick
with something like this because it is demoralizing.
Those of us who practiced law represented a lot of people
trying to do this in Idaho. We have legacy sites. We have new
sites. And to try to do it, you lose a lot of sleep at night.
Ms. Sayer, how much has your company recognized in revenue
as a result of all your expenditures so far?
Ms. Sayer. Well the total amount we spent, $20 million
doing this. We've already gone over and above on $11 million
additional into what we have paid the Forest Service which
the--and the third-party contractor which was over $5 million.
So in total, I think we're around, I think the number was $86
million we will have invested, plus this is a billion-dollar
project to build. We will invest $1 billion once we get the
record of decision to build this project. So, it's a very
large----
Senator Risch. What does the other side of the ledger look
like? How much have you taken in so far?
Ms. Sayer. Oh, I'm, probably----
Senator Risch. Probably close to zero isn't it?
Ms. Sayer. Oh, for the production. Oh, yeah, this has all
been investor money. We have not had, I hear where you're going
with that question.
Senator Risch. Yes, that is my point exactly.
Ms. Sayer. Yes, we have not----
Senator Risch. What kind of stamina it takes to get this
done.
Ms. Sayer. We don't have any profit at all, exactly.
Senator Risch. I want to assure Mr. Mintzes that although
all of us who have worked in this recognize and desperately
need streamlining, there is nobody trying to degrade the
environment. There is nobody more committed to the environment
than the people in Valley County who are promoting this. The
legislature that has passed a memorial in this session
promoting this, all of us, value our mountains and our streams
greatly. Valley County is probably one of the prettiest places
in America, and those people that live there really value that
tremendously.
I can also assure you that in Idaho we have an umbrella
organization called the Idaho Conservation League, and the
Idaho Conservation League is going to look over these people's
shoulder very, very carefully.
I know this is going to be hard for you to believe coming
from Washington, DC, but they actually know Idaho better than
you do and they are going to very, very carefully monitor this.
They have been so far. I think the project is to be commended
for keeping them in the loop as much as they have.
So, with that, I wanted to go into a little bit about how
important this is, but I think there is plenty of literature
and most people are well aware of it.
Madam Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
I will just note for the record that the great State of
Alaska has on its seal a pick and a gold pan recognizing the
contributions that mining has brought to our state as well, so.
Senator Hoeven from the great State of North Dakota.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
We don't do a whole lot of mining other than for lignite
coal, although we do a lot as you know of drilling for oil and
gas, as do you.
But this is a very timely hearing. Thank you for doing it.
I want to start with--do you pronounce it Dr. Fortier or--
--
Dr. Fortier. Fortier.
Senator Hoeven. Okay.
I understand there are 21 rare earth minerals where we
import 100 percent of what we use. Why? Is that because we just
don't have them or we just don't produce them?
Dr. Fortier. I think for----
Senator Hoeven. I know we get a lot of them from China.
Dr. Fortier. Most of the minerals that are on our import
reliance chart which Senator Capito had earlier, which we
publish every year, are available and are in the U.S. We have
reserves or resources in the U.S. They are not mined typically
for economic reasons in the U.S.
Senator Hoeven. Alright.
Are there things then that we should be doing from a policy
standpoint to promote mining those minerals here rather than
importing our entire use, you know, recycling the materials
they are in, encouraging mining? What would make sense in your
opinion?
Dr. Fortier. I think there are a number of things that are
outlined in the Executive Order that the President issued in
December that are part of the response to the report responding
to that order, they are exactly the kinds of things that you
just mentioned.
USGS' role is to identify and inform those policy
decisions, not make them ourselves. So we are contributing to
that report by ensuring that the information that people are
using to make policy recommendations is, in fact,
scientifically accurate and sound.
Senator Hoeven. For example, mapping is helpful, those
kinds of things?
Dr. Fortier. Mapping is an important part of the response
to the Executive Order.
Senator Hoeven. Regulatory burden?
Dr. Fortier. The USGS is not a regulatory agency, so I
can't address that.
Senator Hoeven. I know, but we are asking for your
recommendations.
Dr. Fortier. I really can't speak to that as a
representative of an agency that does not do permitting.
Senator Hoeven. Alright then, Dr. Eggert, how do we develop
more public-private support for development of some of these,
production of some of these minerals? Should we and how should
we?
Dr. Eggert. I think the Federal Government plays an
important role even though we rely primarily on the private
sector to develop the commercial activities throughout the
material supply chain. There are a range of policies, many of
which have been contained in legislation that the Chairman has
worked with other members on in the past, and they include more
efficient permitting that has appropriate environmental
protections. They include information and strategic analysis in
places like the USGS. Clearly geologic mapping that underpins
precompetitive types of research and development, as well as
education, the workforce and professionals necessary for a
minerals and materials industry. All of these are important
roles for the Federal Government.
Senator Hoeven. Mr. Sims, you have a big project going, or
you are working on a big project, I understand, in Nebraska and
Elk Creek. What are the minerals? This could be as much as a
billion-dollar capital investment. What is it you are after?
Why there? And how is it going in terms of local, state and
Federal Government as far as permitting that type of
enterprise?
Mr. Sims. Thank you, Senator.
We're looking to produce three critical minerals, niobium,
scandium and titanium, all of them have uses in a variety of
commercial----
Senator Hoeven. Titanium, of course, I know about. What are
the other two for?
Mr. Sims. The two, they're on your periodic table and I
know you remember these from your high school chemistry class.
Senator Hoeven. That's good. I look at it all the time.
Mr. Sims. But they're both metals and niobium goes into
steel, predominately. It makes a high strength steel, so it's
used increasingly in bridges and infrastructure projects. It
lets bridges last in excess of 100 years instead of, say, 30 to
50. It's used in virtually all steel chassis automobiles today
on the planet. You put a little bit of niobium, very small
amount in steel and it creates a really, really strong steel.
It also then lightens the applications. So, it makes cars
lighter in mass, therefore, more fuel efficient. Therefore,
they have less emissions.
Scandium is also a metal that does for aluminum what
niobium does for steel.
Senator Hoeven. Okay.
Mr. Sims. Add in a very small amount, it makes aluminum
extremely strong, much more corrosion resistant. It's also
used, interestingly, not in its metal form, in a, I would say,
a higher efficiency, clean energy technology called solid oxide
fuel cells. It's a natural gas fuel technology but it's very,
very highly efficient, much lower emissions profile and very
highly dependent electricity.
So those are the two, in addition to titanium, those are
the two we're looking to produce.
Senator Hoeven. So are you advancing this project and how
is it going and what are the regulatory barriers or is it going
well?
Mr. Sims. We're going well. We're going great.
We have a feasibility study done which is about a $35
million plus effort over the last four years. We're now in the
process of focusing 24/7/365 on raising that up-front capital
required to go to construction. That's going well.
And as I mentioned in my testimony, we have been fortunate
in that we were able to make some changes on the front end at
the design stage of this process to avoid and, in some cases,
eliminate what we anticipated were environmental impacts on the
front end. We've engineered a lot of those out so our
permitting process, we still have dozens and dozens of permits
to get to go forward. Most of those now, virtually all of
those, are governed by the state and in terms of a federal
permitting burden or risk, as you would look at it, it's very,
very low now. So we're moving ahead.
Senator Hoeven. Very good.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hoeven.
Senator Cantwell, we have had a great hearing this morning.
It is now your turn.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you so much, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate my colleague, Senator Wyden, being here earlier.
One of the questions that my colleague was getting at: When
you think about how we protect ourselves writ large, the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve is a good example. We make sure
that we don't have a short supply.
In the global market, tight supplies can sometimes push the
innovation we were just discussing.
And so, what, I think Mr. Eggert--and I apologize, your
name plate there, it doesn't quite show your name as forcefully
there.
Anyway, the point is, on global supply chains and
shortages, the notion is that recycling can help us,
particularly with alternative minerals. What should we be doing
to fortify that for the future?
Dr. Eggert. Recycling, to me at least, obviously is part of
the solution. It's not the entire solution.
There's already significant recycling of many of the major
metals, aluminum, copper, iron and steel. There's much less
recycling of the specialty metals, the rare earths, the
lithiums, the niobiums of the world.
It will be some time before recycling can be an important
meeter of demand because many of the products into which these
materials are going have only recently been purchased and have
lifetimes of 5, 10, 15, 20 years. A period of time in which
demand will be growing.
But now's the time to put the, to be thinking about
collection systems, sorting systems and processing technologies
that will be then available when the quantities of materials
are sufficiently large that recycling can play a larger role.
Senator Cantwell. As I mentioned, the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve is our interest in making sure that we don't get caught
short. Why not take the same approach?
For example, we are working on recycling of carbon fiber.
Obviously it made a big play in aerospace, carbon fiber, but is
still very expensive for smaller entities to make those kinds
of investments. We are going to have a lot of carbon fiber, so
we are recycling it so that smaller entities can use it in a
cost-effective way.
This is a DOE program. Why not have a similar DOE program
on some critical minerals? So instead of waiting for the market
to play that role, let us get started in playing that role. I
think, what we are trying to evaluate as it relates to carbon
fiber is, what are all those other small businesses that are
going to develop once they see that you can successfully do the
recycling of carbon fiber?
It is just so new, right? But the one thing that we have as
a nation, the strength of the United States from a competitive
perspective, is our R&D and our ability to take that R&D and
show a scalable solution.
I see a bunch of people nodding. If somebody else wants to
jump on this point?
Dr. Eggert. Let me just say, I agree absolutely.
The consortium that I'm involved with, the Critical
Materials Institute, is in fact this DOE, a DOE consortium of
public-private partnership, if you will, where we helped
develop a process for recycling yttrium and thermal barrier
coatings. And so, yes, there is activity in that area that
potentially could be more important, more broadly than within
DOE and it's----
Senator Cantwell. Are there several other minerals that you
would recommend right now for that same kind of recycling?
Dr. Eggert. I don't have specific recommendations, really
any of the minor metals that have important uses in military
applications.
Senator Cantwell. Okay.
Anybody else? Just a bunch--yes, go ahead.
Mr. Sims. Senator, obviously we're going to be producing
scandium in Nebraska when we're up and running. We're going to
produce 100 tons per year of scandium which, by the way, sounds
like a lot. It's not.
There is a market for scandium, certainly in the U.S. and
globally of, at a minimum, several hundred tons per year. So
even when we're up and running, we're going to be the largest
producer, the U.S. will be the largest producer by far of
scandium. But it's not going to be enough. We'll be able to
sell our scandium, we believe, but perhaps other development
and potentially someday, some recycling may be necessary to
meet that growing demand. You need both, I think.
Senator Cantwell. I am a big fan of reforming the 1872
Mining Law and getting a fair deal for taxpayers and making
sure that we update the reclamation standards. What about that?
Getting product from the mining waste that we are not doing
today?
Mr. Mintzes. Thank you, Senator.
So one of the great features in reforming the 1872 Mining
Law is that it would help create that dedicated funding source
for Reclamation that we already see in the context for coal.
And so, as the West Virginia senators were mentioning
earlier, the notion that you could, in principle, carefully, on
a case-by-case basis, look at projects whereby that Reclamation
Fund pays for these kinds of activities that the researchers
and the private-
public--the DOE is doing right now is possible.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
Just a few final questions here. We have a vote that has
just been called, so it is good timing here.
Ms. Sayer, you have indicated that you are operating on
Forest Service land. I detected a fair amount of frustration
from you in saying that if it was a different Forest Service
you might be subject to different interpretation or different
issues that might be presented.
Explain to me--it seems that almost without exception we
have issues that are brought before this Committee and whether
it is mining or whether it is grazing or whether it is
harvesting trees, whether it is oil and gas permitting, it
seems invariably it is harder and more complicated to do it on
federal land.
So your comments about what you are dealing with is, again,
consistent with everything that we have heard. The fact that we
are seeking to access these minerals that have been identified
by our own Federal Government as important. They are critical.
They are important for us to have. Does that give you, as a
company that is looking to develop on public land, on our
Forest Service land, does that give you any advantages?
I will ask Mr. Gregory the same question. You have noted
that beryllium provides significant advantages to the
Department of Defense. It has been identified as not only
strategic but also critical. Because it has been designated so
and the Department of Defense needs this, are there any
advantages?
We are going to a lot of trouble to put minerals on a list.
But if it is just put on a list and we are still making it just
as complicated and difficult to gain access to it in this
country, I guess I am asking a somewhat rhetorical question is
why do we put it on the list? Your comments? And Mr. Sims, you
can join us in this discussion.
Ms. Sayer. So my first thoughts of that would be the
advantages for the business model and the investment of it
attracting investors and help with the business model to have,
to be listed on there.
It would, it also provides, it's benefited us in a social
license aspect with our communities. We have committed citizens
of Idaho that want to contribute to supporting the critical
minerals and this particularly antimony basically because there
is a history. It's surprising to see the grandfathers of the
people that still live in the community who used to work at the
mine during the war years. So, social license, business
investment, those are all real and that is, that does attract.
The Chairman. Those are both very, very key.
Ms. Sayer. Yes.
But the--it would be, what would be the most helpful as the
tax reforms have been put into place and how that has been
attractive. If we could have the permitting to match that tax
reform and those other benefits that have come. We need to get
the expertise in the permitting across the board that is
efficient and that is consistent and the rules are there, the
regs are there. There is just the interpretations are
inconsistent across the board.
The Chairman. Mr. Gregory.
Mr. Gregory. Materion is--there ought to be a long-term
reliable partner and supplier to both the Department of Defense
and the Department of Energy, starting with the Manhattan
Project and we have always supplied in a competitive
environment.
The area where being a strategic and critical mineral comes
into play though is both departments frequently issue requests
for proposals on ways to improve technology, to reduce cost, to
secure supply and, you know, we respond to those requests. It
gives us a seat at the table and our ideas are judged based on
merit and where we have a good idea, you know, maybe we get a
hearing that we might have not otherwise.
So to me, that is an advantage is getting a seat at the
table when we're looking at improving these resources.
The Chairman. Mr. Sims.
Mr. Sims. Madam Chair, I think one of the biggest outcomes
of this process, besides what may happen with government
relation permitting is just helping Americans understand the
extraordinarily number, large number and complexity of the
supply chains that make this iPhone and everything else.
I'm still trying to get my three kids, Noah, Ella, and
Hannah, to understand just how hard it is to make one of these.
In the 1960s it took about 12 elements on the periodic table to
make a computer chip. It now takes more than 60.
So helping Americans understand that we need these and we
need more than we used to will help them, I think, bring to the
table more support for developing these minerals whether
they're mined or whether they're recycled or in the cases where
we have to import them.
The Chairman. I appreciate that.
Dr. Eggert, I asked about the role of the Critical Minerals
Institute and all that they do. Your testimony describes the
advanced materials and the chemical separation technologies.
Are you familiar with the molecular recognition technology
that Ucore is looking at? It is an effort to do the rare earth
separation. This is up in Alaska. This is something that we
have been in discussion with them on for some time. I am
wondering if you are familiar with it and if this is something
that CMI is perhaps involved with or reviewing?
Dr. Eggert. I am familiar with, know of the molecular
recognition technology that Ucore is developing. It's one of
several potentially very revolutionary techniques in terms of
rare earth separations, one of the key challenges in rare
earths. CMI is aware of this. We are not actively engaged with
Ucore, but that certainly is a possibility in the future.
The Chairman. Yes.
And one of the things that we have not discussed here this
morning, we have been talking about the resources themselves,
but our reality is that we are not doing any of the processing.
That is all going to China too. That is another level of
vulnerability.
When we talk about this full supply chain and what it is
really going to mean in terms of vulnerability, if we are able
to extract it safely here, good for us, but if the next step is
always going to be China for the processing, guess what, we are
back in the same opportunity for more strangleholds here. So I
put that out there.
I know you all think about it, but particularly when we are
talking about the role that China plays with these critical
minerals, we have to be thinking about it full stream.
The other issue that really didn't come up. I think, Dr.
Eggert, you mentioned it somewhat briefly and maybe Dr. Fortier
in your written testimony, and that is the issue of developing
a workforce here.
I know that in Alaska we have great mines, great mining
opportunity, but to develop the men and women to go into this
industry, these critical industries that supply this whole
supply chain. I am worried about that end of it as well.
It is one thing to have the resource. It is another thing
to be able to extract it efficiently and in a manner that
allows for a process that is fair, that is environmentally
sound, but you have to have the men and women and it is more
than just the extraction.
So I feel like, again, this is yet one more year that we
focus on this as an issue. We are shining a spotlight that is
important.
I appreciate, again, what the Administration has done with
the focus with the Executive Order. I think that was necessary,
but there is so much, much more that needs to be done and it
takes everybody here.
I see some folks from the mining industry that are part of
this discussion. They know that it is more than just about
taking it out of the ground. It is how we do it and making sure
that we are attractive from a regulatory perspective, but also
from that investment perspective.
Mr. Mintzes, I think you mentioned in your written
testimony that you felt that this country was a pretty good
place for investment among one of the world's most attractive
destinations for mining investments. I am sure not hearing that
from folks.
That is another aspect of what it is that we need to do to
address that. And unfortunately, until you have some regulatory
certainty, until you have some clear policies here, it is tough
to get investors because what you do out there is not cheap. It
is not easy and it is not quick.
And that social license that you talk about, Ms. Sayer, I
think we all recognize that there is a responsibility. We take
that very seriously. I know the industry takes it very, very
seriously. All these pieces working together will allow us to
move forward.
But we are not moving fast enough in my book, and I am
going to continue to sound the alarm, continue to press on the
urgency because as we saw from that chart that Senator Capito
shared with us, that is part of our binders here this morning.
Our situation is not getting better. It is progressively
getting worse and vulnerability is not a place where I want to
be today.
I thank you for your time and thank you for the expertise
that you have shared with the Committee.
With that, we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:00 p.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.053
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.054
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.055
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.056
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.057
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.058
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.059
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.060
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.061
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.062
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.063
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.064
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.065
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.066
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.067
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.068
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.069
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.070
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.071
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.072
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.073
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.074
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0983.075