- ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2019
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT
APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2019
_____________________________________________________________________
HEARINGS
BEFORE A
SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE
COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
_______
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT,
AND RELATED AGENCIES
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho, Chairman
KEN CALVERT, California
MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
CHARLES J. FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee
PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska
DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
KAY GRANGER, Texas
PETE AGUILAR, California
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington
NOTE: Under committee rules, Mr. Frelinghuysen, as chairman of the
full committee, and Mrs. Lowey, as ranking minority member of the full
committee, are authorized to sit as members of all subcommittees.
Angie Giancarlo, Loraine Heckenberg,
Perry Yates, and Amy Murphy
Subcommittee Staff
_______________
PART 5
Page
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and
Bureau of Reclamation.............................................
1
Secretary of Energy.............................................
95
National Nuclear Security Administration .......................
219
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
32-414
WASHINGTON : 2018
COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS
----------
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey, Chairman
HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky \1\
NITA M. LOWEY, New York
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama
MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
KAY GRANGER, Texas
PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho
JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas
ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas
DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
KEN CALVERT, California
LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma
SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida
BARBARA LEE, California
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
TIM RYAN, Ohio
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
C. A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER, Maryland
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska
HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
THOMAS J. ROONEY, Florida
CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
CHARLES J. FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee
MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
DEREK KILMER, Washington
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio
MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
DAVID G. VALADAO, California
GRACE MENG, New York
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama
KATHERINE M. CLARK, Massachusetts
MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada
PETE AGUILAR, California
CHRIS STEWART, Utah
DAVID YOUNG, Iowa
EVAN H. JENKINS, West Virginia
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan
SCOTT TAYLOR, Virginia
----------
\1\}Chairman Emeritus
Nancy Fox, Clerk and Staff Director
(ii)
ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
2019
----------
Wednesday, March 14, 2018.
ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS AND BUREAU OF RECLAMATION
WITNESSES
R.D. JAMES, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE ARMY FOR CIVIL WORKS
TIMOTHY PETTY, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR WATER AND SCIENCE, DEPARTMENT OF
THE INTERIOR
LIEUTENANT GENERAL TODD SEMONITE, COMMANDING GENERAL AND CHIEF OF
ENGINEERS
BRENDA BURMAN, COMMISSIONER, BUREAU OF RECLAMATION
Mr. Simpson. Good morning. I would like to call this
hearing to order. And welcome to our first hearing of the
fiscal year 2019 budget season.
It seems a little strange doing the 2019 hearings, when we
haven't finished 2018 yet, but I don't know if any of your
testimony today would change depending on what happens in 2018.
Anyway, today's hearing will review the budget request for
the Civil Works Program for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
and the Bureau of Reclamation.
Before we turn to the Budget request, though, I would like
to take a moment to congratulate our ranking member, Ms.
Kaptur. On Sunday she will become the longest-serving female
Member of the House of Representatives.
As we have worked on this committee, I have come to see
that she is a passionate advocate for her constituents in her
home State of Ohio. They have been lucky to have her in
Congress, these many years.
So, Marcy, congratulations on a remarkable accomplishment,
and I look forward to continue our work together, as you extend
your record-setting tenure here in the House.
(Applause.)
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. I would like to welcome our witnesses, most of
whom are appearing before our subcommittee for the first time.
Mr. R.D. James is the Assistant Secretary for the Army, for
Civil Works; Lieutenant General Todd Semonite, is the
Commanding General and Chief of Engineers; Dr. Timothy Petty is
the Assistant Secretary for Water and Science at the Department
of Interior, and knows something about Idaho, having worked for
Senator Risch. And Ms. Brenda Burman is the Commissioner for
the Bureau of Reclamation.
I look forward to hearing from each of you on this budget
request, and learning more about the priorities included in
this proposal and how it will address the nation's water
resource needs.
The Bureau of Reclamation and the Corps of Civil Works
Programs, include a wide variety of water resources and power
activities essential to the public's safety, economic and
environmental goals of our nation.
That is why it is disappointing to see such limited budget
requests for these agencies year after year. It doesn't matter
whether it is a Republican or Democratic administration, OMB
cuts these budgets knowing Congress will provide additional
funds, and I think it is safe to say, we will provide
additional funds again this year from the budget
recommendations.
The Corps and Reclamation would be much better positioned
to advance projects and studies quickly and at a lower cost if
there was an ability to plan ahead. OMB's unrealistic budget
restrictions, however, force the agencies to focus on smaller
increments of work, with no assurances of future funding.
Congress on the other hand, clearly recognizes the
importance of both these programs as evidenced by funding
levels provided in recent fiscal years, I expect this committee
will once again work to develop an appropriations bill that
provides strong support for these programs, that strikes a good
balance across mission areas, including navigation, flood and
storm damage reductions, environmental restoration, hydropower
and water supply delivery.
Again, I would like to welcome our witnesses to the
subcommittee. I would ask all of you to please ensure that the
hearing record, questions for the record, and any supporting
information requested by the subcommittee are delivered in the
final form to us no later than four weeks from the time you
receive them.
Members who have additional questions for the record, will
have until the close of business on Monday to provide them to
the subcommittee office.
And with that, I will turn to my ranking member, Ms. Kaptur
for any opening remarks that she may have.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
kind remarks. And chairman of our full committee, Congressman
Frelinghuysen, a dear, dear friend, it is a great pleasure to
serve with you, and to steward this country during our tenure
here.
We welcome our witnesses this morning; Assistant Secretary
James, General Semonite, Assistant Secretary Petty, and
Commissioner Burman. Thank you so much for being here today to
discuss the administration's fiscal year 2019 budget request.
We appreciate your appearing before our subcommittee.
You collectively represent the water part of our Energy and
Water bill. What an important piece it is.
As the administration ponders investing in infrastructure,
I believe you have an extraordinary opportunity to lead the way
for the nation, and hopefully you will be able to address the
$96 billion construction backlog over 454 authorized active
construction projects, which include $20 billion in dam safety.
Personally, I believe the President should start there, with
his infrastructure initiative.
For any new infrastructure bill, I believe we must
prioritize resilient infrastructure, and find innovative
solutions that incorporate environmental components of a new
age.
Adequate maintenance of existing projects and new
investments in green infrastructure, when combined with
strategic regional and urban planning and policies to allow us
to stay ahead of the water challenges that lay before our
nation as we experience more extreme precipitation events, both
droughts and inundations.
In Ohio, my part of our country, we are experiencing surges
of excess rainfall, which are exacerbating our nutrient runoff
problem at historic levels, and causing massive algal blooms.
At the blooms' peak this past summer, over 1,000 square miles
of Lake Erie were covered in the green slime, threatening our
maritime industry.
In the West, water flow into the Colorado River this year
is forecast to be just 54 percent of the typically expected
amount.
Today, Lake Mead is at 40 percent of capacity, and if the
water drops just 13 more feet, it will trigger Federal rules
that cut the amount of water supply to Nevada, Arizona and
California. Yet, in 2016, the most recent data, those states
combined increase their population by 431,000 persons.
Texas dealt with rain in a class of its own during
Hurricane Harvey where 60 inches of rain, a trillion gallons of
water, enough to fill the Houston Astrodome more than 3,300
times over, fell in just a few short days.
The Corps was forced into a terrible situation, released
water from the Addicks and Barker dams near Houston, or risk
catastrophic dam failure. What a terrible choice.
In Florida, Hurricane Irma brought catastrophic
destructions in Everglades City, in the form of an 8-foot storm
surge. Hurricane Maria devastated the lives of 3.5 million
Americans in Puerto Rico, and families are still dealing with
the aftermath of that category 4 storm.
Ten percent of the population still will not have
electricity at the conclusion of this month. And many have fled
the island for the U.S. mainland with Puerto Rico's Government
estimating that 200,000 citizens, more than 5 percent of its
population will leave by end of this year.
Perhaps most startling, Puerto Rico saw 29 percent increase
in suicides in 2017.
As we watch these terrifying events occur in our country,
around water, I am reminded of the crisis the citizens of Cape
Town, South Africa, are facing at the moment. In order to stave
off the total disaster of no water services, residents are
currently being rationed to only 13 gallons of water per person
per day.
It is up to your agencies, to weigh these developments and
determine how to avoid getting into a situation like the one in
Cape Town.
But it also means that we here in Congress, must think
strategically about how to invest intelligently in long-term
solutions, that will be resilient in the face of changing
precipitation patterns.
Unfortunately, your budget is woefully inadequate to
address the issues that we face in these domains. I cannot
pretend to be terribly surprised or upset though, because it
seems that it does not matter which party controls the
executive branch, this story remains the same, year to year,
and administration to administration.
The story in this legislative branch, I imagine, will
continue as well, as we will continue to work to increase
funding to support these important water resource projects, but
it will be inadequate.
And as we have seen, your work provides a great opportunity
for job creation and community investment, as these projects
created construction jobs and encourage locals to become
stakeholders in their surroundings, from supporting agriculture
to encouraging international commerce, the Corps and
Reclamation provide critical underpinnings to our country.
Yet, too often we increasingly struggle in the active
balancing our local economies, our infrastructure needs, and
preserving our fragile ecosystems.
We as a nation, we were once pushing the boundaries of what
was achievable in infrastructure, and yet now we are known for
failing to maintain and modernize those very networks.
Before us is a budget that is scarce, and unable to fund
the robust infrastructure revitalization that our water system
so desperately need.
Toxic algal blooms, Great Lake's dredging needs, the
invasion of the Asian carp, and an overall improved policy of
environmental care and awareness cannot be carelessly pushed to
the back burner yet again.
And I urge you to address each of these issues with our
fragile Great Lakes and ports in mind. We must keep our ports
and our water projects open for business, however, this come at
the expense of our water security, the safety and quality of
our drinking water, or the environmental integrity of our
precious ecosystems.
I expect you will speak to these concerns today, and I look
forward to our discussion. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. It is now my honor to recognize my boss,
Chairman of the full committee, Mr. Frelinghuysen.
The Chairman. I can assure you, Mr. Simpson has no boss.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah, my wife. (Laughter)
The Chairman. I don't have any prepared remarks but I did
want to take an opportunity to thank Chairman Simpson and his
staff for the good work that they do. It is a very bipartisan
committee.
And let me give a shout out to Ms. Kaptur, she has been on
the committee for a long time. And I will be finishing my 24th
year. So I do want to take this opportunity to obviously thank
Mr. Simpson and his staff for the remarkable things they have
done, to put together the 2018 budget which we did about six
months ago, and hope we will get it across the finish line in
the next couple of days. But it has been done, and I think in a
very amicable way. And obviously the chairman's good humor
contributes to a process that has worked pretty well.
I did want to take the opportunity, to you Mr. Secretary,
and you General Semonite, to thank the Corps for the remarkable
things that I have seen over 20-plus years. I mean, time has
passed, but we look at the Vulcans, and the horrendous genocide
that occurred there.
Often it was the Army Corps, some of your comrades,
civilians and those in uniform who, sort of, laid the
groundwork for our efforts over there. Maybe it was an
imperfect piece, but in reality, the army often is responsible
for the deliveries, and the Corps.
And may I say, if you look across the Middle East, and many
of those associated with your operation, Mr. Secretary,
obviously doing remarkable things back here at home, but
oftentimes volunteered, in some really difficult, dangerous
locations. That continues today throughout the world, but
particularly in the Middle East.
And I just wanted to pay tribute. And coming from my neck
of the woods, we don't forget the role of the Army Corps, and
after September 11, 2001, on the pile, and off the pile, the
things that were done on behalf of the citizens of 80 countries
but certainly the residents of New York and New Jersey. And I
am sure I would share our gratitude for all the activities that
you are responsible for.
We know that people like to damn the Corps, no pun
intended, and you don't get enough praise, but I would like to
say that, as we look across the devastation of the last year,
in Texas, Florida, the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, you know
from time to time there have been some severe criticisms of
Federal support, but I would like to say that, I think we have
given you some money, even though we had a rather disjointed
appropriations process, through continuing resolutions we
intensely dislike.
But I think you have performed admirably, and we are
counting on you to fulfill a lot of obligations because all of
those, the residents of those states are for all American
citizens, and they anticipate that you will continue at a very
level, and high standards.
So, on behalf of, you know, 20-plus years on this
committee, and I am sure on behalf of all of us, we thank you
for the good work you are doing, and we really count on you
doing even a better job in the future.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would echo the
comments of Mr. Frelinghuysen, and thank you for the work that
you do.
I understand that Mr. James, you are going to be first.
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members of this
committee. Thank you very much. I thank you for the opportunity
to discuss the President's Budget today for the Civil Works
Program of the Army Corps of Engineers for Fiscal Year 2019.
As I am sure you are all aware, I was recently sworn in as
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works, and this is my
first opportunity to appear before this subcommittee.
I look forward to the opportunity to share my thoughts with
you, and emphasize my commitment to results rather than
process. To ensure that the Corps is moving dirt, and putting
projects in the ground.
I am honored to be joined by Lieutenant General Semonite,
our 54th Chief of Engineers.
The fiscal year 2019 Budget reflects the administration's
priorities and is focused on investments that will yield high
economic and environmental returns, or address a significant
risk to public safety.
The budget provides $4.8 billion in gross discretionary
funding for the Army Civil Works program. This investment will
enable communities to reduce their flood risks, facilitate
water-borne transportation, restore significant aquatic
ecosystems, and generate low cost, renewable hydropower.
The budget focuses on the highest-performing work within
the three main missions of the Corps, commercial navigation,
flood and storm damage reduction and aquatic ecosystem
restoration.
The budget also focuses on maintaining the vast water
resources infrastructure that the Corps owns and manages and on
finding innovative ways to help rehabilitate or hand it over to
others. It gives priority to coastal harbors and inland
waterways with the most commercial traffic, but also funds the
maintenance of channels at small ports that support significant
commercial fishing, subsistence, or public transportation
benefits. Similarly, the budget invests in safety improvements
at Corps dams based on an assessment of risk.
The Civil Works Program relies on a foundation of strong
relationships between the Corps and local communities that
enable us to work together to help meet their water resource
needs. The Corps program uses a diverse set of tools and
approaches to working with local communities, whether this
means funding projects where they pay a share of the cost or
providing planning assistance and technical expertise to help
them make better informed decisions.
The Flood and Coastal Storm Damage Reduction Program is a
collaborative effort that integrates and synchronizes the flood
risk management projects, programs, and authorities of the
Corps with those of other Federal, State, regional, and local
agencies. It helps to reduce the risk of loss of life and
property damage from river and coastal flooding. It increases
the resilience of local communities through structural and
nonstructural measures.
Funding for the Aquatic Ecosystem Restoration Program will
be used to restore several large ecosystems. Activities include
restoring aquatic habitat in ecosystems where ecosystem
structure, function, and processes have been degraded; work
needed to comply with biological opinions, operation and
maintenance of the Chicago sanitary and ship canal fish
barrier.
The budget prioritizes funding to operate and maintain
water resources infrastructure and the funding allocations for
the maintenance of commercial navigation, flood and storm
damage reduction, and hydropower projects that are informed by
risk-based assessments that consider both project and project
component conditions and the consequences in the event of
failure. For example, funding levels will enable continued
reduction in the number of extended lock closures per year to
preventable mechanical breakdowns and a reduced risk of failure
at our flood risk management projects.
Funding for the construction program uses objective
performance-based guidelines to fund the projects with highest
net economic, environmental, or public safety returns to the
Nation. For example, the budget funds the Olmsted Lock and Dam
Project to completion. The budget also funds the Dam Safety
Program to enable the Corps to evaluate and implement effective
risk reduction strategies at its dams where needed.
The budget funds six feasibility studies to completion and
also includes funding for floodplain management services and
for the Planning Assistance to States Program to assist local
communities with technical and planning assistance and
specifically to help them develop and implement nonstructural
approaches that will enable them to reduce their flood risk.
All ongoing feasibility studies funded in the budget have
signed feasibility cost-sharing agreements and have developed a
plan that outlines their scope and scheduling costs, which has
been agreed upon by the district, division, Corps headquarters,
and the local sponsor.
Lastly, the budget also makes important investments to
promote sustainable management of the lands around Corps
facilities by providing funds to update the plans that govern
how we manage our facilities in helping to combat invasive
species.
Thank you all for inviting me today and I look forward to
your questions. Thank you.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
General Semonite. Chairman Simpson, Ranking Member Kaptur,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to testify today. We are glad to have Secretary
James on the Civil Works team, and I look forward to working
with him in the years ahead. I have been in command of the
Corps for almost 2 years and I want to briefly update you on
where we are going. As I said last year, the Corps' credibility
is measured by our ability to deliver results that are on time,
on budget, and of exceptional quality.
Since Congress first authorized our navigation mission in
1824, the Corps has worked hard to develop and implement
solutions to the Nation's water resource challenges. We are
able to do this because we have a world-class workforce of
talented and dedicated professionals who are absolutely
passionate about what we do. None of our work is done alone,
but with the full participation and the hard work of many
others. We appreciate, value, and depend upon the support of
the administration and Congress and all of our partners to
succeed in our mission.
I am very proud of the work that the Corps accomplishes,
but I am also equally aware that the organization can improve.
I have been, and remain committed to, instituting changes to
the Corps delivery processes in order to become a more
efficient and effective organization.
The Corps faces a multitude of challenges, some old and
some new. Much of our infrastructure is well beyond its design
life, yet the requirements have never been greater. The demands
on the Federal budget continue to grow and as our
infrastructure ages, we find more and more annual
appropriations going to operation and maintenance at the
expense of both investigations and construction.
Today we have over $96 billion in construction
requirements, representing the Federal share on a multitude of
projects. We have close to a hundred ongoing feasibility
studies, which, if authorized, would simply add to the Federal
budget requirement. Our feasibility studies are formulated with
the assumption of efficient funding and most all of our
multiple-year projects are budgeted on an annual basis with no
assurances that adequate funding will be available from year to
year. This creates uncertainty for our non-Federal sponsors, it
drives up project costs and it delays the realization of
benefits. At the current rate, it will take us over a hundred
years to address the backlog and this is simply unacceptable.
Together we must remove barriers to the development and
improvement of our water resource infrastructure. We must
encourage and incentivize alternative project financing,
streamline Federal procedures for delivering projects, and
reduce unnecessary Federal oversight to facilitate timely
delivery of projects.
The Corps has been working with the administration and was
instrumental in the development of 20 legislative proposals
which are a part of the President's infrastructure package
presented to Congress. We recognize the Corps' role in the
future may be different than it has been in the past and that
our level of involvement in project delivery may vary from
project to project, location to location, and sponsor to
sponsor. Whatever works best to deliver the project faster and
cheaper is our goal.
The Corps continues to work on policy and administrative
changes that can improve infrastructure delivery. Over the last
year I have assembled all my General Officers, our SESes, our
Colonels, and our senior leaders to relook internally our
organization, our authorities, policies, regulations, and
procedures in order to identify opportunities for increased
efficiency and effectiveness.
The Corps is fully engaged in support of five
administration efforts aimed at streamlining the regulatory
processes. The Corps is addressing topics such as implementing
the One Federal Decision that establishes discipline and
accountability in the environmental review and permitting
process for infrastructure projects. We are reviewing the
nationwide permit program to identify modifications that will
increase the efficiency of decision-making.
We also are continuing to work with the EPA in reviewing
the 2015 Waters of the United States Rule. Our goal is intended
to simplify for the process for gaining infrastructure permits
while protecting the environment in accordance with the law.
We are working to delegate more decisions to the lowest
appropriate level, encouraging our leadership to take more
prudent risks. Our technical experts close to the issues can
make decisions based on their experience, their knowledge, and
their competence in a specific area. Risk-informed or
professional judgment decisions should be made and documented
without being subject to numerous time-consuming reviews.
We are looking at how we can best capture the total value
of our projects. Most communities have a master plan that was
developed based on an analysis to determine best value for the
community or region. This may consider life risk reductions,
economic value, resilience of the community, et cetera. We want
to make sure that our project reports reflect the total value
of our projects. This may increase the opportunities for non-
Federal investment in the projects. We are reviewing existing
authorities that may help leverage non-Federal financing such
as WRDA 2086, section 203 for Investigations and section 204
for Construction, that allow sponsors to take ownership of the
project delivery process.
Finally, I will mention the Corps is implementing multiple
improvements to the section 408 review process. We have
delegated decisions to the lowest level possible and are
further clarifying when section 408 permission is or is not
required. Additionally, we are looking for opportunities where
section 408 requirements may be met by other Corps processes or
authorities in order to eliminate redundancies and have
eliminated the requirement for a 60 percent design.
The Corps wants to be part of the solution, not part of the
problem. We recognize the need to address internal policies,
regulations, processes, and cultural impediments in order to
remain relevant into the feature. We want to be value added to
delivering solutions, whatever role we may have in that
endeavor. But we can't conduct all these reforms in isolation
by ourselves. We need the help of OMB and Congress to unleash
the power of the Corps by acting on our numerous
recommendations.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee.
This concludes my testimony and I look forward to answering any
questions you might have. Thank you.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Petty.
Mr. Petty. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Simpson and
Ranking Member Kaptur. Again, congratulations on your long and
great service so far and I continue to looking forward to
working with you for the opportunity to discuss not only the
President's budget, but the specifics of Bureau of Reclamation
and the Central Utah Project Completion Act Office.
My name is Tim Petty. I am at the Department of Interior. I
am the Assistant Secretary for Water and Science. The water is
the Bureau of Reclamation and the science is the U.S.
Geological Survey. I appreciate your ongoing support of our
programs.
The overall Department of the Interior's 2019 budget
request is $11.7 billion, which emphasizes Interior's role in
protecting the Nation's natural resources, advancing America's
natural energy, providing vital scientific information for
responsibly managing our resources and energy development, and
honoring our trust responsibilities to the Native Americans as
well. The Bureau of Reclamation's activities, including
recreation, contribute more than $48 billion in economic
resources and support over 388,000 jobs each year.
Reclamation's 37 billion kilowatt hours of electricity provides
for more than $1 billion in gross power revenue alone for the
Federal Government.
The Bureau of Reclamation works with both States, Tribes,
local governments, and nongovernmental organizations to provide
reliable water and power supplies to the West. The 2019 budget
continues our efforts to address the challenges of water
availability. Interior's $1 billion budget request for
Reclamation is to invest in our water and power infrastructure,
facilitating the delivery of water to 31 million people in the
West. In addition, our programs invest in ecosystem protection
and restoration so that we can continue to supply water and
power reliability as we have historically.
This budget also continues to strengthen our Tribal Nations
by implementing Indian water rights settlements as well. We are
proposing that Reclamation invest $127.4 million in fiscal year
2019 toward fulfillment of those responsibilities.
Interior's budget furthers our commitment to developing
domestic energy resources to make America stronger and energy
independent. Hydropower is a renewable, reliable resource
providing clean energy to the western United States. It is the
Nation's largest renewable energy resource and the Bureau of
Reclamation is the second largest producer of hydropower in the
United States.
We support the President's efforts to create a leaner, more
efficient government, and the Bureau of Reclamation will be
actively involved in bringing forward the most promising ideas
to improve government effectiveness and efficiency and to spur
economic growth. For example, Reclamation has developed a
proposal to facilitate the transfer of title of certain
Reclamation projects when such certain transfers are beneficial
to all parties. This will allow irrigation districts and water
managers to make their own decisions to improve water
management at the local level.
Finally, Interior's budget request includes resources for
the Central Utah Project Completion Act Office, which falls
under the jurisdiction of the Assistant Secretary for Water and
Science. The 2019 budget for this office specifically is $8
million. Of this amount $3.4 million will be available for
planning and construction activities administered by the
Central Utah Water Conservation District, continuing our
partnership in the ongoing construction of the Utah Lake
Systems Facility.
The budget also continues Interior's required program
oversight activity of the Endangered Species Recovery Program
implementation through the Department's office. The Central
Utah Project annually provides 62,000 acre feet of water for
irrigation and over a 100,000 acre feet for municipal and
industrial purposes, supplying water to nearly 400,000 people.
In keeping my opening comments brief, I would like to
submit my whole testimony into the record. Thank you again for
your support of our programs. I'm happy to answer any questions
that you might have for us today. Thank you.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, and your full testimony will be in
the record.
Mr. Petty. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. Burman.
Ms. Burman. Thank you, Chairman Simpson, Ranking Member
Kaptur, members of the subcommittee, for the opportunity to
discuss with you the President's requested budget for the
Bureau of Reclamation. Reclamation's 2019 budget continues to
address water supply challenges in the West, to ensure water
reliability, the efficient generation of energy, celebration of
America's recreation opportunities, commitments to Tribal
Nations, and environmental responsibilities. The 2019 budget
prioritizes funding for Reclamation's management
responsibilities to provide water and generate power in the
West.
I have included at your desk a map of the hydrology in
2018, this year, the most recent hydrology in the West. And in
listening to your comments about too much rain and storm and
damage, I would just say that much of the West is facing the
opposite right now. The pattern this year has been wet in the
north, average to above average in the north. But as you work
your way south, they are very below average with extremely dry
years that we are facing so far. It is still March. The
hydrology can change somewhat, but California and Nevada, the
Colorado River system, New Mexico, Arizona, Oklahoma, all are
facing very dry areas this year and that is the backdrop that
we have worked in.
Our budget in 2019 emphasizes the following principles.
First, water reliability and increased storage capacity. We
cannot deliver reliable water supplies in the West without
strong and safe infrastructure. And additional storage will be
necessary to meet our current and future challenges.
Second, efficient energy generation. As the Nation's second
largest producer of hydroelectric power, Reclamation's projects
and programs constitute an important driver of economic growth.
Maintaining and modernizing hydropower infrastructure at the
Columbia River Power System. 2019 promises to be an exciting
year. I again thank the committee and am prepared to answer any
questions you have on our fiscal year 2019 budget.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Thank you all for your testimony.
First question is to you, Mr. James. The budget request
includes new accounts for the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund and
the Inland Waterway Trust Fund. What was the reasoning behind
these budget structure changes?
Mr. James. I think the administration's goal, sir, is to
more clearly present the funding in both of those accounts as
individual accounts so that they can be more easily understood
and correctly interpreted. It does not change cost sharing or
application, either one. It is just a way the administration
thinks we should go forward with those accounts.
Mr. Simpson. And General Semonite, a number of the projects
are proposed for funding in both the newly proposed Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund account and the regular Operations and
Maintenance account. I am concerned that this could result in
delays or other problems with project implementation, for
example. Under the existing budget structure, if bids for
maintenance dredging come in higher than expected, the Corps
has the flexibility to use an unobligated project fund and to
defer other lower priority activities at the project. The
proposed budget structure, on the other hand, seems to reduce
the Corps' flexibility to address the projects of highest
priority. Is that a concern?
General Semonite. Mr. Chairman, I share your concern. We
have lost some flexibility on our ability to be able to portion
different amounts you have given us in the past to be able to
best take care of the requirement.
Mr. Simpson. I was very interested in your testimony in
terms of trying to improve our ability to do projects by
streamlining and other types of things, looking at the total
rule and regulations that we impose on everything. One of the
things that has come up during this discussion of
infrastructure is public/private partnerships and financing
P3's or whatever you want to call them. We have had concerns,
while I support that and I think it is a good thing to look at.
It may be appropriate in some places and not in other places.
One of the concerns we have is that projects that are able
to be financed privately move up on the Army Corps project and
those that do not have access to those resources move down in
priority. I would hate to see those that have the ability to
raise money privately put the others down at the bottom of the
list all the time. Is that a concern of yours?
General Semonite. Sir, I think what the committee has asked
us to do is to come up with some policy. We do not have that
right now. You know there was one project that we got authority
to be able to do, Fargo Moorhead, there are some unbelievable
advantages to that. But I do concur that we cannot just pick
different projects to try individual outcomes. We need some
government policy on how would we go about this for exactly the
concerns you have.
How do we somehow entice people to incentivize certain
projects, but if there is an area of the nation that does not
have the ability to be able to do that, we do not want to
disadvantage them. So there is a sweet spot somewhere that we
have got to be able to find. My guys are working on that policy
right now, I would love to tell you I am going to have it to
you in a couple of weeks but it is probably going to be June
until we are able to give you a draft. I have got to send it to
the Secretary, let him take a look at it. But we have got to be
able to have some overarching methodology of how we can do this
so we do not have what you said.
Mr. Simpson. I appreciate that. When you guys get that
policy, I would love to sit down and talk to you about it and
how we are going to try to implement. We want to work with you
on trying to solve a lot of these problems, I hate to call them
problems but smoothing out some things so that we can get
things done quicker and cheaper and so forth for the taxpayer.
Let me ask a question to the Bureau. Whichever one of you
would like to answer this. The Department of Interior recently
proposed reorganizing all of its agencies in the Department
including the Bureau of Reclamation. Under common regional
boundaries, can you please explain what the current proposal is
and the need for this effort and in that, there are several
questions. What is the process being followed for the
development of this proposed common boundaries, has reclamation
been involved, what is the plan for ensuring meaningful
congressional input? What is the schedule for implementation,
does the current proposal change where regional offices of the
Bureau of Reclamation will be located? What is the cost to
Reclamation of this reorganization and does Reclamation expect
any impacts to the operations or management of any projects due
to this reorganization? So broadly, just everything that is
going on with this reorganization.
Mr. Petty. Mr. Chairman, I will go ahead and start off that
conversation. Actually, in front of you, each member has two
maps. So we are going to talk about the reorg, so if you dig a
little bit with the two maps, one looks like what is the
existing organization within the Department of Interior. The
other one is the latest, this is the seventh rendition. It has
draft written across the front. We have gone through seven
reiterations already to date. It is still in draft because the
highest priority, even Secretary Zinke yesterday on the Senate
side, specifically said we know that it is a high priority that
we interact with you as members up here to know exactly what we
are working with.
So as this continues to be drafted through, what I really
want to highlight is just the convolutedness of how Interior
with all of its bureaus work in almost silo organizations. What
the Secretary and what the goal is, is to put these regions
together so that all the different communities within the
bureaus can actually start working more efficiently together.
What we have found is it takes forever and ever going from one
bureau to another bureau to another bureau in everything from
the areas of policy interaction, permitting and so forth that
takes place.
So again, what I want to be able to, Mr. Chairman, and to
the whole committee, is just be able to say, we really want to
work with Interior, but also with your staff as we continue
through this reiteration. We are working with our senior
executive service staff within Interior. We are working with
the governors offices as well very closely. Again, the idea is
in the seventh rendition, it has gone through quite a few
changes and there have been significant components that really
actually specifically highlight even Reclamation's component on
really looking at the watershed. So if you can compare and look
how the later part, the Upper Colorado, the Lower Colorado, the
California, they have gone through significant changes. So I
will stop there and see if the Commissioner has any thoughts or
comments on top of that.
Ms. Burman. I would just add that I think this draft has
tried to look at not only sensitivity to State borders, which
folks who work with BLM find very important, but also looking
at watershed. So the Colorado River watersheds are kept
together, the Columbia River has gone from being within several
regions into largely one except for the very head of the Snake.
The California system is no longer cut in half, the California
system is now together, the San Joaquin and Sacramento systems.
So I think this draft has gone a long way. In many ways, it
follows Reclamation's borders and we have significant input
into it.
Mr. Simpson. I appreciate that and I am supportive of what
he is trying to do and I look forward to working with the
Secretary on this. I do hear from stakeholders out there that
States borders are really important. I keep saying to them, I
realize that but watersheds do not recognize State borders very
well. When we are trying to--it has been a pain in the rear end
when we have had the Columbia Basin divided between different
States and different regions of Interior's departments. It
always creates a challenge when north Idaho is treated
differently than south Idaho or the decisions made do not apply
in both places and that kind of stuff. I appreciate what the
Secretary is trying to do. Ms. Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you again
for your testimony. I want to support what the chairman is
saying. As a land planner myself, and having had some
experience with the Department of Interior in the past, the
difficulty of coordinating, even between the Parks Service and
the Wildlife Refuge System. What you said, Secretary Petty,
about the silos within Interior, I completely agree. Our region
of the country faced a problem that will require binational
cooperation with Canada and with Michigan, Indiana and Ohio, to
deal with the algal bloom issue, the largest watershed in the
entire Great Lakes with this massive problem. It is very
difficult to even assemble the information properly to begin to
address the problem. There is no political structure that, and
we may have to put it in a couple of our bills to make it
happen but to really address the gravity of this in real time.
So anyway, keep going, you are on the right track.
The question I have but I will give a little background.
What are each of you doing to raise the profile of your Agency
within the administration to help the President and his staff
realize that a focus on infrastructure means also focusing on
the Corps and the Bureau of Reclamation? We hear a lot of talk
about infrastructure and then we get this half-baked proposal
where 80 percent of whatever funding they are talking about
they say has to come from private funding and then everything
goes to a halt.
I remember I had the privilege of working for a former
President of the United States and how hard it was to fight the
internal battles with OMB to do what the country needed. So
because the President has just appointed a military man to be
head of the Department of State and because his Chief of Staff
is a tried and tested Marine, there is default in the
administration to the military side of the equation. So I am
saying to you, that there may--having worked for a President
who was thwarted by his own staff, including OMB, what are you
doing to go around that blockade and really move the
infrastructure issue up through the agencies over which you
have jurisdiction?
I would be very interested in hearing how you intend to
raise the profile of the backlog infrastructure, $94 billion,
and how important that could be in this administration to
actually crafting an infrastructure proposal that could be
funded. By the way, I am old enough to remember General
Eisenhower, when he became President and we created the
interstate highway system. It never existed before. It was a
defense industrial highway system for this country. You are
going to be vising the Soo Locks, thank you very much, Mr.
Secretary, very shortly. An extraordinarily important place
that the Corps is managing but I just think you should not be
shy. You should find a way to go around these blockades that
are purely staff driven and help us meet a national need. What
are you doing to raise your profile?
Mr. James. Madam, I will give you the best answer I can on
that. When I came to Washington as an appointee, the only
reason I came to Washington and accepted the offer that I had
was to move more dirt, take less dollars and do more with it.
That is what I am focused on, that is what I will be focused
on. Right now, we have a taskforce where we are working
together, it is not ready yet. We are going to be working from
my office with all agencies, all secretariats including
Interior, AG, OMB, all of them, in order to try to parallel
projects as they come through what is known as the pipeline.
Because right now the Department of Agriculture delineates
wetlands in this country in every county. Well, the Corps is
given a project to work an EIS on, they go through the entire
project of EIS and guess what, EPA also has delineation rights
on wetlands. So those two agencies get together, sometimes they
see eye to eye, sometimes they do not and it can slow down the
Corps process of an EIS by several months, maybe more.
We are going to try and work with the Corps and all the
other agencies to see if we cannot streamline the entire
process, not just the Corps but from the other people as well.
I met Secretary Perdue yesterday and discussed this. He is very
willing to work toward this. I am still waiting on an
appointment with the other secretaries.
We recognize the problem and we are working toward it. Oh
by the way, we are also looking at maybe if over time we have
created some legislation that works against itself. If in 1990
we did one thing and 1999 we did something--we are looking at
that internally. If I find something along that line, I have no
authority but I would like to discuss it with Congress to see
if we can help along that line as well so that we can all take
some responsibility. We are just limited on funds. We cannot do
enough with the limited funding that we have.
Ms. Kaptur. Mr. Secretary, I apologize for interrupting but
my time is short. To cut your agencies by 20 percent, I know
what happens when you sort of U-turn into OMB and then all of
the sudden some clerk over there cancels something out. I am
just trying to make the point, you have power and I think if
the other infrastructure bill, whatever that is, is stalled,
you have one too. I just would encourage you to think hard
together about how to influence the administration. I have
actually talked to Vice President Pence about this. There are
individuals inside that administration that want to do
something on infrastructure regardless of whatever the Budget
Agency is doing and we can find ways around their
intransigence. But the country needs this, we cannot wait.
General Semonite. Ma'am, I will keep my answer short. I am
more than willing to follow up. We have been very, very
aggressive in the last year of being inside the White House to
be able to work with President Trump's advisor on
infrastructure and to be able to help make sure that as we
think about railroads, roads and other capabilities, that
rivers get added into that. We have not only advised him on how
we can help streamline some of the permitting, but to be able
to bring that $95 billion bill into the White House to be able
to make sure that they are being recognized. Mainly with the
risk that happens to things like Soo Locks that if, in fact,
you do not invest in that then there is going to be significant
ramifications.
Secretary James and I were in the White House yesterday
morning talking about the same exact things to be able to make
sure that those requirements are on the table so when Congress
makes decisions, if you cannot afford all of that, you at least
understand the risk of not putting money into those projects.
Ms. Kaptur. If I might add, the President carried the State
of Michigan. He is well aware of the Flint water crisis. I do
not know what he knows about the Soo Lock but that should be an
absolute must for this administration. Thank you and I will
wait for the second round, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Fleischmann.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary James,
General Semonite, Secretary Petty, Commission Burman, thank you
all very much for appearing before our subcommittee today. I
represent the third district of Tennessee. That is East
Tennessee, Chattanooga, Oak Ridge. The Corps does substantial
work in my part of the world and I thank you. General, I want
to personally thank you for coming and visiting with me and I
appreciate that personal touch.
A brief history about the Chickamauga Lock. When I came to
Congress, the Inland Waterway Trust Fund was broken, it was
broken in several ways. All the money was going to the Olmsted
Lock, virtually all the money. It was underfunded and the
future was uncertain. With members of this subcommittee on both
sides of the aisle and with our colleagues in the Senate, we
worked very hard to reform the Inland Waterway Trust Fund, to
take the overriding burden of Olmsted out so that other locks,
Lower Monongahela Kentucky and Chickamauga, could receive funds
and we did that.
At the request of industry, we increased the revenue on the
user fee, on the diesel tax, so we are very proud of that. New
construction on Chickamauga Lock has reresumed. I think this is
the fourth year we have had construction. There has been a new
contract awarded. I have met with the contractor, I have met
with the Corps. The National Corps does a very good job as well
and obviously I am very concerned and I want to make sure that
that progress considers that we move forward.
In that regard, I have a few questions. I will let whomever
wishes to answer, answer the questions. The President's budget
recommends the imposition of a decal fee on commercial
operators on the Inland Transportation System of $1.782 billion
over 10 years or $178 million per year. My first question is,
is this decal fee in addition to or in lieu of the current 29
cents per gallon fuel tax paid by barge carriers.
Mr. James. Yes sir, it is.
Mr. Fleischmann. It is in addition sir?
Mr. James. Yes.
Mr. Fleischmann. OK, thank you. I am informed that in 2016,
the fuel tax which I previously alluded to, raised $114 million
for the Inland Waterway Trust Fund. So, it's my understanding
that you're here today advocating for additional revenue to the
trust fund of $178.2 million plus the $114 million from the
fuel tax for a total annual fee of $292.2 million per year.
Mr. James. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fleischmann. In that light I have one question. Why,
then, is the budget proposing to spend only $5 million from the
Inland Waterway Trust Fund and for only one project going back
to Olmsted, I believe, when four other projects are currently
under construction, specifically, and including, the
Chickamauga Lock?
Mr. James. That one's harder to answer than the first
question.
Mr. Fleischmann. Yes, sir.
Mr. James. My understanding of that is the fact that due to
the cap of the entire budget that we use, even if money's
coming out of the trust fund, it goes against the cap, and the
prioritizing of the entire budget and the funds that we get out
of the budget that that's where that fell. The way I understand
it for the additional fee is the fact that it's realized that
there's more money going to be needed as we move forward in the
critical repairs of other locks and, therefore, the feeling
that that's building up, it shouldn't be worrisome because it's
felt that we're going to need that within the next ten years.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. A follow-up
question to that then. It looks like there's going to be an
abundance of revenue for the projects, that the priority
language that Senator Alexander and I put in place in our
respective bills to keep Chickamauga Lock forth, Olmsted should
be completed this year. My question would be, are you still
planning on having a new Chickamauga Lock completed by about
2023 or 2024?
Mr. James. Sir, I don't know about the Chief, I can't
answer that right this instant.
Mr. Fleischmann. Yes, sir. General Semonite?
General Semonite. Sir, that depends on future funding, of
course. Right now to be able to meet that milestone the number
that has to be lifted in 2021 and 2022 is about $90 million.
That's a lot more than Chickamauga's gotten in the last couple
years. So, I won't try to guess whether that funding is going
to come or not, that's your decision, but right now, if, in
fact, that funding cash flow is not maintained, there's no way
2024's going to be met.
Mr. Fleischmann. OK. Now, it's my understanding, though,
General Semonite, that I think in fiscal 2019 we're looking at
maybe $99.5 million, because we've got $78 million, I believe,
in 2018, and I was just under the assumption that the number
for 2019 was $99.5 million or thereabouts.
General Semonite. You're talking Chickamauga, sir?
Mr. Fleischmann. Yes, sir.
General Semonite. That's not the number I'm tracking, sir.
Mr. Fleischmann. OK.
General Semonite. I think it goes to add, though, and for
the Chairman and the rest of the members of the committee, and
I'm only talking on what I see when I look at concrete in the
ground, when you build something over 15 or 20 years it's a
very inefficient way of building a project.
Mr. Fleischmann. Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. Wasserman Schultz.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And,
General Semonite, that's a perfect segue into my question about
the 30-year timeline for restoration of the Florida Everglades.
You mentioned, in your testimony, the inconsistency of funding
being an obstacle to completion, which, I think, is self-
evident, but is important to say out loud because we're costing
ourselves more and more money making projects more expensive
the longer the timeline. President Obama's fiscal year 2017
budget request for the Everglades restoration was $106 million.
Fiscal year 2018's request for the same project, only from the
Trump administration, is only $77 million. Fiscal year 2019,
less than $70 million. The Florida legislature, and as most of
you, I assume, know, the restoration of the Florida Everglades
is a 50/50 partnership with the State of Florida. They passed
the Florida Legacy Act committing to invest up to $200 million
a year of State funding in support of CERP. And this year's
proposal is less than $70 million. Why is the administration
not taking advantage of the State of Florida's commitment by
proposing a match if you are committed to speeding up projects
and making sure that that's not an obstacle? We should, at
least, be meeting our end of the bargain, which I will say has
consistently been a problem over many years, but there are some
years in which we have more of a commitment from the Federal
Government than others. So, it's just baffling to me why the
administration, Mr. Secretary, would be proposing less than $70
million. We have, as you will hear my colleagues ask questions
about their own projects, many projects that are on-line behind
the Everglades or that will come up at some point. You know,
what is the administration willing to sacrifice in the next
phase of Everglades restoration given the extremely paltry
request in funding? And that's for the General Semonite and
Secretary James.
Mr. James. I really can't answer for the President's budget
overall, but our part of that budget that we receive and help
identify in the development of the budget. It just goes along
with the prioritization of other projects. That is--we are----
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. I'm sorry. Don't you represent the
President? I mean, why are you not able to answer for the
President's budget?
Mr. James. I said as we help implement and identify the
President's budget, he develops the budget. I misspoke
originally. But, the way I understand it, there is work to be
done and we're looking at the possibility of reprogramming
funds toward the Everglades in order to make up what wasn't
originally identified in that project. And other than that, do
you know more about this, sir? At this point in time in my
early stage of this career I couldn't answer you any further,
ma'am. I'll be happy to visit with you about it or I'll be
happy for the staff to----
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. I enjoyed a strong relationship with
your predecessor and spoke to her regularly, and look forward
to doing the same with you.
Mr. James. Thank you very much.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. General Semonite, if you have a more
detailed response that would be wonderful.
General Semonite. I think probably the best thing is for
the Secretary to come and lay out where we see the budget
happening. I will continue to tell you, though, that the money
that Congress does give us, we want to be very, very committed
to make sure those projects are done expeditiously and wherever
we can find savings in those to continue to be able to make
sure we're putting those, as the Secretary said, moving dirt
and making things happen, we're committed to do that.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. I'm trying to squeeze blood from a
stone. And, Mr. Chairman, you have been excellent about
stepping up and making sure that we provide the kind of funding
we need. My last question relates to Port Everglades rather
than the Florida Everglades, and the dredging project which is
stuck while we await additional environmental assessment work
to be completed by the Corps, which is understandable. But the
reconfiguration of the Coast Guard Station in Fort Lauderdale,
that could proceed at 100 percent non-federal expense. Broward
County, Port Everglades is willing to frontload the funding
with reimbursement and future cost-share when the larger
project moves forward. General Semonite, you mentioned delivery
projects faster and cheaper is our goal, but right now the
Corps is refusing to accept the willingness of frontloading
those funds from Broward County and Port Everglades, and none
of this dredging project can move forward until the Coast Guard
Station is moved. So, my question is, you know, and I'm going
to continue to work with my colleagues here and, hopefully,
we'll be able to get that language inserted in the budget, but
what is the obstacle if we're trying to make that projects are
funded and faster, and cheaper? It is money that you can take,
and it has nothing to do with the environmental assessments.
General Semonite. This is a great place where this dialogue
is beneficial. I was not aware that there was a contribution
offer by Broward County. We--the State of Florida has done
many, many different times, as you're aware of, offered funds
available. So, let me work this, find out what's going on.
Clearly, we are trying to support the deepening of Port
Everglades PPA signature, and then we were thinking somewhere,
2018 or 2019, but the Coast Guard Station is a challenge, but I
was not aware that there was an offer on the table to provide
additional funds. What I'll do, ma'am, is I will figure this
out and I will either come see you or make sure that Jason Kirk
comes to see you and briefs you, my Colonel.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Wonderful. Thank you so much. Mr.
Chairman, thank you for your indulgence. I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Newhouse.
Mr. Newhouse. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank our panelists today, General Semonite, Secretary James,
Secretary Petty, and certainly Commissioner Burman. Thank you
for being here with us. I'd like to take my time and start off
with just a simple statement. My constituents and I need your
help. Actually, we need the help of everybody sitting on this
subcommittee, everybody on this panel. We need the help of
every one of my colleagues in the House and the Senate. We
certainly need the help of our two senators. I think you know
this, but starting in less than three weeks your agencies are
being forced to spill water over our dams in the Federal
Columbia River Power System, and that is due to a single
judge's decision to disregard the science and the collaboration
conducted during the Obama administration between the
scientists and engineers at our Federal Agencies. The four
states, the sovereign northwest tribes, local and regional
stakeholders, and experts who have worked together in an
unprecedented fashion to develop the 2014 biological opinion.
Your agencies recently informed us that the estimated cost of
this forced spill will be an additional $40 million per year,
every year, on the backs of our rate payers in the Pacific
Northwest. And over the past many months I've been working
painstakingly hard alongside Congresswoman McMorris Rodgers,
Congresswoman Herrera Beutler to develop larger legislation and
also more targeted language for this year's fiscal 2018
appropriations bill that will simply put a pause on this forced
spill while all your agencies continue to work on the new
biological opinion as well as the updated NEPA analysis. Now,
Mr. Chairman, if you'll indulge me in our panelists, I
appreciate this. I know it's not an easy thing, but I would ask
that you'd answer succinctly, perhaps a one-word answer, and to
facilitate that, Commission Burman and General Semonite, I
believe, if you could represent your respective agencies. If
I'm wrong on that I'd ask Secretary Petty as well Mr. James to
assist. But could I ask you, isn't it true that through Ms.
Jennifer Greer, who is the Army Corps' Chief of Future
Directions Branch as well as Amanda Coster who is the
Department of Interiors' Congressional Affairs Officer, through
those individuals, your respective agencies, the Bureau of
Reclamation as well as the Army Corps provided us technical
assistance with the fiscal year 2018 appropriations language
that we've developed that puts a pause on this bill, and have
your agencies approved that language? General Semonite,
Commissioner.
General Semonite. Congressman, this is where, basically,
there are--you asked one word, it would be balance. Our job is
to balance all the different requirements we have on a river
system. This particular one is where there has been a Federal
judge's decision to be able to execute that in a certain way.
We are now following that decision. And so, if there are other
things that we can do to be able to help facilitate that, but I
think right now we're continuing to try to follow the order of
the judge.
Mr. Newhouse. Ms. Burman.
Mr. Petty. If you do not mind, Congressman, let me just
give a big picture, that is cooperation. We need to really work
with you specifically as well as all the members in the
Northwest on how we can go and focus back in and rework that
2014 biological opinion and get back to, obviously, the one
that's making that final decision that we all here at this
table need to specifically follow. So, my one word is we need
to come back and specifically work with you in cooperation, so
that we can move this forward and get these to a solution so
that we know where we can head into the future.
Mr. Newhouse. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to ask unanimous
consent to submit the language for the record, of that language
for the appropriations bill.
Mr. Simpson. OK.
Mr. Newhouse. Can I ask, again, will the language that we
are talking about in any way prevent the new biological opinion
from being developed or in any way prevent your agencies from
conducting the NEPA or EIS process?
General Semonite. I'm not aware of that particular
instance. I'll have to get back with you, sir, on exactly
whether that language will have any impact on our ability to be
able to do that.
Mr. Newhouse. Mr. Petty.
Mr. Petty. Yeah, Congressman, the same. What we need to do
is just come back and circle back around with you on the
specifics so that we can be working together in how we can move
forward.
Mr. Newhouse. Can I ask, then, can any of you definitively
say that--or can you point to any scientific information that
says this forced bill will not hurt the very fish that the 2014
biological opinion was developed to protect?
Mr. Petty. From my past review and working specifically, I
was very encouraged that we had the science supporting what we
were needing. So, we look forward to seeing how we can continue
not only what we had in the past, but to build on that so that
we can move forward with the legislation and/or with any of the
court order aspects of revisiting that again and build out what
we need.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you. Well, certainly, Mr. Chairman,
I've gone over my time, and I appreciate your indulgence. Thank
you. Thank you, all.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Aguilar.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary and
General Semonite, the President's fiscal year 2019 request
included a total of $534 million for construction associated
with all Corps flood and coastal storm damage projects across
the nation. Under the President's request no flood-related
construction projects would be funded to completion and no new
flood-related studies or construction projects are initiated.
One of those projects is in my region as well as Mr. Calvert's
fiscal year 2019 funding for Santa Ana River Main Stem Project.
The request proposed $15 million for the project. In fiscal
year 2017 the project received $49 million. In fiscal year 2018
the President's request was for $40 million. Also, the request
did not fund various the Corps' Continuing Authorities
Programs, including section 14 CAP to address steam bank and
shoreline erosion affecting public works. I won't ask you
specifically about the $15 million requested for the Santa Ana
River Main Stem, but of the projects funded for construction,
generally, in the fiscal year 2019 request, how many are
receiving full capability level of funding?
General Semonite. Sir, I think right now I know that
Olmsted is. I need to go and have my staff do a better detail
and come back out. I don't think that--I'm not aware of any
other ones right now that have, but there very easily could be.
We have a lot of projects, obviously, on the table. I owe an
answer back to you.
Mr. Aguilar. OK. Can you talk to me a little bit about the
justification for not funding section 14 in the CAPs programs?
What happens to CAPs projects that are in development if
congress does not choose to fund these programs? How many of
these have been identified, and what's the remaining federal
balance to complete those? Have we done any deep dives on
those?
General Semonite. I haven't, but, we are more than willing
to come and lay out the CAP program. We think there is great
value in the CAP program, but obviously there have been some of
those subcategories in CAP get funded, some don't. We can
certainly walk through exactly where we're at on that.
Mr. Aguilar. Right. We can submit it for the record and get
a detailed response and maybe meet with you folks to get a
little bit more information. A local issue, if you'll indulge
me, will the Corps be funding 408 Permitting Process and making
that a priority? The county in which I represent has forty 408
permits in the process. They also have WRDA section 214
agreements to reimburse the Corps, but have been told staffing
issues could delay those reviews being done. This affects local
infrastructure projects, this affects projects that our local
communities are trying to deliver and, as we see in many cases,
they're putting money on the table in order to do that, and are
being told that they'll be facing delays.
General Semonite. Well, Congressman, great question. There
was some time when we didn't have adequate 408 money. We had
only $4 million in 2016. Last year we only had about $3
million. This year we have $8.5 million. So, we appreciate
Congress taking care of us. I think we are going to be OK when
it comes to staffing, but what is more important with 408s is
over the last several years, I hate to say it, 408s migrated to
Washington, DC, and I'm not convinced you need to be signing
408s in Washington, DC. Trust our Generals, trust our Colonels.
We delegated that all back down to the lower level. Regions are
signing these or the actual districts are signing them, and if
there are 40 there now, then I will make sure that we continue
to work that backlog down. I had a discussion last night on a
408 that took way too long, and I as a 3-star called the
Colonel in charge and said, ``Figure out how to be able to make
sure that we can do this.'' I don't need seven decimal points
to be able to approve a 408, we are committed to do that.''
Mr. Aguilar. Great, I appreciate that commitment. General,
one last for you. In February of 2017, $17 billion was
appropriated to the Corps in response to hurricanes Harvey,
Irma, and Maria, and other flood-related disasters. Of that
amount $1.8 billion was to repair damages to existing projects.
I've got less than a minute here, so I'm not going to give you
the due time, but can you describe the status of the work
accomplished with this repair funding?
General Semonite. First of all, I can't thank the Congress
enough for the $17.4 billion; there is significant damage out
there. We think some time in June we'll have a layout of where
that $17.4 billion is going. We received very, very specific
guidance as to how much goes to certain areas in Irma, Maria,
and Harvey; and then other areas that were affected by other
storms in a certain frequency. Once we get that portfolio all
figured out, it will work its way back through. Now, what we
really want to do is come back and brief the committees, as
well as brief all of you, how much of that $17.4 billion is
going out to each of your individual projects that are out
there. It is a very, very large portfolio, and if I don't get a
chance, Mr. Chairman, to tell you this, right now capacity is
one of my biggest single concerns. I need to make sure we can
put that money in the ground. We're looking at how do I expand
the capacity of the Corps to be able to make sure we can
expedite that because you want to be able to make sure that we
have this in the ground before some other storm comes back and
causes harm to our people.
Mr. Aguilar. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. I want to turn to Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
being here. General Semonite, I know some times you don't hear
it enough in your job, but I want to thank you. Last year, we
had a nice discussion about the dredging issue in the Port of
Cleveland; and I understand that you collaborated with the
other partners there and have now resolved that issue; and I
certainly appreciate your efforts to doing so. Hopefully, we
have cured the open-water dredging issue now, but the one thing
I would like to know is for the fiscal year 2019 civil works
budget calls for $6.789 million for dredging the Cleveland
Harbor. Based on the information that you have, is that amount
going to be sufficient to dredging complete upland placement in
2019?
General Semonite. Congressman, we don't see a problem with
that number. The other thing is we are committed to continue to
have, first of all, a strong relationship with all of the
players that are out there. We know that your state has a goal
of no open lake placement by 2020. We are committed to continue
to do that. There are challenges, of course, where if, in fact,
we end up having to dispose of things in a more expensive way;
and I am talking about as the country now, then that means
there is going to be some ramifications somewhere in the
budget; but, right now, we think that we are OK for fiscal year
2019, and we are committed to try to make sure that we grow
this relationship. And it really has gotten much, much better
in the last year.
Mr. Joyce. Great; and I'm glad that it is working out for
you. On to another question, and I'm going to cut through all
of background on it and we will get right down to it--the
Brandon Road Report. I know my distinguished colleague here on
the panel also has an interest in this; but the fact that--we
have received as a draft--when will we have the final report,
and when will the work begin to actually implement the
structures or barriers that will affect keeping the Asian carp
out of the Great Lakes?
General Semonite. Great question. I am going to sign a
chief's report by August 2019. All my chief reports I am trying
to push left, wherever we can. How can I continue to
accelerate? This is something I think is very, very critical to
be able to make sure we address this issue, and then that way
we will give you a formal recommendation as to what we think is
going to happen in Brandon Road. I think the other thing that
we might need help with here--there is currently not a non-
Federal sponsor. I do not want to slow this down because
somebody says you can't move forward if, in fact, you don't
have a non-Federal sponsor. So this is where the dialogue where
the committees are figuring out, how do we go forward with this
approach. I don't want us to get caught in a bureaucratic
loophole somewhere because we don't have a sponsor, we are not
able to continue to drive forward; our guidance right now says
you basically need a non-Federal sponsor for everything we do.
This is where I think we might need some help with the
committee. Obviously, the Secretary and our team continues to
push, but this is what we might end up hitting an arbitrary
roadblock.
Mr. Joyce. Fair enough, point taken. Mr. James, you say in
the budget ``makes important investments by providing funds
that combat invasive species, among other priorities.'' Do you
know of any other ongoing or past initiative the court has
undertaken to combat other invasive species across the United
States, and were those efforts successful?
Mr. James. I know of other areas where they are being
combatted. I don't know whether they were successful,
ultimately or not. General Semonite's been around the Corps a
lot longer than I have and he might be able to answer that, but
I know there are--somewhere in one of the western rivers--
Columbia, I think--they are fighting some kind of invasive
mussel that they are working on right now, as we speak; I know
of that one. Of course, you know, historically, most of these
things are brought into our country from other areas, and
usually for a purpose; and it has worked out very well for us.
So, success stories I can't tell you sir, I don't know. I can
get some answers for you if the General doesn't know either,
and we will get right back to you on it.
Mr. Joyce. Congresswoman Kaptur, I believe, is here for the
fight with the zebra mussels and some of those other things in
the past. I don't know if we won that war or lost it, or just
gave up; but we certainly want to know if, in fact, things are
working and how we can translate those practices into effect in
Great Lakes because we can't afford to have the Asian carp in
there because it's game, set, match.
Mr. James. Well, that's absolutely a priority. There are
too many states located by these waters up there in the Great
Lakes that will be affected by those things. I'm from down
river from there in Missouri, right on the Mississippi River. I
see what they have done in that area. There is an area in
Tennessee known as Reelfoot Lake. It has definitely hurt fresh-
water fishing there. So, this is a priority to stop them. It's
also a priority to keep navigation open in that area so that we
can continue to move commerce. I think the plans moving forward
as quickly as we can push it to get to an answer of exactly how
do we do it; and I am looking forward to completing that plan;
getting with Congress; and try to get it moving forward at
Brandon Road.
Mr. Joyce. Well, you know, I have been here 5 years and we
have made no movement; so, I would like see something happen
because time is not on our side when it comes to the Asian
carp. I am out of time. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Fortenberry.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to follow
up on what Congressman Aguilar has talked about regarding the
408 permitting process. Generally, you got pretty animated
during that discussion. Do you want me to re-animate you?
General Semonite. I am more than willing to talk about 408,
sir.
Mr. Fortenberry. OK. So, here is an example. Back where I
live, you know we have natural resource districts. It's been an
amazing political subdivision that works with environmental and
flood control projects, a taxing authority with political
representations, one of the more unique types of municipal
constructs in the country. So, we are trying to build some
levees to protect a major national military asset, Strategic
Command at Offutt Air Force Base. The Omaha district informed
the NRD who is coordinating the project, that on a regular
levee inspection, that the levees were unsatisfactory. The
irony of this point is that they have been in a 408 permitting
process for 8 years, which has cost them about $5 million added
onto about the $25 million of costs; and the Corps of Engineers
is what's at issue here. So, on one side of the building, they
are unsatisfactory; on the other side of the building, the
permitting process has dragged on and on, adding cost and
creating the conditions in which this base and personnel are
potentially at risk. We've had this conversation before. You've
been kind enough to continue it in my office--like Congressman
Joyce said--you have to take on a lot of difficult problems and
you don't get enough thanks, but at the same time this still
churns out there as a harsh reality, and I would like your
response.
General Semonite. So Congressman, we will lay this out for
you; but the bottom line is that Papio, Missouri River NRD
ended up having a FEMA map certification issue in 2011. They
hired a subcontractor that did not do proper geotechnical
analysis. It's been about 5 years for us to be able to get the
standard that we needed to be able to do this. This is the
Colonel I talked to last night. The bottom line is that both
General Spellmon, the Division Commander, and Colonel Hudson
have both committed that they will have this 408 done by the
May 15 of this year. Now, the challenge is how do we make sure
that if we have a 408 that is lagging, not necessarily because
of a Corps approval because of the lack of technical analysis,
how do we somehow make sure that everybody is informed of what
is out there, and to be able to make sure that we can try to
somehow coach and mentor the subcontractors are to get it
through. So, this is something that is not indicative of normal
408 problems. This is a subcontractor performance issue.
Mr. Fortenberry. So, it is the NRD's fault, that you are
saying?
General Semonite. I think the NRD needed to hire somebody
that had the technical capability to be able to do this in a
timely manner; yes, sir.
Mr. Fortenberry. What is a normal 408 permitting process
timeline, or what should it be on a project of this magnitude?
General Semonite. I think all 408s are very complicated. We
just approved a pipeline in for the DAPL--you know that one?
That is very, very contentious, a lot of issues with the entire
inner-agency team. That was actually a 408 permit as well.
There are some other permits in there. I think that we want to
try to do these things in a relatively timely manner, 60 days,
100 days, 120 days; but if it has got a lot of--especially if I
need fish and wildlife capability, if there are other type of
variables in this, then some of these are going to be much more
contentious. And we need to be able to give the stakeholders an
understanding going into the 408 how complicated we think it is
going to be, and some expectation of when those things will be
approved.
Mr. Fortenberry. Well, I think the core of the issue is to
ensure that the internal culture--which I think you are
indicating--is highly sensitive to the realities that maybe
there isn't expertise on the ground as robust as it should be
or where you are and, yet, when we are in a unique
circumstances like in Nebraska where we have got monies ready,
full-state participation, and something is being held up, and
the expectation on the local people to have the full range of
expertise in the manner that you are talking about is
unrealistic. That we actually do have a cultural collaboration
and cooperation rather than no, you did not meet the standards,
and it's finished.
General Semonite. I agree, Congressman. I think also we
have a lot of matrix in the Corps of Engineers; we need flags
to go up. When something looks like it is going to take too
long, have the appropriate leaders get back in there. I don't
need to come in as a 3-star figuring out how to get a 408 back
up and running; but at some point, that flag didn't go up early
enough, sir.
Mr. Fortenberry. Yeah, but you're the one in front of me
now. So, I think this is not only a specific--I didn't want to
bring it up just because of the specific concern; although it
is a harsh one, it is generalizable to the bigger principle
here--to this more collaborative-type of culture that I think
you are creating.
General Semonite. Well, and again, this goes back to my
opening statement. It all goes back to how do we make sure the
culture in the Corps is to be able to have good science, good
engineering, but also to be aggressive and to be able to make
sure we are doing the right thing. That culture is not going to
change overnight, but I think we are making a big move to get
it to where it needs to be; and, specifically, on 408s,
delegating that back down and empowering those people and make
sure they are accountable is the biggest single way I can
improve the culture.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary James, we
are glad to have you here along with your colleagues. You are a
native Kentuckian?
Mr. James. Yes, sir, I am.
Mr. Rogers. And Big Blue Nation is going out west, as you
know.
Mr. James. I see that.
Mr. Rogers. We are going to the south regional in Idaho.
Mr. James. The south regional?
Mr. Rogers. Yeah, help me out here.
Mr. James. Thought that would be like the west regional.
Mr. Rogers. It is the south regional.
Mr. James. But they are going to be very welcomed in Idaho,
in Boise.
Mr. Rogers. Well, at least it is in southern Idaho.
Mr. Simpson. That's right.
Mr. Rogers. I was confused there for a while. But, anyway,
Mr. Secretary, we are proud of you, and we congratulate you on
this chore that you have undertaken. Let me ask you about
something that I have been asking the Corps about for years
with no good results. It is the Flannagan Dam, just across the
Virginia line from Kentucky in my district. After the earmark
moratorium went into effect, the House Transportation
Infrastructure Committee created a new process in the WRDA Bill
for communities to request projects from the Corps--as you
know, the so-called section 7001 process. It requires extensive
community engagement, as well as coordination with all levels
of governments--state, federal, and local. The Flannagan Dam
Project is pretty simple. The dam is in Virginia, but the water
that goes through the dam flows directly into Kentucky, and my
district in Pike County. The white water rafting season on the
Russell Fork River, which is the discharge river, is great for
tourism for a very short span of time. They want to see if
there is a way to sort of stretch out the discharge so that
there are several weeks, months even, of white water rafting on
the river; and yet, there is no money requested for the study
that's required in the budget request. For years, we have
mandated that this study take place and the Corps says have a
nice day. But can we get an answer on this? I mean, it's a
fairly small amount of money--probably a million or so; but the
principle is involved, and the success of that project is
involved; and I am so frustrated because the Corps just simply
will not pay attention. What do you think?
Mr. James. Let me ask you one question, sir. This dam, is
it a flood-control dam or water supply, do you know off hand?
Mr. Rogers. It's all of the above.
Mr. James. That's unusual. Some of the kickback might be
fear of loss of flood control if that pool isn't pulled down
quickly enough for flood season. I don't know that; I am not
familiar with the dam, and I have not been out there in the
white water yet, but I would like to go. Let me see what the
General knows about it. If we don't fully answer you, I will
get back with you, sir.
Mr. Rogers. The study only cost $1 million, and half of
that cost will be borne by the State governments. So, the Corps
only needs $500,000.
General Semonite. Congressman, I am sure there is a way
ahead. We do this in other places. I am from Vermont, and there
are certain times when we are able to let that go for white
water. Obviously, recreation is something that is an authorized
purpose in a lot of our facilities. So, I am not convinced that
we have to necessarily do a full study to be able to figure out
in the water control manual where are there some times to be
able to optimize that and do the recreation? What I will do is
have the Colonel in charge come report to you, and make sure
that he lays out what our options are; and if there is
absolutely no way possible to be able to do that release
without a study, then we owe you that, and we'll go back in and
then lay that requirement back on the Secretary; but most of
the time, we have enough flexibility in our water control
manuals to do this unless there is some very abnormal
endangered species thing or some other kind of an issue. Let us
go out and find out exactly where we are at on this particular
issue, and we owe you an answer back.
Mr. Rogers. I take that very seriously, so, thank you. This
is a fairly small amount of money; it is a fairly small item in
your agenda, but it's big for the people of Pike County who are
suffering from the tens of thousands of mine layoffs that are
there. They are looking for a way to make a living; and tourism
is the best thing we have got going in those mountains and
great streams, but we can't get the Corps engaged, and I've
been after this for years. In fact, I have rode the river. I'll
do anything to try to get help. We have paddled the river; and
it is a great river. It needs water, as all rivers do; but this
one needs some white water. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. James. Yes, sir. We have got that, and we'll be back
with you very soon.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. Herrera Beutler.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am
going to try and move quickly because I have several questions
and I want to fit as much in as possible, and whatever I don't
get to, we will just submit for the record. Thank you all for
being here. It is interesting. So, my first one is mostly about
permitting; and I am going to submit most of that piece--but it
was following along with what Mr. Fortenberry brought up--and
the answers that I am hearing are mostly--where it is not
complicated, or there are not endangered species, or fish and
wildlife is not involved, we can move pretty quickly. Well,
welcome to the west, where all of those things are always
involved, right. And shout out to General Spellmon. He's done a
great job. He's got a lot on his plate. You mentioned a small
little pipeline that he has had on his plate, right. Well,
almost every permit in my district involves all of those
things, whether it is for a small project with, you know,
oyster growers, right, aquaculture, who have been given permits
and then had those taken away, or it is a big issue like the
Columbia River. So, it is all complicated where we are at, and
we desperately need your help. We don't have the good fortune
of having--some of the--or activist governors who are not
necessarily interested in seeing just commerce. We have an
amazing hydro system, right. It is a carbonless energy system
that produces--if we were to pull it out like some people want,
we would see--it is like 15--I have heard 15 or so coal-fired
plants would be needed to replace that load-bearing generation,
which is just ridiculous to me. So, we at Wright Parish spent a
lot of money and a lot of time trying mitigate--to protect our
wild salmon runs, but we need your help and so some of the
questions I am going to submit for the record are in that vein,
but I guess more than anything we need to impress upon you as
we move forward we are going to be calling on your office and
your office and we are willing as a delegation, as a region to
do whatever we need to do, but we are going to protect this
resource, we are going to protect our fish runs and we are
going to fight whoever we need to fight, but this is a big one
and it is not going away. So having said that, let me move
really quickly and hopefully, General, you know, previous Army
Corps leadership has been clear about how they felt about
Waters Of The U.S. and I know that that has been rescinded but
it is taking a while for us to see the right EPA finalize how
they are going to move forward with regard to the Court action
and I just wanted to hear from you what is the current status,
what is the current thoughts about WOTUS, Waters of the United
States, by this current Corps leadership?
General Semonite. Well, Congresswoman, I will defer to the
Secretary on that. His office is working that a little bit more
closely with the EPA than I am.
Mr. James. Working very hard, ma'am, to get the Waters Of
The United States back in line with where it came from and
there is nothing established at this time, but it is being
worked as rapidly as possible. We are having input on that and
if our office gets its way it will be more common sense than it
was last year.
And let me mention right quickly on the hydropower part, I
am a great believer in hydropower. I think we ought to have
hydropower dams in a lot more places than we do and on the
permitting process I think General Semonite and I both are
committed on all permits to speeding those up with a little
less pain where it will not be like the dentist maybe.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Well I appreciate that. You know, some
of our challenges were split between Seattle and Portland and
we see dramatic differences in times of similar permits between
the two offices, which tells me it is not always just the
complication of the issue. It is the complication of the staff
and you talked about empowering staff to hold them accountable.
I agree. We need to do that and which is why I have also looked
at whether or not we could transfer my region into the Portland
leadership and if we need to we will continue that direction.
One more piece just because I am running out of time. Judge
Boyles, on Puget Island. So you all, we worked very hard to
deepen the channel of the Columbia River, had tremendous
success. Our ports have enjoyed and the people along with it,
tremendous benefit. I have a small group of folks who have
taken kind of the brunt of the dredging. The Army Corps
dredges, does maintenance dredging now, takes the spoils and
then drops it at a preapproved site where it just sits. Well we
see the beach actually eroding where these bigger ships are
going through and there is probably going to be a disagreement
about what is causing the beach to be eroded, but what I do
know is it needs re-nourishment and these folks watch as the
dredge is taking the spoils out and then take it up river. If
they could just put it back on the beach and we are in a
process, we had a permit to do this. It expired. We are in like
year 3 of trying to get it renegotiated. I think we are going
to get there. The question is how long and painful is it going
to be in the interim. This is an issue where, and I do not have
any more time left, but I am going to follow up on that as
well. And let's see, I think that it is. I am going to have to
submit everything else for the record. You all are just some of
my favorite audience. That is what it is. Thank you.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. James, General
Semonite and let us see, fiscal year 2018 Appropriations Bill
moves forward. I am actually still awaiting the 2018 Work Plan
for the Corps to make sure it includes the requested 6.2
million to complete phase 2A project, Phase 1 environmental and
the side by side comparison for the validation report for the
Marietta Flood Control Ecosystem Restoration Project, which is
in my district, and I brought this up to you a number of times,
General, as you well know and Marietta Creek is, we intend to
keep moving through to completion. We are currently working to
complete the side by side comparison for the validation report.
The report is expected to capture the cost reductions
identified in the Value Engineering Exercise conducted by the
Corps district and the local sponsor. We believe these updates
will result in a more accurate benefit cost ratio and reinforce
the appropriateness of and the critical need for federal
participation in this project. So my question as I bring this
up every hearing and I hope to one day find a different topic
to talk about, though I do have something that was Reclamation,
but until that day happens the last significant flood project
in my district and the last flood was back in 1993. It caused
significant amount of damage in the local community, about $21
million but also people forget it caused a lot of damage at
Camp Pendleton. Remember all those helicopters were on the
tarmac there and they, I think we destroyed about $75 million
worth of helicopters at that time. They would probably cost a
lot more today. Please understand the population in this area
is quadrupled since the project's feasibility study. Today the
economic impact of those projects would be much greater, not to
mention the significant number of businesses infrastructure
which remain vulnerable to flooding and we need to address it.
Can you comment to me that you will include this fiscal year
2018 funding in your work plan, send the reprogramming request
forward quickly, provide the necessary funds to advance this
project from fiscal year 2018 Emergency Supplemental to keep
the Marietta Creek Project moving forward towards completion?
General Semonite. Congressman, first of all the work plan
will go through the Secretary and OMB so I will certainly tell
you about what my position is, but as to what comes out will be
obviously up to others. I had a meeting in the last 24 hours
with Colonel Gibbs and General Helminger about this. This is a
4 phase project. They walked me through this. You definitely
need 3 different buckets of money. You need about $5.5 million
to be able to do one part of it, you need about another million
to be able to NEPA and you need $3.5 million to clean out the
sediment down in Phase 1. I think this would compete very, very
well in the fiscal year 2018 Work Plan because we have done the
majority of this work. We just need to get this thing across
the finish line. This is something I would go to the Secretary
to say let us continue to push and I am mainly talking Phase 1
and Phase 2. Anything that happens on Phase 3 and beyond is
going to be the committee's decision as to what would happen on
how you fund the additional phases, but I think the ability to
be able to see closure on those first ones is something that we
would be very excited about.
Mr. Calvert. Well, Secretary, I do not know you yet, but I
hope you paid good attention here to the good General because--
--
Mr. James. I heard him, Sir.
Mr. Calvert. OK. I hope you listen, too, Mike.
Mr. Simpson. I heard it.
Mr. Calvert. So I thank you for your consideration. We
would like to get this project done and thank you for all the
work you have done on the River Plan. I think maybe in my
congressional career, I only been here 26 years, I may actually
see that come to completion as long as the voters agree that I
need to be around here for a little bit longer. One quick
question for the Commissioner. Thank you for being here today.
As you know, in California we have our fair share of water
issues and then some and some recent reforms are working
better, but there is always more that can be done and should be
done. We have two major waterways that provide California water
that people need, the Colorado River and the Bay Delta. Tell me
about the difference in these projects. Why is it that Colorado
River provides water year after year and the Delta is so
pragmatic? There is no listed species, are there no listed
species in the Colorado River? Is it strictly a storage issue?
Ms. Burman. Thank you, Congressman, for that question. The
Colorado River is on its 18th year of drought and counting and
the extraordinary difference on that system, which does have
endangered species and has habitat conservation plans and other
plans to address those is that they have 60 million acre feet
of storage, meaning an overwhelming amount of storage to cover
dry years to wet years. So after 18 years of drought that
system is still about half full overall.
Mr. Calvert. That is exactly what I wanted you to say. So
does that mean we do not have enough storage in the Bay Delta?
Ms. Burman. So you can just look at 2017, which is the
wettest year on record for California on the Sacramento System
and this year, which is very dry so far, and the Central Valley
Project, which is a federal project, we are having to reduce
allocations for water this year, so after the wettest year on
record we do not have the storage in the system to be able to
carry over supplies into the next year.
Mr. Calvert. So what is the Bureau doing to make sure that
California gets the storage it needs?
Ms. Burman. What are we doing to work on California
storage?
Mr. Calvert. Yes.
Ms. Burman. A number of things. So with the urging of the
California delegation and others, we have been studying storage
in California for 2 decades and the WIIN Act passed in 2016
called for new storage opportunities. In 2017 Congress said
that they were going to put $67 million towards new storage and
then our job at Interior was to send you a list of what
projects would be most useful for that.
Mr. Calvert. That would be great. I would like to see a
timeline where we can finally maybe build something rather than
study it.
Ms. Burman. I absolutely agree. I think Shasta Reservoir is
able to move to construction with support from Congress by the
end of 2019.
Mr. Calvert. That would be wonderful. Yeah, I know, yeah,
doing great, Brenda. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. Chairman, first of all, I am sorry about my
voice. The worst thing that could happen to a politician, lose
your voice. It was cold outside with the high school students
who were making their voices heard outside just now. General
Semonite and Mr. James, first of all, thank you, all of you for
the work you do and for being here today. As you may know, the
Corps of Engineers was instrumental in cleaning the Bronx River
and bringing it back to life. For that, my constituents and I
will be forever grateful. Can you give us some information
regarding the Bronx River Project as well as the New York
Harbor Projects included in your requested budget and their
estimated time of completion?
General Semonite. Congressman, good to see you again. I
remember in 2007 when you and I went to the Bronx River and you
told me the story about the beaver down in the River and so we
continue to be committed to that.
Mr. Serrano. Well, sir, he is still there.
General Semonite. Yes, sir. As you know, we have been
working hard on continuing to work the study of a lot of this
and then right now we are doing an interim decision memorandum
in the next month and a half. The Feasibility Report will be
done by January 2019, that is the Feasibility Report and the
Environmental Assessment and then I plan on signing a Chief's
Report in October 2019. If I can try to cheat that to the left
we will try to do that, but we are committed to continue to be
able to tee this up for the Secretary and the Congress to be
able to make additional decisions on the Bronx River and we
want to put the best economic analysis and engineering analysis
we can in to take care of this great capability.
Mr. Serrano. That would be, so you say by June 19th is key,
one of the key dates.
General Semonite. I sign the document----
Mr. Serrano. June 2019.
General Semonite. I'm sorry, October 2019 is when I sign
the Chief's Report and we do not think right now we can do a
lot more on time, but we certainly want to try to continue to
work with you and the staff to try to, whatever we can move to
the left, we want to move to the left.
Mr. Serrano. Well moving to the left is always a good
thing. I had to say that. Thank you. On another subject,
gentlemen and ladies, Cano Martin Pena in Puerto Rico, you
know, which continues to be a problem, involves the dredging of
approximately 2.2 miles of the eastern end of the canal which
will provide significant ecosystem restoration benefits and
make the adjoining communities more resilient to the effects of
climate change. I wanted to commend the Army Corps of Engineers
for the hard work as done in Puerto Rico. Can you give us an
update with regard to the Cano Martin Pena Project and why it
was not included in the budget request? Is this project in your
rebuilding plans for Puerto Rico as you know the need for this
project has become even more urgent since Hurricane Maria,
which resulted in additional flooding and debris material in
the canal?
General Semonite. Let me take a start at it and then the
Secretary can jump in. I have been to Cano Martin Pena 3 times
in my career. I have been down, walking through there, I
understand that project very well and as you had said, there is
a lot of importance on continuing to not only take care of the
flood control capability, but the people. This is a very
devastated area and the people deserve something better than
this. As you know, right now we continue to be very, very
committed in the Corps of Engineers of rebuilding Puerto Rico.
We have had over 3000 people, $4 billion of our taxpayers'
money going in to do that and we are at 92 percent of the grid
today up and running by rebuilding the Puerto Rico grid along
with a lot of other things. The supplemental that I talked
about earlier before you came in, Sir, the $17.4 billion that
the Corps got for disaster response, that is mainly going to
the 4 big areas impacted by the 3 storms, Harvey, Maria and
Irma and so we now are making a portfolio of where we see those
projects eligible for certain parts of that particular money.
This is one that we will look at to see if Cano Martin Pena is
able to be wrapped underneath that disaster supplemental. I do
not know right now the analysis. My staff is working on it, but
we are not sure if that is going to be able to be qualified for
that supplemental or not. There are portions of this which is
also ecosystem restoration and ecosystem restoration is not
underneath the disaster supplemental, so I think what we owe
you is probably come back in, let you understand what our
analysis is and if, in fact, we do not have good news with
respect to the supplemental, how do we continue to be able to
champion that under ecosystem restoration.
Mr. Serrano. Well I appreciate that because if we could
include it in the supplemental that would be fabulous. I mean
it is a project that was a problem before. This disaster in
Puerto Rico now has added to it and once again, I know that you
have taken some criticism. We all do in public life or
agencies, but I am very happy with the work you have done in
the Bronx and I am very happy with the effort you put in Puerto
Rico and I know that effort will continue. Thank you.
General Semonite. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Where you are working operating under I guess
you are into the 6th month now of a CR operating at slightly
below 2017 levels as it works out. Assuming that the 2018
budget, while I will not release any information because it is
tightly held, if your budget is substantially increased above
2017, do you have enough time to spend it? Is that a challenge?
General Semonite. I think from our perspective it is not a
significant challenge mainly because most of that budget, sir,
is able to be used in other years. It is not a 1-year budget
like we are having. I also do all of the construction for the
Army and a lot of DoD and so when it comes to other types of
money, a good example is DoD OMA, that is going to be a
significant problem of obligating that money, it is not Civil
Works money, but it is other kind of money, but on this
particular one, Chairman, I am not aware of any significant
challenges when we come to the fiscal year end where any of
that money is going to necessarily go away or have any
ramifications. It just means we are going to have to carry over
money and we need your consideration that that will allow this
to be a factor when we do that. Sir, I do not know if I said
anything incorrect. Do you want to add to?
Mr. James. No, that is exactly what I was going to add to
that is that out in the field, out on the ground in the
districts and the divisions I have noticed that when it gets
close to the end of the year, people start trying to spend
money and my ask on that has been in the past why are doing
this, why are you doing this. They are afraid if they take that
money over into the next fiscal year they will be cut by the
amount that they take over, so they push and push and push and
maybe not to the most effective methods in the fiscal year
which they got the money and I would like to visit with you,
sir, and to see how that is treated when you are considering
your next process because I think at times we could make better
use of the money if we are not rushing right at the end of the
year.
Mr. Simpson. I think you are right. I have watched other
Federal agencies that I am familiar with spend half of their
budget in the first three quarters of the year and the other
half in the last quarter for the exact same reason that you
mentioned, that they are we got to get it out of here or we
will be punished for having extra money or stuff and is the
same challenge with the Bureau?
Mr. Petty. Chairman, yes, with regard to the ability is I
think Reclamation is incredibly flexible and so with this next
year's budget, with any budget that goes above and beyond we
have the ability to really utilize that in spaces that we are
ready to facilitate and to keep moving.
Mr. Simpson. Well we just need to make sure that when we
are doing the 2019 budget that we take into account that there
have to be some rollover or whatever from some of these funds
or whatever and we want to work with you on that. We have to
make sure that the money that we're using is being used
efficiently. I know that you're concerned about that also and
stuff, so--anyway, I've got to go to another event that I've
got to be at and Mr. Joyce is going to take over.
Ms. Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me ask--General Semonite, I would like to go back to a
comment you made in response to Congressman Joyce's discussion
of the Great Lakes. You said that Ohio has a goal of no more
open lake dumping, which is a goal that we both support.
I just do want to mention that that is not a goal, in fact,
is a law in Ohio, and I wanted to thank Congressman Joyce for
initially raising this issue.
I also wanted to go back to some earlier questioning on the
Soo Lock. It is my understanding, Secretary James, that you
will be visiting later this month. Thank you so very much for
doing that.
I am not clear on what weight National security factors
will have in determining the cost benefit ratio, which drives
the ability to get the project into the President's budget.
As I understand it, the model being used currently results
in a $2 billion input for the railroad cost, but the actual
cost to build it would be $4 to $10 billion. This really
doesn't make any sense to those of us who have looked at this
and our view is that the input should be based on the actual
cost of building the railroad.
We hope you will agree with that, and I would very much
appreciate a briefing from the appropriate folks in your office
so the experts from the Corps on this issue could provide us
with a clear sense of where you are headed.
Mr. James. Absolutely, Congresswoman, and I agree with you.
To me, this is a priority. When 95 percent of the iron ore of
our nation comes through that one lock that we have now,
without any redundancy on an aging lock, it is a very dangerous
situation for National security reasons.
I'm not sure--I have not seen how the benefits versus the
cost have been calculated. If would give me a week to digest
that myself, we will gladly come over and visit with you about
that.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you so very much, I think your idea of
going with dispatch, being mindful of all these different
factors would really help us with something like the Soo Lock,
which is so vital to this country and located at such a
critical point in our infrastructure.
So the information that your staff has and the way they're
thinking about this would be very beneficial and we thank you
very much for your attention.
General Semonite. I'll get that to you just as soon as
possible, ma'am.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you very much. I wanted to just say to
both Secretary James and General Semonite, I don't know which
of you could discuss this, but in terms of the beneficial use
of dredge material, I really sense a bit of a seachange, a
tectonic shift slowly, by the Corps, which is welcome, related
to the beneficial use of dredge material. There are many areas,
including in my own district, that are writing proposals for
submission.
Secretary James, or, General Semonite, could you please
explain a little bit about how that pilot program might work?
For example, how do you plan to fund these activities and what
kind of visibility will you provide to this committee? Do you
have any idea how you'll select individual projects, and how
will you determine whether the pilots are successfully using
Federal dollars?
I think this is so important. Back in my first term, which
was a few years ago, actually a few decades ago, we sent
samples down to Vicksburg back in those days from all of the
sediment coming out of our ports and being deposited then and
confined disposal facilities and I thought what a waste, what a
waste.
Now looking at some of the phosphorus in there, the
different elements that be withdrawn and reused and the
material themselves, there really is in this 21st century a
need to rethink how we use what could be an enormous organic
for the world added to perhaps by the materials that our major
sewage treatment plants have along the lake once material is
processed and the heavy metal is withdrawn.
So I just wanted to get your thought about how you look at
this beneficial reuse of these vast, vast amounts of organic
material.
General Semonite. So, Congresswoman, you and I have talked
a couple times in your office a couple times. I'm excited about
where we're going with beneficial reuse. We look at sediment as
a resource.
The more that we can continue to take advantage of that for
a couple different reasons, first of all, if we don't find a
better way of taking care of this sediment, then we're going to
end up being more and more expensive on how we dispose of it
and the United States can't afford that and there are some
great opportunities out to be able to do it.
Now, on the pilots, you know very well that Congress gave
us this authority to be able it look at pilots. We've had
queries out for several months now. We just closed off those
queries. We've got 86 different requests for pilots. We're
going through those 86 right now.
We'll have our recommendation done on 4th of June and then
we will go forward with at least ten to be able to continue to
look at--we want a variety of how can we look at different ways
of doing this.
Now, here's where I need help though, ma'am, and, Chairman
Joyce, this is where we got a great recommendation from
Congress to start a pilot program, but there is no money
against it.
So I'm going to end up having to tell you that we've got
the pilots and you're going to probably ask me what are you
doing about it, and I need a venue or a vehicle of how we can
then allocate funding--and I'd love to do it 2018.
The problem is if I can't find an innovative way of funding
it in 2018, then 2019's already on the street. So that means
I'm going to have to wait until 2020. So we're excited to do
this, but I didn't get a vehicle of how to fund it.
Ms. Kaptur. May I just say this for the record, Secretary
James is really sort of providential in your selection being a
farmer.
I just wanted to say with all of you in the room that in
the watershed where we have the greatest difficulty right now,
which is the Maumee, the Western Basin of Lake Erie, which
drains the largest watershed in the Great Lakes, every year--of
course, Toledo's the largest dredging harbor in the entire
Great Lakes, so we have this vast amount of organic material.
But in that watershed every year, we have the residue of
43,500 box carloads of animal manure, because it is a giant
agricultural platform. It is the old Black Swamp and related
rivers and so forth that flow through.
Imagine if you could mix the two. Now, I know it is hard to
get the Corps to corporate with the Department of Agriculture,
but when the Department of Interior figures out that watersheds
matter in this map, somehow we as a country have got to
integrate across disciplines.
We have not been able to do that yet. We have been burying
in confined disposal facilities, as the General well knows, all
this material for decades. We have all of this matter, but in a
country where we will have half a billion people before very
long, five times as many living in this country as when I was
born, there is some sort of water residue nexus that didn't
exist when Native Americans populated the region that I am
privileged to represent.
So somehow we have to put our thinking together. We could
launch a gigantic organic's industry, but we haven't been able
to get the respective parties around the table.
I've asked myself, Mr. Secretary, whether we need to have a
separate title in the farm bill. I haven't talked to Secretary
Perdue about it. I keep looking at they dig up the stuff, but
then I have all this residue coming that is creating these
giant algal blooms and we can't seem to get the departments
together to help us.
And it really--it is a tristate binational issue in terms
of what we face. The Canadians are also dumping a lot of
agricultural residue up there in Ontario. Mr. Ryan's river
comes down into the northern--northwestern edge of Lake Erie,
so it real is a test watershed.
If we can figure out to manage this, and we really need to
because we're not making any more freshwater, and I think that
Commissioner Burman reminded us very well of that today.
But we really have an opportunity, but how do we move this
fast Federal bureaucracy to seize the opportunity to do
something remarkable in this 21st century, that's really what
our challenge is.
Secretary James.
Mr. James. I actually had a meeting with Secretary Perdue
yesterday about another matter. I will ask for a meeting with
him again and discuss this matter with him.
I would like to get a little more information from your
staff, a little more specifics of what we're talking about as
far as the waste materials and so forth and be happy to visit
with him, because he's a farmer too.
Ms. Kaptur. Just to give you a perspective number, I hope
I've got this number right, but Congressman Joyce and I are
both privileged to represent parts of Northern Ohio, but we dig
up enough dredge material every year through the Corps to fill
the Cleveland Browns Stadium annually 400 feet high, every
year.
So when you start thinking about it--have I got that number
right? OK.
Every year, every year, every year and it just keeps coming
down. So this a resource issue and we certainly have the
brains. If we can build nuclear weapons in this subcommittee
and maintain them, we can certainly figure out how to move dirt
and to take elements out of it, but we haven't quite gotten
there yet.
The private sector and a lot of our companies that deal in
natural resources and are very, very inventive, you have a
private sector interest. It is not that it isn't there, but we
haven't found a way to deliver it. We haven't--so anyway.
I just wanted to raise that and I appreciate your interest.
You are uniquely--what is different about this panel than
anyone we've ever had before, we have an understanding that
watersheds matter, we're trying to define them more clearly for
the country, we have an expert in agriculture, and we have a
General who also can spell environment.
We've never had that combination before. So I think you are
uniquely suited to do something remarkable for the country that
really needs it.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Ms. Kaptur.
Congressman Newhouse.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner Burman, let me just say it is a pleasure to
see you again and I appreciated the opportunity to spend a few
minutes with you last week talking about some of the issues
important to me and your assistance with the draft service
request concerning the Yakima River Basin Water Enhancement
Project, an interesting--YRBWEP is an acronym that many people
don't murder every time they try.
I think you mentioned this in your opening comments about
streamlining efforts and how we can get projects in rural
regions, which most of the West is, like my district.
I'm sure you're aware of not only the Yakima Project, but
the Columbia Basin Project, the Odessa Aquifer Groundwater
Replacement Projects, the Banks Lake Pumped Storage Projects,
these represent reliability in delivering water into the
future.
I've been a very strong proponent of streamlining. I've
introduced a bill that your, I guess you could say,
predecessor, the acting commissioner, Mr. Mikkelson actually
testified in favor of H.R. 4419.
So could you expand a little bit on how reclamation would
work to streamline these hydropower projects moving on into the
future?
Ms. Burman. Thank you, Congressman, and it was a pleasure
to get to speak with you last week.
There are a number of ways that Reclamation is moving
forward with streamlining projects. First I would bring up the
Secretary's order on NEPA, that is Secretary Order 3355, and
that said, ``NEPA's getting out of hand.'' We need to be able
to complete NEPA in one year and most projects within 150 pages
for an EIS.
So we are moving forward with that direction. That
direction has been given to our field offices and area offices,
and we are very much looking to how do we streamline that NEPA
process.
That also goes to recommendations that are out there in
legislation as far as Reclamation being a lead agency, helping
to pull together the many other agencies, whether it be the
fish agencies, working with the Corps, trying to bring those
all together to have a lead agency to move forward quicker.
I would also say program management. We're looking at what
we can do program management-wise. We think it is taking too
long to get projects done. So looking at how do we streamline
that. How do we make sure that we start a project and we finish
a project and we are being open and transparent about how we do
it and that it is done on time.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you. I look forward to working with you
on all those things. We can get some of these projects off the
ground and done. We so desperately need the ability to have
water into the future for growth and for our communities, so I
look forward to that.
Ms. Burman. Thank you.
Mr. Newhouse. General Semonite, going back to the Columbia
River just for a second. I understand that the judge's decision
in a way ties the Corps' arms behind your back for the running
of the system, but I was interested to hear your phrasing that
you are compelled to follow the decision.
As you well know, our agencies, the administration, we're
working--we're fighting this decision in the courts, so I
question the language I heard you use that you are compelled to
follow this order. I'm working hard to stop this.
My question: Doesn't this order hurt your ability to do
your job as it relates to the FCRPS?
General Semonite. I think, Congressman, there are a lot of
opinions on this. I always like to try to stay in a balanced
approach, so we're taking care of the needs of the environment,
the needs of the habitat, while at the same point taking care
of the needs of navigation and hydropower, so I'm sure there
are different opinions on this.
If I said that we're going to just follow the order, I
believe my guys right now, our team, is working with DoJ to
continue to work through the litigation of this with different
appeals.
It doesn't mean that we're going to stop where we're at, it
means that we will continue to be able to process that, but I'm
not going to instruct our guys, my team, to do something
different that's against the judge's current ruling.
Again, I don't know the specifics on that as far as
litigation outcome, but we can certainly come and talk to you
and lay out what our course of action is, but we want to try to
work within the Government in the decisions that the judges
have made.
Mr. Newhouse. As do I. I want to process to move forward. I
want to be as responsible as we possibly can for not only the
environment and the fish that we've--as Mr. Herrera Beutler
said, we've invested a lot of money into those fish runs, but
we also want to be cognizant of the people that live in this
area and the economic impact that we have to consider as well.
So I look forward to working with you on this. I think this
is not a mutually exclusive thing. I think we can have the
dams, we can coexist with the environment and work very hard to
accomplish that, but I think we can do that without unnecessary
economic harm to the people that live in the region, and that's
my determination that I'm working very hard to make sure that
we don't allow that to happen.
General Semonite. Congressman, this is so important to me.
I directed my staff to get me up to the area. I like to walk
around and be on the ground, muddy boots, and talking to the
people.
I'm going up there in about the next two months to be able
to understand some of the dynamics out there and certainly want
to be more informed on what are those impacts back both to all
different players in this equation.
Mr. Newhouse. I'd appreciate that. If we coordinate, I'd be
happy to be there during your visit if we can make that happen.
There is a lot of things to understand. It is a complex system
as you know.
Like I said, a lot of time and dollars--taxpayer dollars
have been invested in this system to make it work. We're seeing
salmon recovery rates in the the high 90 percentiles.
So to put at risk the economic future using, in my humble
opinion, unscientific reasoning is just not the proper way to
go, and I'll continue to fight this fight and look forward to
working with you and to a successful conclusion.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Congressman Newhouse.
Congressman Serrano is recognized.
Mr. Serrano. I have a question. The minute the President
has stated his intent to put forward a proposal on
infrastructure investment in the near future. What extent have
the corps and Reclamation been involved in any discussions
within the administration.
Do you have any information for us on when we might see a
proposal or what type of assistance might be included for your
agencies--let me go back to an earlier state that I made and
add something to it.
For a person who has spent as many have a career saying be
careful about our military involvements, when the hurricanes
hit Puerto Rico I said, why don't you send the military in,
send in the military in full force. I said, because the
military is always seen as a fighting machine, but it also
builds communities, it builds ballparks, it builds churches, it
builds whatever it needs to build to bring the people back. At
that point, some people thought I was crazy and so on.
So I want to make sure you're well taken care of in the
infrastructure that is set ahead, because I know the kind of
work you can do and in spite of the criticisms you take every
so often because we always want you to work faster than you
can, but I don't know how to do any what you do, so I have to
cool it down.
I want to know to what extent you can tell me your
involvement, the Corps' involvement, Reclamation's involvement,
and also what we expect to see your role to be when a project
takes off, and I believe a project will take off.
General Semonite. I'll tell you about the Corps first and
then the Secretary can jump in. I said this just a little bit
earlier before you came in, sir, but a year ago we started a
very aggressive engagement with the White House to talk to the
senior leaders over there that are putting infrastructure
package together, the layout--what is the $96 billion of
backlog that the corps has to be able to make sure that they
think through infrastructure.
They think through water infrastructure, which sometimes
the average American has a hard time understanding the value of
water infrastructure, even the point we have put a very, very
senior engineer inside the White House to advise that
infrastructure team on what are some of the risks there to the
infrastructure.
I am not in a position to talk about when is the time we
would think that the President is going to release more
information on that, but I want to make sure you're aware that
the Corps is very involved in proposing different projects that
could be involved as well as the risk that could happen if in
fact those projects are not considered.
The nice thing is most of these already have permits, a lot
of these already have construction undergoing, it is just a
matter of not getting a fund flow that would allow them to be
done in a more efficient and expeditious manner.
I told the committee just a little bit earlier that the
Secretary and I had breakfast in the White House yesterday
morning talking with some of the senior leaders about the value
of our water infrastructure and the importance of making sure
that it is included in any analysis.
Sir, is there anything you would want to add to that?
Mr. James. I would only say right now that the Secretary's
office have also been very heavily engaged with the
administration. I personally have not yet. This is my fourth
week in office, but I have been--in order to move forward those
funds and get the most bang for the buck, I am very interested
and have been chosen to lead a task force to look in ways that
we can expedite service and, as Ms. Burman said, speed up the
NEPA process, discover policies, legislation, Executive Orders
that might be actually hindering us not helping us move forward
with infrastructure, so that's my focus right now.
Mr. Serrano. Let me ask just ask you--I said that was last,
but one last question for sure.
Last year the Army Corps was assigned by FEMA to rebuild
the power grid in Puerto Rico. As you know, there is still a
certain amount of people on the island, significant amount by
what I hear, that still have no electricity 6 months after the
hurricane.
I'm concerned that with the money that Congress provided in
the last supplements were restoring power but not in a
resilient way.
Does the Army Corps have concrete plans to build a durable,
resilient, efficient energy system for Puerto Rico, because one
of the main concerns is that there is a need to restore power?
Of course if your power goes on again after six months of
not having lights, you're not going to get into any other
questions with anybody about how long will this last, but we
know that these hurricanes will continue to come and they're
going to come at different ways that they came in the past to
places like--New York had never heard of these things, we now
have to get ready for these kind of things too. So what are we
doing in Puerto Rico, are we restoring or rebuilding also?
General Semonite. Congressman, first of all we're very,
very proud to be asked to go down to Puerto Rico and to do that
work. We do work for FEMA under that and we work under the
Stafford Act, which basically means we restore back to a given
level.
The disaster supplemental that was approved, and
specifically the $17.4 billion that the Corps got, the majority
of that $17.4 is in flood risk management and other types of
water capability to repair back.
We are not being asked right now to be able to be a player
with respect to resiliency on an additional capability into
Puerto Rico, so I'll leave that question up to FEMA. I don't
know exactly what that is.
I do want to let you know, though, that for the last six
months that we've been down there, we've had several different
recommendations back into the Congress as to where those
investments could take place, where we can build resiliency
back in.
I think matter of fact one of my two stars is testifying
tomorrow again to be able to make sure that we are informing
Congress where good investments can take place, but that is
something that we are not being asked to do with respect to the
long-term resiliency in Puerto Rico.
But you're definitely right, there are some places that we
made recommendations that if you don't harden that system, it
is going to continue to get hit year after year, and then the
taxpayers are going to continue to have to go back and rebuild
unless there is some resiliency built in.
So I'll stay in my lane. We brought it up to pre-storm.
We're 92 percent done as of this morning. But as far as long
term, I will leave that up to the other parts of the
supplemental that it hit on the electrical grid.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you Congressman Serrano.
Congresswoman Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. Yes. I wanted to just restate our concern about
the Asian carp in the Great Lakes. Congressman Joyce brought
this up very eloquently, but I wanted to point something out
and, that is, that the current solution barring any permanent
barrier or enhanced barrier at Brandon Road or other locations,
is that--the solution of the government of the United States
currently is to take money from the Great Lakes Restoration
Initiative, the GLRI, which by the way the administration has
zeroed out and it is our responsibility in Congress to restore
it, to embark upon a fish-out program so what that means is
that they hire contractors who go down to Mississippi, and
perhaps to Illinois, I'm not sure, and they're fishing out
these fish.
It is interesting to me that--so the Department of
Interior's involved, but they contract out. The money comes
from EPA/GLRI, which is zeroed out. To me it is kind of a cut-
and-paste solution, it is not really--a very robust fishing
program.
I can't tell you how many years I've sat here and said to
the various entities involved can you show us--if these are
armies, battalions swimming north from Mississippi, show me
their concentration so we can get a sense of the spread, how
big are they, how multilayered are they, where are they. With
all the detectors we have and everything, isn't this something
we should know about?
As they entered the Ohio River and they ate up everything
or they entered the Peoria and ate up everything. It seems to
me that we're not getting the best information the
administration's different departments have to help us get our
arms around this.
A question a normal person would ask is: Do we have enough
fishing battalions out there, what more can we do to prevent
them from moving north? I don't sense any rigor across the
Departments in really getting their arms around it. So it is
kind of an attitude and it is frightening to the $7 billion
fishery that I represent on the Lake Erie side that it is sort
of destiny, destiny that these things will get up the river and
will get in there.
I don't really accept that. I sort of have a vision that
maybe there is a genetic control that's going to kick in here
at some point. So we've got to be more aggressive about fishing
out what's coming up and we have to find a beneficial reuse for
it. Rose food is probably a good one. But I just am concerned
that we're not treating this enemy as we would some of the
others that we have faced.
So I just wanted to put that on the table, so you
understand our concern, if there is anything you can do to put
together a more coherent interim solution.
As we keep getting delayed and delayed and delayed on the
Brandon Road study, I almost view the delay as an acceptance of
the fate that this is going--we've accepted the fate on the
Executive Branch side that this thing is going to get in,
that's how we look at this delay in our region.
So I really encourage you to do what you can to look at
counting monitors. We even have monitors we put all over Lake
Erie now to monitor the sediments and the particulates,
phosphorous, and nitrogen that's in the water as a result of
the runoff.
But we don't have anything like that that is well presented
from the Executive side on this enormous challenge we face with
these horrendous critters coming north. I don't know what more
I can say.
Our maritime community will do anything to help, our
tourism industries, everything that exist across this
shallowest but warmest of the Great Lakes, more fish than all
the other Great Lakes combined--I'm saying that for the record,
so people understand what is at stake here.
It seems like a glue-and-paperclip solution. I would guess
that Congressman Joyce shares this concern equally and it is
really not a very sophisticated approach. I'm hoping that you
will be able to add more rigor to this current strategy and
help us develop a more sophisticated approach, because people
in our area don't want to believe that this is inevitable.
Does anyone want to comment?
General Semonite. Ma'am, I'll just talk to you about the
fact that we do partner with DOI very closely with respect to
where do we see that front line trace. I've shared this diagram
with you before. This is a consolidated product, so we know
where the adult population is, where the spawning population
is, where do we see the juveniles, where do we see the front
fish that are out there, and we can continue to share this, but
this is a cooperative project with DOI.
I don't disagree with you that there is probably a lot more
that could be done, and I can't comment on the fish program. We
aren't involved in the fishing part of it. But I would just
tell you that I do think it is important to know where the
enemy is and to be able to make sure we are aware of what that
threat is and how it might progress up and down that river.
And I'll leave it to others to jump on, if need be.
Mr. Petty. Thank you, General. Obviously for the Department
of the Interior, it is a very high priority. Across all the
bureaus now, we've actually put a specific group together to
deal specifically with invasive species. I was just being able
to get a brief from the U.S. Geological Survey out of our
research center there in the Great Lakes, the Midwest, out of
Michigan, Indiana, Ohio, specifically not only the Asian carp,
but you've probably already been briefed up on the grass carp
as well, right, and how do we really take these on.
It is complex. The Army Corps has been able to really help
us, specifically deal where are they at, where can we go after
them, what can we do to not only feel like we're on the
defense, but how do we go offense.
So as we work not only with EPA and the other agencies--
that's why it gets back to even some of the groups of reorgs,
so that all of our bureaus internally with DoI are on the same
page specifically with these invasives and then working
outwardly with the agency.
That is our goal and we put a high priority within this
administration to specifically do that with asking
specifically--requesting money for the invasive species
program.
Ms. Kaptur. I don't know who inside the Department could
take a leadership on this, but I would very much appreciate a
Skype briefing where we could put on the other end of the line
all of our marina owners, all of our businesses, all of our
mayors, everybody that's concerned all along the lakefront.
This is not a small group of people, those that manage our
water intakes. I mean, there is just all kinds of things that
we have to be mindful there.
The General mentions the map, but it is not well
interpreted. It is not a time series set of information so we
can really show are we moving them back, are they advancing
further north, what's the density.
I mean, there is all these issues. It is a fish population,
it is no different than a human--well, it is a little different
than a human population, but you measure things and you give
people a sense of how serious we are by the way in which we
present this to them.
And it is a big deal for our part of the country, so if
there is a way you could think about making this understandable
to an audience, we can provide the audience.
And I think they need reassurance that we're doing
everything that we can and this is what we know and this is
what we need to do and let them help partner in some way. So I
just wanted to put that on the table, because I always feel
like time's running out. We're not really--we're not meeting
the challenge here.
All the money we've put out for genetic controls, not
working, nothing, nothing yet. So there is the sense that we're
losing the battle and that the battalions are coming north and
that the spawning schools are moving north. I don't know if
that's true or not, but we--our people need to know that.
So if could I work with you on that, and I'm sure Mr. Joyce
would share with his mayors, his marina owners, his port
authorities, all these individuals, I think it would be very,
very valuable.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you.
To follow up, not only are those local folks at home. But
to give you an idea when GLRI was part of WRDA, it passed 408
to 17. There is a tremendous amount of bipartisan support
throughout the communities in that when we had $300 million
zeroed out last year, it is back at $300 million.
We'll continue to fight--this year they cut it to $30
million, but we're going to continue to fight to get it back to
what it needs to be. Because you need the money so you can plan
accordingly, so you can continue the fight. We want to work
with you to that end. That's why something like getting the
study done and getting a plan of action together would really
be important for all of us.
I would like to thank all the witnesses for being here
today. Excuse me, I'd be remiss if there is another question.
I look forward to working with you to develop the Fiscal
Year 2019 Appropriations bill. For that, the hearing is
adjourned. Thank you.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Thursday, March 15, 2018.
SECRETARY OF ENERGY
WITNESS
HON. RICK PERRY, SECRETARY OF ENERGY
Mr. Simpson. The hearing will come to order. It is my
pleasure to welcome Secretary Rick Perry to his second hearing
with the Energy and Water Subcommittee. Secretary Perry, thank
you for your continued service to our country, we appreciate it
very much.
I look forward to hearing from you today on the fiscal year
2019 budget request and learning more about how it reflects
your priorities for the Department of Energy.
The Department of Energy's role in supporting our Nation's
defense through the maintenance of a nuclear weapons stockpile
and through support for the nuclear Navy are at times not well
recognized. The importance of these activities are well
reflected in the fiscal year 2019 budget request.
However, with the strong increase of $1.8 billion, or 19
percent, requested for nuclear Weapons Activities and $369
million, or 26 percent, for Naval Reactors compared to the
fiscal year 2017 enacted level, these programs and the other
defense activities of this bill are and will remain a high
priority for this committee.
I am also pleased that the administration continues to
propose appropriate funding for Yucca Mountain. Having the
administration's support for current law is refreshing and
hopefully will help us move past the legislative stalemate with
the Senate of the past several years.
The President's budget proposes a $1.9 billion decrease
from fiscal year 2017 for energy programs reflecting the
administration's desire to focus resources on early stage
research and development. This committee must carefully review
the request to understand the impacts to these important
programs and activities.
Unfortunately, the Department has been very slow to provide
details about the request for Energy Programs. In fact, we are
still waiting on some program details and others were provided
just this morning. This delay means today's hearing is an even
more important part of our oversight process.
Secretary Perry, I appreciate you being here today to
explain your budget request and hope that we can work together
to move forward a budget that will strengthen our national
security and advance our energy independence.
Please ensure that the hearing record, questions for the
record and any supporting information requested by the
subcommittee, are delivered in the final form to us no later
than 4 weeks from the time that you receive them.
Members who have additional questions for the record will
have until the close of business on Monday to provide them to
the subcommittee office.
With that, I will turn to my ranking member, Ms. Kaptur,
for her opening statement.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and we
welcome you back, Mr. Secretary, and all of your colleagues who
are with you today serving our country, and we are glad to have
you back again.
No department could be more important in America's security
than the Department of Energy, in terms of energy security and
also guardianship of our nuclear weapons complex so important
to our strategic position.
I understand that yesterday you also led a roundtable
discussion on critical water issues. I want to thank you for
doing that and for the administration grappling with this
rather complex but timely issue, and for your action step to
request information on how best to unleash innovation in this
area.
Our energy and water and food systems are interdependent
and I don't think enough work has been done on the intersection
of these important areas. Texas has experienced very heavy
rainfall, enormous, and has had the edges of drought burn your
edges there, so I think your special sensitivity here is very
important to the Nation at this point in our history.
We need to develop affordable, deployable energy and water-
efficient systems from agriculture to electricity generation
and use, and I look forward to working with you on this
important confluence of issues.
Before we discuss the budget request, I want to take a
moment to express some disappointment and, frankly, frustration
that we are sitting here today over a month after the
President's budget request was released. And unfortunately,
only this morning has the Department provided the final volumes
of your budget request. I wanted to make sure you were aware of
that.
During my time as Ranking Member on this subcommittee, I
have never seen delays like this. While I understand that there
are multiple administration entities involved in this
production process, and certainly one called the Office of
Management and Budget, I have to say this does not reflect well
on the Department and does a disservice to this committee.
I would like to take a moment to discuss the impressive
strides we have made in increasing America's energy
independence with no department more important than your own.
I view this as a strategic goal for our Nation. We now
provide over 90 percent of our energy needs from domestic
sources. This is an accomplishment for decades in the making
and I think with your stewardship we will get over the last 10
percent and give us a little reserve in addition.
Renewable energy is a subset of that; now accounts for 18
percent of our electricity generation. This is nearly on par
with our Nation's nuclear fleet and it has happened in a
relatively short period of time, although some of our
photovoltaic research goes back to the 1980s.
Electricity made up a smaller share of consumer spending
last year than it ever has in recorded history. And every
business I represent tells me that if I can get the percentage
of energy costs down, they become more competitive. The
Department of Energy has been a real leader in that regard.
With our economy growing, our total energy consumption is
declining, providing we have an economic growth pattern that
takes care of emissions.
These successes are due in no small part to DOE's world-
class research. There is simply is no better both basic and
applied. And looking at the budget request, I am gravely
concerned and hope to be able to fix the significant cuts that
are contained in it, particularly in the energy accounts, that
will undermine the advances we have been making to date and
will slow progress to continue job creation and efforts to
modernize our aging energy infrastructure.
The budget request for the Department of Energy provides a
significant increase of 10 percent to defense accounts,
including a staggeringly huge increase in the Weapons
Activities account of 19 percent.
At the same time, the request slashes non-defense energy
accounts by more than 40 percent of which energy efficiency and
renewable energy alone is cut by 67 percent, two-thirds.
Cuts like these lead me to believe that you do not think
that efficiency and renewables are a good investment, so I
would like to take a minute to enumerate some of the
accomplishments of the Office of Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy and feel obligated to do so this morning.
Since 2009, the cost of electricity from new wind power
projects has decreased by 67 percent, wow. For solar that
corresponding figure is 86 percent decline. Americans have
saved hundreds of billions of dollars thanks to new energy
efficiency standards that have brought us smarter appliances,
heating and cooling systems, and lighting and we are on track
to see $1 trillion in savings by 2020.
The Weatherization Assistance Program also proposed for
elimination in this budget request, which I simply cannot
support, delivers $340 million in yearly energy savings to the
American people. These advances have put money in the American
people's pockets and made our air cleaner and most notably for
the President's agenda created jobs.
The fastest growing job in America today, as the Secretary
well knows, is wind turbine technician, and, in fact, Texas is
one of the top states for energy efficient jobs.
Finally, with all of the rhetoric about putting America
first on an economy-wide basis, China outspends us by almost
$100 billion annually on research and development, yet here you
are defending massive cuts to programs that have proven
effective.
If we want to maintain our technological and economic
advantages, we must increase these investments. And make no
mistake, they are investments in our future. We cannot be
shortsighted and let the rest of the world pass us by.
With that, I will close my remarks and thank you again, Mr.
Secretary, for being here with us today and we look forward to
your testimony and the opportunity to adapt your budget request
as the months ensue.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the time.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, the floor is yours.
Secretary Perry. Mr. Chairman, thank you for the privilege
to be here. Ranking Member Kaptur, it is good to be in your
presence and the committee members as well.
We are here to discuss the President's Fiscal Year 2019
budget request for the Department of Energy, and just as an
aside, let me say what a privilege it is to be able to serve.
Ms. Kaptur, I know that you are just a few days away from
being the longest-serving female member of the House of
Representatives. Congratulations. We were just sharing what an
honor it is to be the longest-serving anything; myself as a
governor of Texas back a few years ago. But what an
extraordinary privilege for me to sit in front of you as the
14th Secretary of Energy.
Mr. Chairman, this budget represents a request to the
American people, through their representatives in Congress, to
fund the priorities of this Department. It underscores DOE's
commitment to stewardship, accountability, and service.
And I hope that our interactions with you and other
committees of Congress that we have had over the past year have
underscored the commitment to serve and the transparency that
we intend to share with you and the American people.
In total DOE leadership, I think we have appeared now some
23 times over the last year in front of Congress. We are very
proud of that strong relationship both with the staff we put
together, and some of your young men and women that you have
trained up very well and we have been able to hire. Thank you
for that.
This is the second hearing of 2018 and in the coming weeks,
I am going to have several more opportunities to sit in front
of your colleagues. I am very proud of our standard of
transparency as we try to work together to hammer out this
budget.
When I first appeared before this committee last year, I
committed DOE to advancing several key issues, key objectives
if you will, and I noted at that time that we needed to
modernize our nuclear weapons arsenal, continue to address the
environmental legacy of the Cold War, further advance domestic
energy production, better protect our energy infrastructure,
and accelerate our Exascale computing capabilities.
This Fiscal Year 2019, a $30.6 billion budget request for
the Department, seeks us to move forward on those and other
goals. Mr. Chairman, plain and simple, the United States
Government has no greater or more solemn duty than protecting
its citizens.
Since nuclear deterrence is critical to that defense, last
year we promised a much needed upgrading of our arsenal. This
year we have requested an 8.3 percent increase for that purpose
and to align ourselves with the Nuclear Posture Review and the
Nuclear Security Strategy.
I want to stop just a second and say thank you to this
committee. For 25 years the modernization of our nuclear
stockpile has not been a priority for many in Congress.
Unfortunately, the world has changed a lot in those 25 years
and we can't wait any longer. This committee understands that
you can only defer maintenance and modernization for so long
and that time for inaction has passed, and I just want to say
thank you for recognizing that and for strongly supporting the
modernization for our nuclear arsenal.
We are also focusing on addressing the environmental legacy
left at the Department in a lot of the sites--Mr. Fleischmann,
he has in his district some of those sites, there are many
across the country.
We are asking for additional funds to clean those sites up.
We also have a duty to advance a fundamental mission of our
Department and that is energy independence. Ms. Kaptur made
mention of that, of where we find ourselves.
Thanks to American ingenuity and innovation, we are on the
cusp of realizing that mission objective for the first time
since the oil shortage in the 1970s.
In the coming years, we are going to produce enough energy
from all of our abundant fuels not only to meet our own needs,
but those of our friends, our allies, and our partners as well.
Just last year, we became a net exporter of LNG. There are
27 nations now that receive exports on five continents. Because
of technology, we are also making our energy cleaner.
We can pursue an all-of-the-above policy that more
efficiently develops and uses all of America's energy
resources. Through the power of innovation, we can both grow
our economy and protect our environment.
And that is the heart of this new energy realism doctrine
that I recently described. To drive further energy innovation,
we are requesting continued funding of our energy program
offices as well as the funding for research in fossil fuels and
nuclear power, including advanced small modular reactors.
Now we have a duty to advance domestic energy production.
We also have a duty to ensure that our energy actually gets
delivered without interruption. That is why last year I
promised to step up our efforts to protect and maintain
America's energy infrastructure to all those hazards that are
out there.
The devastation caused by the 2017 hurricanes and the
impact to the electric sector was highlighted. We clearly have
to improve our grid reliability resilience in the face of these
natural disasters, we continue to work with our public and our
private partners and Puerto Rico to help restore power outages
caused by Hurricane Maria and improve the resiliency of Puerto
Rico's electric system. As of March the 7th, the Puerto Rican
Electric Power Authority reported that power had been returned
to 70 percent of the customers.
We also need to protect against manmade attacks, including
cyber attacks. So this year we have requested funding to
increase and strengthen cybersecurity as well as the
Department's cyber defenses. We are establishing a new office
of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, Emergency Response. It is
called CESER.
Much of our Nation's greatest technology breakthroughs
affecting energy has come through, as you made reference to,
Ranking Member, the work at the national labs that we have. We
need to ensure their funding as well.
In 2017, our national labs won 33 of the prestigious R&D
100 awards, including technologies regarding new materials,
protecting our environment, incorporating renewable energy,
reliably onto our electric grid and sophisticating our
cybersecurity tools. These accomplishments, meeting the people
driving our innovation agenda, and imploring them to reach even
higher, are some of the reasons I am committed to visit each of
our national labs.
I am especially proud of the work several of our labs are
doing to harness the power of world-class supercomputers to
improve our health, and particularly the health of our
veterans. We have stood up a program called Active that is
specifically using our computing capability to address our
veterans' health.
Finally, let me touch on one of our other key objectives
laid out last year, and that is to accelerate efforts to
develop Exascale computing systems. This year we have requested
nearly a 31 percent increase for this vital area in order to
keep the United States at the forefront of supercomputing.
So, Mr. Chairman, in my first year I have been able to see
the depth, the breadth of the DOE enterprise. I could not be
prouder to be able to lead this amazing agency. I have visited
19 of the national labs, 4 more coming up before the end of the
month. I also visited WIPP, the Nevada National Security Site;
Pantex; Y-12, the Kansas City National Security Complex, McNary
Dam, and Hanford. But seriously, I told somebody, I said, I
kind of feel like Johnny Cash, that old song, ``I've Been
Everywhere, Man.''
At each of these sites, it became abundantly clear to me
just the amazing talent of the patriots that work at these
facilities all through the DOE complex. These are really,
really fine men and women who I cannot be prouder to get to
work with on a daily basis and say that I am part of a team of
people that is making America safer, more secure, economically
and otherwise.
In the end, it is you, the people's duly elected
representatives, who are going to best decide how to allocate
the resources. If there is one thing I learned as governor, I
learned how the appropriations process worked. I recognize we
push these budgets out and then we work together to finalize
the product.
My commitment to you is not only do I respect your role in
this, I understand my role in this. And that we will use those
resources wisely and in pursuit of the goals that you and I and
the administration have outlined.
So thank you and I look forward to attempting to answer
your questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, I
couldn't agree with you more on the value and the importance of
our national labs and the great work that they do. I call them
the Crown Jewels. I really think that they do some of the best
scientific research in the world at these national labs.
It is kind of a strange time in that we are talking about
the 2019 budget request and you don't know what the 2018 is
yet, so it is a little hard. And some of the questions that we
have are kind of based on what the 2018 budget might be and I
guess we will see that hopefully next week, seeing as how on
the 23rd we run out of funding. I think we are on a path to get
the final year funding done by the end of next week, but let me
get a couple of the questions out of the way.
First of all, I am pleased to see that the Department has
continued to request funding to reopen the Yucca Mountain
licensing process. The reopening of Yucca Mountain is one of
the highest goals of this subcommittee. As you know, it is not
a scientific issue, it is a political issue that we have had a
hard time resolving between the House and the Senate over the
last . . . forever it seems like.
Could you tell me what your plans are to move forward with
Yucca Mountain?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. Yesterday I had a conversation
with Senator Heller along those same lines. He wanted to know
if this $120 million in our line item was for that purpose.
I simply told him, and this is right to the core the law
requires us to go forward with this on the licensing side to
find out what the observations are from both sides of this
issue, and that is, simply put, what this appropriation is for,
it is what the administration means for it to be.
We have an obligation. I made a commitment to uphold the
laws and the Constitution of the United States when I took this
job.
The law clearly requires the Department of Energy to go
through this licensing process. This is the funding to do just
that, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. As you know, we have had some disagreements
between the House and the Senate on Yucca Mountain, which has
led to disagreements on interim storage.
The reality is, as I am sure you well know, we need both
those things. Before we can move forward, I think we have got
to come to an agreement on both Yucca Mountain and the
authorization for interim storage.
I know Congressman Shimkus has a bill in the House that I
think you all have seen. Senator Alexander and Senator
Feinstein have a less comprehensive bill in the Senate. In
trying to work out those differences and trying to get those
passed, are you supportive of the Shimkus bill?
Secretary Perry. I will leave that to those of you with
great talent in being able to negotiate those bills, sir.
I agree with your understanding and your passion about
having places to store long term, both in temporary and in
permanent storage of radioactive material. It is one of the
reasons that not only do we need to look at the issue relative
to Yucca, but also WIPP. There is a site in West Texas that I
was very familiar with when I was the Governor outside of
Andrews, Texas, and there may be some other sites in this
country that are appropriate.
I am going to work with the Congress as you give me
instructions to find the solution to a challenge. I hope I
brought a good focus to that we have in, I think, 38 States now
sites that have these materials. We have been fortunate that we
haven't had an incident, and they need to be stored in highly
secure, highly scientifically proven areas that will be safe
for long-term storage.
Mr. Simpson. One other subject of contention over the last
several years, the Department of Energy first proposed to
cancel the MOX Fuel Fabrication Facility in order to pursue an
alternative means to fulfill the U.S. responsibilities under
its nonproliferation agreement with Russia in its Fiscal Year
2014 Budget.
It is 5 years later and there are still significant
questions surrounding the dilute-and-dispose alternative. The
committee still does not have a comprehensive lifecycle cost
estimate of the alternative and DOE hasn't submitted any
legislative proposals that would be needed to carry out and
fulfill the program.
The fiscal year 2018 National Defense Authorization Act
allows you to terminate the project if you are able to provide
a lifecycle cost estimate that shows the cost of the
alternative is 50 percent of the cost of MOX. We were informed
that DOE was pulling together an interim cost estimate in order
to certify that a cost estimate exists that meets the NDAA
threshold as opposed to submitting the comprehensive lifecycle
cost estimates that is reported under development.
Will it be a comprehensive lifecycle cost estimate for
dilute-and-dispose? When will it be provided to Congress? Do
you intend to submit the NDAA's certification and terminate the
project? And, if so, when and will that be before the
comprehensive lifecycle cost is finished or will you wait until
that is finished? And if and when a waiver is submitted, will
the estimate contain significant detail to allow Congress to
carry out its oversight responsibilities?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. I will try to be very brief. You
covered some pretty good watershed there of issues.
Let me just talk about what you asked. Let me just say
again, Ms. Kaptur, and to Chairman Simpson, from the standpoint
of you getting some information you consider to be too slowly,
and I don't disagree with you. I apologize for that. I am
learning that sometimes this process is not anywhere near as
fast as I would like for it to be either.
Working with our friends at OMB is a new experience for me
coming from a State and having been a governor and
appropriator. I am not making excuses. I am just telling you I
recognize it. I don't like it either and I am going to do
something about it.
MOX, total project cost, according to the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, is $17.2 billion compared to the cost to stand up
the dilute-and-dispose process which is somewhere between $800
million and $1 billion, so almost a 17, 18 to 1 difference.
That is $16.7 billion less to do the dilute-and-dispose
process.
The annual program cost is $800 million to
$1 billion. To build the facility is between $200 and $500
million. The delta there is about $4- to $600 million per year
on the operating cost less for D&D.
Obviously money is important and there is a great deal of
difference in the amount of money that we are talking about
here between building out the MOX and the D&D.
But here are the numbers that really jump out to me, and it
is the completion dates of these two different paths. The
completion date for the MOX project is 2048, the completion
date for the D&D is 2027. That is a 21-year difference, 21
years earlier for D&D.
The starting of the plutonium disposition is 2050-2051
versus 2028. So getting that plutonium into a form that it
could be taken out of South Carolina and disposed of in a
permanent way, is a 22-year difference.
So there is clearly a difference here. We lay this in front
of you. What we will do is there, and I think four questions
that get asked in that final, and then it goes to you for 30
days.
The 11th of May is when that will be--no. Never mind.
Mr. Simpson. The reason I ask----
Secretary Perry. I am telling you more than you need to
know and the last part was wrong.
Mr. Simpson. The numbers you have given me and my question
is where the hell these numbers come from, because nobody
really knows. There has been such discrepancy over the last 4
or 5 years as we have dealt with this of what the real numbers
are and that all depends on who the heck you talk to, and that
has been frustrating to us.
But when the NDAA language came out and said, hey, if you
can do this for 50 percent less, how could I argue with that?
If you can do it for 50 percent less, I am going to go for it.
I just want to know that the information given to us is not
written on the back of a napkin in a restaurant sometime saying
we can do it for 50 percent less, here.
When I hear them say, OK, we have got preliminary costs
substantially less, I want to see the comprehensive report and
I want to know how you came to those conclusions, what you took
into consideration. The last estimate I saw on dilute-and-
dispose, they didn't cost estimate any of the transportation
cost or any of the disposal cost actually in WIPP and the cost
of expanding it.
Are we going to see a proposal from the administration to
expand the land withdrawal in New Mexico? Because I think we
are going to have that if we are going to put this stuff at
WIPP.
Secretary Perry. That is going on as we speak from the
standpoint of requesting through New Mexico the designation
that is going to give us substantially more volume at WIPP.
Mr. Simpson. The other question I have, and this is
probably answerable, I just don't know what it is yet, is, with
the slowdown of WIP because of the incident that occurred, it
is going to be several years before it is back up to full
operation. Right now I think they are taking eight shipments a
week or something like that----
Secretary Perry. That is correct.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. And we are going to add in
another stream of waste into that, so that is going to
essentially lower the shipments that are going to come from
other sites that have agreements with the Federal Government
and we are going to miss some milestones if we are going to
slow that down.
Is that all being taken into consideration?
Secretary Perry. It is and I might add, and again I am
fixing to say something that I read just in the clips over the
last couple of days, but just take that into account where that
came from. The site out in West Texas is going to ask the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission for some licensing approval
there. So again, there may be some expanded options for us to
use. But you are correct, those numbers, those studies, will be
given to you and the committee members, but all that has been
taken into consideration.
Mr. Simpson. One time there was a thought process--and I
was talking last night, the staff couldn't remember where it
came from, about building onsite storage at WIPP, above ground,
so that when you got ready to put it underground, you just had
to take it from the onsite storage at WIPP.
Is that still under consideration? They said at the time
rough estimate to be about $5 million to build an onsite
storage facility at WIPP. Is that still under consideration?
They said at the time, rough estimate to be about $5 million to
build an onsite storage facility at WIPP. Is that still?
Secretary Perry. I am not aware that there are
conversations of that going on. What I do know is that there
are some above ground work being done to modernize. There is
also some work being done there to increase the ventilation
capability, and what have you. I cannot give you a definitive
answer on whether or not there are ongoing conversations about
onsite----
Mr. Simpson. Storage there.
Secretary Perry [continuing]. Interim storage prior to it
being down in the----
Mr. Simpson. It would be interesting to find out because
that was, for a relatively cheap cost, you could build onsite
storage there; and, of course, you would have to have the
approval of the State of New Mexico.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Simpson. But it made sense to me.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Simpson. And then you could come a lot closer to
meeting a lot of these State agreements that we have got around
the country. Before I go to Ms. Kaptur----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You can go to Ms. Kaptur.
Mr. Simpson. We will go to Ms. Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. I thank the gentlemen from not just Idaho, but
New Jersey; and Mr. Secretary, thank you for some clarification
in your replies here to the Chairman's questions. My first
question relates to a statement you made in your opening
remarks. You referenced progress in the United States
increasing LNG exports, I share your excitement at that, but
could you tell us to what extent DOE may be developing new
energy partnerships or pathways to our European allies to
prevent their energy supplies being held hostage to rogue
regimes? Is there any working group, any initiative? Can you
enlighten us in any way in that regard?
Secretary Perry. Yes, ma'am. There are ongoing
conversations with my counterparts, and other government
officials, Poland, for instance, and bringing LNG in through
Poland, down into Central Europe. The real issue there is
interconnects, from my perspective, between the European
countries. Obviously, there is issues with Nord Stream and how
that is going to be ultimately decided, and whether or not, you
know, Germany is going to be a partner with us on LNG or
whether they are going to rely upon the Russian gas that is
coming in. So, we are in conversations, with you being the head
of the Ukrainian Caucus with our folks and Porshnikoff and his
administration relative to how we can assist them.
There are plans for our pipeline--this isn't LNG, but this
is a plan for a pipeline. We think it is important for the
European Union to have multiple choices. You know, we would
love to sell them as much LNG as we can from the United States,
but I think it is important for freedom's purposes that Europe
and the EU has multiple sources of energy of which they can
choose. It is good for competition, but it is also, more
importantly, from my perspective, good for freedom.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you for that perspective, Mr. Secretary.
And if there is any working group within the administration of
which you are a part that can come and privately brief some of
the members of this subcommittee and perhaps others, believe
me, there is deep interest on the part of this member.
Secretary Perry. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Kaptur. I want to move to a domestic concern here. The
cuts in the budget that are proposed to the Energy Efficiency
and Renewable Energy account, the number I have is 67 percent.
And we have a statement here by a senior DOE official who
recently said publicly that the Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy programs are a victim of their own success, and
successes to date in bringing down the cost of renewable
energy. And deploying their technologies means that the Federal
Government no longer needs to make these types of R&D
investments.
Let me just put on the record that China--I represent some
major solar firms, I think the best ones in the country. There
are probably some in Texas, too, but they are hacked hundreds
of times a month by the Chinese. And the Chinese are not
reducing their investment in R&D and there is a huge global
market in these technologies, and your budget basically
relegates the United States to a very inferior position. So, I
know I have a plan to try to alter your budget, but what is
your plan to ensure in the budget you have submitted that we
don't fall behind in the energy efficiency and renewable energy
arena?
Secretary Perry. Ms. Kaptur, you are correct in the sense
that it is a priority of the Department to continue to keep the
United States at the very tip of the spear when it comes to
technology innovation. It is how we have found ourselves to be
at this place in the energy sector at this time. It was through
innovation; it will continue to be through innovation.
One of the things I learned as an appropriator and as a
governor was that just because a line item was reduced didn't
necessarily mean that particular line item had fallen out of
favor. In some cases, what that means is, and I will give you a
few examples, and that high-level DOE person you were talking
about, I understand what they were saying. They are basically
saying we have had some successes and we ought to be
celebrating those successes. For instance, the Vehicle
Technology Office, it met or exceeded its goals in 5 of the
last 5 years. Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technologies Office,
again, they met or exceeded their goals in 5 of the last 5
years. We consider that to be meeting the goals of which we had
put in place. And when you meet the goals, those are mature and
they don't need to be funded going forward. Are there places
where we have, philosophically, I am an all-of-the-above energy
person, so in our National labs, philosophically, I am pushing
some particular areas. You know, battery storage is a great
example of it. I am a big fan; I have been on the record of
saying that is the holy grail of battery storage. We may be
right on the cusp of hitting the tipping point. There are some
that say, well, you have got to continue to spend money, but we
have great successes in that arena. So, the idea that we have
to spend or that the criticism would be because you are not
spending the same amount of money in this line item, I would
suggest to you in many cases it is because there have been
successes in those. The solar energy office is a great
example--5 of the last 5 years, we have met or exceeded. Are we
working on some areas in the solar side in our National labs
that are being funded? Yes, we are. They may not show as a line
item as you have seen before. So, we are reprioritizing, where
do these dollars need to go, what is the best return on our
investment. We are reprogramming, repurposing, if you will. But
I think there is some great celebration that needs to be going
on about the successes that we have had, recognizing that we
have a lot of competition around the world, and that innovation
technology is what is going to take us to the lead. It is why
we have asked for this extraordinary--I think extraordinary--
increase in Exascale and in the next generation of computing,
into quantum computing.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for what you are able
to say. I would hesitate if I didn't say, or I would be remiss
in my duties here, the competition is predatory for many of
these countries. And so, I don't think that we can afford to
put our foot on the brake while we have got our foot on the
accelerator at the same time over there at DOE. I think that we
have to keep our rigor. And so, my efforts on this committee
will be devoted to that end.
Your budget request actually cuts the Office of Energy's
energy storage program by 74 percent. Yes, we have reached
certain thresholds, but we certainly haven't maximized what we
know in these energy arenas. And that brings me to the budget
proposal to eliminate ARPA-E. The President's budget requests
support Energy's efforts to enhance today's energy security,
they state, while also making strategic investments for
tomorrow, yet ARPA-E is eliminated. Your acting director of
ARPA-E suggested at this week's energy summit that reforms may
be coming to the program, and I would like you to know that
this subcommittee is extremely interested in any proposed
changes to ARPA-E. That is kind of like the gold star; it is
where we invent the future. Could we have your commitment that
we will be informed in any proposed changes to ARPA-E early on?
Secretary Perry. Ms. Kaptur, you have my commitment that I
am going to work with this committee. And one of the things,
again, that I have learned as a Governor is that we are going
to honor and follow instructions. The ARPA-E and its future
iterations, we realize that the investment in late technology
and in early stage technology and in basic research is really
important. All of those mesh together. I created and oversaw a
program while I was the Governor of Texas called the Emerging
Technology Fund. I think there is a real role for government to
play in funding, particularly in these early stages, technology
that might not ever get commercialized without that.
You know, if it is the will of this committee for ARPA-E to
exist going forward, in some form or fashion, I hope that you
will have confidence that not only have I done this before as a
Governor, but that we will have good successes and we can stand
up together and say this is how it is supposed to work, this is
a good return on the investment for the American taxpayers
dollars.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I know that my time is
up in this round. I just wanted to ask again if you could
identify someone, Mr. Secretary, from the Department of Energy
who is most knowledgeable about European energy pathways and
perhaps somebody from DOD and somebody from State, I don't
know, but if they could come and brief interested members of
this subcommittee, we would be very appreciative, on what is
happening with the thinking inside the administration
strategically on the importance of that set of allies and their
energy supply lines. Thank you.
Secretary Perry. I can and I will.
Mr. Simpson. We are glad to have with us the chairman of
the full committee, Mr. Frelinghuysen.
The Chairman. Mr. Secretary, welcome. I know that Mr.
Newhouse and Mr. Joyce, Mr. Fortenberry, Mr. Fleischmann, and
Mr. Aguilar have been very patient, so let me just take 2
minutes, what we call two fingers, obviously to welcome you and
obviously thank Chairman Simpson who succeeded me as Chairman.
He's doing a heck of a better job than I ever did and he works
very closely with Ms. Kaptur, who I think was recognized, you
may not know, as the longest-serving woman in the United States
House of Representatives yesterday. I am sure you deserve more
applause.
A couple of things. I hope in the future we can reopen
Yucca. That is something that is important to me. I am a great
believer in the nuclear enterprise being modernized. I do think
the public is owed a better explanation as to why it is
necessary. Maybe this isn't the place to talk about it, but I
think if we are going to make these substantial investments,
let me say, I think we have some incredible laboratories out
there. It has been a while since I visited some of them, but
they are national treasures.
I continue to have some concerns about cybersecurity and
the things that the people who are not on our side might do to
affect their great work out there, and I am sure the issue will
be raised. We need to work on cleanups, the legacy of issues.
And lastly, someone once told me if you don't raise the
local issues, they will find somebody else to replace you.
Fortunately, I am retiring, so I don't have to necessarily
worry about that, but in my life, I have been very much
involved in domestic fusion. I am interested in the future of
ITER. We have these partnerships, let us cultivate them. We are
losing partners all over the place for a variety of reasons.
And, yes, I will put a plug in for PPPL, the Princeton Plasma
Physics Lab.
Good luck to you, and I want to thank the chairman for the
time and everybody for their patience.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Aguilar.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Chairman and
the Ranking Member. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here on
such an important day. I know it is the start of March Madness.
Thankfully, UT doesn't play until tomorrow, so we appreciate
your time.
The electric power industry--and I will pick up a little
bit on what the chairman of the full committee was talking
about when we discuss reliability, resiliency, and cyber. You
mentioned it in your opening statement that the Office of
Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability, has been a lead
role in addressing infrastructure issues related to the power
grid, including physical security and cybersecurity of all
energy infrastructure. The fiscal year 2019 budget request
split these two offices, as you know, into Electricity Delivery
and then the Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency
Response CESER, as you called it. The budget request would
reduce funding levels to the new OE by 59 percent from fiscal
year 2017 enacted levels, and increase funding to CESER, the
cyber side, by 21 percent. Given the challenges of the
hurricanes in prior years presented to our power system,
combined with aging electricity infrastructure and increasing
retirements on baseload coal and nuclear power plants, why has
the DOE proposed to reduce OE's funding in areas intended to
support reliability and resiliency?
Secretary Perry. Mr. Aguilar, I think the answer in a
global way was earlier on when I talked about that just because
you see a reduction in a line item doesn't necessarily relate
to, you know, there is a 36 percent, or whatever that number
is, reduction in our interest in that or in our ability to
affect the areas of which we are discussing. I want to share
with you, if I could kind of shift over to the cyber side of
this, I think the commitment to the electrical sector is still
there. I think we are going to be able to address the needs
with the dollars that we have.
From a prioritization standpoint, protecting the grid from
cyber attacks is substantially high on our priority list. We
spoke about it a year ago. Standing up this office to protect,
and to understand better. Chairman Simpson, in his district
with Idaho National Lab, he has a test grid of which we can go
out and actually break it, infect it, and that is going to
serve, I think, very well. You are going to see this whole
office standing up with a lot of attention and resources to a
critical area: obviously, our capacity to protect the grid. We
have a sector-specific agency requirement by statute to protect
the electrical grid, so, the cyber in this Office of
Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response--and the
emergency response part of it is--there is flexibility of--
obviously I consider emergency response to be in line with some
of the issues that you made reference to on the electrical side
of things. So, I think splitting those up and looking at it
from the standpoint of, well, this is how much you are going to
spend here, so, therefore, you are taking away some of your
focus, your interest, that is not correct. Again, this is about
being able to manage, being able to prioritize, and, yes, the
line item is less there, but that may not necessarily mean,
that there is going to be less results.
Mr. Aguilar. Sure, I understand. And I understand that the
Department was warned in the past about facing imminent
threats. We have talked about that as well, ensuring that we
guard against our resiliency. In 2015, the Ukraine electricity
grid was messed with. I mean, we know that these things happen
and we just want to make sure we are investing in the right
areas in order to make that happen.
I would ask you more questions; my time is up. Let me just
lastly say that part of our fiscal year 2019 analysis and
justification, it has to ensure that we have all the
information in front of us. And I know that there are volumes
that haven't been given to this committee, and our inability to
do our job, as you understand it from your role as executive,
requires that we have that documents. And so, to the extent
that we can continue to request and have that proper
information to evaluate the programs and the line items, it
would sure help us do our jobs a little better. So, I
appreciate your attention to that.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Fleischmann.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
good morning, sir.
Secretary Perry. Good morning, sir.
Mr. Fleischmann. As you know, I represent the great people
of the Third District of Tennessee, and in that district is a
wonderful city, Oak Ridge. Oak Ridge sits in Anderson and Roane
counties and it is a very, very special place. A personal note
of thanks to you, though, sir, before I start for your personal
attentiveness to Oak Ridge and all that we do there. And also I
want to thank you for the tremendous staff that you have put
together at DOE. Your team is exemplary and a privilege and
pleasure to work with, so, I thank them as well.
Mr. Secretary, at Oak Ridge we had the Manhattan Project. I
believe we won World War II there. We won the Cold War there,
and we have done such a tremendous job, the men and women who
have served us for decades there. It is a community that
supports nuclear. We have the Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
which is truly an outstanding facility. We have got the Y-12
Plant under NNSA and we are building the uranium processing
facility, and I want to commend you and your Department. The
contractor there is doing a tremendous, tremendous job. Every
time we go there, it gets better and better. And as you may
know, that had to be redesigned and things were going so well
to make sure that our Nation's nuclear arsenal is strong for
years to come. And I know the Pantex Plant in Texas is doing an
outstanding job as well. We also have a nuclear cleanup
mission, and I appreciate your kind words and support of all
that we do. This is something that Republicans and Democrats
alike work so hard, not only in the House, but in the Senate.
Nuclear cleanup is so, so important. As you know, I am the
chairman of the Nuclear Cleanup Caucus, chairman of the
National Labs Caucus, so it has just been a tremendous
privilege to work with you, sir. One last accolade, I want to
talk to you about, and thank you for your STEM research
support.
At Oak Ridge we have an organization called ORAU. The Oak
Ridge Institute for Science and Education managed by ORAU is
truly outstanding. We also have ORISE, which is a key entity in
the Department providing all of our Nation's laboratories more
than 3,000 research participants per year.
They also work for more than 20 other Federal research
agencies, providing research participants in key facilities.
So, again, thank you for the direction in which you are taking
this critically important Federal agency.
I have some questions. The Department of Energy's National
Laboratories are a key element of our National research
enterprise, but much of their physical plants are over 50 years
old. At the 10 National laboratories, stewarded by the
Department's Office of Science, there is an estimated $2
billion backlog in infrastructure projects.
All the National laboratories have urgent needs ranging
from modernization laboratory space and utility upgrades to
seismic refitting and demolition of excess facilities that are
costly to maintain. At the same time much of the lab's
infrastructure is not directly funded, and if it is, the
funding is inadequate.
So, the labs are left to cobble together funding to
operate, maintain everything from nuclear hot cells and isotope
production facilities to advance manufacturing facilities and
supercomputing centers, all of which are mission-critical to
the Department.
And as maintenance costs grow, laboratory overhead rates
grow making it more expensive for others to work with the labs.
This creates a constant drag on the system of labs to maintain
state-of-the-art assets that attract the best and brightest
scientists to do nationally important research in partnership
with others.
My question, sir, besides the need for additional funding,
how do you propose to address infrastructure needs of the
National Laboratories, sir?
Secretary Perry. Mr. Fleischmann, you are absolutely
correct, in the sense of the facilities when we went and toured
Oak Ridge, and there is a building out there that we refer to
as the mouse house. That is as old as I am and that is old in a
building sense. So, being able to decontaminate and deconstruct
them, there has to be some additional funds.
I hope that the committee would take a look at that from
the standpoint of being able to remove, Mr. Newhouse lives
out--with Hanford right around the corner, and that is a
facility we got to clean up, and in a lot of Members' places,
and so not only the clean-up side of this, but also old
facilities.
And the fact is these do need to be, in some cases,
removed. They are contaminated, they are going to cost a lot of
money, it is going to take substantial time to do that
properly. But the other side of it is to build new facilities
that are going to be attractive to the next wave of scientists
that are going to be coming in, where they want to come and
work in a place that is not 50 or 60 years old and falling
down.
So, our commitment is to prioritize where we can with the
resources that we have, but obviously having the resources
available is going to be important.
Mr. Fleischmann. Yes, sir. Thank you. Mr. Secretary, the
United States and China are in a race for supercomputing
supremacy, which is critical for advances in science and
technology that would drive economic growth. According to
Science Magazine, on February 9th of this year, after
dominating the supercomputing rankings for decades, the United
States is so far behind that the combined power of the top two
machines in China easily outpaces that of all 21 supercomputers
operated by the United States Department of Energy, the
country's top supercomputer funder.
However, that could change this summer when the Summit
supercomputer at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory is
commissioned. At approximately 200 petaflops, Summit will be
the fastest in the world with twice the power of the top
Chinese supercomputer. Summit represents a critical next step
on the U.S. path to developing an Exascale system 1,000 times
more powerful than today's supercomputing systems.
The United States currently has a research and development
plan to develop and deploy an Exascale system by 2021,
including a system at ORNL called Frontier, about the same time
that China or Japan are expected to deploy their own Exascale
systems.
Mr. Secretary, to beat, if not maintain, competitive
relations with the Chinese and Japanese in the field of
supercomputing, the United States needs to deploy its own
Exascale system in 2021. Your budget request makes a serious
investment in achieving this goal. Can you talk a little bit
more about the elements required for this success?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. The fiscal year 2019 request
includes $636 million, and $473 million of that in the Office
of Science and $163 million in the NNSA. June the 15th, I
announced $258 million in funding over 3 years that are going
to support six leading U.S. technology companies, because it is
obviously not just a DOE/National Lab enterprise here. This is
working with our private sector partners as well.
So, not only have you all appropriated and reprioritized
these dollars into the Exascale at the DOE, it is also working
with our national technology companies as part of an Exascale
computing project. It is called New Pathway Forward. And these
awards will, obviously, accelerate and develop the critical
hardware, and it is going to be necessary to put us back in
what I consider to be a rightful place, is having the fastest
computing capability in the world.
Right now, we don't have that. And the importance, from my
perspective, is that getting us back to that position is
tantamount to our national security and Argonne is going to
have the first Exascale computer followed closely by your Oak
Ridge lab.
It is a different architecture, and this should put us back
in either the first or second slot when those are done, and
then obviously the transition on to quantum computing after
that. And, again, this is one of those examples that as
Exascale comes into its maturity, and we start shifting funds
over to the quantum computing, there will be substantially less
spent in Exascale on the line item, and we will start
transitioning those dollars over to quantum computing at that
particular point in time, which your home lab will play a very
important role.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Mr. Simpson. We are fortunate to have with us the ranking
member of the full committee, Ms. Lowey.
Ms. Lowey. And I am fortunate to be here. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and Madam Ranking Member.
Mr. Secretary, welcome. Before we discuss the budget
request I want to take a moment to express my profound
disappointment and frustration that we are sitting here today,
33 days after the President's budget request was released,
without a complete budget justification from your office.
During my time as ranking member of the subcommittee, I
have never seen delays like this. And while I understand there
are multiple administration entities involved in this
production process, I have to say this does not reflect well on
you or your Department, and I do hope you will be getting us
that information quickly.
My first question is about Yucca Mountain, and I know it
has been discussed, but I want to make a couple of points,
because Yucca Mountain and interim storage I think is essential
to deal with.
I appreciate your fiscal year 2019 request, including funds
for Yucca Mountain and interim storage for spent nuclear fuel.
This issue is extremely important for my district, as the
village of Buchanan and town of Portland plan for future
redevelopment of the Indian Point Energy Center Plant site.
So I would like to ask these questions.
Number one, how are you working with Congress to support
moving forward with Yucca Mountain and other consolidated
storage options for nuclear waste? And when do you hope to see
Yucca Mountain or interim storage facilities opened and
operational?
Secretary Perry. Ms. Lowey, I addressed your concerns a
little earlier about the lack of transparency. When you don't
get something, I consider that to be a lack of transparency and
discussed this earlier with the committee. The appropriate
actions will be taken, ma'am. It is not lost on me that not
only do you deserve, but it is my duty, to make sure that the
information that you request gets to you in a timely fashion.
And speaking of timely fashion, the administration, through
their budget request, does put $120 million into the budget to
put the Yucca process back on track from a licensing
standpoint. And I think that is important because it is
required by law.
I am not going to speak to previous secretaries or
administrations, but I made a commitment when I was sworn in to
uphold the laws and Constitution of the United States. It is
clearly a statutory responsibility. There is a law that says
you will take this process forward. We are following the law.
With that said, we will follow the will of Congress, as you
all decide how you want to deal with Yucca, and whatever that
may be, is that we will dutifully follow your instructions
about how to deal with that.
As a side note, I agree with you. I think we as a country
have a moral responsibility to remove that waste from many of
your districts and to dispose of it properly. It may be in a
temporary manner.
It will ultimately be in a permanent manner, and not only
do we need to be looking at the sites that have been designated
and expand some of those facilities we need to speed the
permitting process as much as reasonable, to be able to move
that material out of the sites, that in many cases are not
secure.
Ms. Lowey. Thank you. And I am glad we agree that it is
time for the Department of Energy to finally take title of
spent nuclear fuel and dispose of it safely and permanently.
In advance of Yucca Mountain, or an interim storage
facility being licensed, I do hope that we can work together to
make sure that spent fuel is transported safely.
What work has the Department of Energy done to study the
characteristics of spent nuclear fuel as it relates to
transportation conditions? And can you identify any gaps in the
Department's knowledge about spent fuel volatility? And what
resources will your Department need to study spent fuel and how
to make it safe for transport?
Secretary Perry. Ms. Lowey, I don't know of any obvious
discrepancies that are there, but what I would ask for you, and
the committee's approval to go back, research that with some
detail, and get that back to you as soon as possible.
Ms. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Newhouse.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Kaptur. Secretary Perry, it is a pleasure to see you again.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Newhouse. Part of your effort to ``be an everywhere
man'', I want to thank you for coming out to my district last
August and visiting some of the things that are of high
importance to our Nation. So, thank you very much for that.
But let me get right to the point of question I have for
you. As part of your visit you are able to visit the McNary Dam
and so you were able to see, I think I could say firsthand,
really the huge role that the hydroelectric dams play in the
Pacific Northwest. It is truly an amazing thing.
The Federal Columbia River Power System, unfortunately,
today though is being threatened. And so that means our energy,
our transportation, our agriculture, our irrigation, our flood
control, our economy is truly at risk in the Pacific Northwest.
The people on this panel, my colleagues here and other
places in Congress, have heard me speak strongly and
passionately about this, and I will continue to because right
now there is a single Federal judge that is forcing additional
spill at our dams. That decision overrides a comprehensive
biological opinion that was agreed to by scientists and
engineers at Federal agencies, by Northwest Tribes, by local
and State governments, our regional experts and stakeholders.
I have got proposed language alongside with my colleagues,
Representatives McMorris Rodgers and Herrera Beutler, for the
Appropriations Bill for fiscal year 2018 to prevent this
additional spill. And if we are able to do that we will save
Pacific Northwest ratepayers, in just 1 year, $40 million in
increased utility rates.
So, I know you are a strong proponent of renewable
hydroelectric power. And Mr. Secretary, would you commit to
working with me to prevent this forced additional spill, save
our dams which are a vital component of our way of life in the
Pacific Northwest?
Secretary Perry. The short answer, yes.
Mr. Newhouse. I appreciate that very much.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Newhouse. We are going to need all of your horsepower
and your muscle to be able to pull this off.
Secretary Perry. Certainly.
Mr. Newhouse. And again, thank you very much seeing
firsthand the importance. And I think you made some comments
relating to you have nothing like that in Texas.
Secretary Perry. That is true.
Mr. Newhouse. And they truly are a unique source of not
only energy, but they really do drive our economy and our way
of life in the Pacific Northwest.
Secretary Perry. As you will remember, I shared with you
two things that you all do substantially well, and that is
hydro and wine. And they do that well. Let us not get into
that, sir. I am digging. This hole is already pretty deep.
Well, we won't go into the quality versus quantity
equation.
Mr. Newhouse. I am sorry. I am sorry, Mr. Chairman, I
should not have brought that up.
Mr. Calvert. The difference between Washington potatoes and
Idaho potatoes, quality versus quantity.
Mr. Newhouse. Yes. So, restarting my clock will--also last
summer you were able to visit the Hanford cleanup site, and
part of that you saw the high-level waste in the treatment
facilities at the waste treatment plant. You know, recently it
has been with some concern that I have heard that the
Department of Energy is considering delaying the design,
engineering, and construction of the high-level waste and the
pretreatment facilities. I have expressed that concern to you
and with the Office of Environmental Management because of the
unknown repercussions of such a decision.
Can you tell us for certainty that the DOE would still be
able to meet court-mandated deadlines for full operations of
the WTP with this kind of a delay?
Secretary Perry. Certainly, that is our intention. I will
share with you from a high level that the project that I
inherited as the Secretary, was trying to do too much at the
same time, and they needed to get focused on doing what we know
would work, and that is what we have shifted to now.
With that said, we are going to be able to, on the C-Farm,
that area called C-Farm, and those tanks, we are going to be
able to make an announcement in the not too distant future
about some good progress that we are making there, and that has
not been in the works before.
And so, I am reasonably comfortable that the progress that
we are making at Hanford is meeting the requirements of the
lawsuit. Working closely with the senators from Washington
State, yourself, and other members who have interest in, and
dealing with Hanford as responsibly and as expeditiously as we
can.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you. And I know my time is up, but let
me just, again, stress to you my reservations about the
proposal of delaying, and would hope that we can see concrete
plans from DOE as they continue through that proposal.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, Mr.
Secretary. It is nice to have you here. It was unfair last year
when you were here, you had probably 2 weeks or 3 weeks under
your belt when you first came in for this meeting, but,
unfortunately, I want to take you back to a discussion we had,
again, last year.
And for me, it is incredibly important for Perry Nuclear
Power Plant, and I know Ranking Member Kaptur has a plant also
as well in her district. That, unfortunately, because of the
critical role it has played in the economy of our county, and
the 1,284 megawatt power plant employs more than 700 workers
and is the largest taxpayer and the largest county in my
district.
The plant is one of the largest of its type and it produces
enough electricity to power more than 1 million homes per day.
Now the number of nuclear plants across the country are closed
or announced their intended closure, 6 nuclear plants have
closed in the last 6 years, 19 others have announced closures,
according to the CRS.
And I am concerned for my district, but also for our
electric grid. If plants continue to shut down prematurely it
could seriously affect the reliability of our energy system.
As you well know, the last administration made a war on
coal. A lot of the coal-fired plants were also working in our
area have been shut down, not to return.
This Perry Nuclear Plant and the Toledo Plant are up and
running now and, you know, unlike Texas or some of the other
warm States, we had a month of being less than 32 degrees. And
at some time we are taxing our grid and we are going to shut
down what I see to be a viable plant, which would produce no
real results other than destabilizing the grid.
And so I ask you, Mr. Secretary, can you speak to what your
Department is doing to ensure the long-term reliability of our
electric grid? And is there anything on the horizon that I
could relay to my constituents back home who are worried about
this potential closure, sir?
Secretary Perry. Mr. Joyce, thank you for bringing up what
I consider to be a real challenge for this country, and that is
reliable energy, affordable energy, a resilient grid. I put
forward a 403 request to FERC back some months ago on this
issue of reliability and with a focus on the nuclear and the
coal industry.
I believe with all my heart, and I will give you an
example, As the governor we had the other issue, the other side
of this, is in August it gets really hot in Texas. And we have
ERCOT, which is the Electrical Reliability Council of Texas,
which oversees our grid.
I called in the leadership of that and I told them, I said,
I do not want to get a phone call from someone whose
grandmother has died in her home because the electricity went
off in August, where the days are 105 to 110 degrees.
And that is the same from a citizen safety standpoint, not
even to mention the national security side of this, of being
able to have multiple sources of power, so that if one of them
does get interrupted, gas going to the Northeast, not only is
it being stopped from transmitting across certain States, you
are seeing plants being taken offline because of the economics.
And so I think it is time for us to have this conversation
in a national way. FERC has got to be engaged with this, this
country needs to have a conversation. Are we going to make sure
and take the steps to ensure that our nuclear and coal
industries, in particular, are going to be viable alternatives.
And part of all of the above mix in our energy portfolio, so
that we never have to take that phone call from someone in the
Northeast when the next polar vortex hits that the financial
centers of New York or Boston went offline because they
couldn't keep the power on, but more importantly, the citizens
that had to make the difference between--or had to make the
choice between am I going to keep the lights on or am I going
to keep my home warm?
Mr. Joyce. And I certainly appreciate your efforts in using
every arrow in your quiver to make sure that we could have a
multiple, disciplined grid to make sure we do that. And
especially in light of the fact we just did a tax reform, the
idea that we want to repatriate manufacturing and bring things
back here.
As you well know, in a rolling brownout they are not going
to brown out schools or hospitals or homes. They are going to
brown out factories. And I have heard many manufacturers talk
about the fact that they need a stable, reliable electrical
grid in order to prosper or in order to grow in the area.
Ms. Kaptur. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Joyce. Absolutely.
Ms. Kaptur. I want to thank you very much for bringing up a
particular problem facing Northern Ohio. It is quite serious.
Obviously it relates to our nuclear capabilities on the
commercial side and the fallout from marketplace competition.
But I would like to invite the Secretary, in his wisdom,
with all his experience, to think of a way that we might work
with the Department on a regional focus for what the fallout is
going to be in terms of capabilities of those who work in this
very delicate industry, and what our alternatives are for the
future if, in fact, we are part of the 25 percent of nuclear
power that gets shut down in this country.
I have found, having worked with several departments, that
the Department of Energy, and this is not blaming you, Mr.
Secretary, but it is just the Department's founding, the way it
has operated, to not have geographic sensitivity.
So, for example, after the terrible events of the 1970s
with the first Arab oil embargo we ended up, you know, creating
this strategic petroleum reserve, in fact the Department of
Energy. We were not very conscious of how significant energy is
in the functioning of this country.
And now when the coal plants shut down, the fallout across
Ohio, Southern Ohio, West Virginia, Kentucky, one knows,
politically, the American people should not have been shattered
in those regions, but there was no transition plan. But it is
partly because of the way that the Department was formed and
focused and so forth, and it lacks that kind of geographic,
particularized geographic sensitivity.
The Department of Commerce, the Department of HUD, I mean
they have a little bit more focus. So, my request would be,
could we think of a way to meet with stakeholders from this
region to find a better transition plan for regions that are
going to be hammered?
Mr. Simpson. We will have a second round.
Mr. Joyce. In fact, I will tie this up real quickly, Mr.
Chairman.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Joyce. Well, just the fact that if, in fact, the end
result is that some plant is going to be closed down,
especially in our communities, does DOE have any plans on how
we are going to remediate these areas or help these people who
are going to lose their livelihoods and the largest tax base
and payers in their districts?
Secretary Perry. Mr. Chairman, let me just very briefly, we
are laying out a plan in the not too distant future. We are not
ready to publicly lay it out.
Ms. Kaptur, and particularly the region that we are looking
at is one, as you very appropriately identified, is having some
real economic challenges and that is in the Appalachian region,
and to help transition it into an area where petrochemical
refining would be at the basis of it.
As the governor of Texas I worried greatly in August and
September about a Category 5 hurricanes coming up the Houston
ship channel and devastating the petrochemical footprint. That
is a substantial amount of that industry for the United States.
That is a national security issue.
To develop that in another region of this country,
Appalachia, makes sense because you are sitting on top of the
Marcellus and the Utica, which are prolific gas fields. Helping
transition the workers who are either out of work or not
working in jobs that are satisfactory from their perspective
and into higher paying, refining petrochemical-type jobs, that
is something that we are working on actively today at DOE. And
we are relatively familiar with that, Toledo and the region
there, and the transition that could go.
But the other side of this is to make sure that we don't
lose those plants; to make sure that we make decisions at this
particular point in time, to keep those plants in operation
either until we know for sure that they are not going to be
needed or that we make the transition to another form of
energy, and to be able to transform those communities in some
ways that are wise economically and from a national security
standpoint.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. And if I may just add,
there is at least 20 more years of useful life in the Perry
Plant.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Fortenberry.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
nice to see you, and I apologize for the coming and going. We
have got two secretaries within a hundred feet of one another
right now.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Three.
Mr. Fortenberry. Three.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Yeah, three different ones.
Mr. Fortenberry. I see, Secretary Day.
Secretary Perry. I thought yesterday was Secretary's Day,
then every day.
Mr. Fortenberry. Everyday. President Putin recently
announced his new Satan-2 missile, which can destroy France or
Texas. So, I tweeted that, Mr. Putin, so you can kill us better
than we can kill you. Now what? Part of your portfolio. I
didn't hear back from him, though.
Secretary Perry. He has tapped your phone.
Mr. Fortenberry. Or perhaps he knew the tweet before it
went out. I don't know. Part of your portfolio is
nonproliferation, and the intersection or two significant
responsibilities is what I want to talk to you about.
The International Atomic Energy Association, which is the
multilateral body, has significant relevance in this ever-
shifting world of advancing technology where the genie is out
of the bottle and not just traditional threats are emerging,
but new ones potentially.
The mission of the IAEA as I see it is going to evolve
from, and it already is, from safety to verification. I want to
know how well our Department is integrated in shaping that
culture with them, because I think, again, the importance of
that multilateral institution only grows in a more complicated
21st century.
Secondly, the nonproliferation programs, particularly the
ones where we had some mild cooperation with the Russians, do
we have any thread of communication or cooperation left with
them?
Secretary Perry. Let me address your last question first.
And the answer that we can talk about in this room is yes. We
can go and have further details about that in a different room,
but I think it is appropriately so that we try to reach out
to--and particularly through the IAEA. And we have a very good
working relationship with them and one that we continue to
develop where, as far as I know, the largest contributor to the
IAEA, and so they pay attention to the United States' interests
and goals.
And so, having this leadership role in the nonproliferation
area, and they basically are our agent, if you will, is a
reasonable statement. Not that we single-handedly, manage the--
--
Mr. Fortenberry. I want to say partner.
Secretary Perry. OK. Yes, sir. But I think we have a good
relationship with them, and I think our goals are the same, and
that is to protect this globe against the proliferation of
nuclear materials.
I think we do a good job of that at this particular point
in time, but it is a very different world today. And this
administration's goal of trying to make sure that no countries
are able to be able to develop weapons, nuclear weapons, is
very strong and very capable and very sincere.
Mr. Fortenberry. There is a secondary issue here which we
must tread very delicately through. It is the idea of expanding
nuclear power throughout the world, particularly in the Middle
East. The Russians are building a nuclear plant for Egypt, for
instance, and other countries in the region are seeking nuclear
power.
And fine, looked at through the lens of just alternative,
cleaner energy sources, but there is also a body of scientific
technological knowledge that builds up with one of these
facilities, and it is very hard to begin to separate that from
the possibility of future weapons development. Now, the
infrastructure for obtaining fissile material and the rest is
quite significant. I understand that, so that is a de facto
firewall.
However, I think elevating certainly international
consciousness and to the degree that we can prioritize what we
already have in place in terms of line item programs on
proliferation has to be core of the mission of the Department,
because if one of these things goes off anywhere, just one, it
is a completely different world.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Calvert.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good to see you,
Secretary, and to have you here.
Secretary Perry. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Calvert. Since we brought up wine, you know, we are
happy to have a wine business in California. It is only 90
percent of the U.S. production. I just thought I would point
that out, Mr. Newhouse.
And one of the reason we like the wine business in
California is you can't move the vines to Texas, since we have
moved everything to Texas, but you did a good job. It is hard
to move. I understand that the question has been brought up----
Secretary Perry. If you keep drinking the wine, that is a
good trade.
Mr. Calvert. Yes. Yes. And we need wine in California.
Yucca Mountain, I am sure was brought up, energy storage has
been brought up, MOX I am sure was brought up by the Chairman.
And I have some additional questions, though, so I will send
them your way. If you could answer those, it would be
fantastic.
And one point I want to make, though, it is embarrassing to
have Russian gas in Boston because of not having a pipeline up
there to service that part of the country when we have an
abundance of natural gas in the United States. I am sure you
feel the same way. I just thought I would bring that point up.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. I do.
Mr. Calvert. I don't know if the issue of cybersecurity was
brought up. As you mentioned in your budget request, it splits
the Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability into
two offices, and that is all well and good. And in energy
response, how do you pronounce that CESER?
Secretary Perry. CESER, yes, sir.
Mr. Calvert. CESER, you contend that this will increase
separate focuses on grid reliability and cybersecurity, which
obviously is important. One of my roles on the Appropriations
Committee is to serve on the Defense Appropriations
Subcommittee as well as a liaison to the Intelligence
Committee. And it is obviously apparent that one of the biggest
threats to the Nation is the state of our cybersecurity.
Now, cyberspace, the underlying infrastructure, especially
energy and infrastructure, we are all vulnerable to a wide
range of risks, stemming from both physical and cyber threats
and hazards.
And by the way, I was happy that the President came out
publicly against the merger of Broadcom and Qualcomm because of
things that we know about, and Chinese influence in trying to
take over the 5G component of a feature industry, which is
going to have a big impact on what you are talking about on
quantum computing and the future of cybersecurity and
everything else to do with the Internet, which is extremely
important that we keep that technology in the United States.
But can you speak to how the new CESER Office will
contribute to the overall goal of making our Nation's
cyberspace more secure?
And along those lines, you mentioned that CESER will work
in an integrated manner with private industry. How will this
office's interaction with the private sector, which is
generally more further ahead than, obviously, government at
this point, and create a more resilient cyberspace? And what is
the Federal spending gap as far as combating this thing, so we
know what to fund?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Calvert. It was
your call a year ago when I had just been in the position for a
few weeks, and I came and testified in front of you. I shared
with you that cyber and cybersecurity was going to be one of
our priorities. Nothing has changed my mind. As a matter of
fact, if anything, I realize that this is more and more a high
priority of this country and, obviously, sector-specific DOE
and the electrical grid. So, I think there's $96 million
request for CESER in its own funding account now. This is a
clean split of responsibility in funding lines from the
existing Office of Electricity account, and I think it's like a
13 percent increase over fiscal year 2017 that was enacted. The
other part of that division, of the current Office of
Electricity, is going to be electric delivery and it's going to
continue to pursue it's critical mission to improve
reliability.
Again, these will be more, you know, things that we do at
INL and there will, obviously, be some CESER activities at INL
as well.
But the message was clear from the President that the
warfare that goes on today in the cyberspace is real. It is
serious, and that we must lead the world, not only in
protecting our citizens and our infrastructure, but also our
allies. And this is a responsibility that weighs heavily upon
the shoulders of the United States, and we intend to not only
take it seriously, you have seen the response that we have
taken by standing up this Office of Cybersecurity and Emergency
Response. What we are trying to do is consolidate DOE's efforts
and not have them scattered out in different places and trying
to consolidate them as much as we can so that we get the most
return on our investment and achieve the best results we can
get by the expenditures of these dollars.
Mr. Calvert. One last comment. I know earlier, I think in
the week you were in a panel about water and energy together,
but, you know, obviously, water is extremely important in the
area I represent in California and in the west where we are hit
by drought, it seems more than ever, that's extremely
important. So, the laboratory's research into water or data
collection, computing, simulation, all of that is extremely
important. And I, also, might bring up better ways of
desalinization in the future as a potential water source. We
have a big reservoir out next to us called the Pacific Ocean
that we'd like to tap into more efficiently.
Secretary Perry. I'll just add to that very quickly. This
week we had a roundtable discussion laying out the
administration's effort to create a focus on water, potable
water in particular, by creating an x-prize type of an approach
to this so that we, you know, challenge kids all across the
country, private sector organizations, our National Labs to
come up with the new innovation, the new technology that will
be able to address this issue of water. There are many, myself
included, that think this may be one of the biggest natural
resource challenges that we have. And just like 15 years ago
when they told us that we weren't going to be able to produce
any more energy in this country. There were some visionaries,
some people that didn't just take the status quo and the
conventional wisdom as the truth and go on down the road living
in this sense of scarcity of natural resource from an energy
standpoint. I think that same potential is still in America. I
think our ability to innovate and use our technology, our
brilliant minds from Silicon Valley to the middle of this
country. That issue and challenge of finding water for this
country, and for the world, is out there and it will be
American innovation. We just can't get in the way. Don't let
government be an impediment to it. Let government be a true
partner and to help, lower the barriers, if you will, and be a
part of the solution, not a part of the problem.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. Herrera Beutler.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Secretary, I wanted to, also, piggyback a little bit off of
what my colleague said. So, my district is down stream of
Hanford, are adjacent to the good gentleman here, and we go out
to the mouth of the Pacific. And so, on behalf of my
communities in Southwest Washington I want to thank you for
your commitment to Hanford and to really helping keep the
Federal commitment to clean up the Federal mess, right? So, I
appreciate that very much.
Let me transition. Speaking of every year, the BPA
Transmission Sale-Off Proposal. So, you did get to see part of
our hydroelectric generation system. Part of that also flows
down into my area and we're very proud of our hydro system.
I've heard it would take upwards of 16 coal-fired plants to
replace the low generation that we have from this amazing
energy source that is carbonless, and that we, as right pairs,
in the region put a lot of time and effort into. And that's why
this proposal it seems perennial, but I am generally confused
by this one. I wanted to ask more specifically, so I see a one-
time projected $5 billion revenue increase to the Federal
coffers from a sale-off, but it's over--I want to ask how that
compares with over, I think it's about $32 billion that has
been repaid to taxpayers through the use of these publicly-
owned assets. So, that the efficiency and the use far outweighs
this one-time payment, and I just wanted your thoughts.
Secretary Perry. I think maybe the best way for me to
address this is kind of the way you started, is that it is a
perennial issue and I suspect that it will have the perennial
result.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. OK. Very good. We're happy with that.
The next question I have is Federal dictates that the PMAs,
which includes Bonneville, must sell their rates have to
recover all of the costs associated with the generation and
delivery of power at the lowest possible cost consistent with
sound business principles. I wanted to ask for your take on why
the budget proposal claims that changing the PMA rate structure
from a cost-based to a market-based proposal will mitigate the
risk to taxpayers because, I mean, if the rural electric co-ops
and the municipal utilities are paying all the appropriate
costs, what is the risk to taxpayers that we would be seeking
to mitigate?
Secretary Perry. And here's what I would say, I think these
are conversations that are healthy. I think we shouldn't be
afraid to have them, to lay it out there, and then let the
facts pretty much stand for themselves, and if there is a clear
win for the taxpayers then let's have that conversation in
front of this committee, but, obviously, I think just to lay it
out without, number one, really having the data to back it up
is not particularly of great utility.
So, let's make sure that we are spending money, and are
getting the best return on our investment, and if the numbers
clearly come back and say the way we've historically done that
is in the best interest of the taxpayers and the citizens then
I suspect that's the position this committee's going to take
and I understand my role as saluting and going forward.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. I appreciate that. One final question.
You know these ones, obviously, impact the whole region of the
Northwest. This one's a little bit more specific to one of my
county's on the Columbia River. I wanted to connect with
someone on your team on the department's study of the economics
of pumped storage hydro projects which offer a utility scale
approach to resiliently integrating renewables. So, I want to
put a bug in your ear, but I'd like specifically to connect
with someone.
Secretary Perry. I'm going to have Under Secretary Menezes
coordinate with you. That's in his shop.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Cool.
Secretary Perry. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, sir. I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Just so that we get the full
picture of what's going on in the Pacific Northwest. If I came
from Washington I would be arguing the same point that my
friends and colleagues from Washington are arguing. There's
another side to this story. I come from southeast Idaho. We
depend on irrigation water. We currently send 427,000 acre feet
down the Snake River to flush salmon smolts over the dams. Now,
a judge has ordered that that be increased, that they spill
more water, and this is to recover salmon. The one thing we're
not doing, is recovering salmon. This has been going on for 20
years, as long as I've been in Congress, trying to figure out
how to recover the five salmon runs. We spend, currently, BPA
spends about $700 million a year on salmon recovery. That's
$700 million that the rate payers are paying.
Now, Idaho sends this water down. The power generated by
the dams goes, guess where? Washington and Oregon. A little bit
into Idaho, not much. Most of it, it's in Washington and
Oregon. And then when we send this 427,000 acre feet down the
river, they pump it out after it goes over the dams and
irrigate land to grow crops in competition with the land in
Idaho and the crops in Idaho that we couldn't irrigate because
we sent 427,000 acre feet down the water--or down the river.
And what we're losing, is the economic benefit of the salmon
runs that used to be when the salmon runs were going on in
Idaho you couldn't stand on a river, you couldn't find a place
on the river so people were fishing salmon runs. It was a huge
industry.
And so, what I've told my friends is, ``listen, all of the
costs of the dams on the Columbia River are borne by Idaho, and
the benefits go to Washington and Oregon. Maybe we ought to
consider what's going on here.'' I'm not in favor of removing
dams, I just don't think it's a smart thing to do. But there's
got to be a bigger consideration of that. This is the whole
argument that's going on in the Pacific Northwest right now
about how do you restore salmon runs, how do you maintain the
economy, how do you produce the electricity, etc., etc. You
talk about 16 coal-fired plants. I can build you one nuclear
power plant that'll do it for many other things.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Would the chairman yield for a second?
Mr. Simpson. I certainly would.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. I think your point is very well taken.
I would encourage us not--it's not the Oregon and--really
Oregon and Washington or--I can speak for those of us in
Washington, want you to waste more water, right? But we are
right now battling a Federal judge who is throwing science out
the window. We're all for restoring those runs, right? We, as
rate payers, as a region, spend upwards of a billion. I mean,
there's other things that aren't calculated in there, and in an
effort to mitigate and protect what we can, and then we have a
Federal judge that says the Obama administration science and
the consensus that was put together in the Biological Opinion,
we're going to chuck that.
Mr. Newhouse. Four States.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Yes, four States. So, we're right now
battling and----
Mr. Simpson. I understand that.
Ms. Herrera Beutler [continuing]. So I think that's where
our guns should be aiming.
Mr. Simpson. I understand that, and I'm not opposed to what
you're trying to do.
What I'm trying to say is there's a bigger issue here than
saving four dams. There really is. And it's something that
needs to be considered by all of us. And this is not a
discussion, so, all I'm going to say is when you want to weigh-
in on this, there is more than just one side to this argument
that's going on.
Anyway, let me talk about something else for just a minute.
Secretary Perry. I'll stay in my lane here, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Let me talk about something else for just a
minute. Your Office of Counterintelligence gave its classified
briefing on cybersecurity last fall. I had one--Congressman
Walden was out at the Idaho lab and we took a tour, and we did
a classified briefing on cybersecurity and stuff out there. And
I'll tell you--I'll give you my impression. I'm as worried
about cybersecurity and cyber attacks as I am nuclear. The
difference with cyber is that they could attack and destroy
your economy, and you might not know where it came from. It is
scary business. I think that's our biggest threat.
And I know that I talked with the people at INL that gave
us our briefing there and we'll be talking with your people. We
would like to set up, both Greg and I, a classified briefing
for our subcommittee and his subcommittee that oversees this
stuff. But after 9/11, everybody that came in and lobbied for
something, whether it was an association or a department, or
whatever, they used the word ``Homeland Security.'' We've got
to do this for Homeland Security. Whether we're going to grow
corn in Iowa we had to do it for Homeland Security reasons
because that was the key phrase that was used.
And then we came with climate change, everybody that came
in, ``We got to do this for climate change reasons. We've got
to save the environment,'' et cetera. Now the key phrase in
cybersecurity. And my question is, is that I think we're
attacking it department-wide, but I'm not sure that we're
attacking it government-wide. Today nobody can tell us in the
Federal government how much money we spend on climate change
because everybody has some money to address climate change. We
spent $10 million in the National Park Service, and I can't
remember how many million in the Forest Service as if the
climate change is going to be different when it hits the border
of the park.
And I'm wondering how do we coordinate government-wide to
address the issue of climate change so we all know what
different departments are doing. Who's the lead of this? I
would like to be able to appropriate money to someplace to
address cybersecurity that knows that we're doing it
government-wide. And if, in the Department of Energy we address
cybersecurity, what if the Department of Agriculture's not
doing it or somebody else? So, how do we do this government-
wide?
Secretary Perry. It's my understanding that from a National
security standpoint the Department of Homeland Security is the
lead agency on that. We have a sector-specific, in the energy
sector, the electrical grid is our responsibility. I think you
bring up a really good point that from a budget standpoint and
for managing those budget standpoints that there are probably a
lot of line items or sub-line items in budgets all across
government that in their IT budgets there's something in there
for cyber, and you're absolutely correct, Mr. Chairman, do we
have a global plan for this government so that we're not
duplicating services? One of the things that I found coming in
here from being a Governor and a CEO, if you will, of a pretty
big entity, that there is not, you know, some people may say,
``Well, that's OMB's responsibility.'' I hope that's not the
answer. That we have a better effort government-wide to make
sure, number one, that we are successfully being able to defend
to the American people from these cyberattacks that are
happening literally hundreds of thousands of times a day. And
that we're doing it in a way that is not terribly wasteful and
in a way that is as efficient as we can make it. I'm not
assured of that. I will tell you that I am not confident that
the Federal government has a broad strategy in place, that is
not duplicating or as least duplicative that it can be, and so
I'll just stop by saying that I will, you know, I'd love to
work with you in answering that challenge.
Mr. Simpson. I appreciate that. One of the other challenges
is, as you know, we're--as you said, it's the electrical grid.
The electrical grid is mostly privately owned, and that means
we have to work with the private sector. One of the challenges
is, is when you go to Idaho Power, I'll use as an example, and
you go to the CEO and say, ``We've detected the possibility of
something where you need to do X, Y, and Z,'' you need to be
able to talk to the CEO on a classified basis. And when it
takes two years to get a classified clearance for a CEO of
something, they kind of look back at you like ``that's the
government way,'' you know. Somehow we've got to speed up the
classification process of how we get these classifications
through. It should not take two years. That's just crazy. It
makes it more and more difficult to work with.
Secretary Perry. Again this is a conversation we can have
offline. There may be another way rather than forcing someone
to get a classified briefing before they can be read into a
very specific piece of information. I don't know whether that
is possible or not but I think we need to look at, we
certainly--you are absolutely correct about we have got to be
able to have a private sector. Rail lines are in most cases
private. Electrical wires in most cases are private. Pipelines
in most cases are private and all of those are part of the
infrastructure in this country that cyber, that are exposed to
cyber-attacks.
Mr. Simpson. One last question and I will just--you can
answer this later if you want but as I have mentioned in the
past we are looking at ways to continue the use of the AMWTP,
the Advanced Mixed Waste Treatment Process, that are out of the
compactor and stuff. They are going to be running out of their
job essentially because they have done their job and are there
alternative uses of that? Is there waste that could be
compacted and readied for WIPP that could be transported there
or do we close it down and I don't know.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Simpson. But I have asked the Department to take a look
at that and see if there are other uses for it or do we close
it down, one of the two. So.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. And, you know, there are a lot
of those types of MOX's. One of those that we are having that
conversation with now is OK, so MOX is not going to work and
you are going to go to D&D if that is where you all decide.
What are the different alternatives for that MOX facility? We
are talking about that now. Obviously----
Mr. Simpson. I'm thinking the world championship
racquetball courts.
Secretary Perry. There are some legitimate options that are
out there and I would think that for AMWDP it is the same.
Mr. Simpson. Yes. Ms. Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you. Mr. Secretary, I just wanted to make
a statement at the beginning regarding the Energy Efficiency
and Renewable Energy account again. You don't have to comment
on this but I just wanted to point out that almost all the
centers, the hubs and clean energy manufacturing institutes are
terminated in your budget submission.
I come from a heavy manufacturing part of the United States
as you well know and when I talked to the head of Ford Motor
for example, and we were at a plant dedication for their heavy
truck division, and I said what's the most important thing I
can do to help you compete? He said cut my energy costs by a
third.
I really think that these clean energy centers particularly
focused on our heavy energy users are really critical. If we
lived in a world where other countries traded fairly and
competed fairly, terrific. But we don't. And so I just wanted
to draw that particular set of activities in your department to
your attention and to say that these heavy energy users dealing
with the uneven marketplace that they deal with globally, the
VAT taxes out there, closed markets are out there, predatory
practices are out there, you know, I get sick of it.
Secretary Perry. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Kaptur. We now bear half a trillion dollars in trade
deficit every year for over a quarter century. Hey, why do you
think the American people are upset? Because they are paying
the price of all of this.
So the idea that we could help our own manufactures compete
on our own territory, no brainer.
Secretary Perry. Yes.
Ms. Kaptur. We ought to be able to do that. So I just
wanted to checkmark that for you and say please pay some
additional attention to it. Coming from Texas, you will
understand it completely.
Secretary Perry. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Kaptur. My final question though has to do with the
Nuclear Posture Review. The administrations 2018 nuclear
posture review was released early last month and a nearly final
draft was leaked a little bit before that. But I'm actually not
hearing very much from the NNSA on how it might implement the
new nuclear weapons capabilities that the NPR calls for. There
are a whole lot more costs that will be foisted upon the
Department and as Congress considers the Nuclear Posture Review
it is critical that we really have an open debate about it and
if it make sense to take on these proposals from a security
standpoint, a fiscal standpoint, a work force standpoint, and
I'm wondering, Mr. Secretary, if you could commit that this
subcommittee will be fully briefed on NNSA's plans for
regarding the NPR starting with the fiscal year 2018 budget and
beyond.
Secretary Perry. Yes, ma'am. And just to add a tiny bit of
color to that, we have a new administrator at NNSA. Very
capable, Lisa Gordon-Hagerty is an incredibly bright and
capable, I look forward to having her come over and sit down
with the committee or with you singularly or collectively to
share with you the collective vision and the intent to follow.
Our 2019 request which is a 19 percent increase and over fiscal
year 20 17 levels and is consistent with the NPR. So yes, I
think you will find a very thoughtful, experienced and helpful
partner in the Administrator.
Ms. Kaptur. When she comes we will be very interested in
knowing the impact that the posture review will have on the
modernization program already on record. And also NNSA is
already at capacity working on four life extension projects.
Secretary Perry. Right.
Ms. Kaptur. And so the issue of the workforce, the
infrastructure, these suppliers are all held in advance and we
have a lot of uncertainty about how the new proposals will
impact ongoing efforts within the department.
Secretary Perry. We know it and we recognize it as a
challenge.
Ms. Kaptur. All right. Thank you. Thank you very much for
your appearance today.
Secretary Perry. Yes, ma'am. Can I just add one thing here
just very quickly about your conversation with the manufacturer
that said if you will just lower our energy costs by one third?
One of the things that we did in my home state while I was the
governor was being able to deregulate our energy market in the
state of Texas. Now we are a little bit different because we
have our own grid if you will, ERCOT, for the entirety. But
government regulations, just like we see here in a lot of
different places, cost manufacturers a lot and one of the
things that we talked about earlier was making sure that there
is an efficient, reliable, affordable supply of energy. And so
keeping those nuclear plants, and coal plants so that we have
that competition out there in the market is one of the ways
that you will drive down regulations and reliability and
affordability of energy sources.
We are going to make a lot more impact on this one third
reduction in energy costs than practically anything I can think
of.
Ms. Kaptur. What you said, Mr. Secretary, about competition
is very important because what northern Ohio will face and this
is the heavy manufacturing band that actually stretches from
Gary, Indiana all the way over to Pittsburgh if you really want
to look at what is going on in our region. But here you have a
nuclear power supplying the major base power and if that is
removed OK, without any forethought or, you know, just sort of
stupidly do this, then natural gas, we have the largest
Marcellus Utica Shale discoveries on the whole continent and so
that is going to be displaced.
But I have no doubt in my mind if there is no competition,
those prices will rise like crazy. And so what you just said is
really important. And that's what Congressman Joyce and I,
among the things that we are worried about, are we going to
have this wild mouse sort of reaction in our area? Are we going
to have a smoother transition? Because if we have the wild
mouse solution where you go off the edge and everybody falls
off, we will have so many casualties. Human casualties in the
work force, casualties in terms of consumer pricing, casualties
of the skilled work force and I really am very worried about it
because that has been our history. We have never done it right.
We didn't do it right in the coal fields and we have a chance
of not doing it right again and we don't really mandate the
Department of Energy to have a smooth transition. We don't do
that.
Secretary Perry. We will work with you, Ms. Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members.
Mr. Simpson. Final question, Mr. Newhouse.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, appreciate that. Mr.
Secretary, last summer during your visit to the Northwest you
also were able to visit one of the premiere National
laboratories that we have in this country, the Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory. Thank you very much for doing
that. In fact, on your visit they showed us things that I had
never seen before so please come back so I can see the rest of
what is going on out there. But it was an honor to have you
there.
Just to piggyback on some of the other discussion that has
been going on this morning, you've heard a number of times
about the concerns with the proposed reductions to the Office
of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. And I just want to
make sure that you appreciate the potential impacts to the
National laboratories of that proposal in advancing new energy
technology.
I understand the Departments focus on early stage research
but I also know that there has got to be a strong support for
applied research as well and I believe that they rode the
commercialization is far longer and riskier than the view the
Department may hold. So many EERE research programs assist the
development of advanced energy technologies in the earliest
stages and it is critical to bridging those potential ``valleys
of death'', a term that I have learned recently, that often
appear throughout this development process.
So could you maybe give us, expand or expound a little bit
more about your views and the value of applied R&D at the labs
and what you will do to ensure that this research gets out of
the labs and into the market place?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. Part of my response to you would
be my history of supporting that type of work both basic
research. I understand very well from practical observations
and applications as the governor creating a program called the
Emerging Technology Fund. I think one of the reasons that these
programs have been criticized in the past and my observation,
and I think the reason why, is because they haven't been
managed that well. That Members of Congress or members of the
public have looked at this and went, you know, we don't see any
return on our investment here. You just, put a bunch of money
out there into something that sounded good and then never saw
it on the market. And granted, there is not a banker in America
that has got a 1,000 percent batting average.
Mr. Newhouse. Yes, right.
Secretary Perry. On loans. I get that. But what I will
offer to you is this committee as Congress makes decisions
about what your priorities are and what you want funded, if it
is the observation that you want dollars to be spent on these
early stage development, I have a track record of bringing
really good, capable individuals in, to operate these programs
in an effective way that will commercialize them. And that the
public and the world get to enjoy these technologies that, you
know, would never have been commercialized had we not been
engaged with this.
Do we want to make sure that we get a good return? Yes,
sir. Do we want to be held accountable? Absolutely. But I will
tell you that my interest in this is something not unlike I did
while I was the Governor of Texas. We were relatively
successfully with it and, you know, there will always be people
who criticize government investing in certain innovative
programs. I know that, that is OK.
We have some pretty good examples of sustainable
transportation portfolio that we are funding in this budget.
There is a renewable power portfolio and this is early stage
research on solar, wind and geothermal. We are all-of-the-above
and I think our budget and our focus backs that up.
And thirdly, the energy efficiency portfolio funds $142
million. In the last 40 years of some early stage R&D that had
some real impact, advanced lighting, space heating, cooling,
billing, envelopes and, I think our commitment to this is still
very much all of the above. I think what you are going to
require of us and our expectation and our budget is one that we
are going to oversee this efficiently. We are going to do it
with good outside input and that our results are what we are
going to be judged by.
Mr. Newhouse. I appreciate that commitment and also commit
to you that we will work with you, help to tell the story, help
to make the public and Congress feel comfortable about the
successes we have been able to experience through these
investments. They are many and significant and just real
quickly about this dam issue.
I'm not spelling that word. Mr. Simpson is absolutely
right. There has to be a larger discussion about the
relationship between all the partners in this, Idaho included.
And I do not deny that and I want to look, I look forward to
working with the Chairman on that as well.
Why this is so urgent is because within three weeks there
is going to be a requirement to increase the spill over those
dams which will require more water coming from Idaho. And so
this impacts all of us in a negative way and I know you
mentioned you wanted to say in your lane on this one but
actually this is your lane and you could probably tell us at
great length the impact, the harm on our energy infrastructure
on forced spill and if we had time to go into that I would ask
you that question and I will leave it to the Chairman if he
wants to entertain that answer.
Secretary Perry. Yes, well let's talk after the meeting, I
mean, I think this is a pretty broad issue that covers a lot. I
can talk about it from a judicial restraint standpoint. I can
talk about it in the importance of it may be a good exhibit of
why they need to actually teach economics at law school.
Mr. Simpson. That's what I'm saying, the reason we have
economists is to make astrology look respectable. So but it is
an important----
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. But it is an important issue that
he talks about and it is and my concern on my end of it is if
we don't do something about it, if we don't fix this, 10 years
from now the salmon runs are gone and they are non-recoverable.
So there, I mean, there is a whole range of issues that are
dealt with here.
Mr. Newhouse. Yes, absolutely. Absolutely. And that
discussion needs to happen.
Ms. Simpson. And I understand the decision will probably
come down the day before.
Mr. Newhouse. But we are looking to try to buy some time to
mitigate some of these costs that are going to happen.
Mr. Simpson. I understand that.
Mr. Newhouse. Unnecessarily. Unnecessary costs.
Mr. Simpson. That's why I've been supportive of what you
are going to do.
Mr. Newhouse. Yes, I appreciate that.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Fortenberry.
Mr. Fortenberry. Mr. Secretary, if you could dispatch the
new Administrator of the NNSA quickly to us that would be very
helpful.
Mr. Simpson. She will be here Tuesday. Consider it done.
Mr. Fortenberry. Well done.
Secretary Perry. Yes, very good. Thank you so much. We do
some paranormal work over at DOE.
Mr. Fortenberry. I see. Well good. That will be helpful.
Look forward to that. And then your other offer of another
meeting in another place to talk through some of the more
sensitive things.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fortenberry. The quicker we could do that the better.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir, absolutely.
Mr. Fortenberry. Could we look at a matter of weeks in that
regard?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. Or less.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you. Quickly, what is your
perspective on hydrogen fuel cells? There are some experts that
suggest that real expansive, widespread, commercial viability
is on the horizon. And what is the department's perspective on
that and what is the research intensity in the department in
that regard?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. We continue to support that
research. My personal observation is that it's going to be
driven by economics just like almost everything is from the
standpoint of some states are going to put in CNG filling
stations where there is big heavy haul, such as from Dallas to
San Antonio and to Houston back to Dallas. 85 percent of the
population of my home state lives in that triangle. We passed
legislation to put CNG in there so you could get heavy haul
trucks to transition from older, more inefficient diesel
engines, to CNG. The cost of maintenance, I mean, there is a
lot of different reasons why that makes sense.
A lot of those decisions appropriately should be made at
state levels and that states need to make those. Again, fueling
stations for hydrogen, the transition to those types of
vehicles, is there a use for them in generators? We think there
is some opportunities.
When you think about the number of generators that were
needed in the Texas Gulf Coast, Florida, and when Superstorm
Sandy hit, having access to that type of technology, the cost
becomes less important in that sense. When you start talking
about human lives and being able to either keep pharmacies up
and going, gas stations having access to long term generation,
so there are some aspects of hydrogen fuel.
I'll finish with this one. Out at Savannah River, they are
doing some work on hydrogen fueled hypersonic aircraft. And, I
mean, pretty fascinating work, take you anywhere in the world
in four hours from Los Angeles. And, I mean, this is not Buck
Rogers stuff. I mean----
Mr. Fortenberry. This is academics.
Secretary Perry [continuing]. This is literally to the
point of manufacturing and using hydrogen as the fuel. And we
know, you know, from a global environmental impact when you
start thinking about the emissions that are probably as hard on
the climate, the environment is high level emissions when you
start using hydrogen fuel to run those aircraft then your
byproduct is H2O, water vapor.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Simpson. Did you have something you wanted to say
Marcy?
Ms. Kaptur. I just wanted to say always seeking to curry
favor with the Chairman, I just wanted to say that I really
endorse his statements today on cybersecurity and the benefit
that we would have as a subcommittee regarding a private
briefing on the administration's approach to that issue across
departments. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for bringing that up.
Mr. Simpson. You're welcome. One last question and just for
the record so that you can state it, you're opposed to the
uranium sales to continue the funding of Portsmouth?
Secretary Perry. That is correct.
Mr. Simpson. We are going to try to help you out with this.
I wanted that on the record because I want somebody that is not
here that might be listening.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Simpson. Because I think we need to get your Assistant
Secretary for EM confirmed as quickly as possible confirmed
through the Senate. So----
Secretary Perry. That would be helpful.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. Anything we can do to help but we
will help you out on that.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you for being here. I appreciate your
enthusiasm for the Department. I think it is a great place that
you work and they do fantastic work out there. And thank you to
your staff that you have got, those that you have got here with
you and those that you don't.
Secretary Perry. And just for the record I'm going to stay
there.
Mr. Simpson. We enjoy working with them and get us those
justifications if you can as soon as possible.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Hearing is closed.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Tuesday, March 20, 2018.
NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
WITNESSES
LISA GORDON-HAGERTY, UNDER SECRETARY FOR NATIONAL SECURITY AND
ADMINISTRATOR FOR THE NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
PHIL CALBOS, PRINCIPAL ASSISTANT DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR FOR DEFENSE
PROGRAMS
DAVE HUIZENGA, PRINCIPAL ASSISTANT DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR FOR DEFENSE
NUCLEAR NONPROLIFERATION
ADMIRAL JAMES CALDWELL, OFFICE OF NAVAL REACTORS
Mr. Simpson. I would like to call the hearing to order.
Good morning, everyone.
Today's hearing is to discuss the details of the Fiscal
Year 2019 Budget Request for the National Nuclear Security
Administration, or the NNSA, which includes programs to sustain
our nation's nuclear weapon stockpile and advance U.S.
nonproliferation goals, and provide safe and reliable nuclear
propulsion for the U.S. Navy.
I would like to welcome all of our witnesses, those we are
hearing from for the first time, and those we are welcoming
back.
Ms. Lisa Gordon-Hagerty is the newly-confirmed
Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration;
Admiral James Caldwell is testifying again as Director of Naval
Reactors; Mr. Phil Calbos is the Principal Assistant Deputy
Administrator for Defense Programs; and Mr. Dave Huizenga who
has previously testified before this subcommittee in a
different capacity, is testifying today as the Principal
Assistant Deputy Administrator for Defense Nuclear Non-
Proliferation.
Thanks to all of you for being here today, and we look
forward to hearing your testimony.
The President's budget request for the Department of Energy
shows a strong commitment to enhancing our newest national
security. The request for the NNSA is $15.1 billion, an
increase of $1.16 billion or 8 percent above last year's budget
request.
This funding will advance the modernization of the nuclear
weapons stockpile and its supporting infrastructure, prevent,
counter and response to nuclear proliferation and terrorism
threats and support the Navy's nuclear propulsion needs.
We look forward to hearing from you today on how this
administration's recently concluded Nuclear Posture Review will
impact ongoing nuclear stockpile modernization plans, as well
as what is needed to support the nuclear infrastructure and
workforce that is the foundation our nation's nuclear
capabilities.
With the confirmed Administrator now in place to lead the
NNSA, we are also looking forward to hearing more about your
strategies for addressing long-standing governance and
management problems in the nuclear security enterprise.
Please ensure that the hearing record responses, to the
questions for the record, and in the supporting information
requested by the subcommittee are delivered in final form to us
no later than 4 weeks from the time you receive them. I also
ask that if members have additional questions they would like
to submit to the subcommittee for the record, that they,
please, do so by the close of business on Friday.
With those opening comments, I would like to yield to our
Ranking Member, Ms. Kaptur, for any opening comments that she
might have.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for yielding the time.
And thank you all for joining us today. And we appreciate your
appearing before our subcommittee. And we want to welcome the
Administrator, Gordon-Haggerty, in your new role. It was a
pleasure to meet with you recently. Thank you very much for
taking the time.
The Department of Energy and the National Nuclear Security
administration have an awesome mandate to safeguard and
shepherd our nation's nuclear weapons complex, which undergirds
our national security and strategic interests. And I know that
each of you today bear the weight of that awesome
responsibility. Thank you.
I posture to note that nuclear weapons and the platforms
that deliver them serve as only one component of our national
security and national nuclear strategy. Because, in fact,
strategic diplomacy must be our nation's first pathway to
address global nuclear challenges.
However, I am concerned that this administration does not
take the need for diplomacy nearly as seriously as it should.
The reductions and staffing at the State Department are
decimating our ability to effectively exert that tool of our
national power to mitigate the risk we face from the countries
who have these weapons on hand, and the lack of appointment of
certain ambassadors is particularly troubling.
In addition, I feel the need to remind this administration
that the entire nuclear enterprise is an exercise in
deterrence. That should be the frame through which every
decision about our nuclear capacity and capability is made. How
do our adversaries perceive alternative A versus alternative B?
Diplomatic engagement is fundamental and critical to the
art of deterrence, and without it, it makes nuclear engagement
more possible. It gives us insight into other nation's
perceptions, but it also allows us to help us provide the
narrative so that our intentions and our policies are
unambiguous.
And of course the NNSA Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation
Program also plays a central role in our nuclear security by
securing nuclear material globally, and providing important
insights into foreign nuclear programs, bringing the depth of
knowledge that is well valued.
These efforts rely first on relationships and soft power.
The Nonproliferation Program has an important role in
verification of treaties and agreements to curb nuclear weapons
and weapons-usable materials.
DNN develops technologies to help strengthen the safeguards
mission of the International Atomic Energy Agency. For example,
the Department of Energy's National Labs created the on-line
Enrichment Monitor, which allows the IAEA inspectors to measure
in real time the enrichment levels of uranium, an enormous step
forward for verifying compliance with safeguards agreements.
Yet, in a budget request that sees NNSA increasing 17
percent overall, funding for the Nonproliferation Program is
down slightly.
Since we last met to review the NNSA budget we continue to
see evolving challenges around our world, and an intensified
threat environment such as from Russia and China.
The Nuclear Posture Review recognizes these threats, and
therefore focuses on ensuring and rebuilding military nuclear
capabilities, but pays little more than lip service to the
treaties that have enabled dramatic reductions in certain types
of nuclear weapons.
My concerns with the NPR are many, and I will name just a
few here. I feel compelled to do so. The Nuclear Posture Review
proposes two new nuclear weapons capabilities. While these are
not new weapon systems, they do not currently exist in our
nuclear arsenal as well as retaining the B83 gravity bomb,
which the Department of Defense and Energy committed in 2013
would be retired.
Number 2, I have serious concerns about the potential for
low-yield nuclear weapons making the threshold for nuclear use
more likely. Will our potential adversaries know what type of
weapons we are using if the nuclear weapons are substantially
similar to conventional ones?
This is particularly concerning as the NPR also proposes to
expand the circumstances under which nuclear weapons could be
used including in response to ``non-nuclear strategic
threats.''
Number 3, finally, there is the issue of cost. To continue
to field the Nuclear Force the size we have today is estimated
to cost $1.2 trillion according to the CBO, and 400 billion
alone, in modernization costs.
This doesn't include any of the proposed new nuclear
capabilities outlined in the Posture Review. Regardless of my
opinion on these matters or my vote, these costs increases are
simply not realistically feasible given the other constraints
on the Federal budget.
And so I would say to my chairman, and to my fellow
subcommittee members, it is critical that we have a robust
public debate about the proposals in the NPR within the context
of our fiscal situation.
Recognizing the new threats we face, we need to discuss
these important issues, and in particular, we need to hear from
the NNSA, because so far there has been a significant lack of
detail about how we would implement the proposed new
capabilities.
Mindful of the many needs of our nation, this subcommittee
must ensure precious resources are balanced appropriately as
part of a coherent strategy that includes all the tools of our
national power.
And with that, I close my remarks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for the time.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Ms. Gordon-Hagerty, you have been
on the job now for 3 weeks. So, welcome to our committee for
the first time. We look forward to hearing from you.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you. I am delighted to be here.
Chairman Simpson, Ranking Member Kaptur, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
present the President's Fiscal Year 2019 request for the
Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security administration
Budget Request.
It is a privilege to appear before you today, representing
the extraordinary men and women of the DOE NNSA and the vital
roles we play in executing our national security missions.
Chairman Simpson, a written statement has been provided to
the subcommittee, and I respectfully request that it be
submitted for the record.
Mr. Simpson. Will do.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you. Since being sworn in almost
4 weeks ago, I have had the opportunity to receive in-depth
briefings by the NNSA's programs and projects. I still have a
great deal more to learn, but what I have seen so far is
impressive.
NNSA has shown steady progress with the support of this
subcommittee and Congress. For example, infrastructure and
modernization, flight testing of the B61-12, removals of
highly-enriched uranium from Ghana and Kazakhstan, and
commissioning of a new class of nuclear-powered aircraft
carrier.
These are but a few examples of how NNSA has lent its
world-class expertise to keeping our nation safe and secure.
But there is much more to be done to meet the challenges posed
by the geopolitical environment.
The President's fiscal year 2019 Budget Request for NNSA is
$15.1 billion, providing the resources required to help ensure
we are able to protect and keep our Nation, allies and partners
safe. And this request also moves us towards a deterrent that
is modern, robust, flexible, resilient, ready and appropriately
tailored to meet current and future uncertainties, as outlined
in the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review.
The fiscal year 2019 budget request clearly demonstrates
the administration's strong support for NNSA, and our three
enduring missions, maintaining the safety, security and
reliability of the U.S. nuclear weapons stockpile; reducing the
threat of nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism around
the world; and providing nuclear propulsion for the U.S. Navy's
fleet of aircraft carriers and submarines.
NNSA's fiscal year 2019 budget request for weapons
activities account is $11 billion, an increase of 7.6 percent
over the fiscal year 2018 request. This funding supports the
nation's current and future defense posture, including
infrastructure across the nuclear security enterprise.
This budget request supports our three life extension
programs and one major alteration, and advances
recapitalization and modernization of our Cold War era
infrastructure.
The modernization and recapitalization of our nuclear
security enterprise infrastructure will take decades, but we
are making steady progress.
With this subcommittee's support, over the least several
years, NNSA has completed more than 100 infrastructure
recapitalization projects, and accelerated critical maintenance
work to reduce risks to our workforce and our missions.
Additionally, the Uranium Processing Facility Project
continues to make timely progress with the recent completion of
two subprojects that were finished two months ahead of
schedule, and $18 million under budget.
Of the five remaining subprojects, two are underway and
three will begin this year.
The fiscal year 2019 Budget Request also includes $1.9
billion for defense nuclear nonproliferation account, a 3.9
percent increase over the fiscal year 2018 request. This
funding continues NNSA's far-reaching activities around the
world to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, counter
the threat of nuclear terrorism, and respond to nuclear and
radiological incidents.
The budget request for naval reactors is $1.8 billion, a
20.9 percent increase above the fiscal year 2018 request. In
addition to supporting today's operational fleet, this request
sustains Naval Reactors' ability to deliver tomorrow's fleet.
It funds three key projects. Developing the Columbia-Class
Reactor Plant, refueling a research and training reactor in New
York, and building a new spent-fuel handling facility in Idaho.
The budget request for Federal salaries and expenses is
$422.5 million. This request provides funding for 1,715 full-
time equivalents for effective program management and
appropriate oversight of the nuclear security enterprise.
Of note, since 2010, NNSA's program funding has increased
50 percent, while staffing has decreased 10 percent.
NNSA's fiscal year 2019 budget request is a result of a
disciplined process to prioritize funding for validated
requirements as designated by the administration, and it sets
forth the foundation to implement policies from the Nuclear
Posture Review and the National Security Strategy.
Thank you for your continued strong support and the
opportunity to testify before you today. And I look forward to
answering any questions you may have. Thank you.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Admiral Caldwell, welcome back.
Admiral Caldwell. Thank you, sir; and good morning.
Mr. Simpson. Good morning.
Admiral Caldwell. Chairman Simpson, Ranking Member Kaptur,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
This subcommittee has consistently provided tremendous
support to Naval Reactors, enabling my organization to provide
our Navy with effective nuclear propulsion plants, and to
ensure their safe, reliable and effective operation.
The results of your support are these, our warships,
nuclear-powered warships have unmatched reliability, speed and
endurance. These key attributes allow our nuclear fleet to meet
the demands of forward presence and crisis response worldwide.
Two weekends ago I participated in ICEX 2018, onboard USS
Hartford in the Beaufort Sea, above the Arctic Circle. Here,
the ship and the crew are conducting tactical exercises with
the USS Connecticut. The fact that our submarines can operate
unsupported in one of the world's harshest environments, is a
testament to the tactical advantages of nuclear power.
Today, over 45 percent of the Navy's combatants are
nuclear-powered including 11 carriers, and 71 submarines. Over
the past year, Naval Reactors has supported deployed operations
of 39 submarines, and 33 strategic deterrent patrols.
At any given time, there were approximately 49 of 71
submarines deployed or ready to deploy. This past November,
three carriers, Reagan, Roosevelt and Nimitz, conducted the
first tri-carrier operations in a decade off of the Korean
Peninsula.
Last year the Navy commissioned USS Washington, our 14th
Virginia-class attack submarine, and the aircraft carrier Ford.
The Ford is the first new propulsion plant design in over 40
years. While matching the high speed of our Nimitz-class
carriers, the Ford propulsion plant delivers 25 percent more
power and three times the electrical generation capacity. It
reduces maintenance by 30 percent, and reduces the required
manpower by 50 percent.
In nuclear shipbuilding we have 11 Virginia-class
submarines in various stages of construction, and just
commissioned our 15th Virginia-class submarine, the Colorado,
this past weekend.
Construction of the next aircraft carrier, John F. Kennedy,
is well underway. Naval Reactors' budget request for fiscal
year 2019 is $1.79 billion, and this represents an approximate
21 percent increase over the fiscal year 2018 requested level.
This is consistent with the plan of record provided in
previous budget requests. This request represents a peak budget
year, in the future year's nuclear security plan, and is driven
by the planned funding ramp up for two national priority
projects.
The first project is the refueling overhaul of a research
and training reactor in New York. That refueling overhaul
starts later this year. This effort supports the reactor
development of the Navy's Columbia-class ballistic missile
submarine, and will provide 20 more years of training for
nuclear fleet operators.
The second project is the new Naval Spent Fuel Handling
Facility in Idaho, on which we broke ground last summer. This
facility will enable long-term, reliable processing and
packaging of spent nuclear fuel from aircraft carriers and
submarines.
This budget request also invests in three key areas.
Recapitalization of our vital laboratory facilities and
infrastructure; decontamination and decommissioning efforts to
reduce environmental liabilities of legacy facilities; and
advance reactor technology for initial use in Virginia-class
submarines, and ultimately for use in future classes of
nuclear-powered warships.
Finally, my budget request also allows us to continue
design and manufacturing development for the new propulsion
plant for the Columbia ballistic missile submarine which will
feature a life-of-ship reactor core.
I want to assure the committee that our planning efforts
for current and future budgets are done with extreme rigor. The
investments we make today in our research and development, not
only advance capability, but also result in cost savings, and
improved capability far into the future.
Similar investments a decade ago produced the technology we
are employing in Columbia and enabling us to do the mission
with two fewer submarines.
I understand the difficult budget environment in which
Congress must craft legislation, and I respectfully urge your
support for aligning allocations with the fiscal year 2019
Budget Request.
Thank you for your longstanding support, and I look forward
to discussing my program.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Admiral. Mr. Calbos and Mr.
Huizenga, you didn't have written statements but do you have
some opening comments you would like to make?
Mr. Huizenga. I do not have a statement.
Mr. Simpson. Yes, sir. Just take questions. Thank you.
Thank you for those opening comments.
First question, Madame Administrator. Last week, the
National Academies released a report describing the persistence
of governance and management problems in the nuclear security
enterprise and the failure of past attempts to address them.
This subcommittee has a long history of strong oversight of the
agencies under its jurisdiction and has taken an active
interest in finding solutions to many of these issues described
in this particular report. We look forward to hearing from you,
more about your plans to take on these longstanding problems
and to deliver a program that will successfully modernize the
U.S. nuclear weapons stockpile and the supporting NNSA
infrastructure.
Now the question. What do you believe is the highest
priority management and operating issues that are impacting
NNSA's ability to successfully carry out its mission?
And how do you intend to rebuild NNSA's credibility
specifically with regards to the NNSA's ability to deliver its
programs on time and within budget to consider an appropriate
range of alternatives for its major acquisitions before
presenting Congress with the funding requests to operate with
transparency and how funds are being used, and to improve the
cost estimates so that we can fully consider the implications
of the funding proposals that we are being asked to support? I
know that is a lot of questions.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Well, I will see what I can do to
answer and be responsive to all of them. Thank you, Chairman.
First of all, having been in the position for barely 4 weeks
now, I have however had the opportunity to be briefed as I had
mentioned before about all the good programs that are going on
and the wealth of information regarding management and
governance. I am very familiar with regard to the Mies
Augustine reports, the CRENEL reports and most recently the NAS
NAPA or the National Academy of Science, National Academy of
Public administration.
In fact, prior to their release of their interim report
last week, I asked them to come in and brief me on what their
interim findings were of the report.
I am leaning as far forward as I possibly can to ensure
that we continue to institute good governance and good
management practices throughout NNSA and also I want to mention
that I am also dual hatted, an unusual position because I am
also the Under Secretary of Energy for Nuclear Security. And in
that regard I am going to make full use of that opportunity
that I can reach into the entire Department of Energy as well
as within the National Nuclear Security administration.
And I think with the reforms that Secretary Perry and
under--and Deputy Secretary Brouillette have started, I think
there is an opportunity to take some of those governance
reforms and also implement them throughout headquarters, the
field, our labs, plants and sites. So this is one of my highest
priorities and in fact in my confirmation hearing I made it as
such.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. On another subject, the Fiscal Year
2018 National Defense Authorization Act allows the Secretary of
Energy to terminate the project MOX if DOE can provide a
lifecycle cost estimate that shows cost of the alternative is
50 percent of the cost of MOX.
We were informed that the NNSA was preparing an interim
cost estimate to certify that a cost estimate that meets the
NDAA threshold exists but that you are also developing a more
comprehensive life cycle cost estimate. What is the difference
between the comprehensive life cycle cost estimate that is
under development and the one that might be submitted for the
NDAA waiver?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. So, Mr. Chairman, first of all I wanted
to thank Congressman Allen who took a trip with me recently
down to the Savannah River Site. In my confirmation hearing I
did commit to Senator Graham that I would visit the Savannah
River Site and I did so within 10 days of my confirmation--of
my swearing in. I found it to be a fascinating location. I
happened to do my graduate school summer studies at Savannah
River so I am familiar with the area and it was kind of like
old home week for me.
In that regard I did visit the MOX facility and I visited
all of our other facilities and sites and operations within the
NNSA most in particular the tritium facility and that is indeed
a part of our enduring nuclear mission so that will be part of
our enduring mission for the NNSA. Now I want to make sure that
everybody understands that the tritium operations will continue
at Savannah River Site.
With regard to dilute and dispose the MOX facility, the MOX
facility as I have mentioned is a very large facility and I
believe I am confident by the information provided to me by the
Federal project manager that the $5.4 billion we have spent to
date is, it is notable because the plan for MOX was to be
completed by 2016 at a cost of $4.5 billion. To date we have
spent over $5.4 billion and I am confident in the information
that my Federal project manager has given me that it is nowhere
close to 50 percent complete.
So in that regard, the administration and the Secretary of
Energy and I are working to put together the planned path
forward for the termination. We are still evaluating that but
that request will be put forward shortly.
With regard to the life cycle cost estimation in the past
there were some parts of it that weren't necessarily provided
in the interim if you will but, pardon me, we believe that as a
result, the life cycle cost determination will include WIPP
transportation, the other programs, let me make sure I get
this, the transportation costs and we have coordinated this
with EM, and we believe that we are confident that it will cost
billions less. It will be faster, cheaper and we will be able
to dispose of the 34 metric tons that we are required to do
under the program.
Mr. Simpson. Thanks for that explanation and let me for the
record, we talked about this yesterday, but let me for the
record just let everyone know that as I said with Secretary
Perry, if someone can show me that something is going to cost
50 percent less I am not going to jump and oppose it.
The question we have is we need to make sure that this
isn't an estimate done on the back of a napkin in a restaurant,
that it is an actual cost estimate, that it is professionally
done. That is why I am kind of, that is why we kind of question
what is the difference between a comprehensive life cycle cost
estimate and one that is the interim cost estimate and will the
decision to move forward with the dilute and dispose as opposed
to MOX be based on that interim cost estimate or the life cycle
cost estimate?
I would hope that it would be based on the thorough
analysis of both of them, of what it costs. I would hope that
they rebaseline, we have asked the department to rebaseline the
cost of WIPP for I don't know, several years and so far they
haven't done that.
And I am not sure I trust anybody's estimate about what any
of these costs are because if I go talk to the contractor it's
70 percent complete. I go talk to the DOE, it's 10 percent
complete. Now you said it is somewhere in the 50 percent range.
I have no idea what the full cost of MOX is or would be if we
continued down that road. So and as I said yesterday, I don't
want to get--I don't want a future Chairman of this committee
to 3 or 4 or 5 years from now be sitting here going OK, we
stopped MOX, and we have switched to dilute and dispose. New
Mexico has us by the neck because we need an additional land
withdrawal or agreements with New Mexico and they want us to
pave every road in New Mexico before they will agree to it.
I don't want to be held hostage by that so I want it, if we
are going to head down that road, I want it to be a sure thing
that we are going to do that. And that is where I am coming
from on this whole thing.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. What I would like to do, Chairman, is,
if it is appropriate, what I will do is I will go back, collect
the additional information that you are requesting and I would
be happy to come and brief you and your staffs as soon as
possible. But I am confident that the path we are taking with
the complete life cycle cost estimation will address all of
those issues. And we believe MOX--and we believe that dilute
and dispose methodology which is a proven methodology, we have
already gotten rid of more than 5 metric tons of material
mostly from Rocky Flats plant and other places around the
community. So we know that the process works and we believe
that that is far cheaper, faster, and the appropriate approach
to take to relieve us of the 34 metric tons of plutonium. So I
will be----
Mr. Simpson. I will throw it out before I go to Marcy for
her questions, but, you know, we could dispose of those with a
faster reactor also which is something we don't have in this
country and anybody that wants to use a faster reactor has to
go to Russia or someplace else to use a fast reactor. You could
burn the plutonium doing that. But that is just a thought. Ms.
Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral Caldwell, I wanted to ask you Congress has been
interested in the prospect of using low enriched uranium for
naval fuels and naval reactors has reported to us on this issue
which we appreciate. Would this be an excellent opportunity to
address a significant source of highly enriched uranium use and
further our efforts to convert to low enriched uranium sources.
If Congress appropriates funding for this purpose, will
Naval Reactors carry out research and development efforts in
this area?
Admiral Caldwell. Thank you for the question, ma'am. In our
reports to Congress, we have been pretty clear that the highly
enriched uranium offers a significant military advantage over a
low enriched uranium. Fundamentally, low enriched uranium means
that you'd put a lot less energy in the core and therefore you
would have to refuel the ships more frequently. It would take
those ships off line, it would cost more money.
The manufacturing process for low enriched uranium is very
different from what we do today. The handling of components at
end-of-life is very different. So there were, is a substantial
change to what we are doing today and HEU has serviced well for
over 60 years.
What we have also said in our reports is that to develop an
HE or a low enriched uranium core would take about 10 years, 10
to 15 years and about a billion dollars. And then on top of
that would take probably another several billion dollars just
to deliver the manufacturing materials and all those things
that I talked about previously.
So our view is that HEU is the way to go. To get to an LEU
capable core would require a step change in our design. It is a
significant difference from what we are using today in our
cores. That is why it takes so long and that is why it would
cost so much. That said, if money was available for and
targeted for LEU development, then naval reactors would
continue our work on an advanced fuel system and we would move
along that path. We are working on that as much as we can, a
low, or an advanced fuel system, but that is many decades away
right now, ma'am.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you. Madame Administrator, this budget
request provides a significant increase as I said earlier of 10
percent to defense accounts including staggeringly huge
increase in Weapons accounts of 19 percent. This follows a
similar budget request from Fiscal Year 2018 and all while not
appropriating funding nonproliferation efforts additional
funding there and paying for the increases in Weapons on back
of Department of Defense non-defense accounts.
Are these--with this significant increase in the Weapons
accounts, how will NNSA structure itself to ensure the quality
of its products and the safety of its workforces and honestly
are these kinds of increases sustainable?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you, Congresswoman Kaptur. I
believe that they are. In the short time I have been the
Administrator, I have seen a robust plan and path forward for
not only this fiscal year, for future fiscal years and what it
takes to ensure that we have a robust, reliable, and
sustainable program for the 3 programs that we administer in
the NSSA.
More importantly, we require sustained and reliable and
long term appropriations in order to execute the missions under
which we are undertaking at present. That includes the 3 LEPs
and the one major alteration and it also, I want to make note
of the fact that the defense programs budget actually provides
us with that critical foundation upon which we can build our
nuclear counterterrorism, our nonproliferation and our
counterproliferation programs. Because they utilize the
capabilities that are at our national laboratories, our plants,
and our sites.
So without the foundations of the defense programs
activities, we would not be able to have the technical
expertise resident under our national labs, plants and sites.
And so we utilize the strength of that relationship between our
NA-10 defense programs activities and our NA-20 defense nuclear
nonproliferation as well as our counterterrorism and
counterproliferation programs.
I would ask respectfully if I can offer the floor to Mr.
Calbos who is the Deputy Administrator--the Acting Deputy
Administrator for Defense Programs and he can enlighten you on
some additional facts if you, if that is acceptable.
Ms. Kaptur. Please.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you.
Mr. Calbos. Thank you for the question, ma'am. You are
correct, you know, that there is a significant increase in the
funding over the last couple years but if you look at the
history of what is now the NNSA portfolio, there was a period
from about 1990 to about 2010 where frankly the nation had
diverted its attention from the nuclear deterrent. We are
making up ground now.
The increases are about the weapons that we are putting
back out onto the force but also about the core capability of
the enterprise and by that I mean the bricks and mortar
infrastructure, the science-based stock pile stewardship tools
that we need for the lab directors to assess the stockpile on
an annual basis. And also the people that we need in the
enterprise to take care of all the efforts we have underway.
So as you look at any given year, you are correct that
there are significant increases but as you widen the aperture
and you look across say the last 25 years, there was a period
where there was a downturn in funding and we are now having to
make up ground for that.
Ms. Kaptur. How will you structure your expenditures in
order to spend these dollars in a manner that are responsible?
I mean, for any business a 19 percent increase is pretty
significant in a given year.
Mr. Calbos. Well, as we move forward with each one of these
efforts, we are, you know, ramping up the staffing across the
enterprise and again not only in the Federal space----
Ms. Kaptur. How difficult is that?
Mr. Calbos. I am sorry.
Ms. Kaptur. How difficult is that?
Mr. Calbos. We have achieved what we needed to at this
point. The difficulty actually right now is not in finding the
qualified folks, it is getting them cleared and on board in
time so that they can actually participate in the, you know,
work that is needed to, you know, say perform the work on a
lifetime extension program. That is one of the big hurdles
right now.
Ms. Kaptur. OK. Mr. Chairman, in this first round I am just
going to ask the Administrator for a yes or no answer on the
following. The administration's 2018 Nuclear Posture Review was
released early last month after a nearly final draft had been
leaked weeks before yet there is remarkably little detail from
the NNSA on how it might be implementing the additional nuclear
weapons capabilities that the NPR calls for.
Can you commit to this subcommittee that we will be fully
briefed on NNSA's plans regarding the NPR starting with the
fiscal year 2018 budget and beyond?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Yes.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Calvert.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Gordon-
Hagerty, Mr. Calbos, Mr. Huizenga, Admiral Caldwell, thank you
for being here today and thank you for your service. The
Chairman mentioned something about designing things on the back
of a cocktail napkin and it kind of brought back a memory about
the iconic aircraft designer Kelly Johnson who legend goes was
in a bar in El Segundo and with a couple of his colleagues, and
sat down because the Japanese had a superior aircraft at the
time and designed the P38 on the back of some cocktail napkins
and 9 months later it came across the assembly line. 9 months.
Why? Because we had to. We had to win. And that is kind of
symbolic of the nuclear weapons program.
We started the Manhattan Project and in a very quick period
of time we developed a nuclear weapon relative to our
adversaries. Why? Because we had to and we had to win the war.
But we left obviously some problems behind because we weren't
concerned then about as much as we probably should have been
about the environmental damage and the problems we are having
today.
So when we are talking about maintaining a safe, secure,
effective and reliable nuclear stockpile, it requires modern
facilities, technical expertise, tools to repair any
malfunctions quickly, safely, and obviously securely. Over half
of your infrastructure is over 40 years old and a quarter of it
goes back to the days that I was mentioning, the days over the
Manhattan Project for World War II. It requires constant
upgrades, I have seen some of it. It is in pretty bad shape.
Obviously the safety of your employees is at risk. Handling
of weapons is at risk and to secure the weapon themselves. And
there has been a concerning reports about the state of the
nuclear stockpile itself. Some issues include the buildings
where the nuclear weapons are housed, they are too rusty to
even seal the doors shut. Uranium security complex, the roofs
are collapsing. A shortage of specialized tools for these aging
systems and the principle information technology used to
operate and launch the ICBMs is on an 8 inch floppy disc. Now I
kind of remember the 8 inch floppy. You and I probably do,
Mike, and we kind of, we are about the same age. But probably
the only place on the planet that is using an 8 inch floppy
disc is from the 1960s. Maybe it is a good security protocol, I
guess you can't hack into it, that is maybe a good thing.
I know some are concerned about the trillion dollar price
tag, as we all are, of the current nuclear modernization plan.
I am more concerned about the safety issues and the enormous
price tag associated with maintaining these aging systems and
our aging deterrents.
Can you share with the committee the cost of doing nothing
versus the cost of the next generation of nuclear
infrastructure and obviously the redesign of our nuclear weapon
systems?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Congressman Calvert, I agree
wholeheartedly with the statements that you have made and, in
fact, the NPR said it best. We have fallen far short in our
responsibilities to ensure that we maintain an infrastructure
that is robust and resilient to meet 21st century threats. And
we have done a poor job of ensuring that the capabilities that
are required in order for our best and brightest to maintain a
robust nuclear weapons stockpile is absolutely critical and we
have not done a good job. However, we believe we are on a
strong path forward to ensure a resilient and robust stockpile
with all the ancillary activities associated with it.
As long as we are assured a sustained funding stream, we
believe we will get to that. This is not something we can do
overnight. It will take decades to modernize our infrastructure
but it is critical that we do so now. Insofar as that as
concerned, that is what is necessary to ensure that our
scientists, engineers, technicians, laboratory and plant
specialists can work in a safe environment. And to provide them
with anything less is not appropriate. So I assure you that the
plan that we have and the path forward we have will be what is
necessary to maintain the nuclear deterrent for our United
States, our allies and our partners.
And to your point about doing nothing, we are at a point
where we have no more margin for error or for doing nothing. We
must take on and undertake this program for infrastructure
modernization now. And with that, it is not just about the
buildings. It is not as Mr. Calbos has said, the brick and
mortar. It is about ensuring that we maintain the best and the
brightest, be sure that we can for the next generation of
scientists, engineers, technicians, laboratory support,
administrative support across the board, that we have those
personnel that want to somehow provide a capability to ensure
our nuclear safety, nuclear security for our United States.
So to me, it is imperative that we work with Congress, with
our stakeholders to assure that we can do everything we can to
ensure a modern, robust, and resilient nuclear weapons
stockpile. And in order to do so, we need to make sure that our
infrastructure throughout the nuclear security enterprise is
second to none.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you. Thank you for that answer. I just,
as you know, you probably have the one job you cannot make any
mistakes, it has to be perfect.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Yes, sir.
Mr. Calvert. Because in your job, things go boom, they
really go boom. Good luck, thank you.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Fleischmann.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To this
distinguished panel, I want to say thank you so much. Dave, it
is good to see you, I think I met you my first week in
Congress. Phil, it is a pleasure. Admiral, I want to thank you
on a personal note of privilege for you coming to my office and
articulating in a very strong and comprehensive way where we
are and where you want our great nuclear Navy to go. For me, I
want to say that I agree with your assessment and your vision.
I want to thank the men and women of our great United States
Navy and we will support you. I will certainly work to support
you with the funds needed to complete your mission, sir.
Director Hagerty, thank you and congratulations. As Chairman
Calvert just articulated, the margin for error in this sphere
is zero.
I represent Oak Ridge, Tennessee, birthplace of the
Manhattan Project. Right now, we are under construction with
the Uranium Processing Facility. I will say the men and women
who have worked so hard at Y-12 have done a tremendous job
under very adverse and older conditions. But UPF is now going
well. It has been redesigned, buildings are up, NNSA has done a
great job, our contractor has done a great job on site and I
thank you for all of that.
I have a few questions. The Uranium Processing Facility
project at Y-12 is a critical component of the NNSA strategy
for modernizing the nuclear weapons complex and for continuing
to meet the needs of our nuclear Navy. NNSA is committed to
complete the UPF project by 2025 for costs not exceeding $6.5
billion. The administration has requested $703 million for UPF
for fiscal year 2019. My first question, could you briefly
describe whether your request configured in the President's
budget and the funding profile of the next few years are
adequate to complete the work that needs to be done to advance
UPF toward a successful completion by 2025 as NNSA has
committed.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you, Congressman Fleischmann. Let
me assure you that with reliable and sustained funding, our
intent is to, and I am confident to say that we will complete
UPF within the budget which is $6.5 billion and by the end of
2025. So I always want to make sure that we capture all of 2025
and that it is not on January 1st. We have through the end of
2025. I am confident that with reliable and sustained funding,
we can get to that effort.
As I mentioned in my opening comments, we have just
completed two sub-projects and we completed them two months
ahead of schedule and $18 million under budget. So I think that
is a welcome sign about the good work that we are doing at the
field office as well as our contractor and support staff. I
agree with you and I look forward to my first visit to Y-12.
May I also ask if Mr. Calbos has anything else he would
like to respond with regard to UPF, thank you.
Mr. Calbos. Thank you. The only thing I would add to the
Administrator's comment is that the success we are having in
the uranium space at Y-12 is the result of a methodical process
that we have instituted over the last several years. There are
some folks that will note that we take a bit of time to get
from idea to actual breaking ground, or in this case, pouring
concrete. But we have gotten there through a very methodical,
rigorous process that includes other parts of the Department of
Energy and we have learned from past efforts and we are
applying those lessons that we have applied to UPF to other
parts of our portfolio. So there is a lot of goodness there.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, sir. The NNSA has established
domestic uranium enrichment as one of its strategic material
programs. Redeveloping a domestic uranium enrichment capability
is critically important to our national security. Also of
critical importance is to ensure that current uranium
enrichment workforce, skill and supply chain quality do not
atrophy unnecessarily. Could you please describe the steps that
NNSA is taking to ensure both that the nation's future enriched
uranium needs are met and that the current capabilities of the
industry in this country does not continue to erode?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. We concur that we must reestablish a
domestic uranium enrichment capability. We need to do so for
our long term tritium requirements. We believe that the planned
path forward, assuming that it is fully funded, will provide us
with the tritium needs necessary for our nuclear weapons
stockpile requirements as a critical, strategic material, will
provide us with that necessary capability through approximately
2040. However, as you may be aware, we have two centrifuge
technologies under which we are considering at the present
time. One is in more of a nascent stage right now, so we are
developing the R&D on that. But yes, we are providing resources
to ensure that we can look at the two different centrifuge
technologies and make a determination. Mr. Calbos might have
some more to add, if I may.
Mr. Calbos. Sir, I want to take an opportunity to clarify
something that is often reported. That our strategy, as the
administrator said, there is a two prong strategy. One is we
are going to down blend uranium so that we can bridge to our
own domestic production capability. There have been reports
that we are down blending HEU that is reserved for Naval
reactors and that is not correct. We are not using anything
that is set aside for naval reactors, and I think sir, you are
good until 2060, based on current fleet size and everything.
But in the more near term, the first requirement that we
need to address is the tritium for the weapons. We have a two
pronged approach. One is down blend some highly enriched
uranium that we have identified at the Y-12 complex. And then
going forward, it gets to what Ms. Gordon-Hagerty said about
developing our own domestic enrichment capability in the United
States.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you. And I would like to note for
the record, my strong support for a domestic uranium enrichment
program to move forward in addition to the down blend. The down
blend is a short-term or mid-term solution but I think we need
to address that as a nation. Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Ms. Wasserman Schultz.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madame
Administrator, in your written responses to the Senate Armed
Services Committee during your confirmation process, you wrote
that, eliminating nuclear weapons is a long-term goal and that
the United States ``now faces a more diverse and unstable
geopolitical environment than ever before''. I take it that you
mean that the more diverse and unstable the geopolitical
environment, the longer it is going to take us to reduce or
eliminate nuclear weapons.
But given that the President has agreed to meet with the
most significant driver of instability in our geopolitical
environment with no conditions or questions asked, I would like
to know from your perspective, what steps the Trump
administration is taking to actually stabilize the geopolitical
environment, both in terms of improving our national security
in the short term and working toward eliminating nuclear
weapons in the long term. It seems to me that there is a reason
that previous Presidents were hesitant to just sit down and
agree to a meeting with one of the most dangerous despots in
the world without any preconditions and that perhaps does not
meet the description that you underscored as important in
making sure that we have a more stable geopolitical
environment.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you, Congresswoman Wasserman
Schultz. I cannot speak to the President's direction other than
the position that he has taken, I would defer to the White
House or to State Department from a diplomatic standpoint.
However, to my point about long-term strategy where I believe
the entire world will be better off without nuclear weapons, I
will be the first person to say that. But as long as we are in
an unstable environment, we must ensure a credible nuclear
deterrent and that is exactly what the NNSA is here to do. And
as far as NNSA is concerned, we work with the Nuclear Weapons
Council with our counterparts in the Department of Defense to
develop the requirements and from there, we will execute the
strategies as such.
One of our long-term goals is, of course, and I do not
think it has ever come off the table, I can say confidently,
that if there is a time at which we can pursue an opportunity
to rid the world of nuclear weapons, you would find me standing
at the front of the line and that is what I would welcome the
opportunity to do. However, because of the situation which we
find ourselves, we need to have a safe, secure, and robust
reliable nuclear weapons stockpile for the safety, security of
our nation, our allies, and our partners.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. I can appreciate what you are saying
but you literally have nuclear nonproliferation in your title.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Correct.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. So presumably, your main
responsibility, I mean our posture right now, remains, has
been, should be, achieving the goal of nuclear
nonproliferation. Again, I assume also that you and your team
offer advice and guidance given your expertise, to the White
House, about how to make the geopolitical environment more
stable. So while I can appreciate that the decisions about who
the President meets with are made at the White House, do you or
any of your team of experts weigh in with the White House on
decisions like whether the President is going to agree to a
meeting like this with no preconditions whatsoever?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. To the extent to making that
information known about meeting with no preconditions, I do not
believe we were involved in that decision making process.
However, you rightly state that part of my mission and my
responsibility is nuclear nonproliferation counterproliferation
and counterterrorism. And we have a very robust program in arms
control and other efforts. If I may, Dave Huizenga is my
Principal Deputy Associate Administrator for nuclear
nonproliferation and perhaps he can give you some ideas and
examples about how we conduct our nonproliferation efforts.
Believe me, part and parcel we are involved in interagency
discussions, we provide the technical expertise in nuclear
nonproliferation across the government.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. I am running a little bit low on
time and I do want to hear from him but I want to ask my other
question because he can probably help answer it as well. There
has been so much focus on the Nuclear Posture Review and the
President has emphasized repeatedly that we need to modernize
and we need to nuke up and I agree that there needs to be a
balance struck between nonproliferation and making sure that we
have a modern, robust program. But that modern robust program
is taking cuts. So while I recognize that the administration
has not yet started to significantly cut nonproliferation
programs to pay for weapons, can you assure me here today that
we are not going to move in that direction and that the NNSA
will continue to invest in these vital nonproliferation
programs, regardless of this administration's insistence on
expanding the nation's nuclear arsenal?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Yes, I can. And, in fact, this year's
budget, our 2019 budget request is 3.9 percent increase from
our 2018 request. So yes we are and we have a robust
nonproliferation program and I hope that you will be able to
see some of the results of that. Like I said, we are at front
and center with the IAEA, with State Department and with our
interagency colleagues in terms of nuclear nonproliferation
initiatives.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Mr. Chairman, is it OK if we hear
from Mr. Huizenga?
Mr. Simpson. Go ahead.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you. I think we have heard here the
importance of maintaining the stockpile. But also I think what
we are hearing from both the Congress and the Administrator is
there is also an important element to the deterrence. That is
making sure the other people, our adversaries do not get ahold
of nuclear materials to create nuclear weapons and that we
verify that they are abiding by treaties that are in place. I
can assure you that there has been no change in the ability of
our program to influence these issues. We have direct access to
the highest levels of the National Security Council members and
we play a very, very vital role in supporting those activities.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. The concern is obviously granting a
meeting given the credibility of the meeting with the leader of
the free world to a despot like Kim Jong Un with no
preconditions at all. And not ensuring that there are steps he
has to take to warrant being given that type of a platform an
opportunity.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes, I recognize that, but there are indeed
ongoing discussions now to try to make sure that we are well
positioned.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. One can only hope. Thank you for
your indulgence, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Newhouse.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and welcome
to the panel this morning. I appreciate you being here.
Congratulations, Ms. Gordon-Hagerty, on your appointment and
your confirmation. Reading through your biography, it seems
like you are uniquely qualified for the position and I look
forward to working with you. You had your beginnings at
Lawrence Livermore, is that correct?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. That's correct.
Mr. Newhouse. And even as a professional staff assistant at
Energy and Commerce, I understand. So that should be a source
of inspiration for a lot of people in this room. But also many
other important positions within important activities of the
government related to defense so welcome. You have been on the
job for almost a month so you probably are aware of some of the
things that are going on that are under your purview. I
represent the many skilled men and women, the scientists at the
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory who are very engaged,
conduct a great amount of work and research and development in
support of your efforts. I think, as a matter of fact, they do
more to support the mission of the NNSA than any other lab in
the country. So that is a source of pride for me but also a
very important role that they fill.
My first question, I guess, from kind of a higher altitude
perspective. Could you share with the committee, your vision
for the nuclear nonproliferation programs in the coming years?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you, Congressman. Yes, first of
all, as I had mentioned before, obviously we have three very
important missions and they are equally important to me. The
safe, secure, reliable nuclear weapons stockpile, a robust
nonproliferation, counterproliferation, counterterrorism
program as well as supporting our nuclear propulsion in our
fleet for the Navy. So those are equal and important missions.
I cannot understate the importance that I place on all of those
missions.
In terms of nuclear nonproliferation, it is an important
mechanism by which we can attract, lure, and otherwise avoid
nation states or others from finding the development or the
ultimate execution of building a nuclear weapon or nuclear
device. So we are doing everything we possibly can and I
guarantee you, I promise you that I will make this one of my
highest priorities. I have worked closely with Mr. Huizenga in
the past and we continue to work together today. My door is
always open and we have already started to undertake some new
efforts, some improved efforts in the nuclear nonproliferation
area. Most notably, we have been working on National Security
Council staff matters so that we take it to the highest levels
of government. And we are in the middle of all nuclear
nonproliferation technical efforts. So what I would like to do
also is if Dave can describe, Mr. Huizenga, if you will allow
him to describe some of our most recent accomplishments and
what we plan on for fiscal year 2019 in the areas of nuclear
nonproliferation. But I assure you, it will be one of my top
priorities.
Mr. Newhouse. Absolutely, please.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Administrator. Yeah, you are
right. We actually--the Nonproliferation Office uses the
Pacific Northwest Laboratory folks extensively in our
cooperation and we appreciate their capabilities. We have used
them for years on border security efforts and that was the key
effort in stopping smuggling of nuclear materials and
radiological materials worldwide. So we have a very robust
program that uses not just the PNNL folks, but the draws on the
laboratories in general to make sure that we either secure
material and help other countries secure the material in place
or move it and make it--consolidate it in more secure locations
if possible and to stop smugglers and to also make sure that we
are ensuring verification, as I mentioned, verification of
existing treaties.
Mr. Newhouse. Well, certainly in this day and age is just
some very important work, some of most important work that we
do in a defensive strategy. And like I said, I look forward to
working with you as you engage in your new role and make sure
that we can accomplish those goals as efficiently and quickly
as we can. Thank you very much for being here and I yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Fortenberry.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary
Hagerty, congratulations as well on your new position and,
Admiral, thank you as well and the rest of you for coming
today. The conversation has taken a decided turn toward
nonproliferation and I want to focus there, as well. Chairman
Calvert said it, I think, very responsibly that you perhaps
have one of the most important jobs in the government. If this
goes wrong, everything else we are trying to do does not
matter. When I was a much younger man, it was 1979, I was
actually in the country of Egypt and long story, but I ran into
someone who had been a World War II Veteran; I believe he was
from Australia. And he told me that he was one of the first
troops into Nagasaki, as I recall. And I just being a young
person said, ``Oh my goodness, that must have been absolutely
fascinating. What did you see?'' And he began to cry.
This whole dynamic of trying to create a 21st century
architecture for diplomacy, for proper military strategy for
our own defense, in light of an ever-changing world where the
technology, so to speak, in this arena is out of the bottle,
demands command that we perhaps elevate the focus and our
intentions around this area that none of us can really seem to
get our mind around. The possibility of one of these things
exploding is a game-changer for civilization itself. Now, in
this regard, we are doing the same things that we are doing.
You have made some really--we are doing the same things that we
are doing. Maybe they are robust enough, maybe they are not.
What I do not want to see is that we have a problem with
imagination. There is an interagency effort that has gone on
previously. I would like my question specifically to you all
is, what is the status of that? You are the primary carrier of
nonproliferation mission and legislative intent, along with
DTRA and Defense, as well as some cooperation, I assume, from
the NSC, maybe some from Treasury and State, as well as State.
But again, in my mind, at least, this interagency
taskforce, we are in interagency dialogue that is absolutely
necessary and critical to make sure that we are thinking
correctly and continuing to move the mission from just securing
and safety of nuclear technology to one of verification and
reduction of threats, particularly along the lines of securing
loose material, but also loose technology that is out. So
respond to this, please. The leadership for this purpose, I
think, has to come from you and right here, as well.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you and I agree wholeheartedly
with your statement. We have undertaken a robust interagency
process that I have seen in the few weeks that I have been on
the job. We have looked at things, cyber security, we have
looked at other elements that touch across the elements that
you have described. I would also like to bring to your
attention that in the Nuclear Posture Review, the
organizations--of course, it was before my tenure--but the
State Department, the Department of Defense, and Department of
Energy played equal roles in developing the nuclear posture
review and there is an entire section devoted to
nonproliferation, counterproliferation, counterterrorism
measures. And so that will lay the strategy, if you will, or at
least part of the strategy, I think, to get to where you think
we need to be and rightfully so. That strategy will then
provide us with a framework, if you will, or requirements that
we can then use as an outline for moving forward. But exactly
some materials, methods, equipment, information that we can
find on the internet, all of those play a role in potential
nuclear terrorism and the ultimate goal.
Mr. Fortenberry. So that section of the Nuclear Posture
Review, was that written in coordination with this interagency
taskforce, did that fall primarily to your agency? Who was the
coordinator of that section?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Well, actually, I can turn to Mr.
Huizenga, who was actually part and parcel of that group and, I
believe, even led the process.
Mr. Huizenga. Yeah, we played a very extensive role in
shaping that chapter. That was extremely important from the
very get-go. We wanted to make sure we recognize it was not
just----
Mr. Fortenberry. Right. Let us look at the conclusions very
quick. I am sorry to cut you off. Our time is just very short.
So, again, back to this idea of architecture. Are the main
accounts for nonproliferation the proper structure, the proper
framework for addressing the series of threats that are out
there or are we lacking imaginative possibilities here?
Mr. Huizenga. I have not seen any lack of imagination or
change in posture----
Mr. Fortenberry. OK, let me go back to this. Is this
interagency taskforce, is there leadership to it, is there a
timeline in which it's scheduled to continue to meet, or does
that just become information that sits in various agencies? We
have a fragmentation problem across government, we have a
fragmentation problem--everybody's life has a fragmentation
problem. But if one of these goes off, we just cannot afford
the possibility.
Mr. Huizenga. We are developing very specific plans that
are based on, you know, stopping smuggling, securing material,
verifying treaty obligations, so each one of these major
elements of our export control, you mentioned that as well, you
know, to developing technologies; each one of these has a
specific plan and we are developing and marching through it,
so.
Mr. Fortenberry. Are you shepherding this? Are you the
leading person in the Government?
Mr. Huizenga. I am not personally shepherding it.
Mr. Fortenberry Who is?
Mr. Huizenga It is being run out of the White House, so the
close coordination with State Department and Defense Department
and DOE.
Mr. Fortenberry. So the National Security Council would be
the primary coordinator of the interagency dialogue? Is there a
timeline for further considerations here?
Mr. Huizenga. Yes. There is continued pressure to make sure
that we are staying on top of this.
Mr. Fortenberry. So there is no timeline; I think that is
what you are saying, something--this kind of goes to the point.
This is so serious that I think I am not countering what you
are saying; I am just trying to elevate the seriousness of this
as a core key mission. Because--and look, I represent strategic
command. We are the command; we are the nerve center for our
nuclear policies and weapons systems. And as well, the idea
that we have nuclear weapons for our own defense, as well as
nonproliferation purposes seems contradictive, but it is not,
back to your earlier point. In the meanwhile, we have got to
keep ourselves safe, but as we work toward the possibility of
eliminating all of these things from the world. Now, but unless
we are equating that secondary or primary mission with the
first as well, and it tends to drift, I do not think we will
get there. Because it is easier to build things.
Mr. Huizenga. Yeah, I just want to emphasize, there is no
lack of pressure. I feel the pressure in----
Mr. Fortenberry. From whom? The White House?
Mr. Huizenga. From--the whole interagency recognizes the
importance of this effort.
Mr. Fortenberry. OK, it is a comment. I just need some more
specifics in this----
Mr. Huizenga. Yeah.
Mr. Fortenberry [continuing]. Regard.
Mr. Huizenga. So I guess the reason I am not----
Mr. Fortenberry. I mean, it is a better conversation
offline and we have--I think we are going to probably have some
opportunity to do that, but specifics would help.
Mr. Huizenga. OK.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Administrator Gordon
Hagerty. Thank you very much for being here today. My question
pertains to strategic and critical material beryllium? As you
know, beryllium is the only substance available for certain
U.S. strategic weapon systems. There was language in the report
accompanying the fiscal year 2018 House Defense Appropriations
Bill speaking to the importance of a secure supply of beryllium
to ensure the reliability review as nuclear stockpile. The
language occurs encourages the NNSA to investigate the
feasibility of developing a new and efficient contractor-
operated beryllium and beryllium oxide production capability to
more efficiently and affordably meet your agency's needs. As
NNSA goes through a major modernization effort, does the agency
plan to upgrade and secure its beryllium supply?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Congressman Joyce, we are actually
undertaking that feasibility study right now for our future
beryllium needs. And beryllium is one of our strategic
materials. And so, yes, we are absolutely doing that. We will
determine whether or not under that feasibility study what kind
of requirements we will have for the foreseeable future for
beryllium.
Mr. Joyce. Fantastic. In doing so, is there a role for
private industry to play in this process?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Absolutely. If there are ways of
doing--in fact, we are looking at different opportunities where
there can be public private partnerships. Obviously, the
sanctity of the material, the issues associated with that when
they are ultimately going to be used in our nuclear stockpile
is our biggest concern. Security clearances and other issues
have the security around the program, trusted materials, so on
and so forth. But absolutely, we would welcome the opportunity
to engage with private partners that potentially could provide
us with the necessary materials that meet the needs of our
strategic materials initiatives.
Mr. Joyce. Oh, thank you. You know, and I apologize for
being late. I have another hearing down the hall. I understand
that there had been some discussion you had already discussed
the cyber threats or potential for what you are doing to gear
up for cyber threats in your industry.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Cyber threats are certainly a concern
of ours, whether the system is, you know, and we have a robust
program that we are undertaking right now throughout the
Department of Energy, not just within NNSA. Because obviously,
our infrastructure and our enterprise requires a resilient
cyber security program. And we do have that and I would be
pleased to come back and brief you specifically about our cyber
security strategies.
Mr. Joyce. That would be fantastic.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you.
Mr. Joyce. And I know that the time is running, so thank
you very much for allowing me this time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah. Mr. Aguilar.
Mr. Aguilar. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Congratulations, Madam
Administrator. Thanks for being here. I appreciate my
colleague, Mr. Newhouse, noting that you had some California
roots, as well. That is a strong step for him to compliment
someone who had some time in California.
The Nuclear Posture Review, as you mentioned, sets numerous
priorities for NNSA in support of our enterprise. These include
accelerating work on some life extension programs, ensuring
robust surveillance programs and reducing the backlog and
deferred maintenance at facilities. The fiscal year 2019 budget
provides additional funding for these priorities, which is
commendable. Do you believe the increase for fiscal year 2019
is sufficient to meet the growing demand for these resources
and how do we sustain this level of funding in future years?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you very much and I agree
wholeheartedly with your statement that that is exactly what
needs to be done. We do have a robust plan and a path forward
to maintain the three--to keep on budget and within--on
schedule the three major LEPs we are undertaking at present, as
well as our one major alt and refresh, which is the W88 alt 370
CHE refresh. It is important that we receive sustained and
reliable funding from the Congress in order to ensure that we
can continue to maintain the requirements set forth by the
Department of Defense through the Nuclear Weapons Council,
which I am a member. And this will set our path forward to
ensure a reliable and robust nuclear deterrent. But it is
really dependent on working closely with Congress to ensure
that the requirements needed to modernize our infrastructure
and maintain the capabilities to ensure our long-term
strategies are undertaken. So, Mr. Calbos, do you have anything
to add to that, if I may?
Mr. Calbos. Of course.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you.
Mr. Calbos. Sir, I appreciate the question. One of the
things that we have talked about since we rolled out the NPR is
what it represents. And while there is understandably a lot of
attention that--that is focused on the new initiatives, the low
yield ballistic missile and the sea launch cruise missile, you
know, first and foremost, the NPR represents continuity with
the program that we have had underway for about three to five
years. And that includes the infrastructure improvements,
taking care of deferred maintenance and all that.
So you are absolutely correct that we need to maintain
support for those programs. There is a little bit of, you know,
a tendency to focus on those, on the new initiatives. But first
and foremost, we need to get right what we have already been
working on and make sure that the enterprise is positioned to
support the stockpile for decades to come. This is not a short-
term thing. So it is up to us, frankly, to make sure that, you
know, we receive the support we need by giving Congress what it
needs to make, you know, the right decisions with respect to
appropriations.
Mr. Aguilar. What challenges will we face as we expand
these programs and accelerate some?
Mr. Calbos. You know, it is stable, consistent funding. And
again, this is not a one, two, three-year effort. It took us a
while to reach the point we are and with respect to the
enterprise and it will take us a while to get it back on secure
footing for the next, you know, several decades and, you know.
Technically, we have the workforce that can do it. You know, we
are beefing up the enterprise so that it can conduct the work
that it needs to do, but we need sustained funding for many
years.
Mr. Aguilar. In these walls, sometimes we pat ourselves on
the back for one and two-year budget deals, so that can be a
challenge. As we move forward, you know, how do we find cost
savings that can help offset some of this activity?
Mr. Calbos. Certainly, there are opportunities out there.
You know, it is always a bit of a Catch-22 that, you know, if
you have the time and the effort and you get support, you know,
I will use deferred maintenance as an example. You know, right
now we put money into deferred maintenance and into patching
rooves for facilities that are not in the long-term plan. But
we do that because if we do not, we have got an environmental
issue or a safety issue. In a perfect world, we would condemn
those buildings, you know, take them down, and build a new
facility. In the long run there is cost savings there, but when
you are looking at it in a one-year time horizon, it is cheaper
just to put a new roof on something.
Mr. Aguilar. Cost avoidance is something that government
does not do a very good job at in general. As a former mayor,
we saw that as well. So it is tough and I appreciate--I think
it is commendable, the deferred maintenance money that is--that
you have identified. I think that that is helpful. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Interesting discussion. I, you
know, I agree with you. It would be nice to live in a world
that did not have nuclear weapons, but I think we are--that
technology has already been developed and I do not know how you
are going to get--ever get rid of them or the ability. And it
kind of leads me to--I support the nonproliferation programs
that we have. I think we got to do everything we can to stop
that. But it is almost--and this is just myself speaking--like
I said, a losing game in the long run with the technologies
that is out there, that if a country wants to become a nuclear
power, they have the ability to do it. And the only thing that
we can do is to try to make it in their best interest not to,
somehow.
But at some point in time, I guess, Kim Jong Un decided
that it was in his best interest to. It is a perplexing
problem. I do not look forward to doing your job, but they--
that is a--it is a tough one, trying to stop the proliferation
of this nuclear material and a nation's ability to develop
nuclear weapons. And they often surprise--India surprised us.
We did not know they were developing one and all of a sudden,
they were there. It is a challenge, but--Admiral Caldwell.
The Spent Fuel Recapitalization project has been carried
out, at the Naval Reactors facility in Idaho it is estimated to
cost $1.6 billion. Do you have a cost and schedule baseline for
the project and do you foresee any difficulties in delivering
this project within its current projected cross and what are
the biggest risks of the rising cost and when is this project
supposed to be completely--or be completed and what do the
Navy's--to support the Navy's plans and what are the
implications if there are delays in this?
Admiral Caldwell. Thanks for the question, sir. We are on
pace to deliver the Spent Fuel Handling facility on schedule.
The initial operating capability would be in 2024 and the full
operational capability in 2025. As you know, sir, this is vital
to the Navy because it allows us to continue to refuel aircraft
carriers and refuel SSBNs, ballistic missiles submarines, and
it also allows us to inactivate and take the fuel out of the
retiring 688 Los Angeles-class submarine. So it is very, very
important to us. If there were delays, then we would have to
purchase additional containers to store that fuel so that we
could continue the battle rhythm of refueling and defueling
that I just described. The delay of one year would cost about
$150 million to buy additional containers and we do not want to
do that.
Fortunately, thanks to the support of this subcommittee, we
have been able to stay on schedule and avoid additional cost
growth. The budget submission for this year allows us to
continue the site preparations, to start vetting some
contracts, $32 million worth of contracts this year. It allows
us to continue the design of the equipment that will go into
the facility. It allows us to continue the--to the final design
of the facility. And it allows us to complete site preparations
and to buy the long lead material that we need. Towards the end
of the year, we are going to achieve the milestones CD 2 and 3,
which will establish the performance baseline and that will
allow us to start construction, which will include the pre--the
structural steel, as well as the concrete for the foundation.
So we are on track, sir, and that is largely due to the great
support from this subcommittee and I thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. The ATR, aging reactor, how
important that is in the Navy and do you foresee the Navy
reactor's continued use, a need for the ATR, and its research
and development needs in the future?
Admiral Caldwell. Yes, sir, the ATR, the advanced test
reactor, on the Idaho National Lab, it is essential, it is
vital to the Naval Reactors Program. It allows us to take
samples of materials that we are considering for future
reactors and expose it to a neutron flux, and to see how those
materials are going to perform. And then we can run it through
cycles and we can take that material out, take a look at it,
see how it is performing, and then put it back in the reactor
and run it through additional cycles. That advanced test
reactor has allowed us to develop fuel systems that have longer
lives.
In fact, all of the submarines we are building today have
life-of-the-ship cores. The Ford aircraft carrier has a 25-year
core, so that ship will be refueled once in her life. And it
has allowed us to develop the core for Columbia, which will be
also a life-of-the-ship core over 40 years. We could not have
done that without the advanced test reactor. So, we have used
it throughout the life of the program and we will continue to
use it, and we will continue to support efforts to sustain that
program and to extend the service life, if possible, or to
recapitalize that effort if we need to.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. For the members that haven't seen
it, you need to see how they have to refuel one of these
submarines or one of these aircraft carriers. It is not like
you take the fuel rods and put them under your arm and walk
out, and grab more and put them in and lock. It is a huge, huge
cost to refuel one of these things. And I suspect that being
life-of-the-ship reactors is a huge cost savings to the
operations of that ship in the long run.
Admiral Caldwell. That is correct, sir. And it is, as in
the case of the Columbia class, it has allowed us to do the
mission with 12 submarines versus 14. And we are estimating a
savings of about $40 billion total ownership over the life of
that class of submarines, so, that is very important to the
Nation.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I want to get into one other
subject, Administrator. Last summer, the GAO published a report
that said the NNSA's nuclear modernization programs were
already at high risk of delays and cost increases, and that was
before the NPR and the announcement of additional modernization
programs. The outgoing NNSA Administrator said in January, and
I quote, ``We are pretty much at capacity in terms of people,
although we are hiring more. We are pretty much at capacity in
terms of the materials that we need to do this work, and pretty
much at capacity in terms of the hours in the day at our
facilities to do the work.''
Can the NNSA afford the scope of its current modernization
programs within existing budgetary targets? And, if not, does
the stockpile plan identify all additional needed resources?
And if the funding needs are not met, how would this affect the
agency's overall modernization schedule? And will future
modernization plans continue to include the estimates of the
projected budget for the program to provide the assurance that
the NNSA's programs are aligned with budgetary plans?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Mr. Chairman, our plans are based on
sustained and reliable funding. And we believe that consistent
with the sustained and reliable long-term funding provided by
Congress, we will be able to ensure that the requirements set
forth by the Nuclear Weapons Council are executed. And so, in a
nutshell, it is really about reliable and sustained funding,
making sure that we modernize our infrastructure, we ensure
that we have the necessary workforce now and in the future to
be able to execute those missions.
As General Klotz correctly pointed out, we are at a
heightened state. We haven't seen this amount of activity for
many, many years, in fact, decades. However, we believe that
working closely with our partners in the field offices, plants,
laboratories, and at our sites, we can develop the requirements
in the path forward to ensure that we execute the missions
outlined by the Nuclear Weapons Council.
Mr. Calbos, anything else that you might want to add, if I
may, Mr. Chairman? Thank you.
Mr. Calbos. Ma'am, I think that captures it. As you look at
the workflow, it has grown enormously over the last couple of
years and we are continuing to execute. While we are stretched,
we are still addressing all the efforts we need to address
right now. As you look at the projected funding requirements,
you know, we have a document that lays out the next 25 years as
we currently understand it. Every year we update that. It is a
Stockpile Stewardship Management Plan; we update that. This
year's version will reflect changes coming from the NPR, and to
the extent that we achieve support for those programs, we can
execute.
Mr. Simpson. If the two LEPs were working on the B61 and
the W88, there is talk that, originally, the B61 was going to
be at $8 billion; looks like $10 billion is more accurate now,
and probably a 2-year extension of how long it is going to be
before that is finished, at least that is the rumors that are
out there. If we add additional work due to the Nuclear Posture
Review with the two new weapons that they are talking about,
what does that do to your overall schedule of the life
extension programs for these if we are already at capacity? I
guess what I am asking is how is this going to fit in with the
capacity that we currently have or is that going to have to
expand?
Mr. Calbos. Congressman Simpson, thank you. First of all,
we have not adjusted our cost or our schedule. There are other
estimates out there; it is not new. We have our own internal
organization which provides an independent cost assessment, and
there is goodness in that. They identify risks, and our job is
to work through those risks and make sure that they don't
materialize. So, the $2 billion increase and 2-year slip is not
something that we in the program agree with right now.
As a former Deputy Administrator said when she looked at
me, she said your job is to make sure that does not happen; and
right now we are making sure that does not happen. It doesn't
mean there is not risk in the program. There is absolute risk
in the program, and every day we are working with the labs and
the plants to burn off that risk so that we can deliver the
B61-12 on the schedule that DOD and STRATCOM expect of us.
With respect to do we have the ability to take on
additional work as directed by the NPR, when you look at what
is in there in terms of new initiatives, specifically the low-
yield ballistic missile, relatively speaking, that is a
moderate level of effort--again, relatively speaking--and a
moderate cost. And we believe where we can fit it in in the
near term--and we can have a more detailed discussion, Ms.
Kaptur, ask for more detailed discussion about NPR
requirements, we can do that in a smaller setting.
And then, additionally, the sea-launched cruise missile,
that would happen farther to the right. So, we believe we can
fit those in under the current program.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Ms. Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to
mention Congressman Joyce has left, but he and I both represent
a heavy industrial region of the country. And just for your
information, as the Department moves forward, we represent a
region that has many firms that have high capacity in the areas
of strategic metals, including beryllium, titanium, magnesium,
aluminum, all the V-Ms. So, I just thought I would put that on
the record.
We have no Department of Energy research lab, Oak Ridge and
Idaho are much more famous than we are, but we do have some
amazing capabilities in our region. So, I just wanted to invite
you there some time. We can't get a nuclear sub Admiral up to
Great Lakes on the St. Lawrence Seaway. We have tried to figure
out how to do that. But, in any case, we have people serving in
our Navy and our nuclear Navy, and there is even an Ohio class,
of course, some of our subs, so we are pretty proud of that.
There is actually a Toledo that is out there somewhere. It
might be being rehabilitated at the moment, I am not sure; but,
in any case, I just wanted to put that on the record.
Now, let's see here. On Nuclear Posture Review, I would
like to go back to this. We need to understand the fiscal
impact of these proposals before we start down the pathway of
implementing them and we will appreciate a further briefing, at
your convenience. Does the NNSA plan to use fiscal year 2018
funds to advance either of the proposed capabilities in the
Nuclear Posture Review? And, if so, could you state those
capabilities, those activities?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Congresswoman Kaptur, we are currently
looking at and evaluating what resources might be applicable in
the fiscal year 2019 budget request. However, we are leaning as
far forward as possible to be able to ensure that the Nuclear
Posture Review strategy is taken, and the requirements are
derived by the Nuclear Weapons Council, at which point we will
decide how we can best utilize funding. We do not have any
resources committed in the fiscal year 2019 budget request.
However, we are leaning as far forward as we possibly can,
working with OMB and DOD.
As you may be aware, we require Congressional authorization
to go into engineering phase 6.3 or higher in order to be able
to conduct any types of additional requirements based on the
low-yield ballistic missile requirements.
Ms. Kaptur. There was no funding in the fiscal year 2018
budget, either. And did I hear you correctly, none yet in the
2019?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Our funding requirements, based on the
fiscal year 2019 budget request was as a result of a program of
record, and as evaluated by and directed by the Nuclear Weapons
Council, so there are no resources available for that because
the program of record is what is being funded and not the new
requirements that are laid out in the Nuclear Posture Review.
Ms. Kaptur. Mr. Calbos, is that fair?
Mr. Calbos. Yes, ma'am, that is fair. As the Administrator
stated, we are working with DOD and the Office of Management
and Budget. This is all kind of evolving in real time. Both the
NPR and the budget closed down at the end of the calendar year,
plus or minus, and to the extent that we can do work in 2019,
that would be beneficial. But, as Ms. Gordon-Hagerty said, we
cannot go into engineering development without explicit
congressional authorization, so.
Ms. Kaptur. Very good. And I think when you come and meet
with us privately, I think that would be a very good topic to
address as well.
On the B83 gravity bomb, the Department of Defense and
Energy committed to Congress in 2013 that the B83 would be
retired and you may be aware that it was part of a larger deal
to allow the NNSA to move forward with the B61-12 life
extension project. However, the NPR proposes to keep the B83
around indefinitely, so, that is a change I think we would see
as a change in posture. What has changed militarily since 2013
to require keeping this bomb in the stockpile? And how long
does the administration intend to keep the B83 around, and are
we looking at extending the life of the B83?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Congresswoman Kaptur, I guess I would
defer to my Department of Defense colleagues in terms of what
their DOD requirements are, which they have informed us that we
will retain the B83 in the nuclear weapons stockpile until a
suitable replacement can be found. So, I would defer to the
Department of Defense.
Ms. Kaptur. Alright thank you. I think, Mr. Chairman, I
will submit my other questions for the record.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Fortenberry.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While we have
been sitting here, I went back and pulled the Nuclear Posture
Review and read the nonproliferation section. So, it is 2\1/2\
pages, very well written. It is a lofty visionary-type goal.
Again, without specifics, and this isn't the vehicle
necessary to lay down specifics, but I think we need to return
to this. There is an interagency review, an interagency working
group without a timeline, with something that has been some
culture of a scent that is pushed by the National Security
Council from what I am gleaning from your comments.
Madame Administrator, you have referenced the Nuclear
Weapons Council several times. And, again, I represent
Strategic Command. I have dialogued with the commanders of that
very important part of our military infrastructure for years
about how, if we are to have a reliable nuclear deterrence, we
have to ensure that these weapons are reliable. And if that is
not assured, then their purpose, the deterrent effect, is
diminished. Therefore, we are investing, per the Nuclear
Posture Review, as well as the intention of Congress, many,
many billions of dollars to upgrade our weapons systems.
What I am trying to impress upon you all is there has got
to be a parallel element here rather than a lofty sentiment
about what we are going to do with the 21st century
architecture for nonproliferation, and I need to become
convinced; and I need to be in partnership with you to make
sure that we are exploring every avenue that is open to us to
prevent civilization from blowing itself up. This is the
reality of what we are facing.
And so, again, back to the Nuclear Weapons Council, which
is a decided body, interagency body, with experts on it, who
have created the preconditions for Congress to be able to
consider this modernization piece. Why don't we have a parallel
effort in the nonproliferation space? Because right now it
appears to me, the leadership thereof, appears to be vague
about the intention because, frankly, it is easier for us to
get our mind and heart and technology around building things.
It is harder in this art of diplomacy and art of politics and
art of geopolitical space where there are really bad actors
with ill intention to create conditions which are measurable.
But that doesn't mean that we should avoid it--not that you are
avoiding it--but we do, from my perspective, need to elevate
this.
So, let me propose to you right now, these hearings--we are
on Appropriations--these hearings are generally about these
various spaces of line items that are either of parochial
interest or broader national security issues about what we are
spending, what we are not. I would rather go a little bit
deeper and press you upon this issue of whether or not we have
aligned with specifics this greater goal of using our nuclear
posture for nuclear deterrence in nonproliferation.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Representative Fortenberry, I can't
argue with a thing you have said, and I agree wholeheartedly
with what you are stating. What I would like to do is offer to
you--put together a team from the interagency, as much as that
is possible, and provide you with a more robust briefing, if
you will, an awareness of what actually is going on in the
nonproliferation space. Obviously, the technical expertise
resident in the Department of Energy and NNSA is really where
we provide the robust support to that.
But in terms of diplomacy, defense activities, the
intelligence community, and all of those others that are
factors in the interagency process, I will offer to you, that
if appropriate, I would be happy to find out more, bring those
personnel, my counterparts with me to brief you, which is
absolutely appropriate. If that works for you.
Mr. Fortenberry. Yeah, why don't we start there? But,
again, the first thing you have to do if you are interested in
this space is start to try to figure out what the government
spends and where.
Again, back to the issue--the problem, potentially, of
fragmentation. Maybe we are fine, maybe we are doing everything
we can, but to elevate my assurance and the American people's
assurance, as well as the citizens of this world who are
depending upon us to get this right, to elevate their assurance
that we are doing everything we can to create the possibility
of a new framework for international dialogue in this regard, I
think the mission of that lands to a degree here, even though,
as you correctly defined your role as being more technical, but
the technical aspects of it are not going to get us necessarily
to the art of diplomacy unless we are pushing this through the
means that we have, and I think this is absolutely critical.
Now, in this regard as well, the international agency, the
IAEA, the International Atomic Energy Agency, has, again,
shifted its mission from a traditional one of security, safety,
if you will, to verification. We, you, are playing a critical
role in this regard as well.
I want to hear, Mr. Chairman, if you will allow me a few
more moments, some understanding of culturally what is
happening inside your agency in terms of this shift of mission
of the IAEA because I think this is critically important to
this deeper question as well.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Absolutely, and thank you.
Representative Fortenberry, I can give you one example of where
we are working very closely with the IAEA, as well as with
State Department, and that is for the implementation of JCPOA
with Iran. We are actually providing the technical expertise to
the IAEA in training all of the inspectors to ensure that Iran
complies with the JCPOA. So, we are playing very close, and we
have a very close and robust relationship with the IAEA in this
regard. And, of course, that's an inspection, but I guess,
Dave, who has been doing this far longer than I have, if Mr.
Huizenga could give you some other areas in how he would
describe our current relationship with the IAEA.
Mr. Fortenberry. And briefly, as a part of that, describe
the International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament
Verification?
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you.
Mr. Fortenberry. Is that embedded in the IAEA?
Mr. Huizenga. Not in the IAEA, no.
Mr. Fortenberry. There is a glancing reference to it in the
Nuclear Posture Review.
Mr. Huizenga. Yeah, but we have a close partnership with
the IAEA, as you have indicated. We work with them on safeguard
training. All of the IAEA inspectors have been trained at the
Los Alamos Laboratory to make sure that they know what they are
looking for when they go out there in the field. We have
supported them in nuclear security for decades now, so, they
have a verification and safeguards role in nuclear security,
and their safety role, of course, in that regard as well. So,
we have a very active cooperation with IAEA.
I guess I would like to just come back--I am not trying to
dodge your question. I want to make sure you don't think----
Mr. Fortenberry. You do understand my intent. I am pressing
you for some substance.
Mr. Huizenga. I do, and I want to make sure that you know
that I care because, I mean, I am not giving you a date. We are
regularly churning out policy papers that then drive us to go
do things, to go off in a certain direction and work with a
country to try to help them secure their material or maybe
remove their materials to a more secure location.
You know, we continue to convert reactors. We worked with
the IAEA to convert the reactor in Ghana, recently. We are in
the process of working to convert the reactor in Nigeria, and
this is in a partnership with the Chinese, who shipped these
reactors out there in the past. So, it is a whole of government
here and working with the IAEA and foreign partners, as well.
So, while we are working on policy papers to make sure that
we are going in the right direction in addressing these issues,
we are actually doing things. So, we are converting reactors,
removing hundreds of kgs of HEU and plutonium, working with
you--I know on the Rad Safe bill, to work on eliminating the
possibility of a dirty bomb being used. So, there is a lot of
activity going on. In addition to the fact that we have a huge
challenge, Mr. Chairman, I take that responsibility very
seriously, but we are not just working on paper, we are
actually out there doing work as well.
Mr. Fortenberry. OK. I think my time has expired, but,
Madam Secretary, I will take you up on your kind offer, and if
we can get to actually start the process of scheduling--maybe
right after this hearing--that would be helpful. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. If you haven't figured it out, every member of
this committee has a different interest too, and a different
priority, and stuff, and Mr. Fortenberry's has always been in
nonproliferation. Thank you for that interest and your delving
into it at some length, we appreciate that, and the committee
appreciates it.
Just a couple of quick questions. Madam Administrator, the
budget request proposes a decrease of $104 million or 20
percent for the scientific research on ignition and the
experimental facilities that support that goal, including the
National Ignition Facility, Omega Laboratory for LASER
Energetics, and the Nike LASER at the Naval Research
Laboratory. Though the NNSA constructed the National Ignition
Facility, achieving ignition has so far been elusive. What are
the prospects of achieving ignition at NIF, and are their other
uses for these experimental facilities if ignition cannot be
achieved? And are you proposing to shut down any facility? And
what are your plans for experimental programs in this budget
request?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We have a number of requests. Obviously, there are always
more funding priorities than there is funding. So, we have had
to make due with the amounts of the resources that we have
requested, and part of those have to do with near term
stockpile requirements for assessment and certification. Part
of that is ICF and the three programs that fall under ICF: NIF
at Livermore, Z at Sandia, and the Omega LASER Facility at
University of Rochester. We have determined that for our long-
term stockpile assessment and certification that we can wind
down some of these programs, but most assuredly, we will
continue to use the ICF program to administer certain features
because these are part and parcel of our certification process.
They are critical to ensuring the safe, secure, and reliable
stockpile, both through the assessment and the annual
certification that the three laboratory directors provide to
the President.
Mr. Simpson. So there is no proposal to close any of these
three facilities?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. At the present time we are planning for
the Omega LASER facility at the University of Rochester to wind
down over the next 3 years, our requirements for that user
facility, but we are not planning to shut it down. We are just
pulling away from our requirements based on what our stockpile
requirements are for LASER activities.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. And Admiral Caldwell, your budget
request for the general infrastructure. We talked about the
recapitalization in Idaho, but for the Office of Naval Reactor,
your general infrastructure is for $76 million, or 17 percent
above 2017. Could you please outline the status of the Naval
Reactor's infrastructure?
Admiral Caldwell. Yes, sir. There is an increase in the
Naval operations and infrastructure budget to the tune of about
$60 million over the last budget request. That funds a couple
of important things for me.
One is the recapitalization of key laboratory facilities.
These are the facilities that allow us to do the research and
analyze, you know, problems and issues that not only support
today's fleet, but also enable the future fleet. So that is in
there.
The other thing that is in there is a commitment to go
increase our efforts in decontamination and decommissioning,
D&D. I have environmental liabilities that I am responsible for
and my team and I have set an aggressive goal to take a bigger
cut out of these. So, the budget request is going to allow me
to step up my efforts in D&D and retire some of these legacy
liabilities.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. Kaptur, do you have----
Ms. Kaptur. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that. I remembered
something that I do want to place on the record because we have
such a distinguished panel before us.
Mr. Calbos mentioned workforce issues. Admiral, I happen to
represent a company that makes quite a bit of the innards of
the Harpoon missile, which is not nuclear, but anyway. When we
look around our country at the talents that it takes,
industrial companies to make these things happen, it is a
highly skilled workforce. Unfortunately, one of the companies I
represent, Teledyne, has relocated a lot of its production to
Alabama for different reasons. I represent a workforce at
Teledyne in Toledo that has, like, been shrunk and shrunk and
shrunk.
As you increase your budget, which I think will happen, I
don't know how you look at skilled workforce across the
Department of Energy, but truly this workforce doesn't deserve
to be outsourced or moved. They actually need to be kept
because they are a National asset.
So, you are not the Department of Labor and you have a very
refined responsibility for this society, but I always speak for
our workers. If there is any way I could draw attention to a
workforce like this, if they could be retooled, if they could
be--can't we do this as a country? Though this is not your job,
when we look at what has happened in the mining areas of the
United States as the energy world shifted, we have left
casualties across that battlefield. We are not smart enough as
a country to figure out how to connect the Department of Labor
to the Department of Energy, to the Department of Defense, to
all these things that happen to the American people. It is part
of the reason that they are sort of uneasy right now.
So, I would just encourage you with all of your massive
responsibilities--I don't know who you could talk to. Dan
Verlay is a pretty good guy. I have enjoyed working with him.
But this is an area where I guess I really feel I am not doing
my job as a congresswoman. These people do not deserve to be
forgotten by our country or because of some ridiculous
contracting procedure that we would lose these skills. I think
that still is the best missile of the U.S. Navy, is it not,
Admiral? Am I wrong, it is the most reliable?
Admiral Caldwell. It is certainly a very good missile and
something we depend on. Just to comment on your statements, the
National industrial base is essential to all the things that we
work on around this table. The National Defense Strategy even
talks about that, the importance of that. I think we all work
on this on a daily basis, on individual products when we look
and work with our partners in industry, to encourage them to
develop their people, to sustain their workforce. So, even
though, as you said, there may not be a global effort here,
these efforts go on, on a daily basis at various parts of the
Department of Defense and Department of Energy.
Ms. Kaptur. I can guarantee you that within 350 miles of
the home in which I live, the majority of the machine tool
industry of this country is housed. So, I do think when you
mention the defense industrial base issue, I really do view
this as a critical part of what we are able to do as a society.
I just appreciate you listening. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. And thank you all for being here
today. Administrator Gordon-Hagerty, congratulations on your
first completion before the Appropriations Committee. Well
done. Congratulations on your new appointment. Thank you.
Reading your bio, I am sure you did not come to this job for
the money. So, thank you for your service.
And, Admiral, every time I think this world is going to
hell in a handbasket and the younger generation just doesn't
get it, which I am sure my father thought about my generation,
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, all I have to do is go out and
look at the great men and women in the service in our military
and my faith is restored in the future of this country is in
good hands. So, thank you for your service and everything that
you all do.
Admiral Caldwell. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. The hearing is closed.
----------
[Clerk's note]: The National Security Administration did
not provide answers to submitted questions in time for
inclusion in the record. Answers to submitted questions are on
file with the subcommittee.