- FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY: PART I ITS IMPACT ON OUR CIVIL RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY: PART I
ITS IMPACT ON OUR CIVIL RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MAY 22, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-27
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available on: http://www.govinfo.gov
http://www.oversight.house.gov
http://www.docs.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-663 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland, Chairman
Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Jim Jordan, Ohio, Ranking Minority
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Member
Columbia
Justin Amash, Michigan
Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Mark Meadows, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Harley Rouda, California
James Comer, Kentucky
Katie Hill, California
Michael Cloud, Texas
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida
Bob Gibbs, Ohio
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland
Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Peter Welch, Vermont
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Jackie Speier, California
Chip Roy, Texas
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Carol D. Miller, West Virginia
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Mark E. Green, Tennessee
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
W. Gregory Steube, Florida
Ro Khanna, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
David Rapallo, Staff Director
Yvette Badu-Nimako, Legislative Director/Counsel
Gina Kim, Counsel
Laura Rush, Deputy Chief Clerk/Security Manager
Christopher Hixon, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051
C
O
N
T
E
N
T
S
----------
Page
Hearing held on May 22, 2019.....................................
1
Witnesses
Ms. Joy Buolamwini, Founder, Algorithmic Justice League
Oral Statement...............................................
4
Mr. Andrew G. Ferguson, Professor of Law, David A. Clarke School
of Law, University of the District of Columbia
Oral Statement...............................................
5
Ms. Clare Garvie, Senior Associate, Center on Privacy &
Technology, Georgetown University Law Center
Oral Statement...............................................
7
Ms. Neema Singh Guliani, Senior Legislative Counsel, American
Civil Liberties Union
Oral Statement...............................................
9
Dr. Cedric Alexander, Former President, National Organization of
Black Law Enforcement Executives
Oral Statement...............................................
11
Written statements for the witnesses are available on the U.S.
House of Representatives Document Repository at: https://
docs.house.gov.
INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
----------
The documents entered into the record during this hearing are
listed below, and are available at: https://docs.house.gov.
* Letter from the Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation; submitted by Mr. Connolly and Ms. Miller.
* News article from May 17, 2019, "Researchers alarmed by
Detroit's pervasive, expanding facial-recognition surveillance
program;" submitted by Ms. Tlaib.
* Massachusetts Senate Resolution No. 1385 and House Resolution
1538; submitted by Mr. Lynch.
* Washington Post article from 10-23-18, "Amazon met with ICE
officials over facial-recognition system that could identify
immigrants;" submitted by Ms. Ocasio-Cortez.
* Letter dated 5-21-19 from EPIC; submitted by Mr. Cummings.
* Letter dated 5-17-19 from POGO; submitted by Mr. Cummings.
* Article on Geofeedia Case Study regarding Baltimore County;
submitted by Mr. Cummings.
FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY: PART I
ITS IMPACT ON OUR CIVIL RIGHTS AND
LIBERTIES
----------
Wednesday, May 22, 2019
House of Representatives
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:27 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn Office Building, Hon. Elijah E. Cummings,
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Cummings, Maloney, Norton, Clay,
Lynch, Connolly, Krishnamoorthi, Raskin, Rouda, Hill, Welch,
Kelly, DeSaulnier, Plaskett, Khanna, Gomez, Ocasio-Cortez,
Pressley, Tlaib, Jordan, Amash, Massie, Meadows, Grothman,
Comer, Cloud, Gibbs, Higgins, Miller, Green, and Steube.
Chairman Cummings. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time. I now recognize myself for
five minutes for an opening statement.
Today, we are having our first hearing of this Congress on
the use of facial recognition technology. The Oversight
Committee is uniquely suited to conduct a comprehensive review
of this issue because we have extremely wide-ranging
jurisdiction.
We can look across all Federal agencies, state and local
entities, and the private sector as well. I want to make clear
at the onset that this is a bipartisan issue.
Both the conservatives and liberals alike have real
questions about when they are being monitored, why they are
being monitored, who is monitoring them, and what happens to
this information after it is collected.
We have been working closely with the ranking member, Mr.
Jordan, and I sincerely appreciate his advice and his
assistance and the assistance of his staff in bringing this
hearing together.
Facial recognition is a fascinating technology with huge
potential to effect a number of different applications. But
right now it is virtually unregulated.
In 2016, the Government Accountability Office issued a
report recommending that the FBI make numerous changes to its
facial recognition data base to improve data security and
ensure accuracy, privacy, and transparency.
However, just last month GAO sent a letter highlighting six
priority recommendations that the FBI has yet to fully
implement. At the local levels, cities like Detroit and Chicago
are rapidly expanding the use of facial recognition technology
to track its citizens in real time.
At the same time, other cities, like San Francisco, are
going in completely the opposite direction, banning the
government use of facial technology all together.
Of course, we all see how private companies are using this
technology more and more for advertisements, security, and a
variety of different customer experiences.
But again, there are virtually no controls on where this
information goes. In 2017, our committee held a hearing to
review the law enforcement use of facial recognition
technology. As part of that hearing we found that 18 states
have memoranda of understanding with the FBI to share their
data bases.
As a result, more than half of American adults are part of
facial recognition data bases and they may not even know it. We
also heard testimony that facial recognition technology
misidentifies women and minorities at a much higher rate than
white males, increasing the risk of racial and gender bias.
This issue is very personal for me. My district includes
Baltimore, where I have lived now my entire life. After the
tragic death of Freddie Gray at the hands of the police in
2015, my city took to the streets in anger, frustration, and
grief.
During that time, I also walked the streets of Baltimore
along with religious leaders and people from our community. We
walked together for two reasons: one, to protest this
tremendous loss of life and, two, to urge our fellow citizens
to find a peaceful resolution to this crisis.
Later we learned that the police used facial recognition
technology to find and arrest protestors. It is likely that I
and other members of our community who were simply exercising
our rights under the Constitution were scanned, identified, and
monitored by using this technology.
Think about what I just said. Whatever walk of life you may
come from, you may very well be a part of this process. You
could be at a rally supporting gun rights or protesting gun
violence. You could be marching for the right to life or a
woman's right to choose. You could be pressing for the repeal
of the ACA or the expansion of health care.
In all of these cases the government can monitor you
without your knowledge and enter your face into a data base
that could be used in virtually unrestricted ways.
We need to do more to safeguard the rights of free speech
and assembly under the First Amendment, the right to privacy
under the Fourth Amendment, and the right of equal protection
under the law under the Fourteenth Amendment.
My hope is that today's hearing can be a broad review of
these issues, and we are honored and thankful to have such a
distinguished panel as we have today.
On June 4, we will be having our second hearing on this
topic and we will hear from law enforcement witnesses. After
that I will be asking our subcommittees to conduct deeper dives
on specific issues related to Federal law enforcement, state
and local issues, and the private sector.
Our goal with this review is to identify sensible and
concrete recommendations, legislative or otherwise, that
recognize the benefits of this technology to protect against
this abuse.
With that, I turn to our distinguished ranking member, Mr.
Jordan, for his opening statement.
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
This is a critical hearing on a critical issue.
Congressional oversight on this issue, I think, is of paramount
importance and I do want to thank you because this committee
has a history of working in a bipartisan manner when it comes
to civil liberties, when it comes to privacy rights, and you
have been a champion on that and I applaud your efforts and I
am glad that we have got this nice panel to have a good
discussion this morning.
A few years ago, we had a hearing on Stingray technology. I
think some of you were at that hearing, if I remember
correctly. But this is a technology where you have this device
and instead of people's cell phones going to the tower it
actually bounces off this device and folks' government can get
your cell number and, frankly, know exactly where you are
standing.
And as the chairman mentioned, the potential for mischief
when you think about folks exercising their First Amendment
liberties at some kind of political rally, whether it is on the
right or the left, as the chairman talked about, I think is
scary.
We learned in that hearing also that the IRS was actually
involved in using this technology--the same IRS that a few
years ago targeted people for their political beliefs. We found
that--we found that very scary.
Stop and think then, not just the cell phone now but
actually facial recognition in real-time video, as the chairman
talked about, that is a scary thought. That is 1984 George
Orwell kind of scenario that I think troubles us all.
So I am--I appreciate this hearing. I am glad that we are
going to hear from our witnesses and get a chance to talk about
this important subject and how, as the chairman said, it is
virtually unregulated. But I think that, frankly, needs to
change.
And so with that, Mr. Chairman, I would yield back and I
look forward to hearing from our witnesses in the discussion
that will ensue.
Chairman Cummings. Now I--thank you very much.
Now I want to welcome our witnesses. Ms. Joy Buolamwini--
thank you--founder of the Algorithmic Justice League, and Mr.
Andrew Ferguson, professor of law, University of the District
of Columbia, David A. Clarke School of Law, Ms. Clare Garvie,
senior associate, Center on Privacy and Technology, Georgetown
University Law Center, and Ms. Neema Singh Guliani----
Ms. Guliani. Guliani.
Chairman Cummings. No, you go ahead and say it.
Ms. Guliani. Guliani.
Chairman Cummings. I did the best I could with what I had.
Ms. Guliani. You did good.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much.
Who is a senior legislative counsel to the American Civil
Liberties Union, and Dr. Cedric Alexander, former president,
the National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives.
If you all would please stand and raise your right hand and
I will now swear you in.
[Witness were sworn.]
Chairman Cummings. Let the record show that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative. Thank you, and please be seated.
I remind you that the microphones are extremely sensitive
so please speak directly into them. Make sure it is on when you
speak.
So without objection, your written Statements will be made
part of the record. With that, Ms. Buolamwini, you are now
recognized to give an oral presentation of your testimony.
STATEMENT OF JOY BUOLAMWINI, FOUNDER, ALGORITHMIC JUSTICE
LEAGUE
Ms. Buolamwini. Thank you.
Chairman Cummings, Ranking Member Jordan, and fellow
committee members for the opportunity to testify. I am an
algorithmic bias researcher based at MIT and I have conducted
studies that show some of the largest recorded racial and skin
type biases in AI systems sold by companies like IBM,
Microsoft, and Amazon.
You have already heard facial recognition and related
technologies have some flaws. In one test I ran Amazon
recognition even failed on the face of Oprah Winfrey, labeling
her male.
Personally, I have had to resort to literally wearing a
white mask to have my face detected by some of this technology.
Coding in white face is the last thing I expected to be doing
at MIT, an American epicenter of innovation.
Now, given the use of this technology for mass
surveillance, not having my face detected could be seen as a
benefit. But besides being employed for dispensing toilet
paper, in China the technology is being used to track Uighur
Muslim minorities.
Beyond being abused, there are many ways for this
technology to fail. Among the most pressing are
misidentifications that can lead to false arrest and
accusations.
Just last month in Rhode Island, a Brown University senior
preparing for finals was misidentified as a terror suspect in
the Sri Lanka Easter bombings.
The police eventually corrected the mistake but the damage
was done. She received death threats and her family was put at
risk. Mistaken identity is more than an inconvenience and can
lead to grave consequences.
At a minimum, Congress should pass a moratorium on the
police use of facial recognition as the capacity for abuse,
lack of oversight, and technical immaturity poses too great a
risk, especially for marginalized communities.
The Brown University senior, like me, is a woman of color
under the age of 30. We fall into multiple groups that the
technology repeatedly fails on the most, namely, people with
nonwhite skin, women, and youth.
Due to the consequences of failures of this technology, I
decided to focus my MIT research on the accuracy of facial
analysis systems.
These studies found that for the task of guessing a gender
of a face, IBM, Microsoft, and Amazon had errors of no more
than 1 percent for lighter-skinned men.
In the worst case, those errors rose to over 30 percent for
darker-skinned women. Given such accuracy disparities, I
wondered how large tech companies could have missed these
issues.
It boiled down to problematic data set choices. In
evaluating benchmark data sets from organizations like NIST,
the National Institute for Standards and Technology, I found
some surprising imbalances.
One NIST data set was 75 percent male and 80 percent
lighter skin, or what I like to call a pale male data set.
We cannot adequately evaluate facial analysis technologies
without addressing this critical issue. Moving forward, the
demographic and phenotypic composition of NIST benchmarks must
be made public and updated to better inform decisionmakers
about the maturity of facial analysis technology.
The harvesting of face data also requires guidelines and
oversight. Companies like Facebook have built facial
recognition capabilities by training their systems using our
face data without expressed consent. But regulations make a
difference.
As a result of GDPR, instead of the default, Facebook now
makes facial recognition an opt-in feature for users in Europe.
Americans should have the same assurances that they will not be
subjected to Facebook facial recognition without consent.
No one should be forced to submit their face data to access
widely used platforms, economic opportunity, or basic services.
Just this week, a man sued Uber after having his driver's
account deactivated due to facial recognition failures.
Tenants in Brooklyn are protesting the installation of an
unnecessary face recognition entry system. New research is
showing bias in the use of facial analysis technology for
health care purposes and facial recognition is being sold to
schools, subjecting children to face surveillance.
Our faces may well be the final frontier of privacy.
Congress must act now to uphold American freedoms and rights.
At a minimum, Congress should require all Federal agencies and
organizations using Federal funding to disclose current use of
face-based technologies. We cannot afford to operate in the
dark.
Thank you for the invitation to testify and I welcome your
questions.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much.
Mr. Ferguson?
STATEMENT OF ANDREW G. FERGUSON, PROFESSOR OF LAW, UNIVERSITY
OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, DAVID A. CLARKE SCHOOL OF LAW;
Mr. Ferguson. Chairman Cummings, Ranking Member Jordan, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today.
I am a law professor who studies the intersection of big
data policing and Fourth Amendment freedoms. For the past
decade, I have been studying how new surveillance technologies
shape constitutional rights and police powers, and based on
that work, I have a very simple message for you today.
Congress must act--must act now to regulate facial
recognition technologies because the case by case slow process
of Fourth Amendment litigation is inadequate to address the
rapidly changing world of mass surveillance.
I have five main points.
First, the Fourth Amendment will not save us from the
privacy threat posed by facial recognition technology. The
Supreme Court is making solid strides in trying to update
Fourth Amendment principles in the face of these new
technologies.
But they are chasing an accelerating train and will not
catch up. Only legislation can respond to the real-time threats
of real-time technology.
Second, the Fourth Amendment was never meant to be the sole
source of government regulation. Instead, our entire
constitutional system is premised upon Congress taking a
leading role guided by and only in a rare instance overruled by
our founding Constitution.
Indeed, one Supreme Court justice in particular--Justice
Samuel Alito--has explicitly and repeatedly welcomed
congressional assistance in this area.
In Riley v. California, Justice Alito said it would be very
unfortunate if privacy protection in the 21st century were left
primarily to the Federal courts using the blunt instrument of
the Fourth Amendment.
Third, the few steps the Supreme Court has made on the
subject of locational tracking technologies offer guidance
about how to avoid drafting a law that could get struck down on
Fourth Amendment grounds.
Just last year, the Supreme Court struck down provisions of
the Stored Communications Act in Carpenter v. United States
involving law enforcement acquisition of third party cell site
records.
Such acquisition, held the court, typically requires a
probable cause warrant. So as Congress debates creating
standards to regulate facial recognition technology, this
Fourth Amendment floor should be a baseline consideration.
Fourth, as Congress builds the scaffolding off that
constitutional floor, we need to think about the technology not
just through the lens of today but with an eye toward the
expansion of surveillance technologies that will combine,
aggregate, link, and share data in ways that will reshape the
existing power dynamics of government and the people.
We are not just talking about technological hardware--
cameras, computers, and tools--but systems of surveillance, in
particular, Big Data policing systems that can process, store,
and retrieve information in ways that has never been possible
in past eras.
Legislation must future approve privacy protections with an
eye toward the growing scope, scale, and sophistication of
these systems of surveillance.
Finally, these Fourth Amendment questions must be coupled
with a focus on First Amendment freedoms, civil rights, and
fundamental fairness when it comes to public safety
protections.
The burden of surveillance technology has never been
equally shared across socioeconomic or racial groups.
Surveillance is both a civil rights issue and a civil liberties
issue, and Congress needs to regulate with racial justice in
mind.
In my written testimony, I have carefully laid out the
different types of facial recognition that Congress needs to
address today. Generalized face surveillance, monitoring
without any individualized suspicion, investigative face
recognition targeted with individualized suspicion, and
separately non-law enforcement or emergency uses.
I have also attempted to analyze the Fourth Amendment
implication to both face surveillance and face recognition with
the conclusion, again, that the Fourth Amendment will not save
us.
It will not satisfactorily resolve the core privacy
questions. I would like to emphasize two points here which
arise from my rather lengthy constitutional and legal analysis.
First, Federal legislation should be drafted to ban
generalized face surveillance for all ordinary law enforcement
purposes. Whether stored, real-time, or through third party
image searches, building a system with a potential to
arbitrarily scan and identify individuals without any criminal
suspicion and to discover personal information about their
location, interests, or activities can and should simply be
banned by law.
Second, Federal legislation should authorize use of face
recognition for investigative targeting only on a probable
cause plus standard, requiring an assertion of probable cause
and a sworn affidavit, plus declarations that care was taken to
minimize the unintended collection of other face images and
that proper steps have been taken to document and memorialize
the collection.
This standard would apply to all face recognition including
stored surveillance scans, real-time scans, third party image
scans, and even government-collected image scans.
In my written testimony, I try to defend these
recommendations as a matter of constitutional law and
technological reality, and hope they offer a way forward--a
bipartisan way forward--with specific legislative
recommendations.
Last point. Unregulated facial recognition technology
should not be allowed to continue. It is too powerful, too
chilling, too undermining to principles of privacy, liberty,
and security.
I am happy to answer any questions.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much.
Ms. Garvie?
STATEMENT OF CLARE GARVIE, SENIOR ASSOCIATE, GEORGETOWN
UNIVERSITY LAW CENTER, CENTER ON PRIVACY & TECHNOLOGY
Ms. Garvie. Good morning, Chairman Cummings, Ranking Member
Jordan, and distinguished members of the committee. Thank you
for inviting me to speak to you today.
Face recognition presents unique threats to our civil
rights and liberties. I would like to raise three core points
about face recognition and our constitution that I hope will be
helpful as this committee continues to examine this powerful
technology.
First, face recognition gives law enforcement a power that
they have never had before, and this power raises questions
about our Fourth and First Amendment protections.
Police can't secretly fingerprint a crowd of people from
across the street. They also can't walk through that crowd
demanding that everybody produce their driver's license.
But they can scan their faces remotely and in secret and
identify each person thanks to face recognition technology.
Last year the Supreme Court in Carpenter noted that for the
government to secretly monitor and catalogue every one of our
movements across time and space violates our right to privacy,
protected by the Fourth Amendment.
Face recognition enables precisely this type of monitoring.
But that has not stopped Chicago, Detroit, and other cities
from acquiring and piloting this capability.
The Supreme Court held in NAACP v. Alabama, Talley v.
California, and others that the First Amendment protects the
right to anonymous speech and association.
Face recognition technology threatens to up-end this
protection. Law enforcement agencies themselves have
acknowledged this, cautioning that the technology could be used
as a form of social control, causing people to alter their
behavior in public, leading to self-censorship and inhibition.
But that didn't stop the Baltimore County Police from using
face recognition on the Freddie Gray protests in 2015.
Second, face recognition makes mistakes and its
consequences will be borne disproportionately by African
Americans.
One, communities of color are disproportionately the
targets of police surveillance, face recognition being no
exception. San Diego found that their police used face
recognition up to two and a half times more on African
Americans than on anyone else.
Two, people of color are disproportionately enrolled in
police face recognition systems, thanks to being over
represented in mug shot data bases that the system is run on.
And three, studies continue to show that the accuracy of
face recognition varies depending on the race of the person
being searched. Face recognition makes mistakes and risks
making more mistakes, more misidentifications of African
Americans.
A mistake could mean you are accused of a crime you didn't
commit, like the Brown University student erroneously
identified as one of the Sri Lankan bombers earlier this month.
One of this country's foundational principles is equal
protection under the law. Police use of face recognition may
not comport with this principle.
Third, left unchecked, current police face recognition
practices threaten our due process rights. My research has
uncovered the fact that police submit what can only be
described as garbage data into face recognition systems,
expecting valuable leads in return.
The NYPD submitted a photo of actor Woody Harrelson to find
an unknown suspect in a beer theft. They have submitted photos
of a suspect whose eyes or mouths have been cut and pasted in
from another person's photo, essentially fabricating evidence.
Agencies submit drawings of suspects in places of photos as
well, despite research showing that this will not work. Worse,
officers at times then skip identification procedures and go
straight to arresting someone on the basis of a face
recognition search.
This practice runs counter both to common sense and to the
departments' own policies. And these practices raise serious
concerns about accuracy and the innocence of the person
arrested because of a face recognition search.
But defendants are left in the dark about all of this,
often never told that face recognition was used to help
identify them. These systems produce Brady material--
information that, under our constitutional right to due
process, must be turned over to the defense. But it is not.
For all these reasons, a moratorium on the use of face
recognition by police is both appropriate and necessary. It may
be that we can establish common sense rules that distinguish
between appropriate and inappropriate uses, uses that promote
public safety and uses that threaten our civil rights and
liberties.
But face recognition is too powerful, too pervasive, too
susceptible to abuse to continue unchecked.
Thank you so much for your time. I look forward to
answering questions.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much.
Ms. Guliani?
STATEMENT OF NEEMA SINGH GULIANI, SENIOR LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL,
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
Ms. Guliani. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today
on behalf of the ACLU.
Law enforcement across the country, including the FBI,
continue to expand the use of face recognition without
legislative approval, absent safeguards, and, in most cases, in
secret.
It is time to hit the pause button. Congress must intervene
to stop the use and expansion of this dangerous technology
until we can fully debate what if any uses should be permitted
by law enforcement.
I want to be clear. Use of this technology is already
resulting in very real harms.
Chairman Cummings, in your opening statement you discussed
the use of face recognition at the Freddie Gray protests in
Baltimore and, like you, I share concerns about the impact on
our First Amendment rights.
But it is not the only disturbing example. In Florida,
there is the case of Willie Lynch, an African-American man
arrested and convicted of a $50 drug sale. In his case police
relied on a low confidence match of a poor quality photo that
was secretly taken, and now Mr. Lynch cannot even get key
information about the reliability of the algorithm used in his
case so that he can challenge his conviction.
I want to highlight three reasons why I think it is
particularly urgent that Congress act now and then offer two
recommendations for areas where additional oversight is needed.
So why is this issue so urgent? One, we have never seen
anything like this technology before. The U.S. reportedly has
over 50 million surveillance cameras. This, combined with face
recognition, threatens to create a near constant surveillance
state.
Even more, right now police are often exploiting large-
scale data bases like driver's license repositories for face
matching. This impacts the rights of everyone in these data
bases, and we don't have the option of simply leaving our face
at home to avoid being surveilled.
Two, this technology is more likely to harm vulnerable
communities, including communities of color. Studies have found
that face recognition is less accurate on certain subgroups
including women and people with dark skin.
The ACLU tested Amazon's face recognition product, matching
Members of Congress photos against 25,000 mug shots. There were
28 false matches including Representatives Gomez, DeSaulnier,
and Clay, who sit on this committee.
Forty percent of the false matches were members of color.
But even if this technology was 100 percent perfect, it is not
being used in the perfect world. It is being used in the real
world, and in the real world, poor communities and communities
of color are over policed, they are more likely to be stopped,
arrested, and to have force used against them.
These same disparities are likely to extend to the use of
face recognition and heighten the risks associated for the
errors.
Three, this technology is not being used consistent with
the Constitution. Face recognition is potentially even more
invasive than the warrantless tracking that the Supreme Court
found unconstitutional in the Carpenter case.
Yet, it is being used without a warrant and without other
protections. Additionally, the government is not complying with
its notice obligations. Over a 15-year period where the
Pinellas County Sheriff's Office used face recognition in
investigations, the county public defender reported never once
receiving information as exculpatory evidence, which is
required by the Supreme Court's Brady decision.
As we debate this issue, we must do so with complete facts.
Thus, I urge the committee to investigate two things. One, how
is ICE, the FBI, and other Federal agencies using this
technology?
When it comes to face recognition, the FBI has broken more
promises than it has kept. It has not fully tested the accuracy
of the systems it uses, nor does the agency appear to be
complying with Constitution. Yet, the agency is now reportedly
piloting Amazon's face recognition product.
ICE similarly has met with Amazon representatives and also
appears to use CBP and State Department systems. But we know
little else. The committee should examine these issues.
Two, the committee should look at companies that are
aggressively marketing this technology to the government,
including how accurate their technologies are and what
responsibility they take to prevent abuse.
Companies are market this technology for serious uses like
identifying someone during a police encounter, and we know far
too little. For example, Amazon has even refused to disclose
who it sells this technology to and companies like Microsoft
and FaceFirst have so far not received significant
congressional attention.
There are efforts across the country to stop this dangerous
spread of this technology. San Francisco has banned the use by
city departments and Amazon shareholders are today taking the
unprecedented step of voting on a resolution that would stop
the company from selling this technology to the government and
force it to study the human rights impacts.
Congress should follow these good examples and put in place
a moratorium on law enforcement use. I look forward to
answering your questions.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much.
Mr. Alexander?
STATEMENT OF CEDRIC ALEXANDER, FORMER PRESIDENT, NATIONAL
ORGANIZATION OF BLACK LAW ENFORCEMENT EXECUTIVES
Mr. Alexander. Good morning, Chairman Cummings and Ranking
Member Jordan and----
Chairman Cummings. I am sorry. Doctor. Doctor Alexander.
Mr. Alexander. That is all right, sir.
Chairman Cummings. After attending a number of graduations,
I want to give you all your credit.
Mr. Alexander. Yes, sir. Thank you very much.
Chairman Cummings. All right.
Mr. Alexander. And distinguished members, thank you for me
having the opportunity to be here with you this morning. I am
going to speak from the perspective of a 40-year police
veteran, Chairman, someone who has led organizations both at
the local state and Federal level.
Based on a 2016 investigation by Georgetown Law Center on
privacy and technology, at least a quarter of U.S. law
enforcement agencies use facial recognition searches of their
own data bases or those of other agencies in an attempt to
identify, find, and arrest criminal suspects.
As of 2016, at least 16 states permit the FBI to use the
technology to compare suspects' faces with images of state-
issued IDs. Now, sometimes law enforcement uses facial
recognition prudently and wisely, sometimes recklessly.
On May 16, the Washington Post report that some agencies
use altered photos, forensic artist sketches, and even
celebrity look-alikes for fake facial recognition searches.
Using artificial intelligence to confer on a highly subjective
visual impression a halo of digital certainty is neither fact-
based nor just.
But it is not illegal, for the simple reason that no
Federal laws govern the use of facial recognition. At this
point, law enforcement use of facial recognition is not only
unregulated by law, it operates even without any consensus on
best practices.
Artificial intelligence systems do not invent results from
thin air. They operate from data bases of identified faces in
an attempt--an attempt to match one of those identified faces
with the face of a suspect or subject of interest.
An artificial intelligence system is only as good as its
data bases. Yet, there is currently no standard governing the
content of any agency's facial images data base.
Who is included in it? Who knows. What we do know is that
publicly available facial data bases fail to represent the size
and diversity of the American population and are therefore
inherently biased samples.
Real-time video surveillances can identify criminal
activity in progress. But for the purpose of investigation,
what are the risks to Fourth Amendment guarantees against
unreasonable search and seizure?
And the legal standards should be required prior to facial
recognition search. Answer--we don't know. And before we leave
the Constitution, is there a basis to fear that the combination
of widespread real-time video surveillance and spatial
recognition, AI may infringe upon the First Amendment
protection of free speech, assembly, and association. So far,
this remains unanswered, barely even addressed.
How accurate is facial recognition technology? The answer
is it depends, and that is an unacceptable answer for law
enforcement, the justice system, and the people of this
country.
Facial recognition works best from images and bright even
lighting. Identifying partially turned faces of those poorly
lit is like trying to read a badly smudged latent fingerprint.
Real-time video surveillance often supplies poor quality
images and result in erroneous identifications. One of those
things that artificial intelligence would preclude a racial and
other biases.
In fact, the New York Times reported in February of last
year facial recognition algorithms marketed by major software
suppliers in this country were significantly more likely to
misidentify the gender of black women than white men.
Gender was misidentified up to 1 percent of the time in the
case of light-skinned males and 35 percent of the time in the
case of darker-skinned females.
The problem with artificial--AI skin color bias is serious
enough that a CBS report--news report on May 13 San Francisco
is considering a citywide ban on facial recognition in all
government agencies.
Now, this seems to me to be an overreaction. But
considering the current absence of law, regulations, or even
generally agreed upon best practices, it is certainly an
understandable overreaction.
We human beings are hardwired by evolution to fear and
suspect danger when confronting the unknown. The opaque, even
secretive attitude of law enforcement with regard to facial
recognition plays into that primal fear.
The Georgetown Law Center on Privacy and Technology reports
that defense attorneys have never received face recognition
evidence as part of a Brady disclosure that--which legally
which is that many of us know legally it is required disclosure
of exculpatory or impeaching evidence that may prove the
innocence of a defendant.
Only a very small minority of law enforcement agencies
disclose how, and how frequently, they use facial recognition.
Very few agencies even claim to audit their personnel for
improper use of facial recognition systems.
Indeed, the vast majority of agencies do not have any
internal oversight or accountability mechanisms to detect
misuse. Neither Federal, state, nor most local governments
subject police policies concerning recognition to legislative
or public review.
Secrecy in matters of constitutional rights, human rights,
and civil rights provoke fear and suspicion.
And last, like so many digital technologies, facial
recognition was long ago--not long ago the stuff that we saw as
being science fiction. Today, many of us carry in our pockets
in the form of a smart phone that recognizes our face when we
take it out to make a call or send a text.
It has become a normal part--a normal part of 21st century
living and most Americans have no problem or not trouble
accepting that facial recognition can be a valuable tool in law
enforcement.
But without the judicious and just application of human
intelligence including full disclosure, transparency, public
accountability, prudent legislation and science-based
regulation, the technology of artificial intelligence do not
deserve to be called tools.
They are, instead, blunt instruments and in the worst cases
blunt instruments become weapons.
Thank you very much.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much.
Ms. Hill?
Ms. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all of
you for being here. This is of particular interest to me
because one of the communities in my district is planning on
implementing facial recognition technology in its city within
the coming months with thousands of cameras across the
community.
In Carpenter v. the United States, the court found that
police violated the Fourth Amendment when they collected cell
phone location data without a warrant.
In that case, Justice Alito, in a dissent, wrote that
Congress is a better arbiter of controlling lawful use of new
technologies by police than the courts.
Justice Alito wrote, ``Legislation is much preferable to
the development of an entirely new body of Fourth Amendment
case law for many reasons, including the enormous complexity of
the subject, the need to respond to rapidly changing
technology, and the Fourth Amendment's limited scope.''
Ms. Garvie, can you speak to how quickly facial recognition
technology is developing?
Ms. Garvie. I can. Face recognition is developing
incredibly fast. We must caution, though, against anyone who
says that these algorithms are getting better, which means that
the results of the systems will be getting better, because as
we have seen, it doesn't matter how good an algorithm gets. If
law enforcement agencies put unreliable or just wrong data in,
they will not get reliable results out. These algorithms are
not magic.
Ms. Hill. Thank you.
And Professor Ferguson, do you think the Supreme Court can
rule quickly enough upon the use of these technologies as the
cases arise to thwart constitutionally questionable uses?
Mr. Ferguson. They can, but they won't do as good a job as
Congress regulating it now. Justice Alito has repeatedly made
that claim and I think he is correct to say that this kind of
technology should be regulated first by Congress. The Fourth
Amendment floor will exist and the Supreme Court will address
it. But this body has the primary responsibility to regulate in
this field.
Ms. Hill. From your testimonies and your answers right now,
it sounds like there is broad agreement that Federal
legislation is necessary in order to prevent a confusing and
potentially contradictory patchwork of regulation of government
use of facial recognition technology.
Just last week, San Francisco passed an ordinance barring
police and other government agencies from using facial
recognition technology. San Francisco's decision has attracted
attention across the country and could be followed by moves
from other local governments and at the same time we have local
governments that are adopting this.
The drafter of the San Francisco ordinance is pushing for
additional bans in Berkeley and Oakland and a proposed
Massachusetts state bill would ban government use of facial
recognition systems.
At the same time, many states have also partnered with the
FBI to grant access to their collection of driver's license
photos for use in face image searches. Needless to say, the
maze of recognition across cities and states can be confusing
to navigate.
Citizens may be afforded certain protections from
warrantless surveillance through the use of facial recognition
in one state but then drive several miles and be subject to a
completely different regime.
Ms. Guliani, can you discuss the range of different
standards we see across states?
Ms. Guliani. I think by and large, when we are hearing from
communities it is with a great deal of anxiety about face
recognition. When communities know that this is being used,
they are raising concerns that it has been done without
community input, without clear rules, and without the right
standards to protect First Amendment and other--you know, and
other core values.
So I think the trend is definitely in that direction. But I
think, you know, one of the important things of this hearing is
to ask the questions and have the debate, and until we do that
we just shouldn't be using that technology for all of the
concerns it raises.
Ms. Hill. So if we are talking about a local government or
another company or agency that is looking to implement
something like this, what advice would you give at this point,
given the lack of guidance--and I guess this question goes to
all of you--and what recommendations do you have for us in this
body to move quickly and to be able to set sort of a baseline
of--you know, how local governments should operate at this
stage?
Ms. Guliani. I mean, the advice I would have is to not use
the technology until there has been a legislative process and
clear standards and rules. And you have seen this sort of pop
up in a lot of cities around the country. It is called
Community Control Over Policing Surveillance, right.
This idea that we shouldn't put the cart before the horse.
We should study the harms before you rule something out. That
would be my greatest recommendation and I think that we should
do that federally as well with this technology.
Ms. Hill. Anyone else want to weigh in?
Ms. Garvie. I would add that most state and local law
enforcement face recognition systems have been purchased using
Federal grant money, which means Congress has incredible power
to actually decide how much transparency goes into implementing
these technologies and what rules are in place as well.
Mr. Ferguson. I think Congress has a role to set the floor
and allow local governments and cities to build off that so you
can have places like San Francisco. I think we have seen real
leadership in local cities about democratic control over
surveillance technologies.
But I think that that is no reason not--to not have
Congress also act.
Ms. Hill. Thank you. And I know I am out of time, but will
you be able to provide us with recommendations for that floor
as kind of a follow-up to this?
Mr. Ferguson. Yes. I attempted to do so in my written
testimony and would be happy to work with the committee, going
forward.
Ms. Hill. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much.
Mr. Jordan?
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Guliani, facial recognition system makes mistakes and
those mistakes disproportionately impact African Americans and
others of color. A facial recognition system appears to me to
be a direct violation of Americans' First Amendment and Fourth
Amendment liberties and a facial recognition system also seems
to me to threaten, as Ms. Garvie said, Americans' due process
rights.
And all three of those things--all that happens in a
country with 50 million surveillance cameras. Is that accurate?
Ms. Guliani. That is correct.
Mr. Jordan. How does the FBI get the initial data base in
the first place?
Ms. Guliani. So the FBI has massive data bases and they use
external partners as well. So one of the things they do is they
use state driver's license data bases. I think, you know, up to
18 states have been reportedly used by the FBI. They use
passport photos.
Mr. Jordan. Who made the decision to allow the FBI to
access those 18 or 19 states' DMV data bases?
Ms. Guliani. Apparently there were conversations and
memorandums between those states. But in one state, for example
in Vermont, it was actually against state law and ultimately
the attorney general had to suspend that use.
Mr. Jordan. So my question is, again, did the state
legislature and the Governor actually pass legislation saying
it was okay for the FBI to access every single person in their
state who has a driver's license? Did that happen in those 18
or 19 states that gave that permission to the FBI?
Ms. Guliani. No, and that is the problem. This was all in
secret, essentially.
Mr. Jordan. So some unelected person at the FBI talks to
some unelected person at the state level and they say yes, go
ahead--here is--in the case of Ohio we have got 11 million
people. Most of them drive. Here is 10 million folks who you
can now have their--have this data base?
Ms. Guliani. Right, and the people who wanted a driver's
license many times didn't know these systems were operating
either.
Mr. Jordan. That was my next point. And the individual
themselves did not get permission. Is that right?
Ms. Guliani. That is exactly right.
Mr. Jordan. So the individual didn't get permission. Were
there any kind of notifications at the time they go in to get
their picture and get their driver's license, oh, at my four
years I got to get my new tag, my--or my new license--any type
of information given to them, oh, by the way, this may go to
the FBI?
Ms. Guliani. You know, I think by and large people have
been unaware of these systems and how they operate.
Mr. Jordan. So the individual is unaware. The people they
elect to represent them in their state government did not make
the decision. That information is going to the FBI, which
scares me, particularly in the context of--I mean, you can use
your examples.
Some people would say do you really want J. Edgar Hoover
having this capability. I would argue today do we really want
someone like Peter Strzok with the things we have learned that
he engaged in and the bias that he had, and no one--no one in
an elected position made the determination?
Ms. Guliani. That is right.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Now, when the FBI has this and they are
going to access this data base, what kind of standard do they
have to put in place before they can access it? Is there any
type of probable cause?
Any type of--any type of process, due process, whatever you
want to call it? Anything they go through before they can
access the data base?
Ms. Guliani. They don't have to get a warrant or meet a
probable cause warrant standard, and I think there are
questions that they aren't even notifying people in cases where
it is relevant in their case.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Fifty million cameras, violation of
people's First Amendment, Fourth Amendment liberties, due
process liberties, all kinds of mistakes.
Those mistakes disproportionately impact African Americans,
and no due process. No elected officials gave the okay from the
states for the Federal Government or the FBI to use it.
Does the FBI share any of this information with other
Federal agencies?
Ms. Guliani. They have partnerships with Federal agencies,
for example, like the State Department to scan through their
passport photos.
But, frankly, we don't know very much about how other
Federal agencies are using----
Mr. Jordan. Do we know if the IRS has access to this kind
of information? Can they--do they have any kind of partnership
with the FBI or any other Federal agency to access this data?
Ms. Guliani. I don't know the answer to that question with
regards to the IRS.
Mr. Jordan. That scares me--scares me as well.
So I guess the fundamental question is I think you are all
there. There should probably be some kind of--some kind of
restriction.
Mr. Ferguson, I think you have said we should just ban it,
right?
Mr. Ferguson. I think we should ban face surveillance,
which is the use of these technologies without any kind of
individualized suspicion and I think there should be regulation
about face recognition technologies in certain ways.
But I do think that there are members of this panel who
believe that at this moment there should be a moratorium, and,
again, my position is if we are not going to regulate we should
push the pause button on this technology now because it is as
dangerous as you are expressing.
Mr. Jordan. Seems to me it is time for--it is time for a
time out. Time out. Fifty million cameras, real concerns. I
guess what troubles me too is just the fact that no one in an
elected position made a decision on the fact.
These 18 states--I think the chairman said this is more
than half the population of the country. That is scary,
particularly in light of what we see. You got to remember the
framework.
It was just, what, eight years ago the IRS targeted people
for their political belief. They did it. We know what--you
can--it doesn't matter what side of the political spectrum you
are on. This should concern us all and this is why I appreciate
the chairman's work on this issue and the bipartisan nature of
this hearing.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Cummings. Just to clarify what the ranking member
said, Ms. Buolamwini, you were recommending a moratorium. Is
that right?
Ms. Buolamwini. Yes, I was.
Chairman Cummings. Until what? Until what? Until we can
pass legislation? Is that it?
Ms. Buolamwini. Until there is sufficient scientific
evidence that shows that these technologies have reached
maturity, because with what we know with human-centric computer
vision systems, as they are based on statistical methods, there
is no way that the technology will be 100 percent flawless and
there are tradeoffs that need to be made.
Yet the academic research just doesn't yet exist to say
this is what it looks like for it to meet meaningful
thresholds.
Chairman Cummings. All right.
Yes, Ms. Norton?
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for this
hearing.
I must say I think we are already a little bit pregnant and
I agree with the ranking member, and we have got these cameras
everywhere. We are a little late in saying, well, you really
shouldn't be surveilling people when there is nowhere that we
don't surveile people.
I thank Ms. Guliani. I remember the ACLU when we first
began to surveile people raise the issue of, you know, is this
really constitutional? Is this really right? I don't know if it
was--it was ever challenged and got to court.
I must say this takes me back to my days as a law professor
because all kinds of hypotheticals occur to me.
I got to ask you, Mr. Ferguson--maybe Ms. Guliani--is there
a difference between misidentifying people using facial
technology and misidentifying people which happens all the time
so that the police draw in people based on people saying, that
is who I saw?
What is--what is the difference? How are we to argue that
in court?
Ms. Guliani. Sure. I mean, I think one of--the big
difference is--differences is with an eye witness you can put
them on the stand and you can say, look, were you 800 feet
away? Were you intoxicated?
With algorithms, defendants aren't getting information
about the algorithm. They can't put them on the stand in the
same way and a lot of times this technology is being presented
as if it is perfect when it is not.
Ms. Norton. Let me ask you about police encounters. Suppose
the police stop you for speeding. Now, there is some probable
cause there. He saw you. You can contest it.
Can he put your photo in a data base that the police have
having already had probable cause to stop you? Can he take your
picture and say, okay, you can show up in court but this is for
our data base?
Mr. Ferguson. Right now, the police officer can because
there is no regulations on any of this. The concern is that
that may not be the way we want to go forward and might be a
reason to actually have this kind of regulation.
That is a use. There are companies that literally sell that
technology for that reason and it is, again, a reason to act.
Ms. Norton. I raise that--I raise that hypothetical--a law
professor's hypothetical because I think we are already doing
what we are already afraid of and that we ought to look very
closely at regulation. Watch out because you will be regulating
stuff that is already done by law enforcement and that nobody--
and that we have given a pass to.
I wonder, Professor Ferguson, if you have any sense of how,
particularly since there has been recent Supreme Court--Supreme
Court decision on cell phone location data, any sense how
today's conservative Supreme Court would rule on facial
recognition technology.
Mr. Ferguson. I think in certain uses when you are talking
about a system of cameras that can track where you go, the
principles that the Supreme Court, including Chief Justice
Roberts, was concerned about, this idea of tracking, this idea
of aggregating personal information, this idea of the
permanence.
So you can go back and look and see where people have gone
because this footage is available and you can track where you
have been at every moment. This idea that we don't like
arbitrary police powers or permanent police powers all speaks
to the fact that the Supreme Court, if faced with the right
case, might see this as a Fourth Amendment violation.
Unfortunately, these cases take a long time to get there.
Unfortunately, that it would be, you know, relying on the
Fourth Amendment may not be the place we want to be and I think
that Congress has the opportunity to act now to sort of
forestall our reliance on any number of the Supreme Court
justices.
Ms. Norton. Particularly in light of the issues raised by
the ranking member, I mentioned that this monitoring--he
mentioned this monitoring by facial recognition has been done
really on a mass scale over time and we have let his happen.
Can this--do you think that there is a violation of the
Fourth Amendment if in doing the very monitoring that is done
now, for example, if you go--if we have inauguration on the
Mall, that monitoring is done all the time. That is monitoring
or the use of technology on a mass scale.
If it is done over time and it is a part of regular
surveillance for the safety of those involved, do you think the
court would see that monitoring over time as unconstitutional?
Chairman Cummings. The gentlelady's time has expired but
you may answer the question.
Ms. Guliani. I mean, I think the Supreme Court's Carpenter
decision is applicable to some of the uses of face recognition.
Like when you mentioned tracking people over long periods of
time, I think in that case the court said that warrantless
tracking of that nature was unconstitutional and I think that
there are also significant First Amendment concerns, for
example, if there was a policy of identifying every single
protestor every time they went to a protest, right.
I do think that there is strong case law that would raise
constitutional concerns with that. But, fundamentally, you
know, the Carpenter case was decided two decades after we all
started using cell phones.
So it takes time for these things to work through the
system and it is harder when people aren't receiving notice so
that they can raise these concerns to judges.
Chairman Cummings. Mr. Alexander, I noticed that you were
trying to answer the question, too. Were you trying to answer
the question?
Mr. Alexander. Yes. To Congresswoman Norton, you know, the
question you raise is a very good one so I am going to respond
to it from a law enforcement perspective.
Ms. Norton. Thank you.
Mr. Alexander. For me, and I am quite sure for many of my
colleagues across the country, this technology that we are
referring to can be very valuable in terms of keeping our
communities and keeping our country safe.
There are opportunities for that. The problem that has
occurred it is kind of like the horse that have already gotten
out the gate and now we are trying to catch up with it, because
if you think about the vast utilization of facial recognition
that is going on and the questions that we are posing today are
going to come with a great deal of challenges.
I kind of cringe in some ways when I hear my colleagues
here respond to maybe there should be a complete halt--a
moratorium on facial recognition. I am not sure if that is the
answer.
What I am more concerned about is the failed use and the
misuse of the technology and how do we acknowledge that and how
to we differentiate between when it is being used correctly and
what it is not.
But here is the problem I have for policing in this country
as it relates to this technology. The police end up being the
end user of a technology that is created by some software
technology firm somewhere.
I go out. I use the technology. If I am not properly
trained, if I am not properly supervised, if there is no
policy, there is no transparency that I am sharing with people
in my community about how and when this technology is being
utilized and then something goes awry, then I, the end user--
that police chief, that police department--end up being the bad
guy, and God knows that is one thing that policing don't need,
considering the environment that we are already in trying to
build relationships between police and community.
So there is a place for this technology. But I think, more
importantly, to me and I am quite sure for many of my
colleagues that are out there is that I need to be able to make
sure that I can train my people adequately.
These software companies need to not just pass this
technology to me; I need to be sure that my folks are trained.
There is ethics. There is morals that goes along with it. There
is policy. There is standards. There is good practices that we
know and we feel good about.
But I am not certain if a total moratorium in light of the
fact that we still live in an environment where we are under a
great deal of threat we still can utilize this technology. But
it has to be in a way right now how do we do that while work
trying to develop some standards.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much.
Mr. Cloud?
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Chairman, let
me first of all say thank you for holding this hearing. This is
an extremely important topic and the concerns the ranking
member laid out I couldn't have said them any better, the
concerns of information being shared without any sort of
accountability by people who represent--who are elected to
represent them.
This is scary. I mean, we heard the stories about China,
how China is already using this technology to target Muslims
and Christians. We have known our own abuses recently in our
own government of how agencies have gone--as was mentioned, the
IRS, FBI recently.
I mean, this is real scary stuff. Dr. Alexander, I liked
your analogy of the horse and getting out of the gate too
quick. I am of the tendency of let us air on the side of
liberty while we don't know what is going on here.
But in your thoughts, and maybe, Mr. Ferguson, if you can
add to this, when would be limited appropriate use and at what
point do we need to have the technology developed?
Mr. Alexander. Well, I mean, for me, you know, that is a
very tough question. But I think this hearing and the hearings
that are going to follow, and maybe even some smaller sessions
particularly with our Federal law enforcement, i.e., FBI, who
utilizes this technology to fight off potential threats on a
much larger scale, I think when you start talking about local
policing in and of itself I think to have an opportunity to
talk to some of the chiefs across the country in terms of how
they are using this technology and how they think it could best
benefit them if we can develop some limited framework in which
they can operate from and maybe not as vast that it is now
because it certainly is a serious issue and concern and problem
that we have.
It is not as transparent as it should be and it certainly
is going to create a great deal of angst and anger among
Americans in this country and particularly people who are--who
are--their First and Fourth Amendments are violated.
Mr. Cloud. Sure.
Mr. Alexander. And we are going to find ourselves in this
kind of position where we don't want to be. So I think this is
going to require further conversation certainly beyond today.
But it is something that we have to act on now in a temporary
basis.
But I am not sure if a total moratorium on this is going to
be the answer to us because we still have a homeland we have to
protect and there is still some value in facial recognition.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you.
Mr. Ferguson?
Mr. Ferguson. In my written testimony I lay out what I
think can be the way to regulate this, which involves a
probable cause plus standards sort of based on the Wiretap Act,
requiring an assertion of probable cause and a sworn affidavit
to be able to use and search the data base for facial
recognition, care to minimize the unintended collection because
there would be other faces in this, the memorialization and
documentation of how it is used so you could answer those
questions about whether it had been used and by whom, and steps
to make sure that there was a process in place to see what had
happened and be able to check if there are abuses.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you.
Ms. Buolamwini--did I say that right?
Ms. Buolamwini. Yes, you did.
Mr. Cloud. Okay. You mentioned Facebook in your remarks and
I find that interesting because I am extremely concerned about
the government having this kind of unchecked ability. I would
be curious to get your thoughts of corporations having this
same sort of ability.
And also, Ms. Garvie and Ms. Guliani, if you want to speak
to that, too.
Ms. Buolamwini. Absolutely. So you are looking at a
platform that has over 2.6 billion users and over time Facebook
has been able to amass enormous facial recognition capabilities
using all of those photos that we tag without our permission.
What we are seeing is that we don't necessarily have to
accept this as the default. So in the EU where GDPR was passed
because there is a provision for biometric data consent, they
actually have an option where you have to opt in.
Right now we don't have that in the U.S. and that is
something we could immediately require today.
Ms. Guliani. I mean, just to add to that, it is certainly
something where Federal legislation is needed. We can look to
the state of Illinois for sort of biometric laws. They have a
law on the books requiring consent to use biometric
information.
But very importantly, they also have a private right of
action. So if Facebook or any other company violates my rights
and uses my face image without my permission, I can take them
to court, and that is a really important accountability
mechanism.
Ms. Buolamwini. The other point to bring up is the fact
that oftentimes data is collected for one use and then ends up
in another scenario.
So a recent example of this is with Ever, a photo sharing
company, where users uploaded images of their kids and, you
know, graduations and so forth, and later on they found out
that those photos were used to train facial recognition that
the company now sold as Ever AI.
So we definitely need data protections when it comes to the
use, disclosure, and consent around biometric face data.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Cummings. Mr. Clay?
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank the witnesses
for being here.
You know, the use of facial recognition technology has
already generated a heated debate on whether it is a necessary
tool to combat crime or an unlawful breach of privacy.
The technology identifies people's faces and runs them
against a watch list of images which can include suspects,
missing people, and persons of interest. But privacy
campaigners have described the technology as Orwellian.
I was allegedly misidentified using this technology along
with 27 other Members of Congress--disproportionately black and
brown members.
So I have questions about the accuracy that protections
against misidentification and, obviously, civil liberty issues.
Ms. Guliani, I want to hear more from you about the testing
of Amazon's recognition software. The ACLU alleges Amazon
software incorrectly matched Members of Congress, identifying
them as people who had been arrested for a crime.
If Members of Congress can be falsely matched with a mug
shot data base, what should be the concern for the average
American about the use of facial recognition?
Ms. Guliani. Sure. I mean, with regards to the tests, I
think that one of the most interesting thing was that running
the test cost us less than a large pizza. It was about $12.
And we took photos of Members of Congress, really ideal
conditions, right--portraits--matched them against mug shots
and we found those 28 matches. These were independently
verified.
And I think that one of the things that is important to
note is it is not just our test. It is other tests that have
noted similar problems with Amazon software and other face
recognition algorithms.
Now, we just ran a test. But imagine this in the real
world. Imagine you are arrested or convicted or you are pulled
over by police and you are--they say, we identified you as this
person, you don't even have the information to say, look, you
are wrong--the algorithm got it wrong, and that is really the
nightmare scenario that we are worried about and why we think
that, you know, the prudent thing to do would be to hit the
pause button.
Let us get the information out there, understand the
dangers, understand whether this technology is really the
helpful--the way people say it is and then let legislatures
like this decide.
Mr. Clay. Let me ask you, has the ACLU shared its
methodology on data sets used for the test of Amazon's
recognition that resulted in false matches with criminal mug
shots?
Ms. Guliani. We had it independently verified by a Stanford
professor. We elected not to release the mug shot photos for
the privacy of those individuals. We didn't want to have their
photos, you know, in newspapers, et cetera, when they were not,
you know, public figures.
Ms. Buolamwini. But I can say the Algorithmic Justice
League, we tested Amazon recognition using the same methodology
that we tested IBM, Microsoft, Face++.
Our data set is publicly available under the right license.
Our methodology came from my MIT thesis and was available over
a year before we tested Amazon and also found that they had
false--they had error rates of over 30 percent for darker-
skinned females and zero percent error rates for lighter-
skinned men.
So it is the case that there is verifiable research that
shows you have issues with Amazon recognition.
Mr. Clay. And has any of that been corrected in the lab or
through their technology?
Ms. Buolamwini. So what we found with the first studies we
did of IBM and Microsoft is that they did improve their
accuracy disparities. But even when they approved they still
performed better on men's faces than women's faces. They still
performed better on lighter skin than darker skin. So even when
it is closing we still see a bias.
Mr. Clay. And, Doctor, you know what the collateral damage
can be through misidentification and I have fought for years to
free people from prison who were wrongfully convicted and that
is where this is going because of lax rules and regulations and
technology.
Ms. Buolamwini. Absolutely, and we don't even have
reporting requirements. At least in the U.K. where they have
done pilots of facial recognition technology, there are
reported results and you have false positive match rates of
over 90 percent. There is a Big Brother Watch U.K. report that
came out that showed more than 2,400 innocent people had their
faces misidentified.
And so this is building on what ACLU said, right. We
already see this in the real world where performance metrics
are required. We don't have any kind of requirements in the
United States.
Mr. Clay. All in the name of profits.
Mr. Chairman, my time is up. I yield back.
Chairman Cummings. Before we go to Mr. Massie, let me say
this. As I listen to this testimony I am troubled by something
you said, Dr. Alexander.
It seems like we have a defective system. It is defective,
and it--and so when you say that you are not--that it has good
purposes, it also can be extremely harmful.
And when you balance people's rights, that is a problem. I
mean, so I don't know--in the law we constantly are trying to
do a balancing act with law enforcement and everything.
But when you guys have a product that is defective and
reading wrong, that is a problem, and it has a chilling effect
on our total population. I just want you mull over that because
I am going to come back to you when I have my question.
Mr. Alexander. Yes, I would like to respond to that.
Chairman Cummings. Yes. I am going to come back to you.
Mr. Massie?
Mr. Massie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Supreme Court case, Brady v. Maryland, held that the
government is required to release to the defense potentially
exculpatory evidence that they come upon when prosecuting the
case and I am worried that facial recognition technology
presents a threat to that.
For instance, Ms. Guliani, if multiple photos are returned
during a search of the data base to the FBI and they narrow it
down to a single suspect, are they--does Brady require the FBI
to share those other photos that were similar to the suspect in
question?
Ms. Guliani. Yes. I mean, certainly it could be exculpatory
evidence to know, for example, that an algorithm has a
reliability problem or that an algorithm returned, you know,
similar photos with--indicating they can be the person.
That could support a defense to say, look, I have been
misidentified--there were other people who were similarly
tagged by the system.
And I think that one of the concerns is that we are not
seeing Brady disclosures and we are not really seeing notice.
The FBI has used this stuff hundreds and thousands of times.
There aren't thousands of cases in the court where we see
defendants being informed about this. So judges are not having
even the opportunity to rule on some of these very critical
issues.
Mr. Massie. Well, one of the concerning things too is that
when a human makes a identification or a false identification
you can cross-examine the human--were they drunk, was it dark
outside, how was their vision, do they have prescription
glasses, were they wearing them--all of those things. But you
can't cross-examine an algorithm.
Ms. Garvie or Ms. Guliani or Mr. Ferguson--anybody here--
has the government been providing descriptions of how the
algorithms work to the defense? Anybody?
Ms. Garvie. They have--they have not. In speaking to public
defenders around the country we have found that they will
usually not know if the algorithm was used in the first
instance.
Law enforcement agencies don't typically have access to the
training data or to how the algorithms work as well because
these are private companies that have developed these systems,
and it is considered a trade secret. So it may be that the law
enforcement agency says they can't turn over. So we have not
seen public defenders having access.
On your point about Brady, face recognition systems are
designed to return multiple matches. The Washington County
Sheriff's Office gave an example where a person--a person with
a 70 percent confidence was the person they ended up charging,
even though the algorithm thought somebody else was at a 90
percent confidence.
Essentially, the algorithm was playing witness, saying that
I am 90 percent confident it is this other guy, and yet the
person who I am 70 percent confident is the guy was the one who
was charged. That it quintessentially Brady evidence.
Mr. Massie. I have got a couple minutes left. I want to
pivot a little bit. We have talked about in the cases where
facial recognition doesn't work, and it is very concerning,
especially when it disproportionately affects minorities when
these algorithms are defective.
But I am worried about the case where they work 100 percent
of the time where there are mistakes and nobody gets left out.
Ms. Garvie, can you speak briefly to how China is using real-
time facial surveillance?
Ms. Garvie. Sure. We see China as a bit of a roadmap of
what is possible with this technology in the absence of rules,
and in the absence of rules this is a system where everybody is
enrolled in the back end and there are enough cameras to allow
law enforcement to track where somebody is anytime they show
their face in public, to upload their photo and see where they
have been over the last two weeks, be that public rallies or an
Alcoholic Anonymous meeting or a rehab clinic.
That information is now available at the click of a button
or the upload of a photo. That is what face recognition looks
like with no rules.
Mr. Massie. So do we have any evidence that any U.S. police
departments or Federal agencies are doing real-time monitoring
of events or large events or using streams from cameras and
monitoring them today?
Ms. Garvie. Our research has found that at least two major
jurisdictions--Chicago and Detroit--have purchased this
capability and have paid to keep--to maintain it.
Chicago says they do not use it. Detroit did not deny that
they were using it. Theirs is designed to operate with Project
Green Light, which is specifically locations like, yes, gas
stations and liquor stores but also churches and clinics and
schools.
Mr. Massie. Is there a minimum threshold of evidence or
suspicion that is required before your face becomes one of the
faces searched in real time or in one of these data bases--I
mean, presently?
Ms. Garvie. In no--in no jurisdiction there are rules
around who ends up in the data base with few exceptions. In
Missouri, for example, DMV records cannot be included. But, by
and large, there are no rules around this.
Mr. Massie. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back
the balance of my time.
Chairman Cummings. Mr. Rouda?
Mr. Rouda. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I agree with you, Mr. Chairman. This is a difficult
discussion as we try to balance our private rights with the
potential proper use of facial recognition technology.
I want to focus on three different areas, and the first one
is getting the sense from the panel here are there some of you
who believe that we just outright need to stop this technology
from being used versus legislation on proper use?
A second area I would like to talk about it is if we do
agree proper use makes sense, some sort of definition around
that for law enforcement versus private use, and then finally
maybe talking about if there are violations of that proper use
what we would consider appropriate penalties.
So let us start with that first area, and I ask the whole
panel is there anybody on the panel that flat out says that we
need to stop this technology in its tracks as is, period?
Ms. Buolamwini. Well, it definitely depends on the kind of
technology we are talking about. So we not only have facial
recognition being used by law enforcement. We have broader
facial analysis capacities now being used in employment.
A company called Higher View purports to do video analysis
on candidates for a job to pick up verbal and nonverbal cues
and they train on the current top performers within a
particular company.
There is a case where an Uber driver just had their account
deactivated because Uber uses a face verification system to
determine if you are actually the driver, and just last year
you had transgender folks who were also kicked out of Uber
because of these misidentifications.
So that is a use case that is beyond law enforcement where
I wouldn't necessarily say it is a flat out ban. But we need to
be very specific about which use cases we are talking about.
For law enforcement, as it stands right now I absolutely
think there should be a moratorium because the technology
hasn't reached maturity and we don't have regulations.
Mr. Rouda. Did somebody else want to speak to this as well?
Ms. Guliani. Certainly. I mean, I think I would say two
things. One, there are going to be uses of this technology
where we are going to want a flat-out ban, right--real-time
tracking, use in protests, use in sensitive areas.
And two, I think to determine what, if any, uses are
permissible, we need the facts. You know, we referenced a U.K.
study where there was a 95 percent inaccuracy rate. To me, that
is a very relevant question as to whether we want this type of
technology being used by law enforcement at all.
So until we have those facts, I think it is hard to answer
all the questions.
Mr. Rouda. And that is a fair statement. My concern is that
bad actors are always going to use the tools that they can
access, and if they can access these tools even though we want
to prohibit it from happening, they are going to access it.
So my sense is better that we need to figure out what is
the proper legislation for proper use of it and if we do move
to that question--proper use, law enforcement versus private--
law enforcement has been using digital enhancement of photos
for years and years and I don't think anybody is suggesting
that that is stepping over the line. There was mistakes that
are made all the time as well.
And so my question is how do we make sure that law
enforcement, in using this technology, is using it in the
proper way?
Mr. Alexander. Well, let me respond to that, and I think to
your question--your first, second, and third question, quite
frankly, because there is a string that goes between them--and
it goes back to what I was saying at the beginning of this is
there may be a place for law enforcement to be able to utilize
technology--this technology.
The problem is, is that the technology is developed by a
software company. It is sold to a police department without
proper training, without proper understanding by that
department the utilization of it, and the unintended
consequences.
That becomes a real problem. We have to be able to train.
We have to be able to understand the technology. We know that
this technology has been given to police and when police were
asked to describe how it is used they couldn't do so. That is a
problem.
And therefore, no, they should not be utilizing this
technology. But going back to a question that was asked a
moment ago, are there--are there times or have there been
opportunities when this technology has proven to be valuable
for law enforcement to keep communities safe.
The problem is here is that we are trying to keep the
communities safe, at the same time trying not to violate
people's First and Fourth Amendment rights.
They will rub up against each other and we somehow have to
figure this out. But I don't think you can do one--just throw
one out and just get--you can't throw the baby out with the
bath-water is what I am trying to say.
Mr. Rouda. Another quick question. Does this--does this
technology--we see that there are mistakes. Is there a greater
propensity for mistakes with the current technology than
previous technologies, whether it is artist's renderings or
photographs in general?
Ms. Guliani. I think the concerns are different. You know,
we have talked about how law enforcement can identify you from
far away, right, in a traditional scenario where somebody asks
me for my ID felt that it was harassment. I knew somebody was
asking me for that information.
I could have raised a complaint. And, frankly, the
community would know and be able to raise that with their
elected leaders.
I think the secrecy of this technology is different. The
scale is different. The cheapness is different. And so we have
to address, I think, those fundamental threats before we can
sort of talk about what are or aren't good uses.
Mr. Rouda. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you.
Mr. Comer? Mr. Comer?
Mr. Comer. I just wanted to ask a couple of questions about
facial recognition technology reforms. First question to
Professor Ferguson. Should states and localities be able to
enact their own facial recognition technology laws?
Mr. Ferguson. I think the Federal Government should set the
floor and I think that states and local governments can raise
that floor and create more protections.
Mr. Comer. Okay.
Ms. Guliani, you testified that state and local governments
have taken steps to ban or limit facial recognition. Could you
speak on what those efforts look like across the spectrum?
Ms. Guliani. Sure. In San Francisco, there was a recent
vote to ban the use of face recognition by city governments. In
Washington and Massachusetts, there have been--there has been
legislation introduced that would put in place a moratorium to
study the technology and not permit use until that study is
complete.
And there are 13 localities that have put in place measures
that essentially require that before surveillance technology is
deployed, like face recognition, there has to be a public
process. It has to be voted on by the legislature and there
need to be assessments to look at the privacy and civil
liberties impact.
Mr. Comer. So does all the panel agree that the Federal
Government needs to set the floor before states and localities
create their own rules and regulations with respect to this? Is
that a consensus among everyone on the panel? Yes or no.
Mr. Ferguson. I am not sure before. I think they both need
to act because it is that serious. Both states and locals and
the Federal Government need to act quickly.
Mr. Comer. Okay. All right.
Mr. Chairman, I would yield the balance of my time to the
ranking member, Mr. Jordan.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
So we have got 50 million cameras in the country, a system
that, as we said earlier, is--makes mistakes all the time.
Those mistakes disproportionately hurt people of color.
Violates First Amendment--I think violates First Amendment
liberties, Fourth Amendment liberties, due process standards.
No elected officials are weighing in on this so that is
sort of the list. But then I also think there is this chilling
impact, this intimidation concept that is out there, and it
seems to me this is in some ways--maybe I will give this
question to you, Professor.
NAACP v. Alabama where, you know, disclosure--because this
is going to be, like, constant disclosure. That, to me, as a
lawyer, law professor, am I reaching or is there similarities
to the whole intimidation that takes place when disclosure
happens and this is going to be, in effect, a constant
disclosure of what the heck you are up to?
Mr. Ferguson. I think there is nothing more American than
the freedom of expression and the freedom of association, and I
think what we have seen is that this kind of technology can
chill both of those--the ability to go out and protest in
Baltimore or anywhere else, the ability to support an
incumbent--you know, a political candidate who wants to go
against--I mean, an upstart political candidate who wants to go
against the incumbent.
It is going to chill speech. It is going to chill
association and we are not going to be able to act in ways that
we used to be able to act with anonymity.
Mr. Jordan. Would you say it is--would you say it is just
as bad as when the state wanted to require this organization to
disclose its members for intimidation reasons? We all know that
was the case. That this is, in effect, the same darn thing?
Mr. Ferguson. It is the same First Amendment problem, yes.
Mr. Jordan. Ms. Guliani, do you agree?
Ms. Guliani. Yes. I mean, I think that one of the
fundamental concerns that we need to address is I don't think
any of us want to live in a world where there is a camera on
every street corner that says, you know, who you are and maybe
your emotional state, right, and how do we prevent that
surveillance buildup so that it doesn't look like some of the
uses in China.
And whatever, I think, framework is put in place if there
is a framework put in place I think needs to address those very
real concerns.
And from my opinion, we don't have the solutions and we
shouldn't be using the technology until we can be assured that
people's rights can be protected.
Mr. Jordan. Yes. Let us--let us at least have a debate with
people who were actually elected versus unelected people just
deciding.
Again, Mr. Chairman, I just want to say thank you. I got to
run to something else here. But I want to thank our panel and I
want to thank you again for this hearing. We do need to do
something and I would say sooner rather than later.
Mr. Meadows. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Jordan. Be happy to yield to my colleague.
Mr. Meadows. So because I am going to run to the same
meeting, let me just tell you, you have now hit the sweet spot
that brings progressives and conservatives together, and I--
and, you know, and when you have a diverse group on this
committee as diverse as you might see on the polar ends, I am
here to tell you we are serious about this and let us get
together and work on legislation.
And it is--the time is now before it gets out of control,
and I yield back.
I thank the chairman.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much, and we are--I think
that we can get something done in a bipartisan way. That is
music to my ears and I think it is a very serious issue. Thank
you very much.
Mr. Connolly for a consent request?
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would ask unanimous consent that the prepared testimony
of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation be
entered into the record.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much.
Mr. Welch?
Mr. Welch. Thank you, and I want to thank the witnesses.
You know, oftentimes when there is a technology, as you
pointed out, it will be used. However, the users see it to
advance whatever their cause is, without any public input or
any public limitations.
And you have been doing the hard work while Congress has
really not been paying much attention. So I just want to say
thank you for the important work that you have done.
Ms. Buolamwini--I am sorry--it was great to be with you at
the conference on this at MIT and I see another conference
member there as well.
We have heard a lot of disturbing examples about mass data
collection. I just want to--and I think your idea of a
moratorium makes a lot of sense.
And your view, as I understand it, is there ought to be
affirmative consent, and how would that curb the effects of
machine bias in the use of facial recognition?
Ms. Buolamwini. So I believe there should be affirmative
consent, meaningful transparency, and continuous oversight.
Affirmative consent needs to happen because oftentimes these
technologies are being used without our knowledge.
The example of Higher View came up because we have
algorithmic bias in the wild stories where people will say, I
didn't even know this technology was being used.
Affirmative consent matters when you are thinking about a
case like what is happening with the tenants in Brooklyn where
face recognition entry system is being installed against their
will but at least you have public defenders who are coming up
against them.
So regardless of the bias or how well the technology works,
there should be a choice. But second, we need to know how well
the technology works and what my research has shown is that the
standards from the National Institute for Standards and
Technology aren't even reflective of the American people.
So we have to start there to make sure that we even have a
baseline for what is going on, and then there is continuous
oversight because regardless of the accuracy, regardless of if
there is consent, these systems, as the fellow panelists have
mentioned, can be abused in all kinds of ways.
Mr. Welch. Thank you. Thank you very much.
And Ms. Garvie, in your report ``Garbage In, Garbage Out''
you cite an example where the NYPD, when looking for a suspect
who stole from a local CVS, was unable to find matches and they
used the celebrity Woody Harrelson as an effort to get the
identification, how is this problematic use of facial
recognition technology allowed to happen? Essentially, because
there are no rules now?
Ms. Garvie. It is allowed to happen because there are no
rules and there is no transparency either to the public to
decide whether this is an appropriate use of a technology or
not but also to defense attorneys and to the court to say is
this producing reliable evidence.
It is not producing reliable evidence. But defendants
aren't able to challenge it in court.
Mr. Welch. And you also discussed the use of police
sketches of, quote, ``art'' so there will be an artist's
rendering of who they think it might be or--and how does that
work with respect to protecting defendants?
Ms. Garvie. That is right. So forensic sketches are
submitted to face recognition systems in at least six
jurisdictions around the country.
This is, roughly, the equivalent of--well, face recognition
is considered a biometric identification tool. Imagine if we
had a fingerprint lab drawing fingerprints or drawing where a
latent print's fingers--finger ridges ended with a pen,
submitting that to search. That would be a scandal. That would
e reasons for a mistrial or for convictions being overturned.
So it is hugely problematic.
Mr. Welch. Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
Ms. Buolamwini, again, if the technology improves so that
that the racial bias was, quote, ``eliminated,'' not that
necessarily it will ever happen, would you still recommend
mandating affirmative consent?
Ms. Buolamwini. Even if you improve the racial biases, for
example, there is a case reported by the intercept where IBM
equipped the New York Police Department with video capabilities
to search people by their skin type, by their facial hair, by
the clothing that they were wearing.
So you could also automate the tools for racial
surveillance and racial profiling even if you made these
accuracy disparities go away, which right now the statistical
evidence does not support. So yes, you would still need consent
in the use of these technologies.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much.
Ms. Kelly?
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today on facial recognition technology.
Last Congress, the IT Subcommittee held a series of
hearings on artificial intelligence and in the white paper that
I wrote with Rep. Will Hurd we discussed the issues of bias and
the importance of algorithmic accountability and transparency.
As facial recognition is used more in society, it is vital
that this technology not perpetuate real-world biases that harm
minority communities. Say your name for me because I want to
make sure I say it right.
Ms. Buolamwini. Buolamwini.
Ms. Kelly. Ms. Buolamwini. Okay. What are some of the
benefits that racial--that facial recognition technology can
provide?
Ms. Buolamwini. So one area that has been explored right
now is the use of facial analysis technology in health care--
could we be able to maybe spot, let us say, something like a
stroke or heart disease--other things that might be actually
perceptive from the face.
So that is the promise, and oftentimes what I see is the
promise of this technology is not met by the reality. You have
new research coming out from the University of Toronto that
shows even for health care-based systems of facial analysis
technology you are starting to see biases.
So you get a bias when it comes to accuracy when you are
looking at age or somebody has dementia versus not. So I am
hopeful that research can continue to explore potential uses.
But until we have shown that it actually meets the promise, it
should not be used.
Ms. Kelly. In your testimony you discuss the lack of
mandated accuracy requirements that test the maturity of facial
recognition technology. How do you believe this test should be
conducted and who should approve the technologies as adequately
mature?
Ms. Buolamwini. Absolutely. Well, one thing that we have to
acknowledge is when we are looking at facial analysis
technologies, one metric--accuracy--isn't enough. Not only do
we want to know how accurate a system might be but we want to
know how it fails, right. Who are the false positives? Who are
the false negatives?
Right now in the U.S. we have the National Institute for
Standards and Technology, which does mandate tests. There are
voluntary tests around facial analysis technology. So that
could be one agency that is employed to figure out what are the
necessary metrics that could come in place.
What we are seeing right now is the way that the systems
are tested are very limited. So when I mentioned pale male data
sets earlier on, we can actually have a false sense of progress
if the evaluation standards that are meant to be the gold
standards don't even represent everybody right now.
So we need to change the way in which we evaluate facial
analysis technology so we truly understand who it works for and
who it fails on.
Ms. Kelly. I am not sure how much time I have because--
Okay, now it is corrected, I guess.
But should the use case dictate the level of maturity and
should the government and private industry have different
standards?
Ms. Buolamwini. I definitely believe the use case matters.
If you are using facial analysis to animate an emoji or to put
on SnapChat filters that is a different case than if you are
saying we are going to use facial analysis to infer your
emotional engagement or problem solving ability to inform a
hiring decision, which is what we are seeing with products
coming out of Higher View. So the use case absolutely matters.
Ms. Kelly. Ms. Garvie, you mentioned an EEF study where the
authors recommended facial recognition and in quotes ``only be
used to identify individuals already detained by law
enforcement and under policies restricting its use in specific
instances of criminal conduct.''
Do you believe that this use would be an appropriate use of
the technology for use today and are there any other safeguards
that you would like to see implemented?
Ms. Garvie. I do. Oh.
Ms. Kelly. Also, before you answer that--I am getting my
question--you and Dr. Alexander, as we talk about having
legislation, who do you think should be at the table?
Of course, we should be at the table but who else should be
at the table? Because we are not the experts, so as we come up
with rules and regulations.
Ms. Garvie. I fundamentally believe it is up to communities
to decide to take a close look at how this technology is being
used, what its capabilities and limitations are and decide
whether the risks outweigh the benefits.
San Francisco has taken that look and decided that the
risks do not outweigh those benefits. In my personal view, I
think some communities will come out differently, will say that
there are instances, probable cause where law enforcement needs
to know who is in custody.
Fingerprinting has failed. That may be an appropriate use
for this technology. But fundamentally, that needs to be a
decision made by legislatures, not by law enforcement agencies.
Mr. Alexander. Yes, ma'am.
Yes, ma'am. I certainly do think a couple of things. One
here is that certainly you need to be at the table. The
technology developer of that software needs to be at the table.
Public safety needs to be at that table.
ACLU needs to be at that table, and other legal persons as
well, too, so that if we are going to utilize this technology
in public safety, in law enforcement, I think one thing needs
to be made clear to these software manufacturers is that if you
are going to develop this technology it is going to have to
meet a standard that you hear being articulated at these--at
this table by the scientists and those in the legal communities
that are here.
It needs to meet that standard. If it can't meet that
standard, then there is no place for it in our society. Police
need to be at the table so they can clearly understand if you
decide--your jurisdiction decide to pay for and acquire this
technology, you are going to be held to a standard as well,
too.
Not just training, but the way in which you apply it, how
it is applied, and you are going to be held responsible as a
public safety agency to sharing in your local community how
this technology was developed, why it was developed, and the
use of it, and also where it may not be as effective as we
think.
Because this is a huge--this is a huge, very complicated
convoluted piece of technology that may have some benefits that
you have just heard but they also have a significant amount of
challenges attached to them.
Ms. Kelly. And are there a amount of hours that police
departments or law enforcement are trained right now or is it
just hit or miss?
Mr. Alexander. You know, I can't say that specifically. But
my sense it is kind of hit or miss because we know that there
are agencies out there right now and I have the persons here at
this table who can certainly attest to that, that this
technology is introduced into those departments and there is
very little training and certainly no policy development around
it.
And then when you ask those in those agencies, tell me
about the technology and how it work, they can't do it and that
is a real problem.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Cummings. You know, it is a--before I got to Ms.
Miller, it is a shame, Dr. Alexander, the whole thought of
people being arrested and losing their jobs and everything
based on errors.
Mr. Alexander. Right.
Chairman Cummings. And that is a problem. One of the things
that I question, too, is John Lewis--Congressman Lewis and I--
--
Mr. Alexander. Yes, sir.
Chairman Cummings [continuing]. are mistaken for each
other. If I go out there right now, I guarantee you there will
be at least five or six people that will call me John Lewis.
And I have actually had him in my district where I live and
they call him me. That is a problem. I mean, I am glad it was
John Lewis--a good name.
Ms. Miller?
Ms. Miller. Thank you, Chairman Cummings and Ranking Member
Comer, and to all of you all for being here today.
As technology continues to evolve and grow, the question of
proper uses for facial recognition in our society is becoming
increasingly important.
Ms. Garvie, how far out are we in the United States from
having facial recognition technology that is 100 percent
accurate on photos of people in all demographics?
Ms. Garvie. I don't--I can't speak to the--where the
technology is at. But I will say based on how law enforcement
agencies use the technology it doesn't matter how good these
algorithms get if low-quality images or the images of wrong
people are submitted, which is what we are seeing at the law
enforcement level.
Ms. Miller. Are there any cities in the United States that
are deploying real-time face surveillance?
Ms. Garvie. We see Chicago and Detroit have both acquired
the technology. We do not know the level to which it has been
deployed.
In 2013, Chicago did report back to the DHS, the funder of
their system, that the capabilities were up and running. They
have since said they do not use the capability. We don't know
about Detroit.
A handful of other agencies across the country--Los
Angeles, the West Virginia Intelligence Fusion Center, and
others--have either piloted or have looked to purchase this
technology as well.
Ms. Miller. Okay. Are there any Federal agencies, to your
knowledge, that utilize real-time face surveillance?
Ms. Garvie. The U.S. Secret Service is piloting a program
around the White House complex as we speak. We do not know the
degree to which the FBI has been piloting this. We do know they
have acquired or have been using Amazon recognition, which is
the same surveillance capability that Orlando has been piloting
in real time. But there is no transparency into how and when
they are using that.
Ms. Miller. All right. To you and Ms. Guliani, can you
discuss some of the wrongful arrest cases that have arisen as a
result of the inaccuracy for the facial recognition?
Ms. Guliani. Sure. I think that one of the concerns is that
we don't even have a handle on the full scope of cases and that
is because, No. 1, we are not seeing data about how often these
algorithms are resulting in false matches, and No. 2, when
defendants are being charged they are not necessarily being
provided notice or given all the information.
So the question you ask is a very good one but it is one
that we don't actually have I think full data about.
Ms. Garvie. I would echo that. I speak to public defenders
a lot. There have been close to 3,000 arrests in New York made
including the use of face recognition technology.
Those 3,000 defendants were not told that face recognition
was used. Maybe some of them were. A vast majority of them were
not.
Ms. Miller. Well, like Chairman Cummings, I have had many
people tell me that they have seen my twin somewhere else and I
think we all resemble someone else. So it is kind of scary.
Have there been--can you see--can you set a Federal floor
for minimum standards for the use of facial recognition
technology and what would those Federal standards look like?
Both of you.
Ms. Guliani. I think that when we are having this
conversation one of the questions we should be asking is, is
there an alternative that is less invasive, right.
We have talked about how face recognition is different and
how it raises fundamental concerns with regards to our First
Amendment rights, with regards to persistent and constant
tracking.
There are very real risks with this technology and we
should be asking are there other alternatives that can serve
the same needs that are less invasive and less concerning, and
I think that that would be helpful to have as we are having
this debate to determine what the standard should be and
whether there are uses, if any, that should be permitted.
Ms. Garvie. I would agree, and I think the constitutional
risks that face recognition pose provide good guidance for a
legislative floor--prohibitions on use that would violate the
Fourth Amendment that would risk chilling free speech, that
would affect the Fourteenth Amendment rights to due process and
equal protection.
Ms. Miller. That was my next question. So thank you.
I yield back my time.
Chairman Cummings. Ms. Ocasio-Cortez?
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Ms. Buolamwini, right now Amazon can scan your face without
your consent--all of our faces without our consent--and sell it
to the government, all without our knowledge, correct?
Ms. Buolamwini. Yes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And, you know, Mr. Chair, I would like
to seek unanimous consent on how Amazon actually met with ICE
officials over a facial recognition system that could identify
immigrants. I would like to submit this to the congressional
record.
Chairman Cummings. Without objection.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you so much.
Ms. Garvie, in fact, it is not just Amazon that is doing
this, right. It is Facebook. It is Microsoft. It is a very
large amount of tech corporations, correct?
Ms. Garvie. That is correct.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And do you think it is fair to say that
Americans are essentially being spied on and surveilled on a
massive scale without their consent or knowledge?
Ms. Garvie. I would make a bit of a distinction between
what Facebook and other companies are doing but yielding to Ms.
Buolamwini for more specifics on this. I will say most of the
law enforcement agency systems operate on DMV data bases or mug
shot data bases. So information that has been collected by
agencies rather than companies.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Great. Thank you. Thank you.
And Mr. Ferguson, one the prime constitutional concerns
about the nonconsensual use of facial recognition technology is
rooted or alluded to in the Fourteenth Amendment, correct?
Mr. Ferguson. That is correct. It is one of them.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And right now companies, governments,
agencies can essentially steal or use your biometric data from
you without your consent and this is outrageous, right, because
this is America and we have a right to privacy. Isn't that
right, Ms. Guliani?
Ms. Guliani. That is absolutely right.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And Ms. Guliani, what was the Supreme
Court case that identified the right to privacy?
Ms. Guliani. It has been--I don't remember the original
one. But, I mean, there has been a series of cases where the
court has essentially said, look, with modern technology it
shouldn't mean that we don't have Fourth Amendment rights.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Yes. And what was--was there a landmark
Supreme Court decision that established that that we have seen
recently?
Ms. Guliani. You know, we have seen the Carpenter case
where the court said that it was unconstitutionally--
unconstitutional to warrantlessly surveile individuals.
We have seen cases where the court has also said that you
can't search a cell phone without a warrant leading to an
arrest.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And most specifically, with relation to
the Fourteenth Amendment, it was Roe v. Wade that established
the right to privacy. Is that correct?
Ms. Guliani. Roe v. Wade--the right to privacy was
addressed there as well.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Right. So, you know, we don't just
have--because that right to privacy is alluded to. Part of the
case in our right to privacy is that this doesn't just give us
a right to my uterus.
It gives me a right to my hand and my shoulders, my head,
my knees, my toes, and my face. And so in some ways, part of
the case, although it is not all of it--there is a great deal
rooted in the Fourteenth Amendment with search and seizure--but
in our right to privacy we also see here that it is--this is
about our entire body--our right to our entire body and the
similar principle that keeps a legislator out of my womb is the
same principle that would keep Facebook and algorithms off of
all of our faces. And so do you think there is a--it is fair to
draw that connection?
Ms. Guliani. I think that when we are talking about privacy
it is important to think about more than our face, right. So we
are seeing the FBI use things like voice recognition and gait
recognition, all different types of biometrics that I think
fundamentally raise some of the same privacy concerns that have
been talked about by all the panelists today.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you. Thank you so much.
And Ms. Buolamwini, I heard your opening statement and we
saw that these algorithms are effective to different degrees.
So are they most effective on women?
Ms. Buolamwini. No.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Are they most effective on people of
color?
Ms. Buolamwini. Absolutely not.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Are they most effective on people of
different gender expressions?
Ms. Buolamwini. No. In fact, they exclude them.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. So what demographic is it mostly
effective on?
Ms. Buolamwini. White men.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And who are the primary engineers and
designers of these algorithms?
Ms. Buolamwini. Definitely white men.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. So we have a technology that was created
and designed by one demographic that is only mostly effective
on that one demographic and they are trying to sell it and
impose it on the entirety of the country?
Ms. Buolamwini. So we have the pale male data sets being
used as something that is universal when that isn't actually
the case when it comes to representing the full sepia of
humanity.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And do you think that this could
exacerbate the already egregious inequalities in our criminal
justice system?
Ms. Buolamwini. It already is.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you very much. I yield the rest of
my time to the chair.
Chairman Cummings. How so?
Ms. Buolamwini. So right now, because you have the
propensity for these systems to misidentify black individuals
or brown communities more often and you also have confirmation
bias where if I have been said to be a criminal that I am more
targeted, so there is a case with Mr. Bah, an 18-year-old
African-American man, who was misidentified in Apple stores as
a thief and in fact he was--he was falsely arrested multiple
times because of this kind of misidentification.
And then if you have a case where we are thinking of
putting let us say facial recognition technology on police body
cams in a situation where you already have racial bias that can
be used to confirm, right, the presumption of guilt even if
that hasn't necessarily been proven because you have these
algorithms that we already have sufficient information showing
fail more on communities of color.
Chairman Cummings. Mr. Grothman?
Mr. Grothman. Okay. I guess this is probably for Ms. Garvie
but it could be really for anybody.
China makes a lot of use of this technology, correct?
Ms. Garvie. Yes.
Mr. Grothman. Could you let me know the degree to which it
exists in China? And I believe they even kind of brag about
selling this technology to other countries?
Ms. Garvie. We probably don't know the full degree to which
it is used. We do see face surveillance capabilities where the
government is attempting to enroll all faces of all citizens
into their data bases to be able to effectively identify where
anybody is at a given time in addition to classify people by
the characteristics of their face to try to be able to identify
who is a Uyghur Muslim minority.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. And I could tell Mr. Ferguson wanted to
jump in there. Are they trying to sell this technology to other
countries?
Mr. Ferguson. Yes.
Mr. Grothman. And for what purpose? When they go into--I am
not sure which other countries they are selling it to, but when
they go into another country, what are the benefits that they
describe this technology as being used for?
Mr. Ferguson. China has created a truly--a true
surveillance state where they are able to use hundreds of
millions of cameras and artificial intelligence matching of
face recognition to identify people on the streets.
And so for certain authoritarian governments that is very
attractive there.
Mr. Grothman. And why is it attractive?
Mr. Ferguson. I think because it is a form of social
control. One of the things that they have been doing is they
have rolled it out to prevent jaywalking. So that one of the
ways they do it is to say as people walk past the camera you
will be shamed because you were a jaywalker.
Mr. Grothman. Well, not just jaywalking. As I understand
it, it is also used to monitor how people think or people who
may think one way or another. Is that true?
Mr. Ferguson. It is being used to surveile religious
minorities and dissenting opinions and thus controlling the way
they think and the way they react. And so that is, obviously,
there are lots of human rights abuses that we have seen coming
out of China.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. So in other words, monitor the Muslims,
and I can't remember what they call that group.
Mr. Ferguson. The Uyghurs, yes.
Mr. Grothman. Uyghurs. Uyghurs on the western end, and
Christians----
Mr. Ferguson. Yes.
Mr. Grothman [continuing]. throughout the country. So we
place them so that if there is a church that we know about we
know exactly all who is going in there, and they sell this as
a--I think they describe it as kind of--they have reached the
perfect government.
They have got a free market in the economy so it is a
wealthy society but they have complete control about how people
think and behave otherwise or do what they can to control it.
Is that right?
Mr. Ferguson. That is right, and the scariest thing is that
technology could be rolled out on the streets of Washington,
DC. tomorrow because there is no law saying that it couldn't
be, and that is what we need to address.
Mr. Grothman. Do you happen to know--I mean, I have read
that they have tried to sell this--almost sell a form of
government, but this is a big part of that form of government--
to other countries.
Do you know any other countries specifically who are biting
at this opportunity or is it just something they are starting
out doing?
Mr. Ferguson. I don't know as a political matter. I know as
a technological matter this is a multi-billion dollar industry
of cameras and algorithms and there is tremendous investment by
the Chinese government in improving it.
Mr. Grothman. Do you know any other countries they have--
have had success at selling this to?
Ms. Buolamwini. So there is an example where you have a
Chinese company called Cloud Walk that provide the government
of Zimbabwe with surveillance technology and this enables them
to have access to darker-skinned individuals. So you are
starting to also see the emergence of what is being called data
colonialism.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. So in other words, they are telling
Zimbabwe that they can do what China does. They can monitor who
is here, who is there and----
Ms. Buolamwini. But in exchange for something very
valuable, which would be the dark-skinned faces to train their
system so that they can then sell it, let us say, to the U.S.
where you have dark-skinned individuals as well.
Mr. Grothman. Well, I--as I understand it, though, the
clear goal of a government using these, if, you know, as
America becomes more intolerant, as we have micro-aggressions,
as we, you know, begin to have politically incorrect gathering
places--a gun show or something--is it something that we should
fear that our government will use it to identify people who
have ideas that are not politically correct?
Ms. Garvie. Law enforcement agencies themselves have
expressed this concern. Back in 2011 when the technology was
really getting moving, a face recognition working group
including the FBI said--and they said exactly that face
recognition could be used as a form of social control, causing
people to alter their behavior in public, leading to self-
censorship and inhibition. So this is something police
departments themselves have recognized.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you for having a hearing on this topic.
It is very important.
Chairman Cummings. Ms. Pressley?
Thank you.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Last week, San Francisco became the first city to ban use
of facial recognition technology. But a similar ban is being
considered in my district, the Massachusetts 7th congressional
District, by Somerville, Massachusetts, and it is the first on
the East Coast to propose such a ban.
Facial recognition technology has been used by law
enforcement in Massachusetts since 2006 but there are concerns
about due process, given the police and prosecutors do not
notify defendants when the technology has been used in their
cases.
I do believe the Federal agencies should not use this
technology without legislative authorization and these due
process violations are a perfect example as to why.
But companies have been pushing this technology on police
departments, despite knowing that it works only 30 percent of
the time. This puts many people, including women and people of
color and young people, at grave risk of harm and underscores
the need for congressional oversight.
Ms. Buolamwini, first, I want to say I am so proud that AJL
is in the Massachusetts 7th. You are based in Cambridge,
correct?
Ms. Buolamwini. We are.
Ms. Pressley. So I am so glad that you call the
Massachusetts 7th your home. In a New York Times article from
June of last year titled, ``When the Robot Doesn't See Dark
Skin,'' you describe how and why these inaccuracies exist. You
refer to the, and I quote, ``coded'' gaze. Can you describe
this phenomenon, for the record?
Ms. Buolamwini. Sure. So you might have heard of the white
gaze or you might have heard of, let us say, the male gaze, and
these descriptions are descriptions of power--who has the power
to decide.
And so when I talk about the coded gaze I am invoking the
male gaze and the white gaze and it is a question of whose
priorities, preferences, and also prejudices are shaping the
technology that we are seeing.
So right now, the way I look at AI is we see this growing
coded gaze that is mainly pale, mainly male, and doesn't
represent the majority of society.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you.
Ms. Garvie, in your Georgetown report you found that, and I
quote, ``There is no independent testing regime for racially
biased error rates,'' unquote. Is this still the case today?
Ms. Garvie. NIST has since then adopted looking at the
differential error rates between race and gender in their
studies. They have yet to look at the inter-sexual
intersectional consequences of that. But they are starting to
take a look.
Ms. Pressley. Okay.
And Ms. Buolamwini, are there any measures developers of
this technology can take right now to increase the accuracy of
their facial recognition systems?
Ms. Buolamwini. Right now what we have seen in the research
studies that have happened thus far to improve these systems
tends to be around the kind of data that is used to train the
systems in the first place.
But we have to be really cautious because even if you make
accurate facial analysis systems they can and will be abused
without regulations.
Ms. Pressley. All right. Very good.
Ms. Guliani, in your testimony you raise the example of
Willie Lynch who claims to have key details about the
reliability of a facial recognition algorithm that led to his
arrest and conviction.
In his case it was a low confidence match of a poor quality
photo. Can you talk about the challenges that individuals may
take rebutting a face recognition match and how is it different
than eyewitness identifications?
Ms. Guliani. Sure. I mean, with an eyewitness you can put
that person on the stand. You may raise questions about how
good their eyesight is, how far away they are, whether they
were intoxicated at the time they made that identification.
It is quite different with face recognition. I think people
are assuming that it is 100 percent accurate, and fundamentally
a lot of individuals are not able to get information about the
reliability of the algorithm.
In the case you just referenced, that is still an ongoing
case where Willie Lynch is fighting to get information about an
algorithm that could be used to challenge his conviction.
Ms. Pressley. Do you believe the FBI or other law
enforcement agencies have adopted sufficient safeguards to
prevent its face recognition technology from resulting in these
civil rights abuses?
Ms. Guliani. Absolutely not, and I certainly think this is
an area where additional oversight is needed. When the FBI
rolled out the system, they made a lot of promises.
They made promises about accuracy. They made promises about
testing. They made promises about protecting First Amendment
rights. And now, years later, a lot of those promises have been
broken.
The agency has not acknowledged a responsibility to test
the accuracy of systems it uses of external partners. There is
questions about how accurate their systems are, and it doesn't
appear that they have a high standard in place for when they
are running face recognition searches.
And I think all of those things are cause for concern and
should really cause us to question whether the system should
still be operating, given the lack of safeguards.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much.
Mr. Amash?
Mr. Amash. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Supreme Court recognized recently that a person does
not surrender all Fourth Amendment protection by venturing into
the public sphere. Face recognition surveillance threatens to
shatter the expectation Americans have that the government
cannot monitor and track our movements without individualized
suspicion and a warrant.
It is difficult to comprehend the impact such surveillance
would have on our lives. With face recognition technology
deployed throughout a city, anyone with access to the data
could track an individual's associations and public activities,
including religious, political, medical, or recreational
activities.
Ms. Garvie and Ms. Guliani, could a government's access to
this kind of data have a chilling effect on First Amendment
activities and other constitutional activities and rights such
as gun ownership, the free exercise of religion, the freedoms
of speech and of the press and the right of the people
peaceably to assemble and petition the government, and how
could data gathered from face recognition surveillance be
weaponized by the government against activities protected by
the Constitution?
Ms. Garvie. To your first question, absolutely. Yes. And
this is something that law enforcement agencies themselves have
acknowledged.
In terms of how this can be used, the mere threat or fear
of monitoring or identifying every single person at a protest
or a rally, particularly around contentious or highly disputed
concepts, could cause people to stay at home, to not have those
conversations, to not engage in those discussions that are so
valuable for the participation in an active democracy.
Ms. Guliani. And we have seen examples where there have
been requests for face recognition without cause. So in Vermont
there was a case where there was request for a face recognition
match even though the individual was not suspected of a crime.
They were just the girlfriend of a fugitive.
There was another case where the basis of the request was
simply that someone had asked concerning questions at a gun
store without any allegation that they had actually committed a
crime.
And so I think that speaks to the concern you are talking
about, which is we don't want to live in a world where we can
be identified without our knowledge secretly and on a massive
scale, which is exactly what face recognition allows.
Mr. Amash. Ms. Garvie and Professor Ferguson, even if we
require law enforcement to get a warrant to run a search on
face recognition data from surveillance cameras, would it be
possible for such cameras to use face recognition technology in
public areas without effectively gathering or discovering
information on innocent people who are not the subject of an
investigation?
Ms. Garvie. No. That is not the way the face recognition
systems work. Unfortunately, in order to identify the face of
the person you are looking for you have to scan every single
face of everybody else who you are not looking for.
Mr. Ferguson. That is correct, and I think that the
problem--even a probable cause standard may not be enough and
you have to take steps to minimize if you are going to do this
for particular reasons, which is why a probable cause plus or
something higher should be part of Federal legislation on this.
Mr. Amash. Thanks. Ms. Garvie and Ms. Guliani, what dangers
could access to this data pose to the rule of law and to
keeping our government free of corruption?
Could abuse of face recognition data give officials the
ability to influence political or business decisions or to
unfairly target or benefit from such decisions? Does face
recognition surveillance data need any increased protections to
make sure these kinds of abuses don't occur?
Ms. Guliani. The risk of abuse is substantial and the
reason there is that risk of abuse is, No. 1, this technology
is very cheap. You can run thousands of searches for just a
handful of dollars. Two, it is being done secretly, right, so
individuals don't necessarily know and can't raise concerns.
And three, it is being done on a massive scale. I mean, we
talked about access to driver's license photos and the extent
to which it affects everybody in those data bases.
We are going to--getting to a point where, you know,
virtually everybody is in a face recognition data base, which
gives the government enormous power. And so I think we need to
think about those concerns before moving forward with this
technology.
Ms. Garvie. Think of a way that identifying somebody just
because they show up in public in the--you know, with a camera
present could be used and chances are it can and will be used
in the absence of rules.
Mr. Amash. All right. Thanks. I yield back.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much.
Mr. Gomez?
Mr. Gomez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want people to imagine that they are driving home from
work and then they see in the rear view mirror, you know, red
and blue lights. They have no idea why the police are behind
them.
You know, they weren't speeding. They didn't run a stop
sign. But you know what? They pull over like everybody should.
A voice over a loudspeaker commands them to exit their vehicle
and as you do you see seven police officers, guns drawn, and
they are pointing right at you. One wrong move, a mistake, a
misunderstanding, a miscommunication can mean the difference
between life and death.
That is what is called a felony stop, one of the most
common high-risk situations police find themselves in, and it
all started earlier in the day when a police officer ran a
search with a--through a facial recognition data base and it
incorrectly identified you as a violent felon, and you had no
idea that that even occurred.
That is just one of the scenarios that I think about when
it comes to this technology--one of the many things that could
possibly go wrong.
I must admit, I was not even paying attention to this
technology until I was misidentified last year during the ACLU
test of Members of Congress and it really did spark an interest
and a curiosity of this technology and really did feel wrong
deep in my gut that there is something wrong with this
technology.
I started looking into it since last year. I have had nine
meetings. My office has had nine meetings with representatives
from Amazon. We have asked questions from experts across the
spectrum, and my concerns only grow day by day.
Until February of this year, Amazon had not submitted its
controversial facial recognition technology recognition to
third party testing with the National Institute of Standards
and Technology, known as NIST.
In a January 2019 blog post, Amazon stated that, quote,
``Amazon recognition can't be downloaded for testing outside of
Amazon.'' In short, Amazon would not submit to outside testing
of their algorithm.
Despite the fact that Amazon had not submitted its facial
recognition product to outside testing, it still sold that
product to police departments.
In 2017, police in Washington County, Oregon, started using
Amazon recognition technology.
Ms. Buolamwini----
Ms. Buolamwini. Buolamwini.
Mr. Gomez. Buolamwini. Do you think that third party
testing is an important safe deployment--is important for safe
deployment of facial recognition technology?
Ms. Buolamwini. Absolutely. One of the things we have been
doing at the Algorithmic Justice League is actually testing
these companies where we can, and this is only--we are only
able to do the test for the output. So we don't know how these
companies are training the systems. We don't know the processes
in place when they are selling the systems.
All we know is when we test on our more comprehensive or
more inclusive data sets what are the outcomes. So we
absolutely need third party testing and we also need to make
sure that the National Institute for Standards and Technology--
NIST--that their tests are comprehensive enough.
Our own research show that some of the benchmarks from this
were 75 percent male, 80 percent lighter skinned. So even when
we have companies like Microsoft who figured out how to let
NIST test their system, unlike Amazon, was claiming they
couldn't, even when we have those performance results we have
to see what data set it is being evaluated on.
Mr. Gomez. Yes, correct. Because if it is evaluated on a
data set that is incorrect or biased it is going to lead to
incorrect results, correct?
Ms. Buolamwini. Or an incorrect false understanding of
progress. So back in 2014, Facebook released a paper called
``DeepFace'' and they reported 97 percent accuracy on the gold
standard benchmark at the time.
But when you looked at that gold standard benchmark it was
77 percent male and around 80 percent white individuals. And so
as a result--or over 80 percent. So you don't know how well it
actually does on the people who are not as well represented.
Mr. Gomez. Before I run out of time, what organizations are
equipped to accurately test new facial recognition
technologies?
Ms. Buolamwini. The National Institute of Standards and
Technology is currently doing ongoing testing. But they need to
be better.
Mr. Gomez. Okay. Now, I appreciate it. This is a major
concern. I think that you are seeing the--both parties and
across the ideological spectrum showing some reservations about
the use of this technology.
I am glad to see the chairman of this committee look at
this issue and I look forward to the next hearings that we will
be having.
Mr. Chairman, with that I yield back.
Chairman Cummings. Yes. Mr. Gomez, I do expect that we are
going to be able to get some legislation out on this. I talked
to the ranking member. There is a lot of agreement. The
question is do you have an all-out moratorium and at the same
time try to see how this process can be perfected.
But, clearly, you are absolutely right. There is a lot of
agreement here, thank God.
Ms. Tlaib?
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you, Chairman.
With little to no input, the city of Detroit created one of
the Nation's most pervasive and sophisticated surveillance
networks with real-time facial recognition technology.
Detroit's $1 million face-scanning system is now tracking
our residents on hundreds of public and private cameras at
local parks, schools, immigration centers, gas stations,
churches, health centers, and apartment buildings.
My residents in the 13th congressional are burdened with
challenges that most Americans couldn't bear themselves and
laid on top of these economic challenges and structural racism
that hurts our children more than anyone in the family is the
fact that policing our communities has become more militarized
and flawed.
Now we have for-profit companies pushing so-called
technology that has never been tested in communities of color,
let alone been studied enough to conclude that it makes our
communities safer.
So Dr. Alexander, have you see police departments develop
their own approval process concerning the use of facial
recognition? If so, how are these policies determined?
Ms. Garvie. It seems like Dr. Alexander stepped out, but I
could take a stab at answering that question, if that would
help.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you.
Ms. Garvie. So my research includes FOIAs to a couple
hundred agencies. We have seen some agencies develop policies.
Detroit does have a policy around their use of face
recognition.
Concerningly, however, that policy states that their face
surveillance system may be expanded beyond its current
conception to drones and body cams as well.
So it is not uncommon to see policies saying there might be
some restrictions on its use but also affirmatively encouraging
the use of the technology or reserving the right to expand it
far beyond existing current capabilities.
Ms. Tlaib. Ms. Garvie, right? Can you--do you know if these
policies include any initial justification on the need for the
facial recognition technology program, and second, in that
policy for Detroit does it prevent them from sharing this data
or information with any Federal or state agencies?
Ms. Garvie. Most policies that I have read do not provide
an initial justification beyond that it is a law enforcement
investigative tool.
I would have to get back to you on the question about what
Detroit's policy specifically says. I do not recall any
language either prohibiting or allowing that. But I would have
to get back to you.
Ms. Tlaib. Are we seeing any uniformity in these policies
across law enforcement agencies at all?
Ms. Garvie. No.
Ms. Tlaib. How are--have any of these policies proven to be
effective? I think we all agree that there is too many flaws
for it to be effective, correct?
Ms. Garvie. Correct, and one of the problems is most of
these policies are not available to the public. We have seen
far more policies now, thanks to FOIA processes and FOIA
litigation to try to get information.
But the LAPD, the NYPD, and other jurisdiction initially
tell us they have no records, even though they may have records
or they may have systems. So there is a fundamental lack of
transparency around this as well.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. Chairman, if I may submit for the record an
article, ``Researchers Alarmed by Detroit's Pervasive Examining
Facial Recognition Surveillance Program,'' talking about the
little to no input and transparency in the implementation of
that program.
Chairman Cummings. Without objection, so ordered.
Ms. Tlaib. In the response to this lack of kind of
oversight we have heard various organizations advocate for
independent police oversight board or judicial approval for the
use of facial recognition technology on a case by case basis
which would require a probable cause standard.
Professor Ferguson, can you speak about the benefits of
this approval process?
Mr. Ferguson. There would be some approval--some check if
there was at least a probable cause standard. I think that with
the danger of facial recognition it might even need to be
higher than just probable cause, more of a probable cause plus
kind of idea.
You would also take care of the minimization requirements.
You would be certain of the data and what would happen to it.
But at least it is some check.
Right now, this technology is being deployed without that
check in most cases, and having Federal legislation, state
legislation, and local legislation on it and a third party
check of a judge would certainly be an improvement.
Ms. Tlaib. And, you know, I get this a lot. There are some
that argue that probable cause plus warrant would be too
burdensome for law enforcement officials and would not allow
them to move quickly when attempting to catch a potential
criminal.
Do you agree with this assertion?
Mr. Ferguson. No, I don't think it is that hard. If you
have probable cause of a crime, you know you have an
identification and you want to search a data base, I think a
judge will sign off on it. Judges now can get warrants
electronically on their iPads. I don't think it is that much of
a burden anymore.
Ms. Tlaib. I couldn't agree more. A person's freedom is at
stake.
So thank you so much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield the
rest of my time.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you very much.
Mr. Lynch?
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and let me congratulate
you on a very--just an excellent hearing and I want to thank
the witnesses. You have done a tremendous service, I think, to
this committee and I am sure that your thoughts and inputs will
be reflected in some of the legislation that comes out of here.
For the record, I would like to ask unanimous consent to
submit Massachusetts Senate Resolution 1385 and Massachusetts
House Resolution 1538. This is the legislation that would put a
moratorium on facial recognition in my state of Massachusetts.
Chairman Cummings. Without objection.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
And I don't usually do this, but I read this excellent book
about a month ago. It is by Shoshana Zuboff over at Harvard,
``Surveillance Capitalism,'' and it changes--it really changed
the way I look at all of this.
I am actually the chairman of the Fin Tech Task Force here
in Congress on the Financial Services Committee, and she did a
wonderful job with the book.
And I believe that--after reading this that our focus today
just on facial recognition and just on law enforcement's use of
this information and just, you know, public surveillance is far
too narrow.
You know, right now in this country we have about 257
million smart phones. About 100 million of those are iPhones.
So because we click ``I agree'' when we use those apps, even
though the average American spends about 14 seconds reading
that agreement, and we click ``I agree.''
And so what we don't know is that when we click ``I agree''
it allows Apple, Google, Facebook to use, to share, to sell all
of our information.
So, you know, they track what we look--not only what we
look like but who our friends are or where we go each and every
day, tracking our motion, every selfie we take that gets
uploaded, every book we have read, every movie we see--you
know, how we drive. AllState now has an app where you--you
know, if you let them track you and you don't drive crazy they
will lower your rates, you know, so there is this--so right
now, you know.
And the Internet of Things--my coffee maker and my toaster
is hooked up to the internet. You know, I am not sure I really
need that. But my vacuum cleaner, although I don't use it very
often, is hooked up to the Internet of Things.
So what we have right now--my iWatch. You know, I am a
victim here. I have got everything going. But----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Lynch. The problem is we have total surveillance and we
are looking at this one little piece of it--you know, facial
recognition--and I worry that we are missing all of--all of the
other--the dangers here just because it is not the government.
It is Facebook. It is Google. It is Microsoft. It is Apple.
And to go back to Mr. Grothman's point a while ago, OPM,
you know, gathered up all of our information here in Congress
and then they were hacked. They didn't encrypt any of our
Social Security numbers or anything. So we believe it was the
Chinese. They got all that information.
And so now we are allowing Apple, Google, Facebook to
maintain these huge and granular descriptions of who we are,
and they have been getting hacked as well.
And I am just wondering is there a bigger--is there a
bigger mission here that we should be pursuing, Ms. Buolamwini,
in terms of--you know, I believe in the right to be forgotten.
I believe in the right not to be surveilled. I believe there
should be sanctuary for us that we don't have to be, you know,
surveilled all the time.
Is that something you think about as well?
Ms. Buolamwini. Absolutely, and one thing I can credit the
Massachusetts bill for addressing is instead of just saying we
are going to look at facial recognition they talk about
biometric surveillance, right. So we are also talking about
voice recognition. We are talking about gait analysis--anything
that is remote sensing.
Do we need to be talking beyond facial analysis
technologies? Absolutely as well, so let us look at self-
driving cars.
There is a study that came out of Georgia Tech showing that
for pedestrian tracking self-driving cars were less accurate
for darker-skinned individuals than lighter-skinned
individuals.
So when we are talking about this realm of human-centric
computer vision, it is not just face recognition that should be
concerning.
Mr. Lynch. Ms. Garvie or Ms. Guliani?
Ms. Guliani. I mean, the ACLU is one of many organizations
that have called on Congress to pass baseline consumer privacy
legislation, right, which would put guardrails on how private
companies deal with your private data, including biometrics.
And so I do think that that is very much needed and I think
that that legislation has to include not just protections but
real enforcement.
So when your data is misused you have actually an
opportunity to go to court and get some accountability.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Cummings. Mr. DeSaulnier?
Mr. DeSaulnier. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you as
well and I want to thank the panel. This has been terrific. I
want to take some credit. I don't know if it is true or not,
but I think we are part of the same book club. I think I
suggested the book to Mr. Lynch and it is a fabulous book,
``The Age of Surveillance Capitalism.''
And since, like Mr. Gomez, I was one of the three people
who they say--you showed that I was misidentified, I was hoping
I would be misidentified as George Clooney. But, you know, just
my perception of myself.
So I want to talk about this as a representative of----
Mr. Connolly. Yes. Uh-huh.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Uh-huh.
[Laughter.]
Mr. DeSaulnier. That was Connolly, right? Denial is not a
river in Egypt.
As a representative from the Bay Area and I have watched
these tech companies transform, and I conclude Amazon is part
of this culture, and I have listened to them talk about
disruption as--you know, if I had questions as elected
officials--local or state or Federal--when I was inhibiting
innovation, and from my perspective in having met with CEOs who
one of them once told me when he was asking for my help on
something that he didn't want to deal with people like me.
And I laugh because what he was expressing was that people
from the government were slow, didn't understand how this
culture was transforming the world, and I really think they
believe that and bought into it. It is not about the billions
of dollars they make.
And my argument including with Amazon yesterday it would be
nice if you tried to work with us to do--deal with the societal
impacts because you are going to have to deal with them one way
or the other.
But the problem now is when I think of--when I was
listening to my colleague talk about the Supreme Court cases I
think of Louis Brandeis writing his paper on privacy and
convincing other justices like Oliver Wendell Holmes that they
were wrong about it--was that he said Americans had the right
to be left alone.
How can we say that any longer? None of us are left alone.
We just--we have news reports--it is a story on Forbes from
this month about Echo and Alexa listening to children.
So I really think, Mr. Chairman, and I am so encouraged by
what I have heard in a bipartisan way today that we need to
stop--that it has gone down too far. We are not starting at a
metric where we are just beginning the deployment of this. It
has already been deployed.
And to Mr. Lynch's comments, it is being deployed not just
for facial recognition but for everything we do. And there are
benefits for that and we can see that, but we need a time out
societally, as Europe has led us on, to say no.
And the example in San Francisco is interesting, knowing
people in local government in San Francisco. When scooters were
trying to get permits, it was great what San Francisco did as,
you know, the hub of innovation disruption, sort of.
The two companies who actually came and asked permission
were the ones who got permission. The ones who didn't were
horrified when they were told no, we are not going give you
permits to use these.
If you had just come in in the first place--and I think we
have a responsibility in government to be more responsive. But
they are not even coming halfway.
So, to me, this is a moment for us in a bipartisan way to
say stop. There are benefits to the species in this planet. But
you need societal input to this, and we have already lost our
right to be left alone. They have de facto taken that away from
us.
So, Ms. Guliani, could you respond to that a little bit?
Because the cultural attitude they are taking, and they will
apply it politically vis-`-vis campaigns and other things,
because I think they really do believe that they have done no
harm and you and I are in the way by raising questions about
how they deploy this technology.
Ms. Guliani. Yes. I mean, I think one of the things that we
have seen with some of the private companies is that they are
actively marketing some of these uses.
So in the case of Amazon, they were pushing some of the
most concerning uses--face recognition, body-worn cameras,
right--opening up the possibility of a near-surveillance state.
And so I think that there--they are not passive actors in
the system and they should be forced to take responsibility,
and that responsibility should include questions about how
accurate is their technology, are they disclosing the problems
and the real risks, and are they saying no when they should say
no.
And I think when it comes to certainly some of the law
enforcement uses that really are life and death scenarios,
these companies shouldn't be selling to the government in those
scenarios, given the risks that we have talked about.
Mr. DeSaulnier. And given the lack of regulatory
enforcement, how do we provide civil enforcement for state laws
and Federal laws that aren't being enforced, in my view, right
now?
Ms. Guliani. I mean, with regards to the--some of the
private companies and the extent to which they have sold this
technology, I think there is questions about whether they have
been honest in their disclosures and there is certainly, you
know, investigation and analysis in that.
I think, more broadly, from a regulatory standpoint, it is
really up to Congress and others to say no, we are going to hit
the pause button. Let us not roll out this technology before we
really understand the harm and before we think about whether
there are, frankly, better alternatives that are more
protective for privacy and ones that may also have law
enforcement benefits.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Cummings. I recognize Ms. Miller for a unanimous
consent request.
Ms. Miller. Thank you, Chairman Cummings.
I ask unanimous consent to enter this letter from
Information Technology and Innovation Foundation into the
record.
Chairman Cummings. Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman Cummings. Mr. Connolly?
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If I can pick up sort of on where we just were, Ms.
Guliani. The ubiquity of this technology strikes me. Maybe we
have already kind of mostly lost this battle.
Airports increasingly are using facial recognition
technology to process passengers in a more expeditious way,
correct?
Ms. Guliani. TSA and CBP have both introduced face
recognition plans. They have not done rulemaking, and some of
their plans go far beyond what Congress has authorized.
Mr. Connolly. But CLEAR--isn't CLEAR technology already in
airports?
Ms. Guliani. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. So, I mean, we already have it and are
you aware of any restrictions on that private company in terms
of how it uses whatever data is collected currently?
Ms. Guliani. I don't know that company specifically. I
think that with regards to the airport use, there are a lot of
questions and concerns. For example, requiring Americans to
provide their biometric--their face----
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Ms. Guliani [continuing]. and questions about whether there
is a way to opt out. I tried to opt out. It wasn't an easy
process----
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Ms. Guliani [continuing]. when I was traveling
internationally. And there is also questions about, I think,
the build out, right. It has been sort of presented as, well,
we are just using this to make travel faster. But when you look
at some of the documents, some of the use cases are far beyond
that----
Mr. Connolly. Okay.
Ms. Guliani [continuing]. right, to find people of
interest, whatever that means.
Mr. Connolly. So I just think that is for further
examination as well. What restrictions do exist, if any, on
private companies that are using this technology and from a
constitutional point of view what restrictions can there be
and--or should there be, and I think that is worthy of some
examination as well.
Let me ask about a real-life example of the panel. Anyone
can answer. But the FBI currently has agreements with various
states in terms of driver's license including states that use
facial recognition technology for their driver's license.
And I don't know that that is regulated at all. I don't
know that the average citizen getting their driver's license or
getting it renewed understands that they have tacitly agreed to
allow that piece of data to go to a Federal law enforcement
agency to be used however they apparently deem fit.
And I wonder if you would comment on that because at one
point the FBI was actually urged to determine whether external
facial recognition systems are sufficiently accurate to be
justified for FBI use and whether they would agree to limit it
if it wasn't, and the FBI actually refused to do that--raising
questions that we were talking about earlier in terms of misuse
or misapplication of the technology.
So what about the FBI and that relationship with states?
Should we be concerned?
Mr. Alexander. You know, I don't think that is--it is a
good question for the FBI but it is a good question, quite
frankly, for both local, state, and Federal law enforcement
because in the public safety community we exchange information
back and forth with each other on a--on a constant basis.
And in this particular case in which you are referring to,
that would not be unusual. The question becomes and the current
concern now is that this has been very much unregulated without
any oversight whatsoever and in light of the fact that we are
looking at a piece of technology that is very questionable and
is raising concern as we continue here this afternoon in this
hearing.
So I think that that is part of what has to be assessed and
further questions that have to be asked from both the Federal,
state, and local level in the sharing of this information that
is very sensitive and very questionable when it comes around to
our constitutional liberties.
That does raise a great deal of concern and that is part of
the complexity in this because for me to be effective as a
chief of police at a local level a lot of times I am dependent
upon my state and Federal partners, and vice versa, because we
have seen benefit in that--not so much around facial
recognition technology, but just as a whole of being able to
share and communicate with each other around those types of
things.
Ms. Guliani. I mean, when it comes to FBI use we should be
concerned. I mean, these are systems that have been in place
for years, and as your question rightfully pointed out, the FBI
is not even acknowledging a responsibility to fully test the
accuracy of systems that it is using and relying on.
And that, I think, builds into a larger question of do we
really want this massive data base of all of our faces. We are
rapidly approaching a place where virtually every adult will
have their face in a system that can be searchable by the FBI
where face recognition can be used.
Mr. Connolly. Well, and let me just tell you, in the state
of Virginia I don't want my face that is on the driver's
license in any data base.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Cummings. Mr. Raskin?
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
The witnesses have described a technology of potential
totalitarian surveillance and social control, and I want to
thank you for calling this extremely important hearing.
And as chair of the Civil Rights and Civil Liberties
Subcommittee with my vice chair, Congresswoman Ocasio-Cortez,
we will absolutely work with you to followup on this to make
sure that we are looking at all the dimensions of our privacy
that are threatened by this and similar technologies.
I want to thank all of the wonderful witnesses for their
testimony. I want to start with you, Professor Ferguson,
because back in the day we wrote a book together and that was
in the days when I wrote books. Today, I write tweets. But I am
glad that you are still writing books and Law Review articles.
One of the things I know that has interested you a lot is
the question of the seat of government and the right of protest
and the right to petition for redress of grievances here in the
District of Columbia.
And since January 2017 I have been to a lot of protests
here. I have been to the Women's March, the Climate March, the
Science March, the March for Our Lives, and on and on. And I am
wondering if people knew that this technology were being
deployed by the government and they were being photographed, so
and what effect do you think that would have? And let me ask
you and then perhaps Ms. Guliani to weigh in on this.
Mr. Ferguson. It would fundamentally undermine the First
Amendment and the right of free expression and our freedom of
association. I think it is chilling and a problem and needs to
be banned.
Mr. Raskin. Ms. Guliani, do you agree with that?
Ms. Guliani. Yes, I couldn't agree more. The last thing we
want before someone goes to a protest and exercises their
constitutional right is for them to think, am I going to have
my face scanned.
Mr. Raskin. China, seems to me, to be the dystopian path
that needs not be taken at this point by our society. It has
been leveraging real-time facial recognition technology to
implement its social credit score system, which assesses each
citizen's economic and social reputation and pins it at a
particular number.
Here is the New York Times: ``Beijing is embracing
technologies like face recognition and artificial intelligence
to identify and track 1.4 billion people. It wants to assemble
a vast and unprecedented national surveillance system with
crucial help from its thriving technology industry.''
Ms. Garvie, let me come to you. We are now seeing that most
companies that develop facial recognition systems offer also
real-time software. Do we know how many of these are selling
their technology to government actors in the United States?
Ms. Garvie. That is right. Most, if not all, companies that
market face recognition to law enforcement in the U.S. also
advertise the ability to do face surveillance.
We have no idea how widespread this is, thanks to a
fundamental absence of transparency. We have limited visibility
into what Chicago is doing, what Detroit is doing, Orlando, the
Secret Service here in Washington, DC. and in New York, thanks
to FOIA records and investigative journalists' work.
But for a vast majority of jurisdictions we have no idea.
Mr. Raskin. So you cannot estimate how many communities are
actually deploying this technology right now?
Ms. Garvie. No.
Mr. Raskin. What is the minimum, do you think?
Ms. Garvie. So we can estimate conservatively that face
recognition generally both uses an investigative tool and
potentially as a surveillance tool is accessible to, at very
least, a quarter of all law enforcement agencies across the
U.S.
That is a conservative estimate because it is based on 300
or so records requests where there are 18,000 law enforcement
agencies across the country.
Mr. Raskin. Great.
Ms. Buolamwini, you make some very powerful arguments in
your call for a moratorium on the use of this technology. What
objections would you anticipate from people who say that there
are legitimate law enforcement uses that are actually helping
to solve cases and identify suspects and so on?
Ms. Buolamwini. Well, that is the objection, that there is
this hypothetical good use case. But we actually have to look
at the reality. So the example I gave earlier is in the United
Kingdom where they have reported performance metrics you are
getting false positive match rates over 90 percent.
So the promise for what it could do for security versus the
reality doesn't match up.
Mr. Raskin. And that is dangerous. That is positively
dangerous.
Ms. Buolamwini. Absolutely.
Mr. Raskin. I mean, one, because you are violating
somebody's civil liberties in the most fundamental way, and
two, you are leaving the real criminal suspect or the real
criminal out there at large because you have chosen the wrong
person.
Ms. Buolamwini. True. But I also wanted to touch on your
point with 1.4 billion people being surveyed in China. More
than China, Facebook has 2.6 billion people, and as
Representative Lynch spoke to, it is not just the state
surveillance we have to think about.
We have to think about corporate surveillance. So Facebook
has a patent where they say because we have all of these face
prints, collected often without consent, we can now give you an
option as a retailer to identify somebody who walks into the
store and in their patent they say, we can also give that face
a trustworthiness score.
And based on that trustworthiness score we might determine
if you have access or not to a valuable good. So this----
Mr. Raskin. Facebook is selling this now?
Ms. Buolamwini. This is a patent that they filed as in
something that they could potentially do with the capabilities
they have. So as we are talking about state surveillance, we
absolutely have to be thinking about corporate surveillance as
well and surveillance capital----
Mr. Raskin. And they would say that all of that is built
into whatever contract or licensing agreement people spend 10
seconds signing off on when they set up a Facebook account. Is
that right?
Ms. Buolamwini. You would not have to consent.
Mr. Raskin. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Chairman, finally, something interesting of affinity to
today's deliberations just took place, which is a number of
us--I think you were with me and other members of the Maryland
delegation--we signed a letter expressing concern about the
China government--Chinese government-owned and controlled
businesses getting contracts to run subway systems in America,
including in the Nation's capital here, and there have been a
lot of both civil liberties and national security concerns
raised by it.
And I want to introduce a front-page article from today's
Washington Post, ``Despite National Security Concerns, GOP
Leader McCarthy Blocked Bipartisan Bid to Limit China's Role in
U.S. Transit System.''
Chairman Cummings. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Raskin. And I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Cummings. I have not asked my questions. I am
going to ask them now. I know it is getting late but I will be
brief.
First of all, I want to thank all of you for an excellent
presentation. I think you all really laid out the problem. I
always tell my staff, tell me what, so what, and now what.
And Professor Ferguson, I want to thank you. The ACLU
released documents revealing that the Baltimore County Police
Department, which, of course, is part of my district, partnered
with the private company Geofeedia to identify individuals
protesting the shooting of Freddie Gray in May 2015.
The company stated, and I quote, ``Police officers were
even able to run social media photos through facial recognition
technology to discover rioters with outstanding warrants and
arrest them directly from the crowd,'' end of quote.
To be clear, police officers may have used facial
recognition technology on citizens' personal photos from social
media to identify and arrest them while they were exercising
their First Amendment right to assemble.
As someone who was in the crowd, I find this discovery to
be very disturbing.
Professor Ferguson, the Constitution endows us with, quote,
``the right of people to peaceably assemble.''
So to all of you, how would widespread police use of facial
recognition technology at protests affect citizens' right to
peaceably assemble?
Mr. Ferguson. It is fundamentally American to protest and
it is fundamentally un-American to chill that kind of protest.
What you talk about in Baltimore is a great example of both the
problems of public surveillance and then using third party
image aggregators like Facebook and other social media groups
to do that kind of private surveillance.
Both will chill future protests. It will chill the desire
of American citizens to say that their government may have
acted inappropriately, and it is a real problem which deserves
congressional regulation.
Chairman Cummings. Anybody else?
Mr. Alexander. Yes, sir, and this is what I have been
saying from the onset. If this type of technology is not
utilized in a ethical moral constitutional type of way, it
continues to do exactly what it did to you out there,
Congressman, and other people.
It separates the community from its public safety. There is
a lack of trust. There is a lack of legitimacy. There is this
whole fear of you being a watchdog over me in a warrior sense
as opposed to be a guardian of their community.
No one should have been subjected to what you just
articulated. That is the wrong use of this technology,
particularly when you have individuals, that was just very
eloquently stated by Mr. Ferguson, who are trying to just do
normal work and exercise their First Amendment right and for
people to be able to assemble and not be subjected to this type
of technology, which was used wrongly by Baltimore, and I will
say that publicly and privately, because they lacked the
training and they lacked the understanding of the potential of
what this technology can do to harm their relationship with the
community.
That is a serious problem and that is why you have to--for
me, here again, these companies that develop this technology
they too have to be held responsible and those police
departments that acquired that technology from these companies
have to be held accountable as well, too.
But after listening myself to much of the testimony that
has been stated here today, I really came in here in hopes of
being able to say for public safety, for law enforcement
itself, there is good use of this technology.
But I think a lot of things that we have talked about now
have to be further discovered before we can continue with this
technology because my concern, as a former law enforcement
official, I don't want technology being utilized by police that
is going to separate it further from the community in which it
already serves. If there is benefit to it, let us find it. Let
us utilize it to help keep our communities safe----
Chairman Cummings. Thank you.
Mr. Alexander [continuing]. and because there is no
exception and there is no shortcut around that.
Chairman Cummings. Ms. Guliani, let me ask you the same. We
have had a lengthy discussion here. But I have heard very
little about court cases and I was kind of surprised that I
haven't.
Has this been tested? I mean, have we--are there court
where--has this been an issue and are there court cases with
regard to this?
Because it does seem to me that the ranking member made
some good points that you have got people at the FBI making
agreements with police departments, nobody elected in the
process, and they are using this stuff, and then you have all
the arguments that you all have made with regard to the
defectiveness of the--of the machinery.
What has happened on that front?
Ms. Guliani. Sure. There is no court of appeals that has
directly addressed the constitutionality of, let us say, real-
time face recognition or matching against a driver's license
data base.
And I think that one of the big reasons for that is for
defendants to raise that challenge they have to be notified,
and people aren't being notified.
And so I think that that is insulating this technology from
the judicial review that is very sorely needed. Having said
that, there is, obviously, other bodies of case law--the
Carpenter decision and others--which are relevant and could
apply to uses of face recognition.
But what we need is notice so that these cases can come
before the court. Without that, it becomes very difficult to
have developed case law.
Ms. Buolamwini. One way people are getting notice is by
having economic opportunity denied. So May 20 this week you
actually have William Fambrough, who is in Missouri, who
submitted a case against Uber Technologies, and the reason for
doing this is because Uber requires a selfie verification to
make sure you are the driver you say you are, and in his
particular case, because he was having to lighten his photos so
he could be recognized, Uber said he doctored the photos and
unilaterally kicked him off the platform with no kind of
recourse.
So this was just filed. I don't know how it will go
through. But, again, the only reason the person knew was
because they no longer had this access to economic opportunity.
Chairman Cummings. Coming back to you, Dr. Alexander, how
do you think the use of facial recognition technology to survey
crowds is changing police tactics?
And one of the things I noticed in Baltimore is that they--
you know, at one time--I think they still do it--have a--use a
helicopter and they take these images.
And how does that relate to all of this. You know what I am
talking about?
Mr. Alexander. Yes, and you are also talking about drone
technology, I would imagine.
Chairman Cummings. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Alexander. Yes, sir. Well, you know, a lot of this is
still--in many ways, it is very early stages. But I still think
it goes back to the entire privacy issues.
But one of the biggest things I find, Chairman, from my
experience is that when new technology is developed and we take
that technology and we introduce it into our communities across
the country, we never tell our communities what it is, why it
is being utilized, and how it would help benefit public safety.
So what ends up happening is people draw their own
conclusions around it, already sometimes in suspicion of the
work that police are doing because oftentimes they operate in a
very clandestine type of sense.
But I think it is important as this technology continues to
emerge, whether we are using air support with infrared cameras
or whether we are using drone technology or whatever the case
may be, as we continue to evolve in our technology, when that
technology comes to my front door, as a law enforcement
official I want to know all about it. I want to ask all the
right questions.
I want to have the type of people that are at the table
right here with us today to ask the appropriate questions so we
are going to advance this technology and be able to educate my
community in terms of what it means and what is the benefit of
it and what is the challenges that are associated with it.
It makes that type of technology much better for people to
digest and be able to understand and, as we run across problems
that evolve as a result of it, we are able to work with our
communities to help resolve those even if we have to enact new
legislation around it.
Chairman Cummings. But an hour ago you said that you were
not anxious to see a moratorium and it sounds like you may have
changed that a little bit.
Mr. Alexander. Well, I mean--I mean, I am not because, you
know, one thing I support, Chairman, I support technology. But
I support good technology and I support technology that has
rules with it and it has oversight with it and there is
policies written around it.
I, certainly, would rather not see a moratorium. However,
if the issues that have been articulated here today are as
serious as we believe they to be, then we have to go back and
ask ourselves that question.
But here is the thing we have to be cautious of. If we are
going to put a moratorium on this technology, I also want to
hear what have been the benefits, if any--if any. What have
been the benefits and how do we utilize some of those benefits
in some type of constructive way until we work out the bigger
problems around the issues that we have discussed here today.
I just don't want to throw the baby out with the bathwater
if there is some way in which this technology, which I am going
to make a reasonable assumption and based on my own experience
in some ways it has been useful.
But if it is going to continue to harm the American people,
then it is certainly something in which we need to consider
putting some pause to, if you will, in being able continue to
investigate what is the good part of this technology if
possible we still can utilize as we go through this process of
learning more and putting legislation around it.
Chairman Cummings. Ms. Guliani, you had something to say?
Ms. Guliani. Yes. I mean, I think that we have to resolve
some of the fundamental questions and problems. How are going
to prevent this technology from having a disparate impact
either because of accuracy or because of existing biases in the
criminal justice system?
How are we going to prevent the buildup of a surveillance
state, right, where there is a camera on every street corner
and people don't feel like they can walk around anonymously?
How are we going to safeguard our First Amendment liberties
and make sure that no one says to themselves, I can't go to
this protest because I am afraid my face is going to be
scanned?
And so I think before--we can't move forward with this
technology until we can answer and resolve those fundamental
questions.
Chairman Cummings. Ms. Cortez, did you have anything?
Anybody else?
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Yes. I mean, first of all, Mr. Chairman,
I want to thank you again for holding this hearing. It is so
critical that part of our operation here as government and part
of, as Mr. DeSaulnier expressed, is making government
responsive and making sure that we are ahead of the curve so we
are not consistently operating out of a reactive space but out
of a proactive space.
Because there are forces out there. Whether it is a
corporation trying to make and squeeze a dollar out of every
bit of information about your life or whether it is foreign
governments trying to hack these data bases for that
information as well, we need--there are folks out there that
know the kind of world they want to create that advances their
interests and I think that it is extraordinarily encouraging
that this is a strong bipartisan issue.
Whether we are concerned about this for--whether we are
concerned about this for a civil liberty reason, whether we are
concerned about this for criminal justice reform reasons, about
right to privacy, this is about who we are as America and the
America that is going to be established as technology plays an
increasingly large role in our societal infrastructure.
And we have to make sure how American values and our Bill
of Rights and our constitutional protections get translated to
the internet and in the digital age.
So I want to thank all of our witnesses for coming here. I
want to thank the chairman for your foresight in holding this
hearing. We got to get something done.
Chairman Cummings. And we will.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And I look forward to working with the--
you know, our colleagues on the other side of the aisle and
many of the caucuses that have aligned around these basic
principles.
Chairman Cummings. Mr. Gomez?
Mr. Gomez. Mr. Chairman, I want everybody to be very clear.
We are not anti-technology and we are not anti-innovation.
But we got to be very aware that we are not stumbling into
the future blind and at that same time giving up some liberties
and protections that we have all cherished not only for decades
but for generations.
It is always that balance between innovation and protecting
individual rights and civil liberties. We get that. But this is
a issue that I think must be looked at. As I said, I was never
planning on working on this issue. the issue found me. Well,
thank you to the ACLU.
At the same time, I just got word that the shareholders did
not end up passing a ban--of Amazon did not pass a ban on the
sale of recognition. And you know what? That just means that it
is more important that Congress acts.
So with that, I yield back, and thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for your leadership.
Chairman Cummings. Thank you.
Without objection, the following statements will be
included in the hearing record: Project on Government Oversight
report titled ``Facial Recognition: Facing the Future of
Surveillance; No. 2, Electronic Privacy Information Center
letter on the FBI's next-generation identification program; No.
3, Geofeedia case study titled, quote, ``Baltimore County
Police Department, Geofeedia Partner to Protect the Public
During Freddie Gray Riots,'' end of quote.
Chairman Cummings. Did you have something, Mr. DeSaulnier?
Mr. DeSaulnier. No. Thank you.
Chairman Cummings. Very well.
I would like to thank our witnesses. This has been--I have
been here for now it is 23 years. It is one of the best
hearings I have seen, really. You all were very thorough and
very detailed.
Without objection, all members will have five legislative
days within which to submit additional written questions for
the witnesses to the chair, which will then be forwarded to the
witnesses for their--a response.
I ask all witnesses to please respond as promptly as you
can. Again, I want to thank all of you for your patience. Sorry
we got started late. We had some meetings, and we have gone on
for a while.
But thank you very much.
This meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:23 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[all]