- MEMBERS' DAY HEARING
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
MEMBERS' DAY HEARING
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION
AND LABOR
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, MARCH 14, 2019
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Serial No. 116-10
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and Labor
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: https://edlabor.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-664
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR
ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia, Chairman
Susan A. Davis, California
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina,
Raul M. Grijalva, Arizona
Ranking Member
Joe Courtney, Connecticut
David P. Roe, Tennessee
Marcia L. Fudge, Ohio
Glenn Thompson, Pennsylvania
Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tim Walberg, Michigan
Northern Mariana Islands
Brett Guthrie, Kentucky
Frederica S. Wilson, Florida
Bradley Byrne, Alabama
Suzanne Bonamici, Oregon
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Mark Takano, California
Elise M. Stefanik, New York
Alma S. Adams, North Carolina
Rick W. Allen, Georgia
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Francis Rooney, Florida
Donald Norcross, New Jersey
Lloyd Smucker, Pennsylvania
Pramila Jayapal, Washington
Jim Banks, Indiana
Joseph D. Morelle, New York
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Susan Wild, Pennsylvania
James Comer, Kentucky
Josh Harder, California
Ben Cline, Virginia
Lucy McBath, Georgia
Russ Fulcher, Idaho
Kim Schrier, Washington
Van Taylor, Texas
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Steve Watkins, Kansas
Jahana Hayes, Connecticut
Ron Wright, Texas
Donna E. Shalala, Florida
Daniel Meuser, Pennsylvania
Andy Levin, Michigan*
William R. Timmons, IV, South
Ilhan Omar, Minnesota
Carolina
David J. Trone, Maryland
Dusty Johnson, South Dakota
Haley M. Stevens, Michigan
Susie Lee, Nevada
Lori Trahan, Massachusetts
Joaquin Castro, Texas
* Vice-Chair
Veronique Pluviose, Staff Director
Brandon Renz, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on March 14, 2019...................................
1
Statement of Members:
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', Chairman, Committee on
Education and Labor........................................
1
Prepared statement of....................................
2
Mitchell, Hon. Paul, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Michigan..........................................
3
Prepared statement of....................................
5
Smucker, Hon. Lloyd, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Pennsylvania......................................
2
Prepared statement of....................................
3
Soto, Hon. Darren, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida...........................................
17
Prepared statement of....................................
19
Thompson, Hon. Glenn ``GT'', a Representative in Congress
from the State of Pennsylvania.............................
22
Prepared statement of....................................
26
Waters, Hon. Maxine, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................
29
Prepared statement of....................................
31
Additional Submissions:
Espaillat, Hon. Adriano, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York:
Prepared statement of....................................
36
Evans, Hon. Dwight, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Pennsylvania:
Prepared statement of....................................
39
Maloney, Hon. Carolyn B., a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York:
Prepared statement of....................................
41
MEMBERS' DAY HEARING
----------
Thursday, March 14, 2019
House of Representatives
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
----------
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:02 a.m., in
room 2175, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Robert C.
``Bobby'' Scott (chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Scott, Takano, Shalala, Thompson,
Smucker, Comer, and Johnson.
Staff present: Tylease Alli, Chief Clerk; Nekea Brown,
Deputy Clerk; Ilana Brunner, General Counsel; Jacque Mosley
Chevalier, Director of Education Policy; Emma Eatman, Press
Aide; Mishawn Freeman, Staff Assistant; Alison Hard,
Professional Staff Member; Carrie Hughes, Director of Health
and Human Services; Ariel Jona, Staff Assistant; Stephanie
Lalle, Deputy Communications Director; Andre Lindsay, Staff
Assistant; Jaria Martin, Staff Assistant; Kevin McDermott,
Senior Labor Policy Advisor; Richard Miller, Director of Labor
Policy; Max Moore, Office Aid; Veronique Pluviose, Staff
Director; Banyon Vassar, Deputy Director of Information
Technology; Katelyn Walker, Counsel; Joshua Weisz,
Communications Director; Rachel West, Senior Economic Policy
Advisor; Courtney Butcher, Minority Coalitions and Members
Services Coordinator; Amy Raaf Jones, Minority Director of
Education and Human Resources Policy; Hannah Matesic, Minority
Legislative Operations Manager; Brandon Renz, Minority Staff
Director; and Mandy Schaumburg, Minority Chief Counsel and
Deputy Director of Education Policy.
Chairman SCOTT. The Committee on Education and Labor will
come to order. I note that a quorum is present. The committee
is meeting today for the Members' Day Hearing. This Hearing is
an opportunity for Members to inform the committee of their
interests and priorities as it relates to the committee's
jurisdiction. Members who wish to testify will sit on panels,
each Member will be given 5 minutes to present his or her
testimony orally. After Member's presentation, committee
Members will ask the panelists questions if they wish, under
the 5 minute rule.
Pursuant to committee Rule 7C, opening statements are
limited to the Chair and the Ranking Member, and I recognize
myself for the purpose of making an opening statement.
I want to thank everyone for joining us today for the House
committee on Education and Labor's Members' Day Hearing.
Today's hearing is an opportunity for the committee to hear
from all Members of Congress about their priorities for
addressing our Nation's education system, workforce, healthcare
system, and economy. Issues within the committee's jurisdiction
include a wide range of policy areas that impact Americans
across the country throughout their liveslife, from birth to
retirement. Accordingly, it is not only appropriate, but
necessary, to get input and ideas from Members of Congress
representing all part of this diverse nation.
Today we have the chance to engage in an open dialog, and
how we can work in a bipartisan way to protect vital services
and programs for our Nation's schools, workplaces, health care
systems, and also improve the quality of life in our
communities.
I want to thank all of our Members for being with us today,
and I look forward to our discussion. I look forward to working
with all my colleagues to ensure that America's a country where
everyone can succeed.
I will now recognize the distinguished Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, for the purpose of opening
statement.
[The statement by Chairman Scott follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'' Scott, Chairman,
Committee on Education and Labor
Thank you all for joining us for the House Committee on Education
and Labor's Members Day Hearing. Today's hearing is an opportunity for
the Committee to hear from all Members of Congress about their
priorities for addressing our Nation's education system, work force,
healthcare system, and economy.
Issues within the Committee's jurisdiction include a wide range of
policy areas that impact Americans across the country throughout their
lives, from birth to retirement.
Accordingly, it is not only appropriate but necessary to get input
and ideas from Members of Congress representing all parts of this
diverse nation.
Today, we have the chance to engage in an open dialog on how we can
work in a bipartisan way to protect vital services and programs for our
Nation's schools, workplaces, and healthcare system, and improve the
quality of life in our communities.
Thank you again to all the Members for being with us today. I look
forward to our discussion and I look forward to working with all my
colleagues to ensure that America is a country where everyone can
succeed.
______
Mr. SMUCKER. Thank you, Chairman Scott, thank you for
yielding. I will be brief in my opening remarks. The whole
point of it is this is Members' Day, we get the opportunity to
hear from Members who may not be on the committee.
But, Mr. Chairman, I know that we agree that this truly is
one of the best committees in the house, impacting Americans
from the youngest Americans to the oldest, and everyone in
between. Our broad jurisdiction can be utilized to improve
their lives, make their lives better or worse, and of course we
are always striving for better.
With issues and policies as diverse as the ones we cover
here, every hearing has a potential to be a real learning
experience. And this hearing is a fantastic opportunity to hear
from colleagues we don't always get to hear from.
So save more of my thoughts for another day, and simply add
my welcome to our guests.
I yield back.
[The statement by Mr. Smucker follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Lloyd Smucker, a Representative in Congress
from the state of Pennsylvania
I'll be very brief in my opening remarks because the whole point of
Members' Day is that we get the opportunity to hear from Members who
aren't on this Committee.
Mr. Chairman, I know we are in total agreement that this is truly
the best Committee in the entire House. From the youngest Americans to
the oldest and everyone in between, our broad jurisdiction can be
utilized to make their lives better or worse. Of course, we're always
striving for better.
With issues and policies as diverse as the ones we cover here,
every hearing has the potential to be a real learning experience, and
this hearing is a fantastic opportunity to hear from colleagues we
don't always get to hear from.
So, I'll save more of my thoughts for another day and simply add my
welcome to our guests.
I yield back.
______
Chairman SCOTT. Thank you. Without objection, all other
committee Members who wish to insert written statements for the
record may do so by submitting them to the committee Clerk
electronically by March 27th.
I appreciate all of our witnesses for being with us today,
and look forward to your testimony. You know how the
microphones work and what the 5-minute rule means.
I will now recognize Mr. Mitchell.
STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL MITCHELL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN
Mr. MITCHELL. Thank you, Chairman Scott and Ranking Member
Smucker, and all the Members of the committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to come today and talk about priorities of your
committee. And particular for me is priorities for
reauthorization of the Higher Education Act.
I have first-hand perspective on the importance of getting
information to constituents, to families, in terms of the value
and opportunities in postsecondary education. I spent over 30
years in postsecondary education as an administrator in a
variety of roles.
I also was the first in my extended family to ever go to
college. The first one to set foot on a college campus. At the
time it was a guess. I had no idea what the outcome would be
from going to college, I had a hope. Why? Because such little
information was available and I admit, it was a number of years
ago, Mr. Chairman, I am a little older now. But nevertheless,
when you started asking information about the outcomes, what
was the likelihood of graduating, what was the career
opportunities, what could you learn from the degree I pursued.
All you got was the best anecdotes.
We are asking people to invest in anecdotes right now
because they lack information necessary to make informed
decisions. While right now almost 45 million Americans hold 1.5
trillion in student debt. They acquired that debt largely by
guessing and hoping. We have 11.5 percent student loans that
are 90 days or more delinquent.
We can hold the higher education system accountable by
empowering consumers and families to make informed decisions
about their investment in postsecondary education. These days
no one would buy a car, a refrigerator, without being able to
look. Where do you go, you go online and you say OK, what is
the information on this washer or dryer, what is the
information on this car, what is its reliability. You can look
all that up on the Internet, it is an amazing tool.
Try to find the graduation rate, the employment rate, and
the earnings for the Nursing Program at Michigan State
University. I guarantee it is a difference between the
Architecture Program, the Nursing Program, my alma mater. Try
to find that information. Yet families are making massive
investments for their young people in postsecondary education
and, yes, taking out loans. And then sometimes they're saying
what do we get for this? Why did we end up in this situation?
Because they have no idea, they are guessing.
You are empowered, this committee is empowered to change
that. To in fact give families and consumers the information
they need to make informed decisions. And guess what? It is not
that tricky. Consumers need that information. Policymakers need
that information because they are making decisions about their
institutions. And they don't have aggregate information either
on programs in their institutions.
And last but not least, let's be honest, employers need a
talent pipeline where people are informed in terms of the
decisions they can make.
Today we propose or we submit the College Transparency Act
in Congress. It is different from the last bill we had last
term. I encourage the committee to look at it. We made some
improvements based upon feedback from committee Members, from
outsiders, from various stakeholders.
Last term, and we are still working on co-sponsors this
year, we had 16 Senators, 33 Representatives, 130 organizations
that supported the College Transparency Act. I believe we made
it better.
Let me quickly talk about what it does. It creates a
Postsecondary Student Data Advisory committee empowered to
create a secure data base of the outcomes for students.
Outcomes being how many students enrolled, how many students
graduated, how many students graduated within a reasonable
timeframe, by the way, how many students got employment, and
what their average earnings were. Largely from data that
already exists with the Federal Government, but our systems are
so bad that they can't access that information. And it puts
that information out in an aggregate data base that will
require colleges and universities to publish in a searchable
format.
The important thing is we create that committee, that
advisory committee, and we give them 4 years to design this, to
ensure security, to ensure that information is safe. We don't
want it, nobody wants that information out there. To make sure
they do that with the standards in place, and they can update
those standards.
Yesterday the Republican Leader spoke before the committee
of Congress on the importance of looking at block chain and
other technologies to secure data in the Federal Government. We
want to get them time to do that. But equally I think we need
to be focused on, and I would encourage the committee to focus
postsecondary education upon advising the users, the taxpayers,
and the consumers, what they are putting their money into.
Because as I said earlier, there's trillions of dollars
invested in postsecondary education right now and people in
many cases aren't informed, and they're not getting their
money's worth. Let's hold them accountable, let's hold
postsecondary education accountable by empowering the users
rather than hope, frankly, the Federal Government gets it right
and the regulators figure it out. Because I can tell you from
my 30 some years of experience, they often miss the mark.
With that I yield back, 11 seconds. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
[The statement of Mr. Mitchell follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman SCOTT. Thank you. And I forgot in your
introduction, I forgot to mention that you are a former Member
of this committee, and we miss you.
Mr. MITCHELL. I miss being here. I had a tough choice to go
to the House Armed Services, but if you will let me back every
now and then, I promise to behave myself.
Chairman SCOTT. Yes, it sounds good. Mr. Soto.
STATEMENT OF HON. DARREN SOTO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA
Mr. SOTO. Thank you, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member
Smucker, and Members of the committee, for this opportunity. I
would like to talk about H.R. 827, the Artificial Intelligence
Jobs Act, otherwise known as the AI JOBS Act. This bill would
authorize the Department of Labor to create a report analyzing
the future growth of artificial intelligence and its impacts on
the work force.
I want to first start out by thanking our co-sponsors,
Representatives Chris Murphy, Stefanik, Takano, Mitchell,
Clark, Gallagher, Dingell, Norman, and Khanna. Obviously this
is a bipartisan bill. We also have innovators in the tax base
supporting this bill, including Intel, Lyft, the Center for
Data Innovation, the Software Alliance, and Security Industry
Association.
Imagine first if we could go back in time to the late 90's
or early 2000's and reanalyze how this Congress reacted to
something called the Internet. It was a huge grower of jobs and
our economy, but it also had disruptions. And imagine we would
better prepare ourselves, particularly for workers who were
displaced, while also promoting the innovation of the Internet.
And now consider we are at the same juncture with regard to
artificial intelligence. You think of things like Amazon, who
have redefined retail in many ways, or Netflix and other movie
providers and how we are not renting movies in a store anymore
as much or Spotify or Pandora who people are streaming music.
Even photos, think about the differences from 20 years ago.
And then think about the workers who lost those jobs at
that time and who are looking for a new place in the economy,
and making sure we are giving them the training and the tools
they need.
Since the AI JOBS Act was introduced last Congress,
President Trump also released an Executive Order ``Accelerating
America's leadership in artificial intelligence,'' which
highlighted the paramount economic importance of continued
American leadership in artificial intelligence. One aspect of
this Order focused on building the AI work force and directed
agencies to prepare a work force with the skills needed to
adapt and thrive in this new age of AI.
The AI JOBS Act aligns and further this directive by
commissioning an advisory report within the Department of
Labor. Specifically, the report would collect data to analyze
which industries are projected to have the most growth through
artificial intelligence and the demographics which may
experience expanded careers and those whose jobs may be most
vulnerable to displacement.
To ensure transparency the report will be conducted in a
non-partisan manner in collaboration with the education
institutions, employers, and think tanks in the tech and
manufacturing sectors, and the Secretary of Commerce and the
Director of Bureau of Census. This bill is also supported by
the innovators that I talked about.
I think the key is this could be a template for amendments
from this committee for other areas in artificial intelligence
where we may want to be bullish on. This is the future of the
economy in many sections from healthcare to big data to
manufacturing. There are so many different applications we may
not even contemplate at this juncture. But at the same time
make sure workers in areas that may be disrupted have the tools
to be equipped. We cannot shirk or draw back from this
opportunity, but we do and can be more prepared.
And with that I look forward to questions and yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Mr. Soto follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman SCOTT. Thank you. Thank you for your testimony.
And we will have questions from the panel members. I will
defer, gentleman from California have questions, the gentlelady
from Florida, gentlelady from Florida.
Ms. SHALALA. Thank you very much. Forgive me for my
questions, but I have been at the other end, at the Cabinet
Department when we got these kinds of requirements and at
universities when we got these kinds of requirements.
So, Congressman Mitchell, I really appreciate and I agree
with the need for transparency. Parents really need to know,
even though the students change their majors at least three
times in the course of their college career, parents do need to
know, at least when they are entering an institution, what the
outcomes might be in terms of jobs and other kinds of things.
It's easy to collect that data for professional schools.
And that is nursing schools. Because the students take the exam
and then go right into a job. For arts and sciences majors,
colleges struggle. And let me tell you why. Because so many of
them don't take a job initially. They either go to graduate
school, and for the better colleges, if they do go on to
graduate school it looks like they have no income, so there has
to be sensitivity in that. Or they go wandering around
someplace to take part-time jobs, as you know this new
generation does. They start with internships and it looks like
their income is down.
So while I am not opposed, I actually believe in
transparency and more information, I simply wanted to point out
to you that this is pretty complicated for colleges and
universities.
Mr. MITCHELL. I would say it is complicated to explain in a
5-minute opening as well. I would be happy to talk to you about
it.
The Advisory committee is envisioned to actually address
that. For example, to report the percentage of students that go
on to graduate programs. It is a valid outcome of a
postsecondary education program. To report the number that are
employed but elected part-time employment. That data is
available in various data bases the Federal Government has. The
problem is it does not aggregate it and doesn't report it, and
doesn't do so in any safe kind of, any secure kind of manner.
That's what this envision doing.
Ms. SHALALA. OK.
Mr. MITCHELL. And more importantly, let me say just one
thing, ma'am, which it also allows in making informed
decisions. For example, I don't care whether someone decides to
go to Yale in art history and wants to accrue significant debt
if that's a choice they make on informed decisions. But when
they make that guess, I think that is a poor use of taxpayer
money, individual moneys. And I don't mean to pick on Yale, it
is just an example.
Ms. SHALALA. You and I would prefer they go to the Big Ten.
Mr. MITCHELL. I would prefer, Michigan State's a great
school, yes, it is.
Ms. SHALALA. Thank you. Congressman Soto, I like, you know,
your proposal. The problem is I don't think the Labor
Department has the capacity to actually do it. Are you flexible
enough to allow them to contract out to maybe one of the think
tanks to actually coordinate this information in a way in which
it would be non-partisan? Or the National Academy of Sciences,
for example, that has issued numerous reports on artificial
intelligence, or a combination of the two?
Mr. SOTO. Yes, Congresswoman. And in addition, I would say
we here in Congress have the ability to provide additional
resources to the Department of Labor if we wanted to. But, yes,
I am flexible on this.
The main point of the bill is for us to get proactive with
regard to where we could boost growth in AI while still doing
better than we were able to do with the Internet, which no one
could have possibly imagined what it would be now as it was in
the early 90's to mid-90's. And so it gives us a chance to get
ahead of the game with the displaced workers too.
So I am open minded to not only this being a template for
other AI ideas, but who would participate to help advise
Congress on these sorts of issues.
Ms. SHALALA. Exactly. And my only point is that the
capacity of the Department of Labor to do these things is very
limited. But their capacity to contract out with a think tank
or with the National Academy of Sciences to do a report like
this, even where you interact with business, it seems to me any
way we can get a non-partisan report is important. But I think
the goals of both of your reports are really important. It's
just that both of them are very complicated to do.
And forgive me for being protective of Federal workers.
I yield back.
Chairman SCOTT. The lady yields back. Thank you. Any other
questions? No questions. I will just recognize myself for
questions.
First, Mr. Mitchell, do you know how the information you
are trying to get differs from what's already on the dashboard
under present law?
Mr. MITCHELL. Well absolutely. For example, enrollment
information and programs is often not accurate because, as
Congresswoman from Florida understands, that the IPEDS, what's
called the IPEDS, is less than accurate or clear. It is a
three-ring circus because it doesn't deal well with, for
example, institutions that enroll students every month rather
than by the semester system, start with that. The collection of
the data is cumbersome for universities, colleges, any
postsecondary institution. They have different reporting
requirements depending on the nature of the institutions. You
do not necessarily get apples to apples comparisons of
outcomes.
And I agree that understanding whether or not someone's
successful in going from a postsecondary to a graduate degree
program is important information. In my college, a lot of
students when I went to law school, they were only guessing to
be able to tell you whether they went on to law school or not
because the data wasn't there. And that was the significant
reason for enrolling in that institution. So I think we can go
through a whole list of data, but I think the important thing
is you got a fairly comprehensive set of data, it may not be
everything for everybody, but I assure you it's a whole lot
more than we have now.
Chairman SCOTT. Thank you. And, Mr. Soto, once we get the
information there will be obviously job potential and job loss.
Does your bill tell us what to do with that information?
Mr. SOTO. So I would think that's in the purview of this
committee. And I would think we would want to get this within a
year so that we would still within this term, be able to
respond with thoughtful legislation both to help grow
artificial intelligence industries but also have the work force
and retraining tools deployed to areas that will be disrupted.
I am sure everybody in this committee already has their initial
opinions on where these spaces are. And if we already have all
the answers, then let's just get started on that. But if we
feel like we need additional information from experts in an
official report that then we can rely on, then this is an
organized way to do it. But it only would be step one.
Step two would be sometime next year when we get a report
back, should this committee look favorably on this legislation,
would be to implement those through real dollars and real
policy changes in an organized way.
Chairman SCOTT. Thank you. Are there other questions? There
don't appear to be any questions. Gentleman from Pennsylvania.
Mr. MEUSER. Yes. I would just like to thank the witnesses
for being here, particularly Mr. Mitchell. Do miss you on the
committee. I know you have done some work on this issue in the
past. I think it is very important that students, parents are,
you know, have the information in hand when they are making
decisions in regards to their child's education. So I look
forward to continue to work with you on that.
And, Mr. Soto, we know with AI, with robotics, our work
force will change dramatically over the next decade or two. I
just recently visited a robotics company developing robots that
will work side by side with humans. And they were talking about
their projections and how many jobs will be displaced by
robots. It will be a change in the workplace, but will be a
tremendous opportunity as well. So I do think it is incumbent
upon us to try to understand those changes and understand how
we can implement policy that ensures the work force, folks are
prepared for the jobs that are available tomorrow. So
appreciate your work in your area a well. Thanks for being
here.
Chairman SCOTT. Thank you. Thank you very much. Now we have
a second panel which Representative Waters has been detained on
the floor, so she is expected to get here later. But I
understand the gentleman from Pennsylvania has a statement, and
he is recognized now.
STATEMENT OF HON. GLEN THOMPSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Chairman. I promise to talk
slowly, on time, until Ms. Waters gets here.
Chairman Scott, Republican Leader Smucker, and Members of
the House Education and Labor committee, good morning. Thank
you for providing this opportunity for Members to be able to
bring their priorities before the committee. I have always felt
that this type of opportunity is extremely important, gives us
an opportunity to share with our colleagues.
As a Member of the committee I have served on this capacity
since first being elected in 2009. And while the majority/
minority have changed hands twice since that time, I have been
steadfast in my commitment to provide honest input into the
process. And to share my vision, my goals, and to work toward
those, and we have done so in a bipartisan way, the things that
have been important to me that I have advanced.
And while we don't always agree on every issue, there are
many areas where we can continue to build consensus, to support
programs that will improve lives and shape future.
Primarily among these are areas of consensus is a
dedication to strengthen the work force and provide Americans
of all age opportunities to achieve their full life potential.
So three areas I just want to briefly address.
First of all is career and technical education. And I want
to thank this committee for what we have done on career and
technical education. As Co-Chair of the bipartisan House Career
and Technical Education Caucus, I strongly support CTE programs
that provide learners of all ages with career ready skills.
From agriculture to marketing, manufacturing, CTE programs work
to develop America's most valuable resource, its people. The
most valuable resource of any employer. It's not its product,
service, location, appliance plan, marketing plan, it is
qualified and trained work force.
As this committee knows, CTE is taught in a range of
settings from high schools, area technical centers, 2-year
community colleges, quite frankly an apprenticeship programs on
the job. That's a wonderful program, and I think this committee
has reinforced a vision I have always had as looking for an
education system. And Current Technical Education does this. It
has portals an American of any age can enter to at any time,
get just what they need to make their life better, to get an
advancement or promotion, a better job, come out of that system
and go to work. And maybe come back in at a future point.
In total, 12.5 million high school and college students or
postsecondary students are enrolled in CTE programs.
Fortunately, the 115th Congress unanimously passed the first
major overhaul to Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical Act
since 2006, Strengthening Career and Technical Education For
the 21st Century Act. While I was an original sponsor of this
bill, the process in the bipartisan commitment to doing what is
right for the American worker, American families, American
business, prevailed. Now this couldn't have been done without
many of my colleagues that are part of and who have been a part
of this committee.
The bill was signed into law by President Trump on July
31st, 2018, and it aims to close the skills gap by modernizing
Federal investment in CTE programs and connecting educators
with industry stakeholders. What does the country need to
continue to be vigilant on career and technical education?
So I would like to suggest to the committee there is a bill
that's been referred to this committee as of March 7th, 2019,
it is one that I did with a partner of mine I have worked very
closely on this issue with, Congressman Jim Langevin, and that
is the Cyber Security Skills Integration Act, H.R. 1592.
Cyber security is an incredible emerging issue with every
industry. And so this creates a pilot program and it continues
in the spirit to what we have done. It is a partnership between
employers and education to, you know, to make sure that we are
providing some models, incentivizing, creation of the
integration of cyber security skills into career and technical
education.
Child nutrition is a second area. I would just ask
favorable movement and considerations from hearings on H.R.
1592. Federal child nutrition programs is another area, very
important. As we all know, low income students and families,
those living in financial distress, gives them access to
nutritional meals.
Unfortunately, the last several years there's been, you
know, bottom line, it's time to reauthorize that bill. We
reauthorize to refine, to make improvements where we can, to
learn from the implementations.
And so I really encourage we continue as we did in the sub-
committee just this week, to look at moving on reauthorization,
building toward reauthorization of what was the Healthy Hunger-
Free Kids Act in 2010. You know, one of the areas in particular
to me is, quite frankly, among the changes, the law mandated
that flavored milk had to be low fat milk within the program.
We know that is contrary to all the research that is being
published now almost universally.
So the science has caught up.
That law that we did, along with lower participation as a
result in the program, led to an alarming decline in milk
consumption in schools since 2010. And quite frankly, putting
my agriculture leadership hat on, that loss of a generation of
milk drinkers as a result has been implicated in the 50 percent
decline in the rural economy in the past 6 years. Cotton and
dairy has had a devastating impact on rural America.
So a chance to look at the science, doing what's right for
the kids with nutrition, I would just encourage us to take a
look at that. Obviously the bill in particular is in the
jurisdiction of this committee, has been introduced, has been
referred as the Whole Milk for Healthy Kids.
And finally, the Community Services Block Grant
reauthorization, which is near and dear to my heart. It traces
its roots back to this committee more than 50 years ago to the
Economic Opportunity Act of 1964. The Act established local
community action agencies to help people identify where people
were in poverty and how to address it, how to raise people out
of poverty using public and private partnerships. Virtually
every county in American has a community action agency. They
act as a safety net, really as a catalyst for low-income
individuals and families to be able to raise themselves up out
of poverty and create opportunities. The Community Services
Block Grant is the only Federal program with explicit goal of
reducing poverty regardless of its cause.
First, this program has not been reauthorized in more than
20 years. We all know that is unacceptable. That is why just
this week, I am proud to work with Representative Betty
McCollum. She and I have just introduced, with strong
bipartisan co-sponsorships, H.R. 1695, the Community Services
Block Grant Reauthorization Act of 2019. The bill aims to renew
the Nation's commitment to reducing poverty through an
established network of more than 1,000 local community action
agencies. And it is time for Congress to reauthorize CSBG. We
have done a great job of reauthorizing laws that have been
stale and needed to be updated, brought into the 21st Century,
and it really is time for CSBG.
Thanks again, Chairman Scott and Republican Leader Smucker
and Republican Leader Foxx, Members of this committee, for
allowing me to express my priorities to this committee and the
116th Congress. Appreciate it. Look forward to continue to work
with you.
[The statement of Mr. Thompson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman SCOTT. Well thank you. And I thank you for your
leadership, particularly on CTE over the years.
Do you have any questions at this time?
Ms. Waters is apparently on her way, so why don't we
briefly recess until she gets here. Without objection.
[Recess]
Chairman SCOTT. The committee will reconvene. We were
informed that the conflict on the floor, that's understandable,
you can't be in more than one place at the same time. And we
are delighted to have Ms. Waters with us today. And you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. WATERS. Thank you very much. Chairman Scott and Ranking
Member Foxx, thank you for scheduling this hearing. While this
committee has jurisdiction over numerous issues of importance
to my district, I will today focus on two, student loan
forgiveness and the for-profit college industry.
I testify before you today as someone who has long
advocated for a public education system that is accessible,
affordable, and equitable.
Young people are sold on a simple version of the system in
which students of any color and economic background attend
class in a room furnished with every necessary educational
resource and tool, receive quality instruction from a dedicated
and well-compensated teacher, work hard, and learn the skills
and knowledge necessary to obtain gainful employment after
graduation.
This is the dream of millennials and young people, and this
is a dream that they were sold, I now fear they were not told
the truth. The ability to pay one's way through college, once a
hallmark of the self-sufficient, hard-working student, is now
an unattainable myth. The price of college has increased nearly
400 percent over the last three decades, and rising tuition
leads to a dramatic and corresponding increase in student loan
debt, which now totals about $1.5 trillion. This is 500 billion
more than the Nation's credit card debt. Perhaps if students
were able to procure a job within their field of study, then
such financial burdens would be worth the sacrifice.
For thousands of young people, including most especially
those who attended a for-profit college, the notion of
obtaining employment after graduation is yet another broken
promise. Millennials were promised jobs, careers, and the
ability to provide themselves and their families. They were not
told the truth. And Congress now has a responsibility to
address two of the primary reasons these promises never
materialized, student loan debt and the for-profit college
industry's fraudulent practices.
I urge the committee to protect and expand student loan
forgiveness programs such as the Public Service Loan
Forgiveness Program and forgiveness tied to borrower
participation in income-based repayment plans.
Statistic regarding millennial student loan debt show a
clear and present crisis. The average millennial with student
debt has 75 percent less net worth than those who are debt
free, and 46 percent less in their savings and checking
accounts.
The average debt load per borrower, adjusted for inflation,
has increased 30 percent since 2001.
Over one-third of millennials say they have delayed
purchasing a home because of student loan debt. Thirty percent
say they cannot yet afford to save for retirement, and 16
percent have put off having children. This debt is not
distributed equitably either. Those from the poorest
communities statistically take on the most debt, and women hold
about two-thirds of all student loan debt.
Forgiving all student debt owed by the Federal Government
would increase the gross domestic product by at least $86
billion per year and add a minimum 1.2 million jobs.
Congress must boldly attack the student debt crisis by
protecting loan forgiveness programs.
For-profit colleges greatly contribute to the student debt
crisis. This industry continues to receive Federal funds
despite destroying or disrupting the lives of millions of
Americans. And I personally witness the effects of their abuse
in my own district.
In 1992, legislation I introduced limited the number of
Federal funds for-profit colleges could receive to 85 percent
of their total revenue, leaving 15 percent of their profits to
be raised either through other non-Federal means. This law was
later amended to the current 90/10 rule.
In 2011, I first proposed closing a loophole which
categorizes Veterans' education benefits as a non-Federal
source of funding. This loophole allows for-profit college
industry to enroll Veterans for the GI benefits and tuition
assistance without counting against the cap limiting the amount
of revenue they may receive from Federal funding to 90 percent.
I will soon introduce legislation that will both restore the
original 85/15 rule and count Veterans' education benefits as
Federal funds. Both changes are long overdue. So I urge the
committee to incorporate both policies into the Higher
Education Act.
In conclusion, I thank you for the opportunity to testify,
and I yield back the balance of my time.
[The statement of Ms. Waters follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman SCOTT. Thank you. Gentleman from Pennsylvania, do
you have any questions?
The two proposals that you've made, from the 85/15 and
closing the Veterans' loopholes, the two things that we're
strongly considering, so we appreciate your testimony on those
two issues.
So are there any other ways that we can ensure that the
for-profits are actually delivering a quality product?
Ms. WATERS. Mr. Chairman, I do believe that we need to
scrutinize more carefully and more closely all of these for-
profit colleges. As you know, you have and I have and we have
worked to make sure that some of them are no longer able to
operate because of the abuses that we saw and what we learned
about young people who had great expectations who attended some
of these for-profit colleges, only to discover that in the
first place many of them did not have qualified teachers, many
of them could not keep the promises that they had made for
giving them a quality education, and they were not able to get
a job once they had gone through. Or, some of them literally
closed in the middle of the education that the students were
supposed to be obtaining and left them stranded. And I think we
have some situations like that now that we have to pay
attention to. So I would just suggest that we have got to be
tougher.
Chairman SCOTT. The ones that collapsed in mid-stream, for
those, there is one problem. The students have incurred the
debt and the question is whether they need to repay the debt to
the school that collapsed right in the middle of their
education.
There's a borrower's defense, this administration is trying
to roll that back and make it more difficult for students to
access borrower's defense. We need to make sure that's stronger
too, because if it collapses mid-stream, not only have you
wasted all your time, but there is no excuse to make you pay
student debt for something you didn't even get. So we need to
strengthen the borrower's defense.
On the student loans, the forgiveness programs,
unfortunately have been zeroed out by the administration. We're
going to make sure they get restored in our budget. The income
based repayment and the Public Service Loan Forgiveness and
other forgiveness programs need to be there.
There's one that teachers, if you sign up you can get a
good education, get a grant, conditioned on you teaching in low
income areas for 5 years. People coming to the end of the 5
years, and there's an unfortunate denial of their grant. They
said this is to inform you that your grant is now a loan, pay
back the money. And we're working to make sure that the
teachers who have fulfilled their responsibilities get their
benefit.
I appreciate your testimony, these are two areas that we
really need to be looking into student debt and then the abuses
in the for profit. There are some good ones, and our
responsibility is to separate the good from the bad. And the
Veterans' loophole and 85/15 will not adversely affect those
that are doing a good job. Those that are not doing a good job
will be fearful.
Ms. WATERS. Thank you so very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate your leadership and all of the wonderful work that
you have done for all of Americans on education. And I am
hopeful that Ms. Devos will learn a lot about the for-profit
industry and correct some of the mistakes that she's made. I am
not going to consider her an absolute enemy, I am going to
consider that she just doesn't know any better at this time.
Thank you very much.
Chairman SCOTT. Thank you. Are there other comments? Thank
you very much. And I am delighted we could work with the floor
schedule, this is very important testimony.
I want to thank our witnesses for their participation
today. The input of our colleagues is paramount to what we can
accomplish during this Congress.
As the Ranking Acting Ranking Member, you have any other
comments? If not, there's no further business.
Without objection, the committee stands adjourned.
[Additional submission by Mr. Espaillat follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[Additional submission by Mr. Evans follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[Additional submission by Ms. Maloney follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[Whereupon, at 9:44 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[all]