- NOMINATIONS OF THE HONORABLE DAVID C. WILLIAMS, THE HONORABLE ROBERT M. DUNCAN, AND CALVIN R. TUCKER TO BE GOVERNORS, U.S. POSTAL SERVICE
[Senate Hearing 115-450]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-450
NOMINATIONS OF HON. DAVID C. WILLIAMS, HON. ROBERT M. DUNCAN, AND
CALVIN R. TUCKER TO BE GOVERNORS,
U.S. POSTAL SERVICE
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
NOMINATIONS OF THE HONORABLE DAVID C. WILLIAMS,
THE HONORABLE ROBERT M. DUNCAN, AND CALVIN R. TUCKER TO BE GOVERNORS,
U.S. POSTAL SERVICE
__________
APRIL 18, 2018
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.Govinfo.gov/
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
32-453 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin, Chairman
JOHN McCAIN, Arizona
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
HEIDI HEITKAMP, North Dakota
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
STEVE DAINES, Montana
DOUG JONES, Alabama
Christopher R. Hixon, Staff Director
Gabrielle D'Adamo Singer, Chief Counsel
Jennifer L. Selde, Professional Staff Member
Margaret E. Daum, Minority Staff Director
Donald K. Sherman, Minority Senior Advisor
Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
Bonni E. Dinerstein, Hearing Clerk
C O N T E N T S
------
Opening statements:
Page
Senator Johnson..............................................
1
Senator McCaskill............................................
2
Senator Portman..............................................
16
Senator Heitkamp.............................................
19
Senator Peters...............................................
22
Senator Carper...............................................
25
Prepared statements:
Senator Johnson..............................................
31
Senator McCaskill............................................
32
WITNESSES
Wednesday, April 18, 2018
Hon. Mitch McConnell, a U.S. Senator from the State of Kentucky
4
Hon. Rand Paul, a U.S. Senator from the State of Kentucky
5
Hon. David C. William to be Governor, U.S. Postal Service
Testimony....................................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
37
Biographical and financial information.......................
40
Letter from the Office of Government Ethics..................
60
Responses to pre-hearing questions...........................
64
Responses to post-hearing questions..........................
97
Hon. Robert M. Duncan to be Governor, U.S. Postal Service
Testimony....................................................
8
Prepared statement...........................................
111
Biographical and financial information.......................
113
Letter from the Office of Government Ethics..................
133
Responses to pre-hearing questions...........................
137
Responses to post-hearing questions..........................
162
Calvin R. Tucker to be Governor, U.S. Postal Service
Testimony....................................................
10
Prepared statement...........................................
171
Biographical and financial information.......................
175
Letter from the Office of Government Ethics..................
191
Responses to pre-hearing questions...........................
195
Responses to post-hearing questions..........................
217
APPENDIX
Income statement submitted by Senator Johnson....................
228
NOMINATIONS OF THE HONORABLE
DAVID C. WILLIAMS, THE HONORABLE
ROBERT M. DUNCAN, AND CALVIN R. TUCKER
TO BE GOVERNORS, U.S. POSTAL SERVICE
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 18, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 342, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Ron Johnson,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Johnson, Portman, Paul, Lankford,
McCaskill, Carper, Heitkamp, Peters, Hassan, Harris, and Jones.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JOHNSON
Chairman Johnson. Good morning. This hearing is called to
order. We are meeting to have a hearing on the nominations of
three individuals to serve on the Postal Board of Governors
(BOG), a position that I think is sorely needed.
The history is interesting, in terms of how we came to
this, what I consider a pretty sorry state of affairs where we
have no Board members on the Board of Governors. The Board of
Governors, their task is to, first of all, they are responsible
for the hiring and firing of the Postmaster General and the
Deputy Postmaster General. The Board of Governors approves the
U.S. Postal Service's (USPS) business plan and strategy,
including major changes to the USPS network, collective
bargaining agreements, and rate increases.
Now I think anybody who has taken a look at the numbers,
and I will be the first to admit that the numbers are kind of
hard to analyze. We are actually passing out an income
statement that was kind of a late-night project of mine last
night, trying to make a little bit more sense, to take a look
at it from an accountant's standpoint versus kind of government
accounting, just kind of laying out exactly what has happened
with the Postal Service.
It is pretty easy to diagnose. I mean, you have a fall-off
in volume from 2001, where Postal Service delivered, about
103.7 billion pieces of mail to now, last year it was 58.7. It
is only 56.6 percent of that total volume.
Now they tried to make it up with parcel post. I think part
of the problem--and I do not have as accurate information as I
would like before I release some information, but you take a
look at the price increases over the last 11 years, since the
last time Congress passed postal reform, which, by the way, did
not fix the problem long term, the price increases of United
Parcel Service (UPS) and Federal Express (FedEx) far exceed
what the postal system has been able to run through. And I have
had enough meetings with people who use the Postal Service that
like it that way, but it certainly has not produced a long-
term, viable Postal Service.
In 2006s postal reform, they came up with this concept of
pre-funding, which, listen, as a fiscal conservative I
appreciate the fact that they actually wanted to fully fund
your pension plans. The problem is the Postal Service has not
had the funds. So over the last 11 years, in total, the Postal
Service was supposed to pre-fund about $62.5 billion. In fact,
they have actually made payments equal to about $20.8 billion,
which means they have defaulted on that 2006 postal reform to
the tune of about $41.7 billion.
And if you look at their income statement that I did pass
out,\1\ you can see that the total United States Postal Service
report income was a loss of $63.9 billion, and 62.5 percent,
virtually all of it, has to do with that pre-funding.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The income statement referenced by Senator Johnson appears in
the Appendix on page 228.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, again, if you take a look at it in terms of what I
passed out here, I think this kind of lays out exactly what has
happened over the last 11 years. We obviously need to take a
look at the balance sheet. We need to understand what it is
going to take to make the postal system a long-term,
economically viable organization, which it is not today.
Now we do not have any Governors. The purpose of this
hearing is to have one. Right now the Postal Service is
basically having to deal with the 535-member Board of Directors
and we are not very effective at doing the job.
So again, I appreciate the nominees' willingness to serve.
I want to welcome you. I want to welcome your families. I am
looking forward to your testimony. And with that I will turn it
over to Senator McCaskill.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MCCASKILL
Senator McCaskill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
you holding this hearing and I certainly underscore and
emphasize the comments that you made about how important it is
that we confirm some members to the Board of Governors.
The Postal Service is the only delivery service reaching
every address in America, and is growing by 1.1 million
addressees per year. The Postal Service employs more than
500,000 people, including over 100,000 veterans, to deliver 150
billion pieces of mail and packages each year. It has
operations in all 50 States, the District of Columbia, and all
U.S. territories.
Even as technological advances make the world feel smaller,
mail delivery remains a critical part of the infrastructure
that connects people and businesses across the country and
world.
The Board of Governors is comparable to a Board of
Directors of a publicly held corporation and consists of nine
Governors, appointed by the President and confirmed by the
Senate. Can you imagine a publicly held corporation that would
neglect to have a Board of Directors for 4 years, in terms of
there even being a quorum?
We have no Senate confirmed members of this Board, and I am
not just pointing the blame at this Administration. I am
pointing the blame at the past Administration also, that this
was not made a priority in terms of filling this very important
Board, especially at this critical juncture, in terms of the
Postal Service and the financial constraints it is operating
under. It is currently operating under the Temporary Emergency
Committee, which includes the Postmaster General and the Deputy
Postmaster General. This is untenable. We are in dire need of
qualified Governors to help make critical decisions especially
to address the financial challenges facing the agency.
As the Chairman has indicated, the Postal Service has
experienced 11 consecutive years of net losses, totaling $65
billion. In 2012, it reached a statutory borrowing limit of $15
billion, so it cannot borrow more money from the Treasury, and
current law prevents the Postal Service from accessing private
financial markets.
These financial problems result from a combination of
factors, including the decline of First-Class Mail and
requirement to pre-fund 100 percent of its liability. Due to
its universal service obligation (USO), the Postal Service is
required to deliver to more addresses every year. Closing post
offices and processing facilities can save the Postal Service
money, but can adversely impact these communities, especially
the rural communities, where the local post office is more than
brick and mortar. It is very important to the survival of these
communities that they continue to have first class postal
service.
The bipartisan Postal Reform Act of 2018, which Senator
Carper introduced with Senator Heitkamp, Senator Moran, and
myself, seeks to balance the Postal Service's competing
interests while providing the Postal Service with short-term
flexibility to make some necessary capital investments.
I hope that we can move forward with nominees for the
Board. We have a long history of pairing nominees from both
parties. I am concerned that we are not doing so today. I hope
the President will quickly nominate a fourth person to the
Board so that we will have a quorum to take action, and short
of that, Mr. Chairman, I hope you will work with me to quickly
confirm a fifth member to the Postal Regulatory Commission
(PRC). I understand there is a nominee under consideration for
that position already. We should continue the long bipartisan
tradition established by this Committee and ensure that balance
is on the Board of Governors at this critical time.
While I remain committed to working with the Board of
Governors and Postal Service management to address management
and financial hurdles, that will not work if the Postal Service
refuses to cooperate with congressional requests. For example,
I continue to be concerned that the Postal Service is not
maximizing its best but most expensive asset, the last-mile
delivery, in its negotiated service agreements with FedEx and
UPS. Without the Postal Service, FedEx and UPS would be forced
to find more expensive alternatives to deliver packages to the
last mile.
I have railed in this Committee for years, we should not be
giving a deal to our competitors for the last mile of delivery.
They should be paying a premium, not be getting a discount. In
no other realm would we be giving a deal to our competitor. And
package delivery is the future of the Postal Service. But
despite my repeated requests for data and information about
these contracts, I have been stymied time and time again. My
request for Postal Service negotiated service agreements with
UPS and FedEx has gone unfulfilled for years.
I will not be able to support anyone's nomination unless
they can commit that this important oversight committee gets a
look, and we can negotiate as to how much of that would become
public. But it is ridiculous that we have reached such a
roadblock in getting this incredibly important information as
we try to put the postal service on a more sound fiscal
footing.
I see that our leader is here. I apologize for going on
once he entered the room, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will put
my entire statement in the record\1\ and I look forward to the
testimony of the witnesses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator McCaskill appears in the
Appendix on page 32.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator McCaskill, and in
addition to welcoming our nominees we do have the distinct
honor of welcoming the Majority Leader of the Senate, Senator
McConnell, who would like to introduce Mr. Duncan.
So, Majority Leader.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MITCH MCCONNELL, A UNITED STATES
SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF KENTUCKY
Senator McConnell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
McCaskill. I appreciate the opportunity to be here this morning
to present my friend and fellow Kentuckian, Mike Duncan, to
serve on the Board of Governors of the United States Postal
Service.
I have known Mike for a very long time. I am glad that
President Trump has nominated such an intelligent, able, and
experienced individual to once again serve our country. As a
businessman, a public servant, and a dedicated mentor to young
people, Mike is an outstanding choice to help oversee the
world's largest postal organization. He has a wealth of
business experience. He brings important skills to the Board to
help manage the Postal Service with efficiency and
effectiveness.
After graduating from Cumberland College, which is in my
State, and the University of Kentucky College of Law, Mike and
his wife, Joanne, moved to Inez to lead the Inez Deposit Bank.
This is a small community up near the West Virginia line. In a
small coal community like Inez, community banks are a critical
resource, and Mike's local focus has helped the area for a very
long time.
With proven leadership and dedication, Mike has gained a
keen understanding of the needs of rural Americans. In addition
to his financial work in Eastern Kentucky, Mike has served as
President of the Kentucky Bankers Association and a Director of
the Cincinnati branch of the Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank. As
a result, he is adept in corporate governance and business
management. He has shown responsibility, creativity, and
integrity, and these qualities will continue to serve him and
all who rely on the Postal Service well on the Board of
Governors.
When Mike and Joanne moved to Inez they committed to
spending at least one day a week doing something to benefit
their community. Borne from that commitment is Mike's lifetime
civic service on a local, State, national, and even
international scale. From directing the Christian Appalachian
Project to representing our Nation by teaching the principles
of democracy to former Communist leaders, Mike has clearly gone
above and beyond his initial commitment of one day a week. In
fact, in 2006, he took on the herculean task of serving on the
Board of the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) at a time when
the TVA was billions of dollars in debt and failing to
adequately serve Kentuckians. The Senate confirmed Mike on a
voice vote, and his public service helped to improve the TVA.
Most recently, President Trump asked Mike to chair his
commission on White House Fellowships. This position proves
both the trust which the President has in him and exhibits
Mike's lifetime commitment to mentorship, which all began back
in Inez many years ago.
As a dedicated mentor to dozens of young people in
Appalachia, Mike helps them understand that they have the
ability to flourish in their communities. He emphasizes the
importance of hard work and community service and his program
pushes these young people to reach their potential. Encouraged
by Mike, they are succeeding in their own lives and bringing
long-term benefits to their communities.
So, Mr. Chairman, I am confident that Mike will bring all
of these qualities--fierce intelligence, business acumen, and a
commitment to public service to the U.S. Postal Service. During
the course of this hearing, this Committee will come to
understand how much the USPS and our Nation will benefit from
his leadership and public service.
So I appreciate very much the opportunity to come by and
take a few minutes and talk about my good friend, Mike Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Leader McConnell. I believe
Senator Paul would also like to make a few words.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RAND PAUL, A UNITED STATES SENATOR
FROM THE STATE OF KENTUCKY
Senator Paul. Thanks, Chairman Johnson, and thanks, Senator
McConnell, for taking the time to appear on behalf of our
mutual friend, Mike Duncan.
I believe Mike is a great pick to serve on the Postal
Service Board of Governors. Mike and I have known each other
not for as long as Senator McConnell and Mike have known each
other but for several years, and I think he will be a great
pick. He has worked with several hospitals, several colleges,
and other nonprofits, Senator McConnell mentioned, in his
resume. But in all the dealings I can tell you, with Mike, that
I have found him to be honest, forthright, and fair, which I
think are very important qualities for someone serving in
government.
Mike has provided successful and steady leadership for an
impressive array of organizations, from large national
nonprofits to regional quasi-government enterprises to small
community enterprises, and throughout his distinguished career
across a number of sectors he has always proven that he
understands how to cultivate and manage personal relationships
in order to effectively balance the needs of stockholders,
industry, customers, rate payers, and, really, in the service
of the public interest.
The true hallmark of Mike's career, though, as Senator
McConnell mentioned, has been his willingness to give
generously of his time, including to students in and around his
native Martin County and Eastern Kentucky. Though he has been
to the big city, I do not think he has forgotten he is from the
small city, and those Eastern Kentucky roots of loyalty to his
home and loyalty to his State I think have guided him well in
his career.
In summary, I think Mike Duncan is a fine man and a
dedicated public servant. I believe the U.S. Postal Service
Board will benefit tremendously from his broad experience and
skilled leadership, as well as, most especially, his good old
fashioned Kentucky common sense, and I highly recommend him and
hope the Committee will vote him through. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator Paul. I would ask
consent that my written statement be entered into the
record.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Chairman Johnson appears in the
Appendix on page 31.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is the tradition of this Committee to swear in
witnesses, so if you will all stand and raise your right hand.
Do you swear the testimony you will give before this
Committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you, God?
Mr. Williams. I do.
Mr. Duncan. I do.
Mr. Tucker. I do.
Chairman Johnson. Please be seated.
Our first nominee is the Honorable David Williams. Mr.
Williams is currently the Director for the Center for
Performance and Integrity at George Mason University. Mr.
Williams is the former Inspector General (IG) for the United
States Postal Service, having retired in 2016. He has also
served as the watchdog for the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) and Internal Revenue Service (IRS), among
other agencies.
Mr. Williams.
TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE DAVID C. WILLIAMS\2\ TO BE A
GOVERNOR, U.S. POSTAL SERVICE
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Senator
McCaskill, and Members of the Committee. Thank you for
considering my nomination. By way of background, my government
experience began with military service in the Americal Infantry
Division in Vietnam. I then joined the Secret Service. I served
with the Department of Justice Organized Crime Strike Force in
the Labor Department's Office of Inspector General and was part
of President Reagan's Commission on Organized Crime.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The prepared statement of Mr. Williams appears in the Appendix
on page 37.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I went on to head the Government Accountability Office
(GAO's) of Special Investigations. I was then confirmed by the
Senate to be the Inspector General at the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, the Social Security Administration (SSA), and the
Treasury. I was also the first IRS Inspector General, and for a
time was simultaneously acting as the Inspector General for
HUD. Most recently, I served as the Inspector General for the
Postal Service for 13 years, until 2016.
As the Postal Service Inspector General, I conducted audits
of program efficiency and effectiveness and worked closely with
the outside auditor to review Postal Service financial
statements. The office also conducted investigations to ensure
the integrity of the organization's actions and its business
dealings. I am currently a Distinguished Professor at George
Mason University.
I believe the Postal Service has long served an important
role in America. As an economic engine for commerce and in
supporting the daily, the communications, and logistic needs of
Americans. I believe that the contribution of the Postal
Service continues in this fast-moving and disruptive era. We
are certainly fortunate to live in these times but they are
continuously challenging and disorienting for citizens and
commercial enterprises. The Postal Service and other American
infrastructures are stabilizing constants, enabling opportunity
while supporting citizens and businesses in this complex
ecosphere.
Each year the Postal Service continues to protect the
privacy and security of its 150 billion mail and parcel pieces,
vigorously investigating thefts and abuses. The business model
since 1970 relies entirely on revenues from its product sales.
The Postal Service provides the Nation with an unconflicted
infrastructure serving the public good.
The Postal Service recently navigated an immense storm that
included digital messaging diversion, an historic economic
downturn, and while serving as the sole participating in a
major experiment to pre-funds its $400 billion benefit
programs. And, as a result, there is rightfully a concern for
the finances of the Postal Service, which are currently
difficult for stakeholders to interpret and understand, and
stakeholders, as a result, often accuse one another of
understating or exaggerating the financial results.
I believe it is essential for the financial condition to be
more clearly presented, so that decisionmakers can make
important judgments and chart the future. A first step is to
decompose postal liabilities into component parts and to more
clearly define the universal service obligation.
I also believe that Congress could use the Postal Service
to further support American citizens and to position business
enterprises for opportunities and challenges of the digital
global era. Today I suspect the Postal Service leaves much of
its value to the Nation on the table.
The country is also facing the promise and the specter of
coming megacities, featuring smart systems and the Internet of
Things (IOT). New systems must integrate our neighborhoods with
our cities and surrounding regions and to the world. Binding
our coming nation may actually be more challenging in the near
future than in our past.
The Postal Service's facilities and truck fleet could help
collect and provide needed data for the Internet of Things and
perhaps serve as platforms to increase internet broadband
access.
The digital age is still unfolding and the period ahead is
likely to be challenging. The Postal Service's trusted presence
in every American neighborhood could make it a candidate for
new national mandates should Congress direct. The neighborhood
operations of the Postal Service often provide the most visible
presence in the daily lives of American citizens. This is
particularly true in rural areas, where the Postal Service may
be vital to enabling citizens of small towns and rural areas to
enjoy the lives that we have intended for all Americans.
If confirmed, I look forward to the challenges of this
complex era and working with you to respond to the needs of our
Nation. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Williams. Our next nominee
is Robert Duncan. Mr. Duncan is currently the Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Inez Deposit Bank and is
the former Chairman of the Tennessee Valley Authority. He has
over 40 years of experience in community banking and the
financial services industry in rural Kentucky.
Mr. Duncan.
TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE ROBERT M. DUNCAN\1\ TO BE A
GOVERNOR, U.S. POSTAL SERVICE
Mr. Duncan. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member McCaskill, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for holding this hearing to
consider nominations to the U.S. Postal Service Board of
Governors. I am, as you know, Robert M. Duncan of Kentucky, and
I am pleased to be joined today by my colleagues, David
Williams of Illinois and Calvin Tucker of Pennsylvania. I thank
the President for having the confidence and trust to nominate
me for this important job. I greatly appreciate the
encouragement of my Kentucky Senators. Senator Paul, thank you
for being here today and the words that you spoke, and Leader
McConnell, I thank you very much for being here and speaking on
my behalf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Duncan appears in the Appendix on
page 111.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As you know from the material submitted, I have been
involved in government, business, and politics at all levels
over my career. I believe that my experiences in the public,
private, and nonprofit sectors make me uniquely qualified to
serve as a Governor of the U.S. Postal Service Board. I have
studied management and leadership in different sectors and have
an appreciation of the differences, similarities, and best
practices in each.
The Postal Service is an interesting blend of a public,
private, and nonprofit organization. My service on the
Tennessee Valley Authority Board helps me understand this
unusual but important structure. I was selected a member of the
President's Commission on Executive Exchange in 1989 and 1990,
and I worked at the White House in the Office of Public Liaison
while studying public and private organizations. I have served
in many other governmental positions at the local and State
levels and currently serve as Chairman of the President's
Commission on White House Fellowships.
My work with nonprofit organizations includes the Christian
Appalachian Project, chairing a State University board, and
serving for many years as Chairman of Alice Lloyd College. In
addition I was Treasurer, General Counsel, and, finally,
Chairman of the Republican National Committee.
As a community banker in Appalachia, I have worked with
many small businesses and have an appreciation for the
challenges and potential of rural America. My work with the
American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity gave me
experience of working with CEOs of the largest railroads,
utilities, and energy companies in the country.
In addition to my undergraduate and law degrees, I have
attended numerous Executive Education programs including
programs at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard and the
Harvard Business School. I believe I have both the practical
and theoretical knowledge to be an effective member of the
Postal Board of Governors.
On a personal note, my grandfather, Walter Duncan, carried
mail on horseback in eastern Tennessee and one year was on a
train from Cincinnati to Chattanooga as a mail sorter. I have
been interested in the post office all my life.
I consider the Postal Service a public trust as every
American citizen enjoys universal service. Referenced in the
Constitution, the organization has served to bind America
together for over 200 years. The Postal Service is in daily
contact with virtually every business and citizen. The local
postal employees are the primary contact of most Americans with
their Federal Government.
My approach to leadership and governance is simple. It is
my goal to include all stakeholders through aggressive outreach
and communications. The working relationship with the Postal
Service, Congress, and the Postal Regulatory Commission is
critical. More transparency in governing helps stakeholders
plan for the future. An adequate staff is necessary for this
Board to carry out its planning and oversight responsibilities.
But I believe the reconstituted Board will be strong and
independent.
As a new Board member, I do not begin with an agenda of
specific recommendations. I support a thorough and transparent
planning process. The basic business model must be examined
carefully. I will learn as much as possible, as soon as
possible, to understand the financial conditions of the
organization, Mr. Chairman.
The work of the Board will be particularly challenging as
we begin our tenure. There are many unresolved issues and
pending legislation that will require flexibility in our
approach.
Issues that I expect to confront us are: (1) Governance
structure. What are the relationships with Congress and the
PRC? (2) Universal service. What is the intent of Congress? (3)
Delivery frequency. What is the optimum number of days of
service each week? (4) Delivery standards. What is reasonable
and affordable? (5) Changes in rates. What are the constraints?
(6) Rural service. What is fair to all Americans? And then (7),
Mr. Chairman, opioids. What can be done to protect the mail,
customers, and employees?
If confirmed, I look forward to working with Congress, my
colleagues, the leadership of the Postal Service, the Postal
Regulatory Commission, and the stakeholders. The Board's role
is to establish policy, monitor results, and evaluate
management. As a board I believe that we can accomplish this
mission.
Thank you for considering my nomination, and I look forward
to your questions, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Duncan.
Our third nominee is Calvin Tucker. Mr. Tucker currently
owns and is the Managing Partner for Eagles Capital Advisors
LLC, a financial consulting business. His work is focused on
turning around struggling businesses and starting small
businesses in Philadelphia. Mr. Tucker has over 30 years of
experience in the financial services industry.
Mr. Tucker.
TESTIMONY OF CALVIN R. TUCKER\1\ TO BE A GOVERNOR, U.S. POSTAL
SERVICE
Mr. Tucker. Thank you and good morning Chairman Johnson,
Ranking Member McCaskill, and Members of the Committee. It is
my pleasure to be here today. I want to thank the President for
his decision to nominate me to become a member of the Postal
Service's Board of Governors. I am honored and humbled by the
confidence that President Trump has placed in me.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Tucker appears in the Appendix on
page 171.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I also want to thank my wife, Sharon, who is with us today,
and my family, represented by my two sons, Aaron and Bradley.
Those who could not join us include my daughter, Sheneen, and
my granddaughter, Amaya, and my mother, Emma. I want to thank
them all for their support in everything we have accomplished
as a family.
Over my 43 years, I have worked at many diverse
organizations, and I have had the privilege to serve on
numerous community and nonprofit boards. From this experience,
I believe I can truly appreciate these communities. If
confirmed, I will bring that perspective to help the Postal
Service better focus on the needs of the small business and
community groups.
For example, in my consulting practice, many clients are
single operators who struggle with their day-to-day
responsibilities. They will ask questions like, who can help
marketing, sales, or simply get product to the customers? So
can the Postal Service simplify shipping options so there is
one less thing for them to worry about? Are we doing enough to
support nonprofits and their good work?
If I am confirmed, these are the kinds of questions I will
ask. I want to work with the small business community, postal
management, and all stakeholders to ensure that everyone is
well represented at the Postal Service. Today, it is essential
that the Postal Service consider this small business
perspective. Large companies can leave mail in favor of
digital, but mom-and-pop businesses still need innovative
solutions. For example, a neighborhood accountant may struggle
with a digital advertising campaign, so a mail-based, local
solution may be necessary. Are we doing everything we can to
make it the easy and cost-efficient choice? A rural farmer may
not have broadband, but she should always be able to count on
mail delivery. How can we service these rural customers better?
While my experience is in the small business community, I also
appreciate that the Postal Service is a huge part of our
Nation's economy. From the smallest to biggest business, from
the cities to the countryside, from the richest to the poorest,
the Postal Service is public service without playing favorites.
Every day it delivers mail to more than 154 billion homes and
businesses, made possible by more than 640,000 hardworking
employees. If I am confirmed, I will work to ensure that the
Postal Service continues to be a significant economic engine
for all Americans. I am mindful, however, that the Postal
Service faces significant challenges. These include large
financial losses, growing debt, and a decline of its most
profitable product, First-Class Mail. If I am confirmed, I will
use all of my energy to help find solutions. These solutions, I
believe, will be found in the Postal Service's strengths. Its
31,000 post offices connect America. Its workforce is dedicated
and knowledgeable. And it was, in fact, the very first social
media network. If we leverage these strengths, I believe the
Postal Service can flourish. While I do not have all the
answers, if confirmed, I pledge to bring my perspective and
experience, listen closely to all stakeholders, including
Congress, and always remember the tremendous responsibility I
have been given. Thank you, Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member
McCaskill, and Members of the Committee. I look forward to any
questions that you may have.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Tucker. There are three
questions the Committee asks of every nominee, for the record.
I will ask the question then just, in order, starting with Mr.
Williams, just answer yes or no.
First of all, is there anything you are aware of in your
background that might present a conflict of interest with the
duties of the office to which you have been nominated?
Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. No, Sir.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. No.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Tucker.
Mr. Tucker. No.
Chairman Johnson. Do you know of anything, personal or
otherwise, that would in any way prevent you from fully and
honorably discharging the responsibilities of the office to
which you have been nominated?
Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. No, sir, I do not.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. No, Senator.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Tucker.
Mr. Tucker. No, sir.
Chairman Johnson. Finally, do you agree, without
reservation, to comply with any request or summons to appear
and testify before any duly constituted committee of Congress
if you are confirmed?
Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. I do.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. I do, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Tucker.
Mr. Tucker. I do.
Chairman Johnson. Well, my intention was to actually defer
to our Ranking Member, so I can respect the other Committee
Members' time. Are you ready to go for questions?
Senator McCaskill. Sure.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Senator McCaskill.
Senator McCaskill. Let me first ask a brief yes-or-no
question for all three of you. Do you agree to provide
information and documents when requested by Members of
Congress, regardless of party? Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. I do, Senator.
Senator McCaskill. Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Yes, Senator.
Senator McCaskill. Mr. Tucker.
Mr. Tucker. Yes.
Senator McCaskill. Do you believe that the USPS management
should comply with the requests for documents and information
from Members of Congress, regardless of party? Not you,
specifically, but the management. As the Board of Directors,
would you require the management to respond to requests from
Members of Congress, regardless of party? Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. I would, Senator.
Senator McCaskill. Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Yes, Senator.
Senator McCaskill. And Mr. Tucker.
Mr. Tucker. Yes, Senator.
Senator McCaskill. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan, before I get into some of the postal issues, I
want to just ask you briefly, I know that you have run a bank
and banks are typically closed on Federal holidays. Were there
any Federal holidays where you required your employees to work?
Mr. Duncan. There are no mandatory Federal holidays that
our employees are required to work.
Senator McCaskill. Let me put it this way. Are there
Federal holidays where the bank is closed and you required your
employees to work?
Mr. Duncan. We have dates where we do training and the bank
is closed on those days.
Senator McCaskill. And what holidays would those be?
Mr. Duncan. In the past it has been President's Day,
occasionally it is Martin Luther King (MLK) Day.
Senator McCaskill. So every year you require your employees
to work on both MLK Day and President's Day?
Mr. Duncan. Senator, I am not sure. I have been absent from
the bank for a period of time. I would like to be able to
respond to you----
Senator McCaskill. Well, that would be important, because
if MLK Day is the only day that you require your employees to
work when the bank is closed, that would be something I think
this Committee would want to know about.
Mr. Duncan. I can tell you that they are required to work
on President's Day. I am sure of that.
Senator McCaskill. OK. Well, if you would get us the
details of that, I think that is important.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you.
Senator McCaskill. Thank you.
Let us talk about last-mile delivery and negotiated service
agreements. I want you to know that when I began talking about
this several years ago, I kept getting reassured that I would
get this information. It was clear to me that there had not
even been a thorough cost-benefit analysis done as to what they
should be charging UPS and FedEx for last-mile delivery. So I
kept drilling down and trying to get information, and
eventually I came to the conclusion that I was not going to get
anything from management other than ``trust us.''
Now I need to let you know that, on top of that, I have
been approached by people who lobby for both FedEx and UPS,
saying, ``You are right.'' I had one of the companies go so far
as to tell me that the Postal Service has no idea whether it is
maximizing its profits on these agreements.
You can imagine, in light of--I mean, it feels like, to me,
that their--I am so concerned that their desire for volume has
overwhelmed good business decisions, their desire to cut costs
has overwhelmed good business decisions, particularly when you
talk about the competitive edge we represent, in terms of the
number of days we deliver and our access to the last-mile
architecture.
If confirmed, would you work with me to ensure that I get a
copy of these contracts, Mr. Williams?
Mr. Williams. Yes, Senator. I want to know more about what
is going on. I was present a number of times when you made that
representation.
Senator McCaskill. You were in the room when I have been
hollering about this as IG, right?
Mr. Williams. I was, and I remember, I think the first time
and the other times as well. So I know that it has been going
on for a long time, and I know that you have a good concern,
and it is a very interesting question. So we do need to get
into it. We do need to work with your staff, who I have
considered friends for many years, and get to the bottom of it,
and I am sorry that that has not occurred as yet.
Senator McCaskill. Yes. I understand that they do not want
information out in the public domain, in terms of a competitive
business situation. That is perfectly understandable. But keep
in mind, we go into classified briefings and learn things all
the time, that hopefully most of us never share. I am not
anxious here to trot out private business information. I am
anxious to figure out whether or not we are maximizing profits
on the part of the system that is most expensive to us. To me,
that seems like a simple oversight request, and I am frustrated
that this has been so hard.
Mr. Williams. And I know that----
Senator McCaskill. Did you ever have a chance to look into
this when you were IG, as to whether or not they were
maximizing profits for these co-optition agreements? What do
they call them? Not competition but----
Mr. Williams. Co-optition.
Senator McCaskill. Yes.
Mr. Williams. We did look at the National Security Agency
(NSA) process and I am not sure we looked at these particular
agreements other than to assure that they met the floor. So
they have a legal deal. Do they have the best deal----
Senator McCaskill. Right. I want to know if they have the
best deal.
Mr. Williams [continuing]. Is another better question.
Senator McCaskill. Mr. Duncan, would you work with me to
ensure I get a copy of these contracts, in some form?
Mr. Duncan. Absolutely, and I would work with the Board to
make sure the Board has copies of the contracts and analysis of
these contracts.
Senator McCaskill. Yes. I think it would be really
important that analysis be done, especially in light of the
explosive growth of packages. I just think that is the future.
I do not think we are going back, in terms of volume of
packages in this country, and I am very concerned that we have
enabled our competition to be more successful while we have
hamstrung the Postal Service.
Mr. Tucker, would you agree?
Mr. Tucker. Yes, I will agree to work with you and the
Committee to ensure that we all understand these service
agreements.
Senator McCaskill. Are all of you comfortable standing up
to the President if you determine that the deals that have been
cut with Amazon for delivery of packages are a good deal for
the United States Postal Service? Mr. Williams?
Mr. Williams. I would be entirely, and I am anxious to look
into it. I would like to look at how NSAs are approved by the
Postal Service. It appears as though a review has already
occurred with regard to whether they have met that legal floor,
but I think that space between the legal floor and the moment
we drive Amazon away is the space we need to operate in and get
an understanding of.
Senator McCaskill. Yes. I am just concerned. Presidential
task forces sometimes tell Presidents what they want to hear,
and the people who go on the task force are people who want to
get in and tell the President what they want to hear.
Mr. Duncan, are both you and Mr. Tucker comfortable with a
confrontation with the President over the agreements with
Amazon if you determine they are in the best interest of the
Postal Service?
Mr. Duncan. Senator, we have to follow the facts and the
facts will lead us toward the truth, and that will be what we
advocate for.
Senator McCaskill. Mr. Tucker?
Mr. Tucker. Absolutely. I would not necessarily
characterize it as confrontation but I certainly would be
willing to challenge the assumptions if I determined that----
Senator McCaskill. Well, there is no question he is on a
mission here.
Mr. Tucker. Yes.
Senator McCaskill. He has a thing about the man who owns
Amazon, and we all kind of follow the tweets and follow his
personality as it relates to when he decides to pick on
somebody. Those who confront him typically are shown the door
in not too long a period of time. And I just want to make sure
that you are not so afraid of being shown the door that you are
not willing to do the right thing for the Postal Service.
Mr. Tucker. Oh, absolutely, I am willing to do the right
thing and I will challenge any assumptions.
Senator McCaskill. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator McCaskill. I will say
that I think one of your biggest tasks is going to be
extracting the information you need to make good management
decisions. I share Senator McCaskill's frustration. I have been
at this for a number of years and we are starting to drill
down. I am actually looking forward to the task force being
able to extract that information as well. So best of luck to
you.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Paul.
Senator Paul. The interesting thing is I think, Senator
McCaskill and the President, you are on the same side, really,
on this issue. He is concerned about how much Amazon is charged
in that last-mile, and that is what we have been talking about,
whether or not they are charged adequately or not.
Senator McCaskill. Well, there is a difference, Senator
Paul, in that Amazon is hiring someone to deliver their
packages. UPS and FedEx are the competition to the Postal
Service.
Senator Paul. Right. But there still is----
Senator McCaskill. Two different animals.
Senator Paul [continuing]. There is the question, in that
last mile, which is very expensive, are we charging Amazon
adequately or are we charging anybody adequately. And, really,
the biggest question we face with the post office is, is the
post office losing a lot of money? I mean, billions and
billions of dollars--how are we going to keep the post office--
I mean, these are enormous questions.
And so we have to look at rates. For First-Class Mail it is
dwindling, so it is not like we can lower the rates and get
more money through volume. We are just losing the volume in
first class. What is an appropriate rate? We have to figure
that out, and I think we have to have the openness to figure
that out.
And I guess it is not so much seeing the contracts is how
you get to the contract, how you get to that price. when we
deliver that last mile, which is very expensive, to go down
that last mile to Inez or some small city, it is very
expensive, and are we subsidizing companies by doing that? And
we have to look at that, and it is easy to define the problem.
It is hard to figure out what is the adequate rate?
Right now Amazon does not have a post office to deliver the
last mile, so it is not like they could do it on their own.
There is probably some price at which they would do it on their
own, actually. But I do not know if we have adequately found
that price, and maybe there is room for improvement. And so we
do have to explore all of that.
One thing that has amazed me, when we have looked at this
before and we have had a bunch of reforms come forward, none of
them, I think, have adequately really examined the problem, and
this is a problem but not maybe easy for people to actually get
to the solution. Eighty percent of the post office's cost is
labor. With UPS it is about 50 percent. With FedEx it is about
38 percent. I am convinced the post office, because of lack of
market forces and because their labor costs so much, I do not
think they are ever going to be profitable unless something
happened with the labor costs. But involves, sort of union
contracts, and how we get to more affordable labor, I do not
know.
But I think, really, is that I hope you are all open-minded
and that you will be open-minded into looking for answers. I do
not have a specific question here, but I think what I would
like to see is that maybe after you are approved that 6 months
later we come back and say, ``What have you discovered and what
are we going to do to try to fix the post office?''
I think there are things that could be done even short of
legislative changes. One, are we charging the adequate rates?
Are we negotiating the best deal? And that is the only thing
that I would advise, is that maybe we come back and look at
this again. And I do not think it has to be--Amazon is a big
supplier in our State. I like Amazon. I like all the employees
that work in Northern Kentucky for Amazon.
So I am not against Amazon, but I am for seeing what the
price is. Are we charging an adequate price for the last mile?
It is not easy. It is not like there is a philosophic answer to
this so we can say, ``This is the price that is the appropriate
price.'' Markets determine prices, and so it has to be based on
supply and demand. But when you have only one supplier, That is
why it is difficult to let the marketplace work. We have to
figure out, is there a way we can try to figure out what the
market price is for the last mile.
And I do not say that because I dislike Amazon. I just
dislike losing a billion dollars a quarter at the post office,
and we have to figure out for all companies that use the last-
mile, Amazon just happens to be a big player, but there are
thousands of smaller players that use the post office in the
same way, for the last mile. We have to figure out how we are
getting the adequate price.
But I commend you all, really, for wanting to do this
service to the country, and I hope you will really think long
and hard about being open to all solutions.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Portman.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PORTMAN
Senator Portman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, yes, I want
to echo Senator Paul. Thanks to you guys for stepping up. This
is not an easy job. There are lots of challenges, and I think
Senator Paul is correct about the last mile, and, Mr. Tucker,
you talked about the importance of that too. So it is not only
costly but, qualitatively, it is, in some respects, the most
important thing the post office does, because no one else is
going to do it. And that is a challenge, but there is a bigger
challenge, really, in the financials, if you look at them, and
that is this pre-funding of retiree health and how we deal with
that, and pre-funding of pensions. And I know that that is
something that some of you have some expertise on.
Mr. Williams, in particular, has spent a lot of time
looking at that, so you bring really important insider
information that probably no one else on the Board of Governors
ever has had, about what is actually going on. You know where
the bodies are buried and you have probably buried some of them
in your role as IG. And Mr. Duncan has the business experience,
and he understands how government works too, which is helpful.
And I appreciate you being willing to step up once again and
serve your country. Mr. Tucker, you talked a lot about your
small business background, and you have been a successful
entrepreneur, and that is sort of the bread and butter,
ultimately, of the Postal Service. And again, those are people
who might get left behind if it is not done right.
So appreciate it, and it is not going to be easy. I know
this Committee is looking at the House legislation that came
out of their committee, and I know Tom Carper has been at this
a long time.
And, by the way, one issue that I feel very strongly about,
that some of you are knowledgeable about, I know, is this issue
of security of the mail system, and particularly the
unbelievable threat that we have right now with fentanyl. I
would just tell you, the communities that I represent in Ohio
are just getting killed by fentanyl. Columbus, Ohio, that
county, Franklin County, just did their analysis of last year,
2017. A 47 percent increase in overdose deaths. Two-thirds of
those were from fentanyl.
And guess how it is coming to that community? Through the
mail system. I mean, it is coming through the U.S. mail system.
And I can say that with some degree of certainty because we
spent a year studying it, Senator Carper and I, on the
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigation. I think, Senator
McCaskill, you were there when we started that investigation.
But it is clear where it is coming from. It is primarily
coming from China, primarily coming through the Postal Service.
When we went online undercover with some Federal investigators
from Homeland Security, the websites that were selling this
poison all said the same thing--use the Postal Service. They do
not want to use UPS, FedEx, DHL, or anybody else because the
Postal Service does not require them to provide the information
that could help law enforcement to be able to interdict these
packages.
And so I have been on an tirade on this, and we have good
legislation that most Members of this Committee, I believe,
have already co-sponsored, called the Synthetics Trafficking
and Overdose Prevention Act (STOP Act). We have had hearings in
this Committee. Unfortunately, it is not in this Committee's
jurisdiction, because I know the Chairman cares a lot about it
and the Ranking Member. I think we would probably have
something done by now, out of Committee, but it comes out of
the Finance Committee, which we are working on, because it has
to do with our Customs agreements.
But, one, are you all aware of our study on this, and, by
the way, it says that the post office is doing a little better.
They are now providing advanced electronic data that law
enforcement can use to identify these packages on about 36
percent of the packages, as opposed to 100 percent with the
private carriers. But even with that 36 percent we found that
20 percent of the time the Postal Service was not presenting
the package to law enforcement, and we also found out that some
of the data was not legible, not usable by law enforcement.
So, fewer a third of these hundreds of millions of packages
are getting reviewed by law enforcement, and meanwhile, the
poison keeps coming in and killing more and more Americans.
So I would just ask you, are you familiar with the report,
and I would ask all three of you that. And then, second, do you
think the post office should be providing this advanced
electronic data to U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) and
let the law enforcement, which they say is critical to their
ability to try to interdict some of these drugs? Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. I am familiar and deeply appreciate what you
did with regard to this. This is a nearly unbelievable problem.
There are some complications. I know that the packages
received in China are received by China Post, not the United
States Postal Service. There are some hopeful signs, as you
said. There is a growing number of packages, any packets coming
in from China, that do have the data on it, and that is
increasing.
I would like to know more, too, about what we are doing
with the data that we receive, both with regard to Customs and
the postal authorities. What kinds of data analytics are we
engaged in? You have to really move fast when that data arrives
or it really is not worth anything.
I would like to know, is there any daylight between the
efforts of the enforcement agencies? The role of the Customs
broker, for the private express carriers, I would like to know
more about. Is there a value-added there, and where are we
exploiting that, as well as the advanced entry data.
Senator Portman. Let me just say, briefly, the big data
capability is impressive, and when law enforcement is provided
with this data it is extraordinary what they can do with it,
the analytics that they have in place. You are probably aware
of that from some of your other experience. But they are much
more sophisticated than they used to be, and so it works well
in the context of these private carriers.
And I have been to the sites and I have seen what happens,
how they pull packages off and how they can get that data
immediately. As you say, it has to be real-time. But the post
office has to have that level of sophistication too, to be able
to present the packages that they identify as suspicious, and
that is not happening, and obviously they are not even
requiring it from a lot of countries. So there is much more to
be done.
Mr. Williams. There have been some problems at the
international centers that are related to that, and I think it
would be a great area for us to focus on, for a number of
reasons. But certainly opioids is the one that care most about.
Senator Portman. So if you were confirmed for this job, you
would want to focus on that and support providing that advanced
electronic data to law enforcement?
Mr. Williams. It would be something I would want to do the
very first day.
Senator Portman. Thank you. Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Senator. Yes, I am familiar with
your report. I am also familiar with the ravages that are going
on in the part of the world where I live, in Appalachia,
Huntington, West Virginia; Ashland, Kentucky; Pineville,
Kentucky. That whole area is very personal.
I do not know all the facts. I do not know as much about it
as my colleague, Mr. Williams. But I am optimistic about
technology. I have some data background, as you know, and I
believe this can be a problem that can be solved. I cannot tell
you when. I do not know what the finances are. I have a lot of
questions about it. But it is a commitment. It is one of the
seven issues that I mentioned today.
Senator Portman. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Duncan. Yes, I think
your background in terms of using data is very important. Mr.
Tucker.
Mr. Tucker. Yes, Senator. I am generally familiar with it.
If confirmed, I will certainly look at it. And as I said in my
questionnaire, anything we can do to provide to law enforcement
to protect our workers and the American citizens I am in favor
of as well.
Senator Portman. Thank you to all three of you. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Heitkamp.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HEITKAMP
Senator Heitkamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is
definitely a very important hearing for us. The post office has
been rudderless. We, as a major Board of Directors here on this
Committee, but certainly the Board of Directors for the post
office has not been functioning for a long period of time, and
you see the result of that in the numbers that somebody has put
together for us here. And I know, Mr. Williams, as the former--
--
Senator McCaskill. The Chairman put this together late last
night.
Senator Heitkamp. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. The accountant.
Senator Heitkamp. Yes. The accountant. Well, I appreciate
this because I think it is the best we can do right now to
really illustrate the enormous challenges that are ahead of us.
Now it is no mistake. I have been very aggressive on this
issue. And to give you a sense of how important this is in
North Dakota, I opened up a portal on my Web page--now, North
Dakota is a very small State, population-wise--and it was
called Fix My Mail. And in a month we had over 500 discrete
contacts from people who have seen deterioration in service.
And just yesterday I was with someone from rural North Dakota
who thanked me for the work on the post office.
So understand this. Where frequently the problems that we
talk about here may not have reached America in the same way,
America knows that the post office is not delivering the way
they used to deliver. And I think that has been a
responsibility not of the men and women who walk and deliver
mail. I think it is the responsibility of management. Whether
it is us and you guys as the future Board of Directors or
whether it is the upper management of the post office, we have
to fix these problems.
And so I am going to ask just some quick yes-or-no
questions for all of you. If confirmed as a Governor for the
United States Postal Service, will you make sure that the Board
focuses on strong service performance so mail delivery in rural
America is protected and then improved?
Mr. Williams. Yes, Senator.
Mr. Duncan. Yes. It is one of the issues I outlined today.
Mr. Tucker. Yes, Senator.
Senator Heitkamp. On the record. How would getting postal
reform legislation help you in accomplishing your job? And I
would add to that, have you read Senator Carper, Moran,
Heitkamp--I think Claire is on this bill too--McCaskill's
postal reform bill, the latest iteration here that we
introduced a couple of weeks ago. Mr. Williams?
Mr. Williams. In my mind, you are the reason there is a
Postal Service. We have, in this room, some of the express
companies. They are the best in the world. You need us not in
those big cities but we are needed where you are.
The reform bill that is coming through, and has been
presented, is aimed at reestablishing the financial stability
of the organization, and that is really the only thing in my
mind that ought to be a challenge at all. Our dedication to you
is absolute. You are the reason we have.
Senator Heitkamp. We are going to hold you to that, Mr.
Williams, because frequently what we find out is that when push
comes to shove and we end up financial, we start hearing about
reducing service, we start hearing about reducing delivery. And
the other problem that we have--and I will just take a moment--
is getting appropriate data. Never mind financial data. Getting
service-related data that we can rely on. We come into the post
office and say, ``Look, it took 10 days to get a letter.'' They
go, ``No, that does not happen.'' Well, yes, it does happen. I
mean, do not call the people who are talking to me fibbers.
This happens.
And so, Mr. Duncan, can you illuminate us at all on what
your expectations would be of this Congress, in this giving you
the tools you need to reestablish stability, financial
stability, at the Postal Service?
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Senator. I have not read the report,
the new legislation, but I have read press reports of it, and I
think it goes to the heart of what we are about. We have to
develop a business model that requires the cooperation, first,
of Congress. It has to be of our regulator, the Postal
Regulatory Commission. It has to be of this Board and our
stakeholders. And I believe bringing that group together is how
you do it.
I am very aware of the level of service difference today as
compared to 20 years ago, as someone who uses the mail both
professionally and in my business.
Senator Heitkamp. And, Mr. Tucker, we will give you a
chance too. My baseline question is, can you actually do what
you hope to accomplish for the Postal Service without a postal
reform bill?
Mr. Duncan. No.
Mr. Tucker. No.
Senator Heitkamp. So we are sending you on a mission that
is doomed for failure unless we do our job here. Mr. Tucker, is
that a fair statement?
Mr. Tucker. I would say that 90 percent of what we need to
do is directed to Congress. I think we need a reform bill. I
think we need to move a 20th Century business model to the 21st
Century, and I think the reform bill, as I understand it, goes
a long way to move us in that direction.
Senator Heitkamp. So our choices are pretty limited. Your
choices are going to be pretty limited if we do not do postal
reform. You are going to sit in a room and you are going to
move money from this pile to that pile, and hope you can make
it happen. But there is not any certainty of success in
stabilizing the financial outcome or the financial situation
for the post office. There is no likelihood of success if we do
not do postal reform. Would you agree, Mr. Williams?
Mr. Williams. Both limited and extremely controversial. The
decisions ahead of this, without postal reform get very bad,
very fast.
Senator Heitkamp. Mr. Duncan?
Mr. Duncan. The business model must be changed. I am an
optimistic person and I think there are things that can be done
at the margin, but this comes down to the basic model.
Senator Heitkamp. Mr. Tucker.
Mr. Tucker. Yes, I agree. As I indicated in my opening
remarks, we can do some business development and bring new
clients to the marketplace, particularly small business and
community groups and nonprofit organizations. But at the end of
the day, we need reform.
Senator Heitkamp. Yes. I mean, I would just say this. It is
like a business that has not modernized, a business that has
not taken the appropriate steps for a long period of time, in
part because they have been squeezed by requirements of
Congress, requirements of this Board of Directors, at this
table. And so now, to suggest that we can do this without some
kind of opportunity to stabilize in the short term, your job is
going to be extraordinarily difficult.
And so I am committed, as I have been since I got here,
that we ought to do our job, and that you cannot do your job
unless we do our job, and get you the right set of
circumstances.
So I want to thank every one of you, and your families, for
you guys taking on this job. I think it is one of the hardest
jobs right now in America. And I appreciate the extent of the
service and the diversity of the opinion here, and I look
forward to working with you after you are approved, and get the
Board of Directors up and running so that we have a partner
that we can work with as we move postal reform.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator Heitkamp, and I
appreciate you noticing my little income statement. Let me take
just a minute here to talk about the numbers, because it is
actually pretty stark and pretty easy.
Setting the income statement sheet aside, if you just look
at the balance sheet, as of September 30, 2017, when you
combine the current retired health care benefit liability with
the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS) liability, the
Federal Employees Retirement System (FERS) liability, and the
long-term retiree health care benefits, that totals $440
billion. The fund has a balance of $336 billion. That is
leaving an unfunded balance of $104 billion. That is the
problem.
On the income statement you can see, over the last 11
years, of the $63.9 billion loss that the Postal Service
reported, $62.5 billion of that is the pre-funding of that
liability.
So if you are not really willing to take a look at how do
you fund that obligation to retirees--I mean, you can talk
about postal reform but you have to really understand exactly
what we are talking about. And we can also throw in pretty
words like ``Medicare integration,'' but it has been pulling
teeth trying to figure out what does that actually cost, what
has been contributed, what has been used by postal--I cannot
get it. I have been trying to get it for years.
This little income statement here is the result of
extracting information kind of bit by bit from the Postal
Service to try and lay out exactly what has happened over the
11 years so we can understand what is happening moving forward.
But again, I mean, the basics are in terms of pre-funding, the
pre-funding to the tune of about $20 billion, and they have
defaulted on about $41.7 billion. And that just tells you it is
kind of hard to follow verbally, but is all in the long-term
pension and health benefit liability. That is the problem.
Senator Peters.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PETERS
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I will just
echo the comments made by my colleagues here, and Senator
Heitkamp, in particular. You have a very tough job ahead of
you, if confirmed. We appreciate your willingness to take on
this challenge. But it is a challenge that has to be met,
particularly in our rural areas. Michigan is an urban State but
it is also an incredible rural State, particularly in Northern
Michigan and Michigan's Upper Peninsula, which is a very rural
area.
And whether it is a retiree waiting for a Social Security
check or life-saving prescriptions, this is a very real and a
very big deal for folks, which is why I concur with the
sentiments that I have heard about the need for postal reform.
It is up to us to push this forward, and I certainly appreciate
Senators Carper, Moran, Heitkamp, and McCaskill--thank you for
your leadership on this issue. Senator Johnson, I know this is
something you want us to focus on as well. We need to make this
a priority and move something going forward, and I hope we do
that very well.
But Senator Heitkamp alluded to something, the kind of
complaints that I have been hearing fairly regularly too, which
is how do you balance the very challenging fiscal situation
that the Postal Service is in with service? As you cut service
to meet the demands of the fiscal needs, then people become
disenchanted with the Postal Service and try to look for other
options. And then you get, basically, on a slippery slope. You
cut more services, you lose more business, and your revenue
goes down so you have to do more cuts.
And so I want to focus on a couple of areas that I have
been hearing a great deal about, and one of those areas is the
consolidation of mail processing centers. As a result of
unrealistic budget requirements, we are concerned that two more
centers in Michigan will be placed on the chopping block--
basically, one in the Upper Peninsula near Iron Mountain and
another in Lansing that service a great deal of Northern
Michigan. We had a facility near Kalamazoo in West Michigan
close recently. The pattern of shutting down these processing
centers, it seems clear, means that it takes a lot longer for
mail to get to places because it is not being processed as
quickly with a number of facilities.
So I would like to have each of you tell me, will you weigh
in on decisions related to consolidation of mail processing
centers, and how are you going to weigh cost savings with
customer service, given the current situation that you are in?
We will start with you, Mr. Williams, and if we could go
down and kind of get a sense. How do you grapple with this
challenge? Give us a sense of your decisionmaking process.
Mr. Williams. The Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act
(PAEA) legislation did a lot of good, particularly in the early
years, but it did go on a long time. And as those budget cuts
became more extreme in order to meet our obligations, the
downsizing became less measured, the targets of opportunity
were all wiped out, and there were a number of targets of
opportunity. And we are now down to what needs to be a very
scientific process. And I think we can only do it through
modeling. We need to understand the universal service and we
need to create a modeled network that will deliver that.
I know, from my work as the Inspector General before, some
of the early analyses efforts for the impact of closure were
wrong and mistakes were made. And some of the mistakes became
more frequent as the financial crisis became more serious.
So I am a huge believer in modeling. I do not believe we
can close things through professional judgment any longer.
Those are all gone. And we need to show you how we are going to
do it, and give everyone a chance to arrive at the same
conclusion that we did, that we now have the model for a
network that will deliver on our promises.
Senator Peters. Thank you. Mr. Duncan?
Mr. Duncan. I agree with what my colleague is saying today.
I guess I am an optimistic person and I start on the revenue
side first. I think that is where I look before I start doing
the cuts, because, as a business person I know that there is a
tipping point, that if you cut into the muscle then you lose
many other things in an organization. So my predilection would
be to start looking on the revenue side to make sure that we
are properly charging for our services.
I think defining what universal service means, what
Congress means by that, will help us along the way. I have felt
the cutbacks, personally, in the processing centers. I have
seen the change in the standard. We need to know what the
American people want, what Congress wants, what our
stakeholders want.
Senator Peters. Thank you. Mr. Tucker.
Mr. Tucker. Yes. I agree that modeling is an area that we
need to look at. We need to define that universal service
obligation, what it means today, and how do we maintain our
service standards in communities across this country. I would
look at both revenue and expenses in making decisions. But I
think we need to see all of the analytics around how it is
going to affect those communities before decisions are made
with respect to consolidation or doing some other things.
Senator Peters. The strength of any organization is
dependent on the people within that organization. So morale, as
all three of you know, is incredibly important to having an
efficient, well functioning organization. People have to come
to work motivated to do a good job and take pride in their
work. And what I have heard, on a regular basis, is that morale
is a challenge at the Postal Service. Workers feel that they
have too much mandatory overtime, their opinions are not
listened to, and they are not communicated to in terms of some
of the decisions that have to be made, sometimes difficult
decisions.
So in the remaining time, if you briefly could give us a
sense of your vision of how are we going to strengthen the
postal workforce and the morale in that workforce, which will
be critical to making sure that this organization runs
properly?
We will start with you, Mr. Tucker, and then work the other
way.
Mr. Tucker. No, morale is key to a strong and committed
workforce. I think some of the internal tools that the Postal
Service should use, it is internal communications, to
communicate some of the issues that we face, some of the
opportunities, and bring people in on an incentive basis to
help them create the opportunities they want, the income that
they are trying to achieve. And I think just information is
important to driving morale in any organization.
Senator Peters. So where does that rank in your priorities,
in this new position?
Mr. Tucker. That ranks pretty high because we do not--as I
noted in my opening remarks, we have 640,000 people and that is
the No. 1 asset of the Postal Service is our workforce. And to
keep an interested and committed workforce is the No. 1, I
think, priority that we should strive to do. Because without
the workforce, we can do all of these reforms and other issues
and still not achieve what we need because it is the people
that is going to make things happen.
Senator Peters. Right. Mr. Duncan?
Mr. Duncan. Well, I think the postal employees have a lot
to be proud of. Consistently, they have delivered the mail, day
in, day out. They are consistently ranked as the best
government agency, and I think they have a lot to be proud of.
On the other hand, they have to have constant
communication, and that communication is in the form of
education. They have to understand it is up to us. The tone is
set at the top by the management of the postal board. That is
how they work with the union representatives but also the rank
and file everyday member of the organization. And it is
communication. It is constant and consistent communication.
Senator Peters. So that will be one of your priorities?
Mr. Duncan. It has to be one of the priorities of the
organization.
Senator Peters. All right. Thank you. Mr. Williams?
Mr. Williams. The last couple of years have been really
rough on the Postal Service employees. In response to that,
they have risen to the occasion. They were the first ones back
after September 11, 2001, after Hurricane Katrina. And their
morale has taken a beating but it is extremely high. It is a
very dedicated group. And as Senator McCaskill said, there are
113,000 veterans there, and they bring with it the discipline
that they learned to this new job.
We downsized very fast. It reached a reckless pace. The
wheels were coming off the wagon. And also we focused so much
on our problems that we only focused on our problems, and there
were some extraordinary accomplishments that we forgot to thank
people for. They are our assets. They are 80 percent of our
operation, and we need to take care of them and thank them for
what they have done. We need to focus on the successes as well
as the problems ahead, and the successes have been enormous.
We also kind of inherited a legacy before any of us were on
the scene in this. There were labor management problems that
went back to the 1950s and the 1960s, that still sort of cast a
pall over things. I am glad that you mentioned this. It is a
big deal and we never talk about it, and its time has come. We
need to address this and make sure that morale remains high and
we do not just, intuitively, rely on it.
Senator Peters. Well, I appreciate that. I appreciate all
three of your comments. It is a strong workforce. They care
deeply about their job. But it is important to celebrate them
and it is important to make sure that they are a part of the
decisionmaking process, because they do bring a great deal of
expertise to the job each and every day. So thank you for your
comments.
Chairman Johnson. Thanks, Senator Peters. Mr. Williams,
real quick while we are on the subject of employee morale,
having been the Inspector General, do you happen to, off the
top of your head, know the top pay scale, on a per-hour basis,
for postal workers?
Mr. Williams. I think I understand. There is a pay scale
for all of the various professional series.
Chairman Johnson. Just for a letter carrier. Do you know
what the top pay scale is?
Mr. Williams. I have it in my head that it is around
$50,000.
Chairman Johnson. Do you know how soon they can retire on
full benefits, how many years?
Mr. Williams. I think it is a combination of experience and
age, and I think it is about 30 years of experience.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Again, we will explore all of this as
we work together with the task force.
Mr. Williams. And if I am wrong, I will send a confirmed
note.
Chairman Johnson. No. Again, unfair question at this point
in time, but because of your past experience I thought you
might be able to answer it.
Mr. Williams. I think that is right.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Senator Carper.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CARPER
Senator Carper. A couple of guys on--probably some gals as
well, on our committee, are baseball fans. Senator Peters and I
both turned out to be Detroit Tigers fans, for reasons I will
explain later. Ben Cardin is our big Orioles fan. And I watched
the end of the Tigers-Orioles game last night, where the Tigers
actually won a game, 4-2. And one of the things that you are
always worried about as a pitcher, is that you are not
telegraphing your pitches. You want to telegraph your pitches
to the hitters.
I am going to telegraph my pitch, and my first pitch deals
with revenues, which I think, Mr. Duncan, you mentioned. And I
think I have met you before. I am happy to meet you today and
to welcome you, and thank you for your willingness to serve. We
have known David Williams for a long time and just thank him
for all of his service.
Mr. Williams. Thanks, Senator.
Senator Carper. We need Governors. I am an old Governor. We
need Governors, desperately. To have the idea we have maybe the
second-largest business in the country and we do not have a
Board of Directors, we do not have a Board of Governors? I
mean, that is awful. And hopefully we can do something about
that real soon, and we can also move a kind of bipartisan
legislation, Senator Moran and I, and others, have worked on
with folks in the House. But I am delighted that we are here
today. This is an important step.
All right. Before we talked about--and the pitch I am going
to telegraph is to ask you what the Postal Service should be
doing to innovate, to bring in revenues, the kinds of revenues
it needs to be able to invest in capital, whether it is capital
in processing plants, post offices, technology, technology on
new vehicles that actually do not break down, that are not 30
years old, and they are actually a better size for the kind of
work the Postal Service is doing these days with packages and
parcels. So To start thinking about that.
And I will just say, as a backdrop, the Postal Service has
gone through a lot of cutting, as I am sure Mr. Williams knows.
They have half as many processing centers as they used to have,
one-half. They have about a third as many full-time employees
as they had before. And about a third of all the post offices
across the country no longer are open 6 days a week, say from 8
or something in the morning to 5 in the afternoon. We are
basically on a much tighter--slower schedule--smaller schedule.
And there is a menu of options that smaller communities and
towns can take in terms of how do they want to provide service
to Postal Service, to their residents and their customers.
But one of the things that I focused on as Governor for 8
years is balancing budgets, and we were fortunate to be able to
balance budgets 8 years in a row. We actually reduced taxes 7
out of 8 years. A lot of jobs were created. I am told more jobs
in those 8 years than any 8-year period in history in the State
of Delaware.
The reason why I mention that is we paid off debt. We got
AAA credit ratings for the first time in State history, and I
was so proud of that. So proud of little Delaware getting AAA
credit ratings, across the board. And I remember after we got
the AAA credit ratings, meeting with the rating agencies the
next year, and they said, you have done--and not just me, but
previous Governors and legislators--Pete du Pont, Mike Castle
and others--did really yeoman's service in terms of their
fiscal responsibilities and leadership.
But each of the rating agencies said to us, me and my
cabinet, they said, ``You have done, over the years, really
responsible stuff, good stuff in managing your State's
finances. You still have one obligation, one liability, you now
have to address.'' We literally were amortizing 10 years the
unfunded liability for pensions. We had no money in the pension
fund, 10 years later. We were amortizing over 40 years, and
within 10 years we got there. And we just had a lot of extra
money and we just threw it in the pension fund and did it in 10
years.
But fast forward. We have AAA credit ratings in Delaware in
1999, and the agency said, ``You still have a major liability
that you have not addressed.'' And we said, ``What is that?''
And they said, ``You have all these pensioners, fully funded
pension fund, but they have a health care liability that you
have not put aside any money to address, and you need to do
that.'' And so we started doing that.
As it turns out, we were not the only one. I did not know.
Almost no State had even acknowledged that was a liability,
health care liability through the pensions. And they said,
``You need to get to work on that.''
Well, as it turns out, that was like 19 years ago, and if
you look across the country, you look at most States, most
States still have not really acknowledged that that is a
liability, and they are not setting aside money. But they
certainly have not funded it to 100 percent of the liability,
on 90 or even 80 percent, or 70 percent, or 60 or 50 percent.
And if you look at big businesses, I had my States look at
Fortune 100 companies, Fortune 500 companies, Fortune 1000
companies and see what they are doing to fund their health care
liability for the pensioners. Almost nobody that I know of has
actually funded to 100 percent of the liability, and very few
are even close to 50 percent.
And part of the Postal Service's problem, as you know, is
that they have been required to meet a liability--how do you
meet this liability, a real liability, and how do you do it
over a reasonable period of time? How do you do it over 10
years? Well you cannot, and that is what we said. You have to
not only realize and recognize this liability but you have to
pay it off in 10 years.
And sort of, I think, the genius behind what Senator Moran
and I and others are trying to do is to say, this is a
liability. We want you to address it. We want you to fund it,
but over a reasonable period of time. And that is 40 years.
That is part of what we are trying to do. And so I just want to
mention that up front.
All right. Let us talk about--what would you all need--and
let us start with David, if we could--some ways that you might
suggest that we would allow the Postal Service to innovate and
to be more creative and bring the revenues it needs to invest,
realizing that all that growth in packages and parcels is
coming out of technology, it is out of the internet. And there
is just a lot of running room there, to make money. But go
ahead, please. I talked too long.
Mr. Williams. Thanks, Senator. There are a lot of levers
that can be pulled that will result in revenue for the Postal
Service that we have not fully exploited in the past, and we
need to look at the implications of exploiting those. There are
down sides too. But in my mind I think of things like returns
management. A huge issue for e-commerce is the number of
packages being returned. Those can best be managed at the point
that they are returned, and the Postal Service could easily
manage that. It is a perfectly situated adjacent space to the
services we have.
A lot of foreign shoppers would love to buy here but they
cannot, because they do not have an address. We could provide
virtual post office boxes for them and it would help commerce
and it would help the Postal Service. There are a lot of
services we could do in connection with last-mile. We could
provide presence services for the elderly and deliver nutrition
to the elderly. There is a growing army of freelance workers
that now have no office. They work at home. And that is only
going to grow in the future. Better supporting them in this
last-mile effort. Smart cities are going to bring with them
smart systems, and the collection of data from the Internet of
Things. There is something that these 227,000 vehicles and the
30,000 post offices could do to collect and do initial analysis
for.
We could do 3-D shippings, where we are not shipping
anything. We are just shipping the software, and we actually
produce it at the point that it is delivered. So there are an
ocean of things that could be done, and this exactly how world
posts have gone from losing money to profitability.
Senator Carper. Thank you so much. Those are great. Mr.
Duncan?
Mr. Duncan. I think it starts with technology. I am very
optimistic about technology. I like the technology that we are
using at the Postal Service today to allow you to see what your
mail is going to be. I think that there are things that will
build off of that platform. My colleague has mentioned some
other things, the returns. I think this goes to partnerships,
and it goes to the ability of us being able to flexibly act on
an agile basis. One of the things that you can help us with is
to make sure that we have the ability to act on these
opportunities that come forward.
Also look at our physical plant. I have been in many of the
post office buildings, for example, the Farley Building in New
York. I have been in one in Indianapolis. And I look at how
little of the space is being used in some of those buildings.
We have partnership opportunities there.
Senator Carper. All right. Thank you. Mr. Tucker?
Mr. Tucker. Yes. I know my colleague talked about informed
delivery, the innovation side of what the Postal Service has
been doing. When I first learned about informed delivery I
mentioned it to my son, who is a millennial, and he was
excited. He thought it was great that you could see 12 pieces
of mail that is being delivered to your home, regardless of
where you are. So I think if we could tell that story, get that
out to the marketplace, that is going to be a driver of some
revenues.
But in my opening statement I talked about three things:
small business, community organizations, Consumer Directed
Community Support (CDCs), as well as nonprofits. Those are
areas that I think we need to cultivate and farm, and possibly
raise some significant revenue from those communities, and
heretofore I am not sure if the Postal Service has been working
with those revenue generators.
Senator Carper. All right. Thanks. Grateful that you are
here. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for holding this hearing
for these nominees, and we look forward to working with you, to
move forward. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator Carper.
As is usually the case, my colleagues have done a good job
answering the questions that you are really in a position to
answer. My questions really have to deal with the detailed
financial information that you are going to have to gain access
to, so we can actually go through a problem-solving process,
develop the information, gather it, do a root cause analysis,
define achievable goals. I mean, do that first. Then we will
start working on exactly what the solution is. I think past
attempts have just really not had adequate information.
So, again, I appreciate your willingness to serve, and,
again, I want to say thank you to your families for working
with you on this.
I do have a couple of magic words to read. The nominees
have made financial disclosures and provided responses to
biographical and pre-hearing questions submitted by the
Committee. Without objection, this information will be made
part of the hearing record,\1\ with the exception of financial
data,\2\ which are on file and available for public inspection
in the Committee offices.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information submitted by Mr. Williams appears in the
Appendix on page 40.
\2\ The information submitted by Mr. Duncan appears in the Appendix
on page 113.
\3\ The information submitted by Mr. Tucker appears in the Appendix
on page 175.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The hearing record will remain open until noon tomorrow,
April 19, for the submission of statements and questions for
the record.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:29 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]