- DOJ OIG FISA REPORT: METHODOLOGY, SCOPE, AND FINDINGS
[Senate Hearing 116-396]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-396
DOJ OIG FISA REPORT: METHODOLOGY, SCOPE, AND FINDINGS
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON
HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
DECEMBER 18, 2019
__________
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
40-971 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2021
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin, Chairman
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
RICK SCOTT, Florida
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Gabrielle D'Adamo Singer, Staff Director
Joseph C. Folio III, Chief Counsel
Brian M. Downey, Senior Investigator
Scott D. Wittmann, Senior Professional Staff Member
David M. Weinberg, Minority Staff Director
Zachary I. Schram, Minority Chief Counsel
Roy S. Awabdeh, Minority Counsel
Jeffrey D. Rothblum, Minority Senior Professional Staff Member
Yelena L. Tsilker, Minority Professional Staff Member
Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
Thomas J. Spino, Hearing Clerk
C O N T E N T S
------
Opening statements:
Page
Senator Johnson..............................................
1
Senator Peters...............................................
4
Senator Paul.................................................
15
Senator Scott................................................
18
Senator Hassan...............................................
20
Senator Hawley...............................................
23
Senator Lankford.............................................
26
Senator Carper...............................................
30
Prepared statements:
Senator Johnson..............................................
41
Senator Peters...............................................
44
WITNESSES
Wednesday, December 18, 2019
Hon. Michael E. Horowitz, Inspector General, U.S. Department of
Justice
Testimony....................................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
46
APPENDIX
Abbreviated Timeline.............................................
75
Letter to CIGIE..................................................
87
FISA Court Order.................................................
93
Statement submitted for the Record from ACLU.....................
97
Responses to post-hearing questions for the Record:
Mr. Horowitz.................................................
102
DOJ OIG FISA REPORT: METHODOLOGY, SCOPE, AND FINDINGS
----------
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 18, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 o'clock a.m.,
in room SD-342, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Ron
Johnson, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Johnson, Paul, Lankford, Romney, Scott,
Hawley, Peters, Carper, Hassan, Sinema, and Rosen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JOHNSON\1\
Chairman Johnson. This hearing will come to order.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Johnson appears in the
Appendix on page 41.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I want to thank Inspector General (IG) Horowitz and his
team for being here. I know in the Judiciary Committee hearing
you had everybody raise their hands, so if you would raise your
hands and identify yourselves, all the people who did this
excellent work, we appreciate that. But I want to thank you for
all your hard work and efforts preparing the report that is the
main subject of our hearing today.
The bipartisan praise you have already received for your
efforts is well deserved, and I share those sentiments. The
release of this report is an important step in providing the
public answers to many of the questions that have festered for
far too long. But as thorough as this report is, its scope is
also narrow, and many important questions remain unanswered.
Much attention has been paid to the report's conclusion
that the Crossfire Hurricane investigation did have adequate
predicate, but that inaccuracies and omissions in the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) application and renewals
call into question the integrity of that process. Yesterday's
order by the presiding judge of the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Court (FISC) is a dramatic rebuke and underscores
how serious the FISA warrant abuses are. I would argue that,
based on what the report reveals about early knowledge within
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), we should be asking
a more fundamental question: At what point should the
investigation into possible collusion between Russia and the
Trump campaign have been shut down?
Although the IG concluded the investigation was properly
initiated, the consensual monitoring of Trump campaign
officials conducted in the first 6 weeks did not result in
``the collection of any inculpatory information.'' But rather
than shut it down or use the ``least intrusive'' methods, the
FBI ramped it up. Confidential human sources became FISA
wiretaps, top FBI officials
argued--by the way, disagreeing with the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA) on this--for inclusion of the unverified and
salacious Steele dossier into the body of the Obama
Administration's Intelligence Community (IC) Assessment, and,
finally, the FBI investigation ballooned into a Special Counsel
investigation. As a result, the Trump administration was
tormented for over 2 years by an aggressive investigation and
media speculation--all based on a false narrative--and our
Nation has become even more divided.
For anyone willing to take the time to read the report, the
report is a devastating account of investigative and
prosecutorial negligence, misconduct, and abuse of the FISA
Court process by FBI and Department of Justice (DOJ) officials.
The most disturbing revelations of the IG investigation include
reports of doctoring and using an email to mislead the FISA
Court, ignoring the fact that exculpatory evidence was obtained
during surreptitious recordings of investigation targets,
deciding not to provide a defensive briefing to the Trump
campaign, planting an FBI investigator in an intelligence
briefing for Candidate Trump under false pretenses, and
withholding known and significant credibility problems related
to the Steele dossier.
With these abuses in mind, and in light of what became
known early in the investigation, I strongly believe that
Crossfire Hurricane should have been shut down within the first
few months of 2017. Had the public known what the FBI knew at
that time, it is hard to imagine public support for continuing
the investigation, much less the appointment of a Special
Counsel 4 months later. Investigations into Russian hacking,
Paul Manafort, and Michael Cohen should have continued using
normal FBI and Department of Justice procedures. But with a
sufficiently informed public and an FBI and Department of
Justice that rigorously followed their own procedures, this
national political nightmare could have been avoided.
Which raises the question: Why wasn't the public properly
informed? Some of the reasons are now obvious; some are
speculative. What is obvious is that certain FBI and Department
of Justice officials were not truthful or ``scrupulously
accurate'' in their filings. Also, as this Committee's majority
staff report on leaks in the first 4 months of the Trump
administration shows, an unprecedented number of leaks--125 in
the first 126 days of the administration--helped fuel the false
narrative of Trump campaign collusion with Russia. The media
was either duped by, or complicit in, using those leaks to
perpetuate this false narrative.
The role of other Obama Administration officials and
members of the intelligence community is murky and unknown, but
legitimate suspicions and questions remain and must be
answered. For example, who initiated the contacts between
Joseph Mifsud, Alexander Downer, Stefan Halper, and Azra Turk
with George Papadopolous? Was the January 6th intelligence
briefing given to President-elect Trump by James Comey, John
Brennan, and James Clapper orchestrated to provide a
justification for the news publication of the Steele dossier?
The fact that the involvement of others outside the FBI and
Justice Department remains murky and unknown after an 18-month-
long Inspector General investigation is not criticism of his
work but speaks to the statutory limitations of Inspectors
General that should be evaluated and reassessed for reform.
Another question that needs to be asked is: Who will be
held accountable? During his investigation of the FBI's
handling of the Clinton email scandal, the Inspector General
uncovered a treasure trove of unvarnished evidence of bias in
the form of texts between FBI officials Peter Strzok, Lisa
Page, and others. Were it not for the discovery of those texts,
would we even be here today reviewing an IG investigation of
these stunning abuses of prosecutorial power? I have my doubts.
The officials involved in this scandal had plenty of time to
rehearse their carefully crafted answers to the IG's questions
or to use time as an excuse for their lack of recall. For
example, on significant issues described in the report, Andrew
McCabe told IG investigators 26 times that he did not recall.
Some of those involved are even claiming vindication as a
result of the IG report. I appreciate Mr. Horowitz's testimony
last week in which he stated about this report, ``It does not
vindicate anybody at the FBI who touched this, including the
leadership.''
Finally, I would argue that the process for investigating
and adjudicating alleged crimes within the political realm is
completely backward. Congressional oversight and, therefore,
public awareness end up being the last step in the process
instead of the first. Once a criminal or Special Counsel
investigation begins, those investigations become the primary
excuse for withholding information and documents from
congressional oversight and public disclosure.
In order to avoid a repeat of unnecessary Special Counsels
or improper investigations of political scandals, I would
suggest that Congress should increase its demands for obtaining
documentary evidence--concurrently with criminal
investigations, if necessary--and hold hearings early in the
process. This would result in more timely transparency while
preserving an adversarial process to provide political balance
and fairness. If possible criminal acts are found during
congressional oversight, they can be referred to the Justice
Department for further investigation. If conflicts of interest
exist that prevent a fair adjudication by the Justice
Department, then a Special Counsel can be appointed, but only
as a last resort, not a first.
I am sure we will spend most of today's hearing discussing
the Crossfire Hurricane investigation and the Inspector
General's report on it. I do hope we can spend some time
discussing some of the other issues I have just raised.
Regardless, this Committee's oversight on the events involved
with and surrounding the FBI Midyear Exam and Crossfire
Hurricane investigations will continue until I am satisfied
that all the important and relevant questions are being
answered. Senator Peters.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PETERS\1\
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Horowitz,
thank you for being here today and for your testimony.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Peters appear in the Appendix
on page 44.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inspectors General play a vital role in conducting
oversight, offering independent assessments of how programs are
working and holding agencies accountable when errors are made.
The Justice Department Inspector General's Office conducted
a thorough, 19-month investigation, interviewing more than 100
witnesses, and analyzed more than 1 million pages of materials
to complete the report that we are going to be discussing here
today.
This report found unequivocally that the FBI investigation
into coordination between individuals affiliated with President
Trump's campaign and the Russian government had a proper legal
and factual basis and found no evidence that the investigation
was affected by political bias.
Politically motivated investigations are a betrayal of our
bedrock democratic principles, and this institution should
speak with one voice to say that we will not tolerate them, no
matter who is in power.
In this case, the report found that the investigation was
rooted in identifying any Federal criminal activity or threats
to American national security. The Inspector General verified
that politics played no role whatsoever in opening this
investigation.
Importantly, the report did find that there are areas that
do need improvement, including the process used to obtain FISA
warrants.
Identifying these areas for improvement is a key part of an
Inspector General's role, and I applaud the Inspector General's
robust and thorough work to shine light on the FBI as well as
the Justice Department's shortcomings.
It is this independence and commitment to the rule of law
that sets our institutions apart.
FBI Director Wray has received this report and agreed with
its core conclusion that political bias played no role in
opening the investigation.
Director Wray also accepted the Inspector General's
findings that errors occurred in the FISA process and ordered
more than 40 corrective actions to improve and reform this
important process.
I hope that today's hearing provides this Committee with
the opportunity to carefully examine this report's
recommendations and determine whether there are areas that we
can help strengthen as well.
However, the most important fact that we should take away
from this report and this hearing is that Russia, a foreign
adversary, engaged in a sweeping and systematic effort to
interfere in the 2016 Presidential election and that the FBI
was right in investigating those who may have been involved.
The Russian government's effort was an attack on our
democracy and on our national security, and it is happening
again.
The Russian government is intent on sowing distrust,
spreading misinformation, and undermining democracy, and they
will pursue these efforts at all costs.
Members of both parties must come together to pass
legislation strengthening election security and ensure that no
foreign adversary can meddle in our elections again.
I had the opportunity to work with Chairman Johnson and
Senator Lankford on bipartisan legislation to strengthen
cybersecurity standards for our voting machines. And I hope
that we can continue working together to identify these kinds
of commonsense steps that will protect the very heart of our
democracy.
Finally, Inspector General Horowitz, I would like to thank
you and your team for your independence, your integrity, and
your hard work in completing this report. And I look forward to
your testimony.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator Peters.
It is the tradition of this Committee to swear in
witnesses, so if you would please stand and raise your right
hand. Do you swear that the testimony you will give before this
Committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God?
Mr. Horowitz. I do.
Chairman Johnson. Please be seated.
Mr. Michael Horowitz has served as the Inspector General of
the Department of Justice since April 16, 2012. He also chairs
the Council of Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency
(CIGIE).
Prior to joining the Inspector General's Office, Mr.
Horowitz worked in private practice and before then as a
Federal prosecutor in the Department of Justice. Mr. Horowitz.
TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE MICHAEL E. HOROWITZ,\1\ INSPECTOR
GENERAL, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
Mr. Horowitz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Peters, members of the Committee. Thank you for inviting me to
testify today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Horowitz appears in the Appendix
on page 46.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The report that my office released last week is the product
of a comprehensive review that examined over 1 million
documents and conducted over 170 interviews involving more than
100 witnesses, all of which is documented in our 417-page
report. It also includes a 19-page executive summary, which, if
folks do not have the time to read 400-plus pages, I would
certainly encourage people to read the 19-page executive
summary.
I want to commend also the tireless efforts of the team
that did this. They worked rigorously through long hours to
complete this review.
The investigation that is the subject of our report, the
Crossfire Hurricane investigation, was opened in July 2016,
days after the FBI received reporting from a friendly foreign
government (FFG) stating that in May 2016 Trump campaign
foreign policy advisor George Stephanopoulos ``suggested the
Trump team had received some kind of a suggestion'' from Russia
that it could assist in the election process with the anonymous
release of information that would be damaging to Candidate
Clinton and then-President Obama.
We determined that the decision to open Crossfire Hurricane
was made by the FBI's then Counterintelligence Division
Assistant Director, Bill Priestap, and that this decision
reflected a consensus reached after multiple days of
discussions and meetings among senior FBI officials. We
reviewed Department and FBI policies and concluded that
Assistant Director Priestap's exercise of discretion in opening
the investigation was in compliance with those policies. We
also reviewed his emails, texts, and other documents, and we
did not find documentary or testimonial evidence that political
bias or improper motivation influenced his decision.
While the information in the FBI's possession at the time
was limited, in light of the low threshold established by
Department and FBI predication policy, we found that Crossfire
Hurricane was opened for an authorized purpose and with
sufficient factual predication.
This decision to open Crossfire Hurricane was under
Department and FBI policy a discretionary judgment left to the
FBI. There was no requirement that Department officials be
consulted or even notified prior to the FBI making that
decision. Consistent with this policy, the FBI advised the
Department's National Security Division (NSD) of the
investigation days after it had been initiated.
As we detail in our report, advance Department notice and
approval is required in other circumstances where investigative
activity could substantially impact certain civil liberties,
allowing Department officials to consider the potentially
constitutional and prudential implications in advance of these
activities. We concluded that similar advance notice should be
required in circumstances such as those present here.
Shortly after the FBI opened the Crossfire Hurricane
investigation, the FBI monitored meetings and recorded several
conversations between FBI confidential human sources (CHSs),
and individuals affiliated with the Trump campaign, including a
high-level campaign official who was not a subject of the
investigation. We found that the CHS operations received the
necessary approvals under FBI policy, that an Assistant
Director knew about and approved of each operation, even in
circumstances where a first-level FBI supervisor could have
approved it, and that the operations were permitted under
Department and FBI policy because their use was not for the
sole purpose of monitoring activities protected by the First
Amendment or the lawful exercise of other rights secured by the
Constitution or laws of the United States. We did not find
documentary or testimonial evidence that political bias or
improper motivation influenced the decision to conduct these
operations. Additionally, we found no evidence that the FBI
attempted to place CHSs within the Trump campaign or report on
the Trump campaign or to recruit members of the Trump campaign
to become FBI CHSs.
However, we are concerned that, under applicable FBI and
Department policy, it would have been sufficient for a first-
level FBI supervisor to authorize the sensitive domestic CHS
operations undertaken in Crossfire Hurricane, and that there is
no Department or FBI policy requiring the FBI to notify
Department officials of a decision to task CHSs to record
conversations with members of a political Presidential
campaign. We concluded that current Department and FBI policies
are not sufficient to ensure appropriate oversight and
accountability of such operations.
One investigative tool for which Department and FBI policy
expressly requires advance approval by a senior Department
official is the seeking of a court order under FISA. When the
Crossfire Hurricane team first proposed seeking a FISA order
targeting Carter Page in mid-August 2016, FBI attorneys
assisting the investigation considered it a ``close call,'' and
a FISA order was not sought at that time. However, in September
2016, immediately after the Crossfire Hurricane team received
reporting from Christopher Steele containing allegations
regarding Page's alleged activities with certain Russian
officials, FBI attorneys advised the Department that it was
ready to move forward with a request to obtain FISA authority
to surveil Page. We concluded that the Steele reporting played
a central and essential role in the decision to seek a FISA
order.
As we describe in our report, the FISA statute and
Department and FBI policies and procedures have established
important safeguards to protect the FISA application process
from irregularities and abuse. Among the most important are the
requirements that every FISA application contain a ``full and
accurate'' presentation of the facts, and that all factual
statements are ``scrupulously accurate.''
We found that investigators failed to meet their basic
obligation that the FISA applications be ``scrupulously
accurate.'' We identified significant inaccuracies and
omissions in each of the four applications: 7 in the first FISA
application and a total of 17 by the final renewal application.
As a result of these significant inaccuracies and
omissions, the FISA applications made it appear as though the
evidence supporting probable cause was stronger than it
actually was. We also found basic, fundamental, and serious
errors during the completion of the FBI's factual accuracy
reviews, known as the Woods Procedures, which are designed to
ensure that FISA applications contain a full and accurate
presentation of the facts.
Department lawyers and the Court should have been given
complete and accurate information so they could have
meaningfully evaluated probable cause before authorizing the
surveillance of a U.S. person associated with a Presidential
campaign. That did not occur, and as a result, the surveillance
of Carter Page continued even as the FBI gathered evidence and
information that weakened the assessment of probable cause and
made the FISA applications less accurate.
We concluded that as the investigation progressed and as
more information was gathered to undermine the assertions in
the FISA applications, investigators did not reassess the
information supporting probable cause. Further, the agents and
supervisory agents did not follow, or even appear to know,
certain basic requirements in the Woods Procedures. Although we
did not find documentary or testimonial evidence of intentional
misconduct, we also did not receive satisfactory explanations
for the errors or the missing information and the failures that
occurred.
We are deeply concerned that so many basic and fundamental
errors were made by three separate, hand-picked investigative
teams; on one of the most sensitive FBI investigations; after
the matter had been briefed to the highest levels within the
FBI; even though the information sought through the FISA
authority related so closely to an ongoing Presidential
campaign; and even though those involved with the investigation
knew that their actions were likely to be subjected to close
scrutiny. This circumstance reflects a failure not just by
those who prepared the FISA applications, but also by the
managers and supervisors in the Crossfire Hurricane chain of
command, including senior FBI senior officials who were briefed
as the investigation progressed. Oversight by these officials
required greater familiarity with the facts than we saw in this
review where time and again during the Office of Inspector
General (OIG) interviews FBI managers, supervisors, and senior
officials displayed a lack of understanding or awareness of
important information concerning many of the problems we
identified.
That is why we recommended that the FBI review the
performances of and hold accountable all individuals, including
managers, supervisors, and senior officials, who had
responsibility for the preparation or approval of the FISA
applications as well as the handling of the Woods Procedures.
Additionally, in light of the significant concerns we
identified, the OIG initiated an audit last week that will
further review and examine the FBI's compliance with its Woods
Procedures in FISA applications that target U.S. persons in
both counterintelligence and counterterrorism investigations.
The OIG report made a number of other recommendations that
we believe will help the FBI more appropriately use this highly
intrusive surveillance authority and that will also strive to
safeguard the civil liberty and privacy of impacted U.S.
persons. We will continue as an OIG our rigorous independent
oversight as these processes move forward in the months and
years ahead.
That concludes my prepared remarks, and I look forward to
answering the Committee's questions.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Inspector General Horowitz.
These Greek names are hard. I just want to give you the
opportunity. You made the same mistake I did. I started saying
``George Stephanopoulos,'' but you really meant George
Papadopoulos. Correct?
Mr. Horowitz. Papadopoulos, correct. And my apologies to
George Stephanopoulos if that is what I said. [Laughter.]
Chairman Johnson. Mine as well.
Before we start the clock on me, I did want to provide some
clarity. I was going to do this in my opening statement, but I
think it is best to have just a quick little exchange here. In
a number of places, not only this Inspector General's report
but also in the Midyear Exam, you have a similar statement, and
I am going to quote: ``We did not find documentary or
testimonial evidence that political bias or improper motivation
influenced the decisions'' fill in the blank. You have used it
in a number of cases now. I know we talked earlier about you
are pretty confident there was no political bias in the opening
of the investigation with Bill Priestap.
Mr. Horowitz. We did not find evidence, and as to him, we
knew who made the decision. We could focus specifically on him.
Chairman Johnson. But in both these investigations, you
found political bias?
Mr. Horowitz. We found through the text messages evidence
of people's political bias, correct.
Chairman Johnson. Also political motivation, for example,
Bruce Ohr talked about how Christopher Steele was desperate to
make sure that President Trump did not become President.
Mr. Horowitz. As to Mr. Steele, that was, of course, a very
important part of this discussion, is when they understood his
motivations and his potential bias, and we have the November
statement from Mr. Ohr that he had been told by Mr. Steele that
he was desperate to prevent----
Chairman Johnson. So, again, you are not denying there is
certainly evidence of bias; there is certainly evidence of
political motivation. But what you are saying--and this is what
I want to clarify because I think this has been misconstrued
and misused, depending on where you put it. You are not saying
that that bias did not potentially influence that. You are just
saying you had no evidence that it did. Is that an accurate
statement?
Mr. Horowitz. We have no evidence that it did. We laid out
here what we did to find bias or evidence of bias. We put this
report out here so the public can read it, look at the facts
themselves. But we did not find exactly what we said,
documentary or testimonial evidence of bias. Nothing more,
nothing less.
Chairman Johnson. But you are not saying you did not, that
it did not. You did not find evidence that it did, but you also
did not find evidence that it did--you are not saying that this
bias or motivation did not influence. You are not making that
declarative conclusion. Correct?
Mr. Horowitz. Again, I want to carve out the opening and
the predication.
Chairman Johnson. Priestap versus the others.
Mr. Horowitz. Because that decision was made by one person,
we knew who made the decision, understanding that there were
questions raised by people above and below him. As to the other
decisions, for example, the FISA decisions and the errors and
the problems, we do not reach a motivation conclusion precisely
because of the concerns we have on that. So I think it is
important for readers to read the report themselves. We talked
about this before the hearing. Our job as Inspectors General is
to do what I know all of you expect us to do: transparency, get
the facts out there. And that is what we have tried to do here.
Chairman Johnson. So you are leaving it up to the reader,
to the American public, to judge whether the bias and the
motivation that you have uncovered, to what extent did that
potentially influence decisions throughout this process.
Mr. Horowitz. We are drawing the only conclusions we felt
comfortable drawing here, and the public can read, and an
informed public is very important for all of these purposes.
Chairman Johnson. Just one final follow-up. What kind of
evidence would you require, literally an oral confession or a
text saying, ``I so hate this guy that I am going to choose
this path versus the other''?
Mr. Horowitz. So it was very hard to look at all this
evidence and obviously, as we all know, get in people's minds.
What was the motivation for decisions to be made? What we
looked at was: Who touched the decision? Did we find evidence
through text messages, emails, witness interviews? We sometimes
do get--not in this case, but we do sometimes get
whistleblowers and other people coming to us and saying, ``I
think so-and-so made a decision for an improper purpose,'' and
we as IGs look at that.
We were looking for that kind of evidence. As you noted, as
to some people we had concerns about that. Our last report lays
out not just as to, for example, Mr. Strzok or Ms. Page, but as
to others, concerns about certain text messages. What we were
trying to figure out is: What was the evidence? Who was
involved in decisions? And was there evidence linking those
biased texts or other evidence connected to decisions? Could we
bring them together? That was what we were trying to do.
Chairman Johnson. I know in your report you say the text
messages were not only indicative of a biased State of mind--
these are the Strzok-Page texts--even more seriously imply a
willingness to take official action to impact Trump's electoral
prospects. So that is a statement you also make.
Mr. Horowitz. Right.
Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman, would you yield to me for
just a moment?
Chairman Johnson. Sure. Stop the clock.
Senator Carper. Is it fair to say that there are FBI agents
who were pro-Trump and anti-Trump, including some fairly senior
people that were pro-Trump and made it very clear that they
were?
Mr. Horowitz. We found in both reports evidence of
political views disassociated from action, and I think that is
very important, and I tried to emphasize this last year as well
as last week. We are not concluding that someone is biased
simply because they supported one candidate or another.
Frankly, they should not be using their devices for any
purposes that are political. It raises Hatch Act, potentially,
and other issues that are not bias, but other legal issues. But
what we are looking at are were the comments so significant
that it concerned us that they might have caused them to
influence decisions they made, and that is, particularly in
last year's report, where we had far more evidence of text
messaging. We had some people who had expressed political views
but did not act on them.
Again, here we have some members that we have in here that
reference their political views, but no information and they
are not the kind of written texts that suggest a potential
State of mind that would cause us concern.
Senator Carper. All right. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. I think we have that covered.
So my first question--and I am not asking you to speculate,
but based on your knowledge of FBI policies regarding
investigation closures and also based on what you found out
that the FBI knew pretty early in the process that consensual
monitoring and what they found out once they finally
interviewed the primary sub-source, would it have been
consistent with FBI and Department of Justice guidelines to
close Crossfire Hurricane shortly after the FBI first
interviewed Steele's primary sub-source in January 2017? And
would that have been a reasonable discretionary decision?
Mr. Horowitz. Certainly one of our criticisms that we have
laid out here is that as the team was gathering this evidence
as to the Carter Page FISA in particular, they were not
reassessing it, including primarily, as I am sure we will talk
about, the information from the primary sub-source that was
inconsistent with the Steele reporting. We even have in here in
the report a reference on page 212 where we have agents talking
with one another about why is Page even a subject anymore. To
your question of why are they still looking at him, they were
actually asking that question not just as to the FISA but the
foundational question of Carter Page, we are not finding
anything as to him, why are we not reassessing.
Chairman Johnson. So, again, it would have been within
their guidelines. If they had done that and you were doing an
investigation, you would go that is a reasonable discretionary
decision to close this thing down.
Mr. Horowitz. Certainly as someone who has done these cases
in Assistant United States Attorney (AUSA) and working with
agents, if you are getting information that is not advancing
and, in fact, potentially undercutting or significantly
undercutting your primary theme or theory, as was happening
here with the Carter Page file, so you would look at the Carter
Page file and say, ``Should I keep going on this Carter Page-
related matter?''
Chairman Johnson. I believe this is going to be outside--
and I think I know what your answer is going to be, but I want
to ask the question. In the course of your investigation, did
you ever find out how George Papadopoulos was put in touch with
Mifsud, Downer, Halper, or Turk?
Mr. Horowitz. That was not something within the scope of
our review. If we would have seen something in FBI records
about that, we would have assessed it. But we were focused, as
I said in my opening----
Chairman Johnson. And so you saw nothing in the records
that would answer those questions?
Mr. Horowitz. We did not find anything that would connect
all of that from the FBI side of the information.
Chairman Johnson. According to James Comey's May 28, 2019,
op-ed in the Washington Post, Joseph Mifsud, unnamed at the
time, was a ``Russian agent.'' Again, did you find anything in
the FBI documents that would support James Comey's conclusion
about that?
Mr. Horowitz. I want to be careful on that because I think
if I answer either way, I might be touching on information I am
not sure I can speak to in this setting.
Chairman Johnson. OK.
Mr. Horowitz. But let me be clear. We certainly would have
looked to see if what the FBI----
Chairman Johnson. We will follow up in a different setting.
Did you ever determine why on April 1, 2016, FBI
headquarters directed FBI's New York field office to open a
counterintelligence investigation on Carter Page? Did you ever
get to the bottom of why that happened?
Mr. Horowitz. I am sorry. Could you----
Chairman Johnson. Again, on April 1, 2016, FBI headquarters
directed the field office in New York to open up a
counterintelligence investigation on Carter Page. Did you ever
figure out what caused that?
Mr. Horowitz. The primary purpose of this was not to look
at that investigation. We did get some testimony we describe
here about that investigation and what prompted them to open
it. It grew out of a Southern District of New York case. But we
did not go beyond that and dig into the files.
Chairman Johnson. So you never found out why FBI
headquarters directed that it should not be a sensitive
investigative matter?
Mr. Horowitz. Again, we did not go into the specifics of
how they precisely decided to open it other than interviewing
some of the witnesses to understand a little bit for background
purposes.
Chairman Johnson. Neither of Peter Strzok's immediate
bosses, Bill Priestap or Assistant Director Steinbach, wanted
him to run the investigation, mainly because of the
relationship with Lisa Page as well as kind of a tendency to go
around particularly Steinbach and go right to McCabe. But
Andrew McCabe overruled that decision. Did you ever find out
why?
Mr. Horowitz. So we talk about that in the report, page 64
and 65, about that very issue, and Mr. Priestap recalls it as
you describe. Mr. McCabe--we have his explanation in there--did
not precisely recall certain of the events, recalled some other
events, and, again, we laid out there what he was involved in
in terms of selecting or, as Mr. Priestap described it, having
Mr. Strzok stay on the investigation.
Chairman Johnson. On August 25, Deputy Director McCabe
directed Crossfire Hurricane to contact the New York field
office for helpful information. It turned out that that helpful
information was the Steele reporting. Now, this is 25 days
before the FBI actually received the first six Steele reports.
Did you ever get to the bottom of how Andrew McCabe was so far
ahead of the rest of the FBI on that?
Mr. Horowitz. Again, we asked witnesses about that,
including Mr. McCabe, and we ultimately were unable to get to
the bottom of exactly what caused that delay or what prompted
that call.
Chairman Johnson. Now, McCabe told people he did not
remember doing this. But, in fact, McCabe told your team he did
not remember details about 26 significant events in your
report. Did you find his memory lapses credible? He seemed to
be pretty involved in this investigation, I mean overruling to
make sure Peter Strzok would be named the director, contacting
the New York field office. He seemed to be pretty involved, and
yet on some pretty significant issues in your report, he just
does not recall. Do you find those memory lapses credible?
Mr. Horowitz. We did find he was briefed on the
investigation, and as you noted, there were several points at
the beginning where he was involved. We do not make a
determination or credibility finding on that issue.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Senator Peters.
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to clarify, after some of that line of
questioning, just so we are clear for the record, and you can
answer these first couple of questions with yes or no if that
works for you, Mr. Horowitz. Did you find any documentary or
testimonial evidence that the decision to open the
investigation was political?
Mr. Horowitz. We did not.
Senator Peters. Did you find any documentary or testimonial
evidence that the decision to open the investigation was
motivated by bias against President Trump?
Mr. Horowitz. We did not.
Senator Peters. Your report states that in mid-2016 the FBI
was investigating attempts by Russia to hack into political
campaigns, parties, and election interference. Is that correct?
Mr. Horowitz. Right. We put that in there for background
purposes. Correct.
Senator Peters. Your report also states that the FBI
received information from a friendly foreign government that
Russia offered to assist the Trump campaign. Is that correct?
Mr. Horowitz. Correct. We lay out the precise words that
Mr. Papadopoulos reportedly stated to the friendly foreign
government.
Senator Peters. Now, your report does outline a number of
problems with the FISA process, as you have elaborated on,
particularly when it relates to questions from the Chairman
regarding Carter Page. My question is: Did the FISA errors
affect the investigation's other three subjects in your
analysis?
Mr. Horowitz. We did not see information from the Carter
Page events in the FISAs affecting the others. In fact, part of
the concerns that we outline here is the lack of developing of
information as to Mr. Page. So it was not developing, advancing
the investigation precisely for the reasons we outline here,
and by definition, therefore, not being of assistance or
impacting the others.
Senator Peters. So it had no impact on the other
investigations?
Mr. Horowitz. As to the other three, we did not see any
connection between this and the others with, I will say, this
caveat, which is the Papadopoulos information was being used in
the Page FISAs, and so the extent to which the Page FISAs were
not advancing information as to Mr. Page, they arguably were
not advancing information as to Mr. Papadopoulos because that
was the linchpin fact, initially at least, to go for opening
all of the cases.
Senator Peters. OK. So as you have identified a number of
issues related to how the FBI used the FISA process, certainly
those are things that need to be addressed, the Director has
said that he is working to address. So my question is: Do you
have any idea if, as you are quoted as saying, basic and
fundamental errors were made in this process, is there any idea
that this is kind of a systemic problem in the FBI? Or did this
only occur with this particular investigation? Or do you think
this is much broader that we have to deal with in a broader
sense?
Mr. Horowitz. As you know, as an IG I will speak to what we
found here, and that is, frankly, why we started the audit,
because the concern is this is such a high-profile, important
case. If it happened here, is this indicative of a wider
problem? And we only will know that when we complete our audit.
Or is it isolated to this event? Obviously, we need to do the
work to understand that.
Senator Peters. You mentioned the audit. Could you describe
the scope of the audit for us, please?
Mr. Horowitz. So what we are going to do in the first
instance, since we do not know what we do not know, and this
is, to our knowledge, the first ever deep dive anyone has taken
in a FISA, what we are going to do in the first instance is
have our auditors do some selections of counterintelligence and
counterterrorism--this was a counterintelligence FISA. We have
heard lots of concerns about counterterrorism FISAs about
targeting and other issues there. We are going to take a
sampling. We are going to look and compare and see how the
Woods Procedures played out in those FISAs by comparing the
Woods binders to the FISAs and seeing if the same basic errors
are occurring there. If they are, then what we will do is we
will make further selection to do deeper dives as appropriate.
But we first want to get a window into these. We have limited
resources, and we want to make sure we are targeting them in
the right places.
Senator Peters. So if I recall from your testimony here
today, the errors that were occurring, the fundamental errors
and basic errors related to the FISA process, you did not find
any evidence that there was political bias there, no
documentary evidence. The errors occurred and those are
troublesome, but you did not necessarily link those to any
political bias. Is that accurate?
Mr. Horowitz. I want to draw a distinction there. What we
did not find was, as they were considering in August and
September whether to seek a FISA, we did not see evidence there
in those communications. But as to the failures that occurred,
we did not find any of the explanations particularly
satisfactory--in fact, unsatisfactory across the board. In the
absence of satisfactory answers, I cannot tell you as I sit
here whether it was gross incompetence--and I think with the
volume of errors you could make an argument that that would be
a hard sell, that it was just gross incompetence--to
intentional or somewhere in between and what the motivations
were. I can think of plenty of motivations that could have
caused that to occur, but we did not have any hard evidence
that I can sit here and tell you why did these occur. I can
tell you they occurred. I can tell you we did not get good
explanations. But I cannot tell you why.
Senator Peters. But it is conceivable those bad
explanations are a result of a systemic problem with the FISA
process, so it is difficult--I would ask--it would probably be
extremely difficult to answer that question until you complete
your further audit to see whether or not this is a systemic
problem within the FBI that has to be corrected. It was not
something just with this particular case. Is that accurate? How
would you look at that?
Mr. Horowitz. We certainly would not make any conclusion
about systemic or not. As to the failures here, in the absence
of the satisfactory answers and given how basic some of these
were, how fundamental, this was not an error because this was
too complex, you did not understand that the fact you gathered
here was inconsistent with the fact you were relying on the
error in the FISA. These should have been told, and I think you
see this in the FISA Court opinion yesterday.
Senator Peters. Right.
Mr. Horowitz. These should have been told. These were
basic, fundamental errors. It is hard to figure out what the
rationale is, which is why we are not sure what the motivation
was.
Senator Peters. I just want to clarify. The way you will
know that is, as you are looking at other cases through your
audit and you find that these are occurring on a pretty regular
basis, that may be something that--why we have to correct the
FBI, the reason they were fundamental is because they are
making these fundamental errors in a lot of other cases, and we
need to make some reforms.
Mr. Horowitz. Right, and it could be--if you look at the
others and you find similar errors and bad explanations there,
it may be one answer. Frankly, if you find no other errors
there, that would be particularly concerning, right, as to this
one.
Senator Peters. Right.
Mr. Horowitz. Why then in this one? So I think we need to
understand----
Senator Peters. But that is why we need the audit.
Mr. Horowitz. Right.
Senator Peters. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. So I want to just quick consult Committee
members here. The vote has been called. We could continue with
this. The next questioner is Rand Paul, then Senator Hassan,
and then Rick Scott. Or we could recess, go vote and come back
so we do not miss any of the testimony.
Senator Paul. I would kind of like to get mine done and
continue on, if we could.
Chairman Johnson. One vote. So it is very easy for us to
manage this, but we are going to keep going?
Senator Peters. Yes.
Chairman Johnson. OK. So what I would suggest is, Rand, you
stick around, certainly Rick, and maybe all of you quick
skedaddle and get back. OK? Then I will go vote. Senator Paul.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PAUL
Senator Paul. Thank you for coming, and much has been said
of bias and, in a town that is full of politics and opinions,
it is kind of hard to be anybody without bias. But I do
appreciate that you and your team try to avoid having bias in
your reporting and try to be as objective as possible. I
appreciate that. I think you and other Inspectors General do a
great service to our country, trying to figure out and make
things better and root out where there are problems.
I would say that when we look at bias, I guess the first
question would be a short question, just to reiterate and make
sure it is very clear. You did find evidence of biased
individuals who were involved with the investigation.
Mr. Horowitz. That is correct.
Senator Paul. OK. I think that is very clear. And is it
difficult to determine what people's motives are, whether
biased or not biased?
Mr. Horowitz. It is very difficult.
Senator Paul. Right. And so just by saying you did not find
it, it does not mean it did not exist; it does not mean you
could not have had 15 people very biased who influenced every
one of their decisions. You just cannot prove it.
Mr. Horowitz. We could not prove it. We lay out here what
we can prove.
Senator Paul. OK. One specific instance I would like to ask
you about, though. The Office of General Counsel (OGC) attorney
is the one I think you have referred for criminal evaluation.
Correct?
Mr. Horowitz. I will just say we have referred it to the
Attorney General (AG) and the FBI.
Senator Paul. OK, and that is the possible criminal
evaluation. He also had text messages that said ``Viva la
resistance.'' Did you interpret those to be--or what is your
opinion? Does that show that he might have had some bias
against the Trump administration?
Mr. Horowitz. He was one of the individuals in last year's
report precisely for those text messages that we referred to
the FBI precisely for that concern.
Senator Paul. You interpreted that as evidence of bias, but
I guess my question would be, if you saw that he was biased, he
has obviously made errors that you think actually may have been
intentional. Why in that instance would you not be free to say
that there is documentary evidence of not only bias but then
malfeasance?
Mr. Horowitz. That is precisely why we do not say that as
to the errors, the failures in the FISA process.
Senator Paul. Could you then specifically say the opposite,
that actually in this instance there actually was evidence of
political bias and evidence of record changing that looks like
malfeasance?
Mr. Horowitz. There is evidence of both. I agree with you.
But I want to make sure there is a fair process----
Senator Paul. That is fine, and I think the Chairman is
very correct that the media has misinterpreted what you have
said and drawn conclusions that I do not think are accurate as
to what you are saying, and people should read the report, and
the report is very damning as to the process. Whether there is
bias or not, there are problems.
Now, getting to your solutions, you have suggested that--
and I think you are attempting to make valid suggestions as to
how the process would be better. I would make the argument that
the process cannot be corrected, and the reason I would say
this is that the FISA Court system requires this high
scrupulous nature for the agents, and they are both the
prosecutors and supposed to be defense at the same time. There
is not anybody on the other side. And this is not the standard
of the Constitution, and we have allowed this to happen because
we are going after foreigners, and we just frankly say, well,
we are not going to have all the constitutional protections for
listening to Gaddafi's phone calls or Saddam Hussein. We are
just not going to have all these protections.
My point is we are now getting into something that is at
the root of our democracy or of our republic, and that is
political debate and discourse and the First Amendment. I do
not think the tweaks to the FBI will work. I frankly think what
we have to understand is the FISA Court is for foreigners. It
is at a lower than constitutional level. And so I guess my
question to you would be: Do you think it is within the realm
of the reforms that we should consider whether or not political
campaigns should be investigated using a secret Court where
there is no legal representation for the defense?
Mr. Horowitz. And you raise excellent questions here, and
one of the things that we are careful not to do when we make
recommendations is make recommendations to Congress on
statutory changes. So we try and work with the process, as you
noted. There will be a lot of debate that goes well beyond what
we are recommending to try and fix what is existing. There is
going to be a legislative look. The FISA Court clearly is going
to look at some of these issues now. And we are prepared to
come meet with legislators and talk through these issues as you
all consider things that go beyond the four corners of what
exists.
I think one of the issues here--and we reference this.
Having been a prosecutor where you go ex parte to a court for
search warrants and wiretaps and the criminal process, but you
also know that at some point the defense lawyer is going to get
those if there is a case made, and there is the potential for a
litigation in an open courtroom before a judge with a defense
lawyer cross-examining, and that alone, that understanding that
that could happen, has some effect.
Senator Paul. I agree, and I think if you do not have that
in the FISA system, no matter what you do, you tweak the
system. When you are telling me it requires FBI agents to
always be scrupulous and never have bias enter into that we are
trying to prevent bias from entering in. I think it is a
standard that is too high for individuals to take, and there
will always be people on both sides of the political spectrum
who may let their biases enter into that, and the check is to
have a defense attorney, to have a public trial. And secret
courts really were not intended to examine crime in America or
to examine political campaigns. And I think that is the thing
that needs to come out of this, is that we do not--and while I
do not fault your recommendations for FBI process to make it
better, there is a big danger that we take that politically and
say, oh, that is the end answer to that.
No, the lesson to me on this is that--and I do believe both
sides could be equally culpable of this--is that we should not
subject our political campaigns to secret courts and to secret
warrants and secret surveillance. And there are all these
questions still of, were all these encounters that Papadopoulos
had just accidental? Did the government instigate these
encounters? And if they did, that is very troublesome to me
that our own government would be sending informants into
campaigns to try to have chance encounters with different
people.
So I am very worried about it, and I hope other Members of
the Committee will consider as we look at FISA reform that what
we have to do is Americans should not be caught up in this.
American citizens were not the target of this. And even
American citizens who talk to foreigners--can you imagine in
campaigns moving forward that if you are appointed to a high-
level foreign policy position, is there a likelihood that you
may have talked to Russians or Chinese in your career? If you
have been in a foreign policy career for 40 years, you have
talked to many Russians. And so to say you are an agent, well,
he had 16 conversations with different members of the Russian
government. Is that enough to open like a FISA process into
that he might be a foreign agent? And it is not the
Constitution. It is showing that you have evidence that someone
may be related to a government. It is not evidence of a crime.
And so I think we ought to really consider as we move
forward that this is not the appropriate vehicle for
investigating political campaigns.
Thank you.
Mr. Horowitz. And if I could just add on that, Senator, I
think one of the things also here that we uncovered and learned
as we did this, for example, you mentioned the confidential
human source issue separate from the FISA. The absence of rules
there applies whether this was counterintelligence or criminal.
There did not need to be notice to the Department even had this
been a criminal investigation. So I think there are some issues
here that cover broader than just the FISA issue that you have
raised and are concerned about.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Hassan, I am assuming you voted?
Senator Hassan. I did.
Chairman Johnson. So we are doing this as the vote is
going. I actually asked Senator Scott to stay, so if you do not
mind, I would like to give it to him so he can go vote. OK.
Senator Scott.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SCOTT
Senator Scott. Thanks for being here. First, I want to
thank FBI Director Christopher Wray for reporting more than 40
changes in how the FBI's seeks secret surveillance warrants
after you pointed out a series of flaws and the FBI's efforts
to monitor a foreign campaign adviser. I think it is very
important that safeguards be put in place to prevent a
politically motivated rogue agent or agents from being able to
manipulate any processes to pursue their own agenda.
We had the Parkland shooting down in Florida. We lost 17
wonderful individuals there. And after that, the FBI Director
did the right thing. He held individuals accountable at the
FBI, and I had the opportunity to go out, as I told you, to
West Virginia and I saw some of the processes that they worked
really hard to improve.
Now, the errors committed by the FBI and abuse of authority
presented in your report should alarm every American. Federal
officials motivated by political bias and hatred for our
President abused the FISA process in order to surveil people
affiliated with the campaign of President Trump, and that is
wrong. We are talking about liberal FBI officials abusing their
power in an attempt to discredit and undermine the legitimacy
of a candidate and his campaign.
We should all be greatly concerned about this, and I think
you brought this up in your report. Where was the oversight?
Where was the oversight when the FBI did not bother to confirm
any of the claims in the Steele dossier before presenting them
to the Court as evidence to surveil Carter Page? Where was the
oversight while the FBI was making seven key errors or
omissions in its original FISA application and ten more in the
three subsequent applications? Again, where was the oversight?
It was not there. The decision whether to open this
investigation was a discretionary judgment call left to the
FBI.
So, Mr. Horowitz, to your knowledge, has the FBI ever spied
on any other Presidential campaigns? And if so, which ones?
Mr. Horowitz. So we did not go and look, Senator,
historically at what other investigations the FBI conducted of
various campaigns, so I am not in a position to answer that.
Senator Scott. Do you know of any investigations that have
ever happened to see if there were investigations of
Presidential campaigns or spying?
Mr. Horowitz. Certainly as I sit here, I am not aware of
any surveillance that was done or use of confidential human
sources. But I certainly cannot say it did not happen. I just
cannot tell you as I sit here that I know of any.
Senator Scott. OK. I know some people do not like the word
``spying,'' but I think that is exactly what Comey's FBI did.
It is very similar to the Obama Administration's Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) deciding to target conservative
organizations. I think the business of weaponizing Federal
bureaucracies for political purposes is dangerous and
disastrous. I cannot imagine any sane person really wanting to
go down this road. I do not know anybody I work with that wants
to do this.
Can you just go through some of the recommendations you
think that are the big, most important ones that the FBI has to
do to make sure this does not happen again?
Mr. Horowitz. I think first and foremost there needs to be
a change in practice and policies that involves consultation
and discussion with the Department lawyers before moving
forward, whether on opening a case or involving these kind of
constitutional issues or sending in confidential human sources.
The level of discussion--I did public corruption cases when I
was a prosecutor in New York many years ago, and you would want
to talk through very carefully before moving forward in a case
like this in all steps, both the opening and the
investigations.
On the FISA side, there has to be a fundamental
understanding that decisions about evidence that is un the
dercutting, inconsistent with the theory of the case, has to go
to lawyer, the lawyer who is handling it for the Department,
and it has to move up the chain in the Justice Department
because they have to make the judgment calls. They are the
gatekeepers. They are the ones who are there to understand is
there enough for this FISA or isn't there, and if there is, we
have to make sure this application fairly represents to the
Court all the evidence and all the information. That is what
did not happen here, and that is, I think, why you see the FISA
Court order yesterday.
Senator Scott. Do you think the FBI is going to make the
changes that they need to?
Mr. Horowitz. I certainly understand that from Director
Wray that that is the plan.
Senator Scott. OK. Do you think he is committed?
Mr. Horowitz. Yes. Everything I have heard, he has made it
clear he is committed to it.
Senator Scott. Given the abuses that were found during this
investigation, what should the vetting process be for assets
and criminal informants? What do you think the----
Mr. Horowitz. There clearly on the FBI side needs to be a
better process or a more effective process and understanding in
place on how to vet individuals and how to make sure that
managers are supervising, and the reason we made the referrals
for accountability of the supervisors is this is not only a
failure of the line agents; this is a failure of management
from the first level all the way up to ensure hard questions
are being asked. When you are running something like this, you
have to ask insightful, targeted questions. You have to know
the answers. And you have to make sure that managers understand
what their responsibilities are.
So on the easier end is training. On the harder end is
making people realize that they cannot be making all these
discretionary judgments for themselves. Other people need to
know about them.
Senator Scott. Mr. Horowitz, to your understanding, was
Christopher Steele ever polygraphed?
Mr. Horowitz. I do not believe we saw any evidence of that.
Senator Scott. Does that surprise you?
Mr. Horowitz. I would probably want to talk further with my
team about making sure I understand what the rules are at the
FBI in terms of doing it, but you could see--presuming it is
within the rules at the Bureau to do that, it is certainly a
reasonable question to ask.
Senator Scott. So when the FBI finds an asset that they
determine not to be credible, what should they be doing?
Mr. Horowitz. Well, they should----
Senator Scott. What would be the process?
Mr. Horowitz [continuing]. Cut that person off as a
confidential human source, full stop.
Senator Scott. Do they have an obligation to go back and
tell everybody that he was providing information based on a now
not credible source, that they were wrong?
Mr. Horowitz. They have an obligation to close the person,
put it in what is called the ``delta file'' so it is in the
FBI's system so that every single person who has relied on that
informant can see that information. It is one of the criticisms
we have here, that not all information went into the delta
system as they were learning information about Mr. Steele. And
as needed, they should be alerting not only the agents who have
relied on it, but if it is criminal, they should also be
telling the prosecutors what they have learned.
Senator Scott. Thank you. Senator Hassan, thank you again
for letting me go.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HASSAN
Senator Hassan. Oh, sure. My pleasure.
Thank you, Inspector General Horowitz, for being here. I am
grateful to the Chairman and the Ranking Member for having this
hearing. And, Mr. Horowitz, I also just wanted to thank your
team for all of their extraordinary hard work because I think
the role of Inspectors General is incredibly important. So let
me just start with a couple of general questions about the
tools that you all have to work with and really the function
that you perform.
First of all, I believe you all do a great service to the
country. Inspectors General not only evaluate Federal programs
and spending to ensure that taxpayer dollars are well spent,
but they also confront wrongdoing that threatens to undermine
our democratic institutions and the specific missions of the
agencies that they serve.
Consequently, Congress has to do everything it can to
support the work of Inspectors General and establish safeguards
to protect their work against agency interference or political
influence.
So, Mr. Horowitz, can you discuss the importance of
maintaining the independence of the Office of the Inspector
General as it reviews agency actions and makes recommendations
for improvements? And, in particular, how does maintaining that
independence help you do your job?
Mr. Horowitz. Thank you, Senator. It is foundational to
what we do.
Senator Hassan. Right.
Mr. Horowitz. This report has credibility because the folks
who worked on it behind me and who have worked on other reports
go at it in just a down-the-middle-of-the-road way, completely
independent. We want to put forward information so the public
can make its assessment of what happened with a government
program, whether it is FISA, whether it is a taxpayer-funded
program of another sort. But we are all about transparency,
putting information out there, and not being swayed by what
maybe the FBI or the Justice Department leadership want to see
happen or want to see a particular outcome. We have to be
completely independent of that, be able to lay out what we
think.
The Attorney General disagrees with our finding on
predication. That is fine. I did not take this job to always
agree with the leadership of the Justice Department. That is
not what this job is about. And that has to be built into the
system, and there has to be respectful disagreements.
Senator Hassan. Right.
Mr. Horowitz. But there has to be that ability to have
disagreements.
Senator Hassan. Great. Thank you for articulating that so
well. It is something I think we need to stay focused on.
Now let us get to a couple of the tools that I would like
to ask you about. The Inspector General Act gives IGs numerous
tools to conduct their evaluations, audits, and investigations
in a thorough and objective way. However, additional tools may
be required to adequately perform what is really important
work.
One of these additional tools is the ability of the IG to
subpoena witnesses who operate outside of the agency or its
programs, including former Federal employees.
How would the ability to compel testimony from these
witnesses enhance the investigative capabilities of the IG
community?
Mr. Horowitz. So it is a critical tool that we have
advocated for for many years. This Committee has been very
supportive of us getting it. As an example in this review, we
had two witnesses who would not speak with us--Mr. Simpson and
Mr. Winer--and we had no ability to get their testimony.
Most importantly, also, though, partly the reason this took
18 or 19 months is because many witnesses initially declined to
speak to us and only toward the end of the investigation
reengaged and said now they were interested in speaking with
us. We were not going to turn down their testimony.
Senator Hassan. Right.
Mr. Horowitz. That required us to extend our timing. So
having subpoenas not only would have led us to get evidence we
did not get, but it would have led us to move this more rapidly
to a conclusion.
Senator Hassan. Right.
Mr. Horowitz. Very importantly, on programs that cost the
taxpayers money, grant recipients, contractors of the Federal
Government, those are people who are not Federal employees who
do not have an obligation to cooperate. That would be very
helpful in that regard. Former employees, I could go over and
over and over with you, and we have sent many examples to the
Committee, of individuals who engaged in misconduct at the
Justice Department and retired on the eve of us questioning
them, and then they do not come in. And valuable evidence is
lost. Sometimes they are the subject. Sometimes, frankly, they
are the critical witness.
Senator Hassan. Right.
Mr. Horowitz. They retire, they have their pension, they
move on. And, in fact, actually if they become contractors,
they can come back and work for the Federal Government, and we
cannot subpoena them in that position.
Senator Hassan. OK.
Mr. Horowitz. So there are a lot of reasons why that is a
very important provision, and, by the way, the Defense
Department (DOD) IG has that authority. It has been used very
sparingly in all the years because when you have the authority,
people work out voluntary arrangements to come in and talk with
us.
Senator Hassan. Right. Of course. Well, thank you for that
explanation, and that is something I hope we can work on in a
bipartisan way.
Another one of the tools that could aid your office in
particular is the ability to investigate misconduct of
Department of Justice attorneys. Can you provide us with more
background on why this particular policy is in place and
whether in your view it is an appropriate exception to your
authority?
Mr. Horowitz. Absolutely, and thank you for asking about
that. This has been something we have advocated for 30 years
since we came into existence in 1988. The deal that was struck
in 1988 that allowed the Justice Department to have an IG with
the Attorney General at the time was to carve out lawyers and
actually at the time to carve out the FBI and the Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) from oversight by the
independent Inspector General. So when we started, we largely
oversaw the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), which
was at the Department at the time, and a few other entities.
In 2001, at the time it was within the discretion of the
Attorney General to change that, Attorney General Ashcroft,
after the Aldrich Ames scandal, gave us authority over the FBI
and DEA. Congress legislated that a year later. Lawyers
continued to be carved out. The discretion to change that is no
longer with the Attorney General. It is Congress that would
have to change the law. We are the only Inspector General
Office that I am aware of that does not have authority over
misconduct by any employee in the agency they oversee. And so
if the misconduct is by the line prosecutor in a courtroom
prosecuting someone criminally to the Attorney General, we do
not have the authority to look at that. That goes to the Office
of Professional Responsibility (OPR), which does not have the
statutorily protected independence and transparency that we
have.
Senator Hassan. OK. Thank you. It is my understanding that
legislation is required to provide the IG community with these
tools, and I look forward to working with you to explore this
further in order to find a bipartisan way to strengthen the
investigative capabilities of the IG community. You really do
important work, and we are very grateful. Thank you.
Mr. Horowitz. Thank you, Senator. I would just add on that
OPR bill, and our ability to oversee prosecutors, the House has
passed a bill, voice vote, bipartisan, unanimous. Senator Lee
has a bill pending in the Senate with bipartisan cosponsorship,
and I know this Committee has cared deeply about it, and I look
forward to working with you on it.
Senator Hassan. OK. Thank you, and thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Hawley.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HAWLEY
Senator Hawley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Horowitz, I see that the FBI continues to persist in
characterizing the problem related to their surveillance issues
here as ``limited.'' And I see the FBI Director's statement
yesterday, the FBI's statement yesterday makes it sound as if
there is a limited problem. So let us just talk a little bit,
if we could, about the scope of the problem at the FBI and how
it is that the FBI came to be intervening in a Presidential
election while the election was ongoing in the fall of 2016.
First, let me just ask you when it comes to FISA warrants,
surveillance warrants, are the targets of those warrants given
an opportunity to defend themselves in court at the time the
warrant is sought?
Mr. Horowitz. No.
Senator Hawley. So the Court relies on who to establish the
facts?
Mr. Horowitz. The FBI and the Justice Department.
Senator Hawley. So there is nobody there to contest the
facts. The Court only hears from one side. Is that correct?
Mr. Horowitz. Correct.
Senator Hawley. Is it normal in your experience, your
knowledge, for the FBI to use as the principal basis for a
surveillance warrant political opposition research paid for by
a major political party?
Mr. Horowitz. I cannot say that we have looked at any other
FISA----
Senator Hawley. Have you heard of that being done before?
Mr. Horowitz. I have not heard of it, and I can tell you
there was obviously, as we lay out here, concern at the Justice
Department among the lawyers involved as to that question.
Senator Hawley. And, indeed, the FBI, of course, knew very
well the nature and source of this Steele dossier on October
11, 2016. After they were asked three times by a DOJ attorney,
the FBI responded that Steele, and I am quoting now, ``had been
paid to develop political opposition research.'' This is right
at the time that the FBI was going to the FISA Court and asking
for a surveillance warrant in the middle of a Presidential
campaign. Correct?
Mr. Horowitz. That is correct.
Senator Hawley. And so the FBI absolutely knew where this
was coming from. What about the number of people involved? How
many people at the FBI were involved in misleading the FISA
Court by your count, your estimation?
Mr. Horowitz. We do not have a precise number of exactly
who knew what when, but there were four different FISAs. There
is a case agent, there is a supervisory agent who are reviewing
each. There was some overlap so it is not eight. I think it is
either six or seven who had both of those responsibilities,
some of which, to be fair, were more egregious than others in
terms of the mistakes and the failures that occurred. And then,
of course, as we note here, the reason we refer people up the
chain is there is information flow up the chain, and even
though those individuals did not have direct responsibility
under the Woods Procedures, as managers and supervisors, we
believe they had a responsibility to ask probing questions they
should have been asking and followed up on information they
were getting to make sure they were in a position to
effectively supervise.
Senator Hawley. I want to come back to the information flow
up the chain in just a second. You say on page 65 of the report
there were over a dozen agents, analysts, and one staff
operations specialist in the original Crossfire Hurricane team,
which would have included at least nine FBI agents and
supervisors involved in overseeing the Carter Page
investigation. By my count, just what you have said in the
report, looking at an organizational chart, we are talking
probably at least a dozen individuals who were directly
involved in the Carter Page warrants the four times. Does that
sound approximately correct to you?
Mr. Horowitz. In fact, there is the org chart here at the
end of Chapter 3.
Senator Hawley. Exactly.
Mr. Horowitz. There were different organizational charts,
and people can see and follow this for themselves.
Senator Hawley. So we have about a dozen people at the FBI
directly involved. That is a lot of people. The FISA Court
pointed out yesterday that an electronic surveillance
application under Federal law must be made by a Federal officer
in writing upon oath or affirmation, and those individuals
swear to the facts of the application. Yet we now know that in
October and then three times--October 2016 and three times in
2017, these individuals deliberately, knowingly misled the FISA
Court. I mean, that is really the nicest way to put it.
Basically they lied to the FISA Court to get a surveillance
warrant of an American citizen.
Why would so many people do that?
Mr. Horowitz. So we lay out here the reasons. As I said,
there are multiple teams, there are some more senior people,
more junior people. We obviously try very carefully to lay out
who knew what when and which people--so I want to be careful
and not----
Senator Hawley. Were they just all incompetent? I mean, all
of these people, they just could not--they did not--I mean,
they were competent enough to deliberately mislead the FISA
Court, to change submissions to the FISA Court, to alter
emails. So it does not sound like they are very stupid to me.
But, what is the explanation? Why over time, why would all of
these people, four times over the space of half a year,
deliberately mislead a Federal Court?
Mr. Horowitz. We do not make a conclusion as to the intent
here, so I want to be clear about that. But that was precisely
the concern we had, is what you lay out. There are so many
errors. We could not reach a conclusion or make a determination
on what motivated those failures other than we did not credit
what we lay out with the explanations we got.
Senator Hawley. Yes, it certainly was not the reasons that
they offered to you, is what you----
Mr. Horowitz. We did not credit that, and, frankly, this is
one of the reasons we were not able to but did not reach a
conclusion, is we now have the Court weighing in and the Court
wanting to understand what happened here as well.
Senator Hawley. Yes. I think the scope here is what really
alarms me, the number of people directly involved at the FBI,
the repeated decisions to mislead, outright lie to the FISA
Court, and the total implausibility of the explanations that
these people offered you, I mean, again maybe they are
incompetent, or maybe they had an agenda here. And I just want
to put a fine point on that. Was it your conclusion that
political bias did not affect any part of the Page
investigation, any part of Crossfire Hurricane? Is that what
you concluded?
Mr. Horowitz. We did not reach that conclusion.
Senator Hawley. Because I could have sworn--in fact, I know
for a fact that I have heard that today from this Committee,
but that is not your conclusion?
Mr. Horowitz. We have been very careful in connection with
the FISAs for the reasons you mentioned to not reach that
conclusion, in part, as we have talked about earlier, the
alteration of the email, the text messages associated with the
individual who did that, and our inability to explain or
understand what--to get good explanations so that we could
understand why this all happened.
Senator Hawley. I think we are left with really--I mean, it
is two possibilities here. You have three different
investigative teams, as you testified earlier. You have a dozen
people at the FBI. You have the decisions made over time to
mislead the FISA Court. Either these people were really
incompetent and bad at their jobs, or they had an agenda that
they were pursuing. And having an agenda, I do not care what
word you put in front of it, political agenda, personal agenda,
but whatever it is, it is antithetical to democracy.
Let me just ask you about the information flow up the
chain. We see that Director Comey, we know that Director Comey
was briefed about Crossfire Hurricane in August 2016. Who else
knew about this? On October 14, 2016, we know that Deputy
Director McCabe gets a text message saying that the Deputy
Attorney General wants to be part of a meeting, and the White
House has asked the Department of Justice to host. Who at the
White House knew about the Crossfire Hurricane investigation?
Mr. Horowitz. So as you know, we are not the Inspector
General, over the White House or the Executive Office of the
President, and so what we have access to are the records at the
FBI and the Justice Department. I cannot answer questions about
that as to who knew or who was involved beyond people in the
Justice Department and the FBI.
Senator Hawley. I will say in closing, Mr. Chairman, I find
it very hard to believe that the Deputy Attorney General of the
United States, the FBI Director, all knew about this, but that
the senior leadership, the Attorney General herself or, for
that matter, the President of the United States would not know
about a surveillance program of a major party candidate in the
midst of a Presidential campaign. That just boggles the mind.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator Hawley. By the way,
good line of questioning.
I want to take this opportunity real quick to put a little
meat on the bones here. You talked about mid-October. October
11th and 12th, Christopher Steele's meeting at the State
Department with Kathleen Kavalec and Jonathan Winer, who
refused to cooperate with this investigation, is also the same
day, October 11th, that Stu Evans is raising questions about
Steele, going, ``Where is this coming from?'' Three times asked
the question. Did not get a satisfactory answer three times.
Also, I think the next day, October 12th--the 11th and
12th, Lisa Page is texting Strzok and McCabe saying that there
are some problems with Stu Evans, and, oh, by the way, in order
to break down his resistance--my words, not hers--basically she
might have to use McCabe's name to get Stu Evans to basically
agree to letting this FISA warrant go through.
So talking about information up the chain, you have McCabe,
you have Strzok, you have Page, that little cabal--I know they
did not call themselves a ``secret society,'' but it sure
sounds like they had a little bit of a cabal going here, and
that is being really influenced. You can see it right there in
those texts. That is why the timeline is so important. Take a
look at the lineup. These unvarnished truths that the texts
reveal combined with the timeline of events happening, it is
pretty revealing. Senator Lankford.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR LANKFORD
Senator Lankford. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask
unanimous consent that we enter into today's record the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Court's order\1\ that they put out
yesterday.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The FISA Court Order appears in the Appendix on page 93.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Johnson. Without objection.
Senator Lankford. It is pertinent, obviously, to this
conversation today.
Mr. Horowitz, thank you. Thanks for your leadership not
only at CIGIE but also, obviously, what you are doing there at
DOJ. I appreciate your whole team and the work that you
continue to do.
You used the term, when talking about the mistakes that
were made, saying there were so many mistakes, this was either
somewhere between ``gross incompetence'' to ``intentional,''
but you did not try to be able to determine the motivation of
all these. It gets a little more harsh when the FISC responds
back to this in the letter that they sent out in their order
yesterday. They said, ``Because the conduct of the OGC attorney
gave rise to serious concerns about the accuracy and
completeness of the information provided to the FISC in any
matter in which the OGC attorney was involved, the Court
ordered the government on December 5, 2019, to, among other
things, provide certain information addressing those
concerns.''
Then this: ``The FBI's handling of the Carter Page
applications, as portrayed in the OIG report, was antithetical
to the heightened duty of candor described above. The frequency
with which representations made by the FBI personnel turned out
to be unsupported or contradicted by information in their
possession and with which they withheld information detrimental
to their case calls into question whether information contained
in other FBI applications is reliable.''
One of the reasons this hearing is so incredibly important
is because what this group did at the FBI not only took our
Nation down years of turmoil, but they are now calling into
question every FISA application. I am confident every attorney
is going to bring this case up and say we cannot rely on the
FISA process now, and it will cause turmoil in the FISA Court
for a very long time. So the Crossfire Hurricane team not only
did damage to our Nation, did damage to our justice system, and
potentially damage to what we are doing in counterintelligence
and counterterrorism. So we appreciate your work because this
is incredibly important to actually get to the bottom of this
process.
Can you compare the quality of work as you went through the
interviews with the Crossfire Hurricane team at headquarters
with the Washington field office and those agents and the
quality of their work? Did you see the same number of mistakes
made in what was done between the Crossfire Hurricane team and
the Washington field office team?
Mr. Horowitz. So many of the problems that come up here
flow from the earliest parts of the investigation, which were
the headquarters-based team. As you know, the teams got mixed
as they went along. It went out to the field; then it came back
at various times, which is a problem we identified here. Most
of the problems are occurring at the headquarters-based times
when the teams are together. It is not exclusive because it
goes to the field as well.
Senator Lankford. The Washington field office seemed to
handle documents and procedures better than headquarters
handled it.
Mr. Horowitz. I think on balance that is a fair comment,
although, frankly, we do not go into trying----
Senator Lankford. Right, you are not trying to compare the
two. I am asking for an opinion after you have gone through the
process.
Mr. Horowitz. And there are so many problems here. We
decided not to sort of----
Senator Lankford. Try to separate it out.
Mr. Horowitz [continuing]. Work out exactly where things
might have been not as problematic as others.
Senator Lankford. Let me follow on what the Chairman was
talking about with Jonathan Winer. The meetings in the State
Department are very curious to me, that Steele somehow either
initiates or he says was invited by State Department officials
on October the 11th to be able to come sit down with officials
at the State Department. He made very clear he is trying to get
documents into the public eye before the election and to try to
get all these things made public. That meeting happens on
October the 11th.
On October the 19th, Steele delivers to an FBI handling
agent what he received from Jonathan Winer, from the State
Department. So Steele is coming to make his case to the State
Department. He makes his case. Apparently Jonathan Winer then
takes a document, gives it to Steele, since he is getting
things out into the public, and he sends that out. So someone
from the State Department is trying to get out into the public
what he described as ``a friend of a well-known Clinton
supporter who received this from a Turkish businessman with
strong links to Russia.''
So, apparently, someone from the State Department is taking
a foreign document or a foreign source, getting it to Steele,
who he knows is trying to get it out into the public. Were you
able to close the loop on what that document is, how that
happened, where that document came from?
Mr. Horowitz. We did not, and partly the issue, as you
know, is the inability to talk to Mr. Winer about where the
document came from, that meeting, those connections, but also
our access here and our review here was focused on FBI conduct
and conduct by FBI personnel.
Senator Lankford. So just to clarify on this, this is very
apparent to your team, though, that this is someone in the
State Department trying to take a foreign source document and
trying to get it into the public to affect the campaign against
Mr. Trump.
Mr. Horowitz. I can only tell you what we gathered here. We
did not have a chance to question people on it. So I want to be
careful. We did not reach conclusions. We are just presenting--
--
Senator Lankford. You are just saying what you saw at this
point.
Mr. Horowitz. Right.
Senator Lankford. Bruce Ohr is very curious in this
process. The FBI ``cuts off a relationship with Steele'' early
November and then makes it official November 17, 2016, saying
we are going to have no more contact with Steele at all. But
yet the next day the FBI for the first time pulls Steele's
file, and they are still going through this after they have
``cut him off,'' and then within days Bruce Ohr is then doing
back-channel communications with Steele, and they continue to
maintain back-channel communications with Steele.
So was Steele cutoff as a source, or was the Crossfire
Hurricane continuing to use him as a source, just not
officially?
Mr. Horowitz. We concluded the latter, that while he was
cutoff officially in FBI records, the FBI continued to meet
with him through Bruce Ohr as the conduit on 13 different
occasions.
Senator Lankford. Why would Bruce Ohr continue to be able
to meet with him? And why would he continue to be tasked to do
that?
Mr. Horowitz. Well, let me just be clear. He was not tasked
to do it. As he said, he understood what the FBI was looking
for from him. But he was able to do it because there were no
clear rules that prohibited him from doing it, and he intended
and desired to do it. There was nothing that he----
Senator Lankford. He maintained that. On page 188 of your
report, you make this comment: ``that Steele tasked [his
primary sub-source] after the 2016 elections to find
corroboration for the election reporting and that the Primary
Sub-source could find zero.'' He reported that to the FBI he
could find zero. He reported that to the Washington field
office when they met with him in May 2017. What I am trying to
figure out is Steele is tasking his sub-source to go find
corroboration after the election is even over. This was at
least a month through this process and cutting off from the
FBI. Who is tasking Steele to continue to go chase down more
information?
Mr. Horowitz. We do not have evidence as to anybody
specifically tasking Steele to go chase down evidence, but it
is pretty clear from what we are laying out here that the FBI
from day one was asking questions about the corroboration for
the Steele reporting and not getting it. So it would not be
surprising that Steele was still trying to see if anybody could
find corroboration so he could demonstrate that there was
support for his reporting when, in fact, what we had here----
Senator Lankford. It was zero.
Mr. Horowitz [continuing]. That was not what was happening.
Senator Lankford. It was zero, and it was known immediately
by FBI at that point that there was zero corroboration for
this. In fact, the State Department personnel, even when they
met with Steele, noted that he had his facts wrong, even what
he was presenting at that point, and they knew it all
immediately.
Mr. Horowitz. They referenced, I think it was, the
purported Miami consulate, that there was no such Miami
consulate.
Senator Lankford. All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Lankford, just real quick, your
line of questioning, again, reveals the shortcomings--again,
not because of Inspector General Horowitz's fault, but just the
fact that he is constrained in terms of what information he can
really gather, which is why I am basically reaffirming to you,
our Committee's investigations have kind of combined, Senator
Grassley in Finance, Senator Graham in Judiciary, and this
Committee. We have begun the process of requesting voluntary
interviews on a host of different issues. This is just one of
the areas. Again, our investigation started with the Clinton
email scandal, kind of morphed into this because it is the same
cast of characters moving into this.
So as I said in my opening statement, I am not going to
stop our oversight, our investigation, until I get all the
answers to all the questions. The ones you and Senator Hawley
raised are very valid, but, again, the constraints of
Inspectors General, the way they are pretty well siloed in
their departments really prevents those questions being
answered, even though it was an 18-, or 19-month investigation.
So we will continue our efforts. Senator Carper.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CARPER
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Horowitz, very
good to see you. Thank you for your service to our country. For
how many years?
Mr. Horowitz. Seven and a half.
Senator Carper. It seems longer.
Mr. Horowitz. It seems longer, but it is 7\1/2\.
Senator Carper. We are glad you are here. We appreciate the
work you are doing and the leadership you provide. Some of the
folks behind you, are they part of your team?
Mr. Horowitz. Yes.
Senator Carper. Would you all raise your hands, please? All
right. Thank you very much.
I think it was Thomas Jefferson who once said if the people
know the truth, they will not make a mistake. Think about that.
If the people know the truth, they will not make a mistake.
Sergeant Joe Friday on the TV show ``Dragnet'' said it
differently. My sister and I used to love that show, and he
would be making a visit to someone to try to get information
from them, a man or a woman, about a crime or an investigation,
and he would always knock on the door, they would open the
door, he would say: ``Just the facts, ma'am,'' or, ``Sir, just
the facts.'' So that is what we are interested in.
For a long time there was an older Methodist minister in
the southern part of Delaware in a town called Seaford. His
name was Reynolds, Reverend Reynolds. And when I was elected
Governor in 1992, he was nice enough to come and visit me and
just give me some advice. And one of the pieces of advice he
gave me was he said, ``Governor, just remember to keep the main
thing the main thing.'' And I said, ``Pardon me?'' And he said,
``The main thing is to keep the main thing the main thing.''
And it took me about 2 years to figure out what he was talking
about, but I am reminded of those words today as we try to
figure out the truth and to figure out what is indeed the main
thing as it flows from your investigation and your work.
In preparing for this hearing--I was speaking of Methodist
ministers--I was reminded of a verse of Scripture, I think it
might be in the book of Matthew, that warns those who see the
speck in their brother's eye but do not consider the beam that
is in their own eye.
Over the past few years, the media and some of my
colleagues have focused extensively on text exchanges between
FBI officials Lisa Page and Peter Strzok which have been cited
as proof of political motivation behind the Crossfire Hurricane
investigation. But, Mr. Horowitz, your report I believe notes
that other agents exchanged pro-Trump texts and instant
messages during the course of the investigation.
For example, one supervisory special agent wrote in
November 2016--I think it was just after the election--and this
is a quote from him, that he was ``so elated with the
election'' and compared election coverage to ``watching a Super
Bowl comeback.'' He later explained his comments by stating
that he ``did not want a criminal to be in the White House,''
referring, I presume, to Hillary Clinton.
Mr. Horowitz, this agent was supervising the use of a
confidential human source in the investigation. Is that
correct?
Mr. Horowitz. So the individual was in a field office with
a confidential human source who provided certain information
but was not ultimately used by the Crossfire Hurricane
investigation.
Senator Carper. All right. And you found other examples of
pro-Trump exchanges between FBI personnel. Is that true?
Mr. Horowitz. Yes, generally.
Senator Carper. Mr. Horowitz, did you or your team find any
evidence that the agents who exchanged pro-Trump messages were
influenced by political bias?
Mr. Horowitz. We did not find evidence of action there.
And, again, as I mentioned earlier, we were very careful to
separate out general statements pro or anti a candidate
compared to text messages that went a step further and
suggested some intent potentially to act on them or that had
wording that was concerning. FBI employees, like any other
employee in the Federal Government, are allowed to have
personal views on which candidate they support or do not
support. What they cannot do is act on them. What they have to
do is check them at the door before they get to work. And that
is what we were trying to sort through here.
Senator Carper. I think that is the main thing. All of us
have our political views. We certainly have them on this
Committee and in the body where we serve. And the question is:
To what extent do they impede or promote our ability to get
things done?
But I will just ask the question again. I just want to make
sure I understand. Did your team find any evidence that the
agents who exchanged pro-Trump messages were influenced by
political bias?
Mr. Horowitz. No, we did not.
Senator Carper. All right. Thank you. And this is
consistent, I believe, with the standard of behavior one would
expect from FBI professionals. Is that right?
Mr. Horowitz. That is correct.
Senator Carper. And, similarly, did you find any evidence
that political beliefs affected the work of Mr. Strzok and Ms.
Page?
Mr. Horowitz. On this investigation, what we looked for
very carefully was whether they had the ability to impact the
decision specifically, and on the issues we looked at--the
confidential human source decisions, the FISA decisions, and
the opening--we found that they were not the decisionmaker on
them, so that we could segregate out their views and their
activities from those decisions.
Senator Carper. All right. Thank you.
Let me just follow up. During your appearance before, I
think it was, the Senate Judiciary Committee last week, Mr.
Strzok and Ms. Page were described by some of my colleagues as
the ``people in charge.'' But a witness your team interviewed
stated that Mr. Strzok was, in fact, ``not the primary or sole
decisionmaker on any investigative step in Crossfire
Hurricane''. Witnesses also stated that Ms. Page ``did not work
with the team on a regular basis or make any decisions that
impacted the investigation.''
Is it fair to describe Mr. Strzok and Ms. Page as the
``people in charge'' of the Crossfire Hurricane investigation?
Mr. Horowitz. So Ms. Page was not in the chain of command
at any point in time. Mr. Strzok was in the chain of command,
so he did have supervisory authority for a period of time. He
rotated off the organizational chart in roughly January when
the second team came into being, and there were a series of
problems that occurred after that as well. And so I think he is
in a different position in terms of the chain of command
certainly than she was.
Senator Carper. All right. In March 2017, President Trump
alleged that ``Obama had my wires tapped in Trump Tower just
before the victory''. Later he retweeted a statement that ``the
DOJ put a Spy in the Trump campaign.'' Attorney General Barr
repeated these accusations in April of this year when he
testified that he thought ``spying did occur'' on the Trump
campaign.
I would just ask, Mr. Horowitz, did you find any evidence
that the FBI engaged in spying on the Trump campaign?
Mr. Horowitz. So we are very careful to use the words, the
legal words that are used here, which is ``surveillance.''
There was the Carter Page surveillance that we have identified
here. We did not find evidence of other court-authorized
surveillance. We found the confidential human source activity
that we detail here and did not find additional confidential
human source activity prior to the election.
Senator Carper. If I could close with this, does the report
find that the FBI engaged in surveillance at Trump Tower?
Mr. Horowitz. We did not find evidence of surveillance on
Trump Tower.
Senator Carper. And did the report find that any monitoring
of Trump campaign officials occurred without necessary FBI
approvals?
Mr. Horowitz. All of the monitoring activities were
approved.
Senator Carper. And is it fair to say that the statements
by President Trump and Attorney General Barr that I have
described are incorrect?
Mr. Horowitz. Again, we do not use the term ``spying.'' We
are looking at whether there was court-authorized surveillance
or not.
Senator Carper. Thank you so much.
Mr. Horowitz [continuing]. I will stick to what we have
here.
Chairman Johnson. I want to go back to October 11th's
activities. After being asked three times by Department of
Justice attorney Stu Evans, the FBI finally responds that
``Steele had been paid to develop political opposition
research.''
In your report, you write that Strzok has advised Page
support from McCabe might be necessary to move the FISA
application forward. Strzok texts Page: ``Currently fighting
with Stu for this FISA.'' The following day, Lisa Page texts
McCabe: ``I communicated you and boss' green light''--I think
that should be ``your''--``to Stu earlier. If I have not heard
back from Stu in an hour, I will invoke your name to say you
want to know where things are.'' Isn't that pretty high-level
pressure on Stu Evans by Peter Strzok, Lisa Page, and Andrew
McCabe?
Mr. Horowitz. There was certainly that effort exactly as
you describe. What ultimately happens is McCabe speaks with the
head of the National Security Division about it, so they
ultimately do not need to do what they are talking about here.
But that is absolutely what they are talking about.
Chairman Johnson. I want to go back to pick up a little bit
what Senator Lankford was talking about with Bruce Ohr. These
are quotes in your report by senior Department of Justice and
FBI officials describing Ohr's ongoing interactions with Steele
and the FBI. These are just basic descriptions of how these
officials thought about it: ``outside of Ohr's lane''; they
were ``stunned''; they were ``uncomfortable'' with it; ``out of
the norm''; ``bad idea''; ``raised red flags'';
``flabbergasted''; ``FBI should have alerted DOJ'';
``shocking''; ``inconceivable.'' Again, those are a lot of
senior Department of Justice and FBI officials.
What is interesting is how Andrew McCabe responded to Ohr's
activities. He said it was the ``responsible thing'' to do.
How do you explain that discrepancy from most of the FBI
and Department of Justice officials and Andrew McCabe thinking,
not a problem, it was the ``responsible thing'' to do?
Mr. Horowitz. Look, I cannot explain why that view would be
there. I think it is perfectly understandable why, if you are
in the Deputy Attorney General's Office, whether you are the
Deputy Attorney General or right below the Deputy Attorney
General, to have someone on your staff doing what was going on
and not telling anybody is highly problematic. And as we point
out here, the net result of that is the Deputy Attorney General
was signing a warrant that did not include key information that
someone on her staff knew and had told the FBI, but the FBI had
not come back and told the Justice Department. That was the net
outcome of that. That is a problem.
Chairman Johnson. Again, I am seeing Andrew McCabe's
fingers all over this thing. I am also seeing him saying he
cannot recall 26 times on significant issues. I am not buying
it.
Let me go back to the State Department involvement. I
realize that you are limited, but I just want to ask some
questions. Are you aware of why high-level State Department
officials were meeting with Steele and forwarding his reporting
to the FBI?
Mr. Horowitz. The only thing I could say is from speaking
with Ms. Kavalec, it was because she thought she had to tell
them because they needed to know. But as to the others, why
they were doing what they were doing, I do not know the answer.
Chairman Johnson. Did you obtain any information, meeting
notes or any other documentation, based on those meetings and
contacts?
Mr. Horowitz. We obtained certain information from the
State Department, including, for example, Ms. Kavalec's notes,
and we were able to speak with her.
Chairman Johnson. You did request interviews with Jonathan
Winer, right?
Mr. Horowitz. Correct.
Chairman Johnson. Do you know why he refused to cooperate?
Mr. Horowitz. I do not know.
Chairman Johnson. Why did you want to interview him? What
information did you feel he had that you wanted to know?
Mr. Horowitz. Precisely because of his interactions with
Mr. Ohr and Mr. Steele, much like we wanted to talk with Ms.
Kavalec, because we wanted to tie off an understanding as to
what was happening between the Justice Department and the State
Department.
Chairman Johnson. On September 30, 2016, Peter Strzok texts
Lisa Page, ``Remind me tomorrow what Victoria Nuland said.''
Did you ever find out from Lisa Page what Victoria Nuland had
told her somewhere on or about September 30th?
Mr. Horowitz. I do not recall as I sit here whether we
heard about it. I would have to follow up with that, Senator.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Peters, do you have--I am going
to organize my thoughts here. Do you have some other questions?
Senator Peters. I do. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Horowitz, in addition to your role as the DOJ Inspector
General, you also serve as the Chair of the Council of
Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency. I have a
question. I know you have addressed this somewhat with a
previous question, although I was out voting at the time. If
you could speak a little bit again to the importance of the
Inspector General independence and, in particular, why CIGIE is
important to the work of Inspectors General and what we need to
do to strengthen that organization as it ties into the general
theme of why independence is so important, that would be very
helpful.
Mr. Horowitz. Absolutely. So the foundation of what we do
as Inspectors General is our independence, is our ability to
both report to our agency heads and Congress about what we
find. We are not, very importantly, untethered from the
departments we are in but, rather, serve that dual purpose and
that ability to report to both. And the independence is
critical because we have the ability to get information like we
did here, to use our own judgments without influence from the
leadership of the Justice Department, the FBI, or others, but
to make unbiased decisions based on our historical reviews of
Department activities. And that is critical.
The foundation also is our ability to be transparent and
our ability to produce reports like this so that the public can
decide for themselves what they think of our factual findings,
which hopefully are 100 percent accurate. And I note here no
one is taking issue with our factual findings but, rather,
inferences drawn from them, and that is critical.
So we have to be able to do that. We have to be able to
have robust dialogue. As I mentioned earlier, the fact that I
may disagree or the Attorney General may disagree with me is
not a problem. In fact, it in some respects demonstrates the
importance of our independence and our independence.
Some of the things that CIGIE does, that is important is
pull together all 73 Federal IGs and bring us together for
common goals, common purposes, common issues that we should
have oversight of, training, but most importantly, being able
to advance independence and transparency in the government,
represent the taxpayers in our agencies, support the ability to
get information out there to the public so that the taxpayers
know where their money is going, how their money is being used,
whether programs they are authorizing--in this case, FISA--that
are highly intrusive programs are being used wisely or not
being used wisely, and making recommendations to fix them, and
then doing follow-up to make sure that is done, and being able
to come up here, frankly, like I did for many years before this
Committee and the Chairman on access to records and other
issues that we were having problems with so we could do our
jobs.
In fact, this Committee, as it is aware, this report would
not have been possible but for the IG Empowerment Act that you
all passed, because this was one of the areas we were being
hamstrung on in being able to oversee.
And so that is the kind of independence we need. We need,
for the reasons I mentioned earlier, testimonial subpoena
authority. We cannot get relevant evidence at key times,
including when individuals resign on the eve of being
questioned by IGs, contractors who get sometimes tens, hundreds
of millions of dollars, at some agencies billions of dollars in
contracts potentially, and grant recipients who get a
considerable amount of money.
So there are a lot of tools we need to further our efforts.
The Committee has always been very supportive of our work, and
I certainly appreciate it, and I know as Chairmen and Ranking
Members you both led the way on that for us.
Senator Peters. Mr. Horowitz, as our Committee states in
questionnaires that we present to every nominee who comes
before us, ``Protecting whistleblower confidentiality is of the
utmost importance to this Committee,'' something that, as you
know, is absolutely vital for us to do our work in oversight.
But, in your words, why are whistleblowers important, and why
is protecting whistleblowers of critical importance?
Mr. Horowitz. So precisely for the reasons you indicated,
Senator. We get a significant amount of our information from
individuals who are willing to blow the whistle. Some call
themselves whistleblowers. Some do not call themselves
whistleblowers. But they are willing to come in and blow the
whistle on wrongdoing and misconduct.
In July, we issued a report at CIGIE, the Council of IGs--
it is on our website--about cases that move forward precisely
because whistleblowers were willing to come in and report to
us. Many of them are willing to come in and use their names,
have their identities known, and are not afraid to do it. They
are incredibly courageous for doing that. But they do it. Many
are afraid and do not want their names known. They want to be
anonymous. Others send us information through our hotlines, and
we never learn their names. It does not mean we cannot follow
up on it, but what we have to do in those instances in
particular is see if we can corroborate the information. And
that is really what we are charged with doing. We want
information. We want people to come in. We get in my office
over 10,000 calls to our hotline a year. We have to sort
through them. Not all of them develop into leads. Not all of
them, when we investigate them, develop into findings. But they
are critically important, and that ability to come in and
without fear of retaliation or the threat of retaliation is
critical. And we as IGs have to do our job not only educating
people so they will come in, but also making sure that if
anybody is threatened with retaliation, we do our jobs to
ensure that there is accountability if that occurs.
Senator Peters. I certainly get this from your testimony,
but I just wanted to reiterate and get your response. It seems
to me, based on the importance of confidentiality and the fact
that you do not just act based on a confidential report, you
actually have to corroborate it with actual evidence, but you
mentioned how important confidentiality is, so I suspect that
identifying the identity of a whistleblower without their
consent would likely have a very significant chilling effect on
whistleblowers generally. Is that an accurate statement? If you
could expand.
Mr. Horowitz. That is a fair statement, and, in fact,
Congress in the IG Act has told us we are not allowed to
disclose whistleblower identities precisely because of that
reason unless there is a legal requirement that we do so,
unless we are unable through other means to protect their
identity. So people who come forward, it takes great courage.
My first involvement in this as IG was when I walked in and
Fast and Furious was ongoing. We had courageous whistleblowers
from ATF come in and report that information to us. Most of
those individuals put their names with the information. But
people should not have to do that. That does not mean their
information is no less important that we consider, but it does
mean, as you indicated, we do not act on purely anonymous,
uncorroborated information. The obligation is then on us to
corroborate the information and be able to move forward. But it
takes great courage to come in as a whistleblower. We have to
protect identities as the law requires us to do as IGs. And we
have to make sure, if there is retaliation or threats of
retaliation, that we take action.
Senator Peters. So in September, the DOJ's Office of Legal
Counsel (OLC) issued an opinion that attempted to justify
inappropriately withholding an intelligence community
whistleblower disclosure from Congress, as I am sure you are
very aware of. What is your view of the Office of Legal
Counsel's opinion in that case?
Mr. Horowitz. So in response to that, one of the things we
did as the Council of Inspectors General is put together a
letter that we sent to the Office of Legal Counsel on behalf of
the IG community--it is posted on our website--that expressed
our serious concern about an IG's inability in that instance to
be able to present the information that he believed should go
to Congress in that circumstance. And that is something that
concerns all of us in the IG community.
Again, the law as it is set up provided a mechanism by
which an allegation could get to Congress. It required a
judgment by the IG, and then it required Congress to be given
that information, and then, frankly, it is up to Congress to
decide what to do with that. It does not have to act on that.
It can act on that. It makes, obviously, in all instances its
own determinations. But that is a process that Congress
carefully considered and put in place in the law. I am of the
view and we were of the view as the IG community that that is
the way the process should have played out.
Senator Peters. So the letter you reference from October 22
I have, Mr. Chairman, if I could enter that into the record
without objection.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The letter referenced by Senator Peters appear in the Appendix
on page 87.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Johnson. Without objection.
Senator Peters. Thank you.
One final question. I understand that the Office of Legal
Counsel responded on October 25th to this letter. Are you
satisfied with that response? If you could elaborate.
Mr. Horowitz. They ultimately responded in the way they
did. We had a respectful dialogue back and forth. As I said
earlier, as an IG I did not take this job to be in agreement
all the time with everybody. We disagree, as our letter says.
We stand by our views in our letter. OLC has their point of
view, and I will let readers--those are both public, and,
again, the public should make their own determination. That is
really what we are foundationally about as IGs, is putting out
information and letting the public, an educated and informed
public, read them and make their own decisions.
Senator Peters. So I gather, if I may summarize, as a
professional, highly trained IG, you were not satisfied with
the response.
Mr. Horowitz. I stand by our letter and our legal position
and our views.
Senator Peters. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator Peters.
Let me just quick talk a little bit about whistleblowers. I
would share Senator Peters' and I think everybody on this
Committee's and your desire to afford those whistleblower
protections. There is no doubt about it. I am shocked, quite
honestly, coming from the private sector at the level of
retaliation against people that come forward. But I do want to
clarify the law.
As Inspectors General, you are by law barred from
providing--or basically blowing the confidentiality,
identifying the whistleblower. But the statute actually does
contemplate if somebody is accused of something by a
whistleblower and they are in a court of law, it actually
contemplates the person being accused being able to confront
his accuser--correct?--the whistleblower.
Mr. Horowitz. It basically says by operation of law. It
would be up to the judge to make a consideration of that, but
certainly, if it was in a criminal case and you intended to
rely on the witness, the witness would have to be there. What
you would try and do--I mean, in police corruption cases, I
have had this issue, and you have some people willing to come
forward and some people not willing to come forward. If they
are not willing to come forward, you have to figure out how
that information, if possible--and it not always is--if
possible, can be translated into the Federal Rules of Evidence
allowing that information in a courtroom.
Chairman Johnson. Again, there is no absolute statutory
protection in terms of a whistleblower's confidentiality.
Mr. Horowitz. The IG Act says we have an obligation to keep
it unless the law requires us to do otherwise.
Chairman Johnson. I just want to kind of tie up a few
things here. I have a lot of questions, which we will submit as
questions for the record,\1\ and we would appreciate you being
responsive on that.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The questions of Senator Johnson appear in the Appendix on page
102.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Real quick, going back to the Bruce Ohr activity in terms
of being a conduit between Christopher Steele and the FBI,
Peter Strzok in your report has handwritten notes which pretty
well demonstrate he knew about Ohr's activity. And yet in his
interview with the Inspector General team, he denied that he
was aware of what Ohr was doing. Are you buying his denial?
Mr. Horowitz. I would have to go back and, frankly, refresh
my recollection on the notes versus what he told us. I would
want to just double-check on the breadth of what he knew
because Bruce Ohr having 13 meetings, he clearly knew, for
example, about the Manafort-related meetings because he was at
some of the Manafort-related meetings.
Chairman Johnson. OK. We will put that in questions for the
record.
I do want to talk a little bit about monitoring or
surveiling the--what is the euphemism? ``Consensual
monitoring''? In other words, you are wiring somebody to
surreptitiously record----
Mr. Horowitz. Right.
Chairman Johnson [continuing]. Someone associated with the
Trump campaign versus the Trump campaign. I think it is a
difference without a distinction, but there is a distinction
because there is a difference in terms of what authority, what
approvals the FBI would have to get. Correct?
Mr. Horowitz. Correct. That is the reason for the
distinction, but I agree with you, there is varying degrees
here of what occurred.
Chairman Johnson. So they were trying to be pretty
scrupulous about it, saying, ``Oh, we are not surveiling the
campaign. We are just surveiling people associated with the
campaign.''
Mr. Horowitz. So what ended up happening here is, as you
said--and we will try and--what they did was they took
individuals, informants that were signed-up informants for the
FBI, wired them up so they could be recording conversations
they had without the person they were speaking with knowing
that they were being recorded. That is in essence what a
consensual monitoring is.
Chairman Johnson. It sounds really close----
Mr. Horowitz. One party's consent----
Chairman Johnson. It sounds really close like you are
monitoring the campaign, but, again, just lay that aside. That
is my own personal opinion.
Did you ever determine why the FBI changed its opinion? I
think early on when they interviewed--and, again, this was not
exactly done aboveboard, but they interviewed Michael Flynn. At
that point in time, I think the agent did not feel that Michael
Flynn was dishonest with him. Somehow that changed. Do you have
any idea why that opinion changed?
Mr. Horowitz. I do not know. I have heard that, but we
actually have no insight into what happened there on that case
specifically.
Chairman Johnson. A quick follow-up on Senator Paul's line
of questioning, and we spoke about this a little bit earlier,
too. There really are a lot of controls in current law that,
had they been followed, the Woods Procedure, other requirements
that the FBI and everybody knows this, they have to be
scrupulously accurate, so there are plenty of layers of control
over this FISA application. Correct?
Mr. Horowitz. There are a lot of layers of control.
Chairman Johnson. And I realize your limitation. You cannot
really recommend legislation. You have to kind of stay within
your lane at the Justice Department. But do you really think
another layer of controls is going to fix this problem? Because
this was caused by people circumventing----
Mr. Horowitz. Right. There are certainly some additional
controls that could help, for example, on some of the informant
activity and others.
With regard to the FISA, I agree, I think there is--and
this is at the hearing last week and this week--real questions
about are there legislative--does there need to be legislative
activity here? And, of course, also now the FISA Court has put
out its order, and they are going to have some involvement,
obviously, in a significant way in that decisionmaking as well.
That is well beyond the Executive Branch figuring out which----
Chairman Johnson. My own personal opinion for somebody who
is definitely supportive of the FISA Court, largely because we
were told, well, show us where the abuse has been, that these
applications are approved at such a high level because it is so
rigorous, it is so scrupulously accurate. Now, that has been
completely blown. I think the FISA Court is in jeopardy,
personally, and I view that as a very serious issues in terms
of our national security. I think it was James Lankford talking
about that, so I agree with his concerns.
The final two questions really speak to the limitations
that you have in terms of conducting an investigation like
this. So real quick, who couldn't you investigate? Or what
couldn't you investigate? Who couldn't you talk to that, if you
had been able to, you would have been able to tell a fuller
story here? Because there is still a bigger story to be told.
Mr. Horowitz. So our review, as we made clear here, is
about the Justice Department and the FBI's handling of the
opening of the Crossfire Hurricane investigation and the Carter
Page-related FISAs, along with the FBI's activities on their
confidential human sources and surveillance that the FBI did.
We did not go and look at or try to assess allegations about
what the State Department activities----
Chairman Johnson. So you would have kind of liked to have
known that, right?
But you could not do it.
Mr. Horowitz. We certainly wanted to know from the State
Department side, which is why we went to Mr. Winer, what Bruce
Ohr and Mr. Steele's activities were with them. What we were
not trying to figure out is separately what the State
Department might have been doing on their own or their own
interests if they had any. I do not know as I sit here today if
they have any.
People have asked questions about what did other
intelligence agencies know. If that information was sitting in
the FBI's files, we had access to it. If it is something they
did separate and apart from the FBI, that was beyond the scope
of this review.
Chairman Johnson. But you would kind of like to know how
George Papadopoulos met all these individuals who just happened
to be connected in different ways.
Mr. Horowitz. I think you would want to--it would be
interesting to know a lot of pieces of information that are
strands here. I do not necessarily believe it would have--well,
based on the access we had at the FBI and the information we
had at the FBI in terms of the FBI--what affected the FBI's
decisions, I have no reason to think there is something else
out there that we did not see.
Chairman Johnson. OK. This is very similar, but what other
big questions are outstanding?
Mr. Horowitz. It depends what--at the FBI? I am not sure
what other questions are out there other than what I mentioned
earlier, which is how did all of these failures in the FISA
process that is layered with all of these controls happen and
why. And I know that is a big question for people to know an
answer to, and I understand why. But, at this stage that I
think we did not get good explanations about, and that was
something we frankly would have liked to have gotten good
explanations about.
Chairman Johnson. I want to thank you and your team for
really an extraordinarily good piece of work here,
understanding the limited nature of the scope. We will be
providing additional questions for the record. We have
obviously been looking for this to guide our actions, and one
of the reasons I asked those last two questions is that will
also help guide our future oversight as well. You are obviously
steeped in this. You have the details. So I would just ask your
entire team, who else would you want to have interviewed that
you did not have access to? What other questions do you think
remain? And I will just kind of throw that out as an open-ended
question for our questions for the record.
Mr. Horowitz. OK.
Chairman Johnson. But, again, I want to thank you for your
integrity, for all your hard work and efforts. This is
unbelievably important what you have revealed, and we have a
lot of work ahead of us.
Senator Peters, do you want----
Senator Peters. That is good.
Chairman Johnson. OK. With that, the hearing record will
remain open for 15 days until January 2nd at 5 o'clock p.m. for
submission of statements and questions for the record. This
hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12 o'clock p.m., the Committee was
adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]