- VACCINES SAVE LIVES: WHAT IS DRIVING PREVENTABLE DISEASE OUTBREAKS?
[Senate Hearing 116-312]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-312
VACCINES SAVE LIVES:
WHAT IS DRIVING
PREVENTABLE DISEASE OUTBREAKS?
=======================================================================
HEARING
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION,
LABOR, AND PENSIONS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
ON
EXAMINING VACCINES, FOCUSING ON PREVENTABLE DISEASE OUTBREAKS
__________
MARCH 5, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-391 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2021
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR, AND PENSIONS
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee, Chairman
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
PATTY MURRAY, Washington
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
BERNARD SANDERS (I), Vermont
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia
ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., Pennsylvania
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
SUSAN M. COLLINS, Maine
CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
BILL CASSIDY, M.D., Louisiana
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
TIM KAINE, Virginia
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska
MARGARET WOOD HASSAN, New
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
Hampshire
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana
DOUG JONES, Alabama
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
David P. Cleary, Republican Staff Director
Lindsey Ward Seidman, Republican Deputy Staff Director
Evan Schatz, Minority Staff Director
John Righter, Minority Deputy Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
STATEMENTS
TUESDAY, MARCH 5, 2019
Page
Committee Members
Alexander, Hon. Lamar, Chairman, Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions, Opening statement.........................
1
Murray, Hon. Patty, Ranking Member, a U.S. Senator from the State
of Washington, Opening statement...............................
3
Witnesses
Wiesman, John, DrPH, MPH, Secretary of Health, Washington State
Department of Health, Olympia, WA..............................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
8
Summary statement............................................
14
Omer, Saad B., MBBS, MPH, PhD, William H. Foege Professor of
Global Health, Professor of Epidemiology & Pediatrics, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA........................................
15
Prepared statement...........................................
16
Summary statement............................................
20
McCullers, Jonathan A., MD, Professor and Chair, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Pediatrician-in-Chief, Le Bonheur Children's Hospital, Memphis,
TN.............................................................
21
Prepared statement...........................................
23
Summary statement............................................
25
Boyle, John G., President and CEO, Immune Deficiency Foundation,
Towson, MD.....................................................
26
Prepared statement...........................................
28
Summary statement............................................
29
Lindenberger, Ethan, Student, Norwalk High School, Norwalk, OH...
30
Prepared statement...........................................
31
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL
Statements, articles, publications, letters, etc.
Alexander, Hon. Lamar:
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986, DHHS, May
4, 1988, report, Submitted for the Record..................
54
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986, DHHS, July
21, 1989, report, Submitted for the Record.................
126
Murray, Hon. Patty:
National Association of County & City Health Officials,
letter, Submitted for the Record...........................
178
Casey, Hon. Robert P., Jr.:
Prepared statement, Submitted for the Record.................
181
Boyle, John G.:
Recommendations for live viral and bacterial vaccines in
immunodeficient patients and their close contacts..........
182
VACCINES SAVE LIVES:
WHAT IS DRIVING
PREVENTABLE DISEASE OUTBREAKS?
----------
Tuesday, March 5, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
Room SD-430, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lamar
Alexander, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Alexander [presiding], Isakson, Paul,
Cassidy, Roberts, Scott, Braun, Murray, Casey, Baldwin, Murphy,
Warren, Kaine, Hassan, and Smith.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ALEXANDER
The Chairman. The Senate Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions will please come to order. Senator Murray
and I will each have an opening statement, and then we will
introduce our witnesses. After the witnesses' testimony,
Senators will each have five minutes of questions.
It was not long ago, when I was a boy, that I remember the
terror in the hearts of parents that their children might
contract polio. I had classmates who lived in iron lungs. The
Majority Leader of the United States Senate, Mitch McConnell,
contracted polio when he was very young. He has a poignant
story about his mother, did not know what to do, but she took
him to Warm Springs because that is where President Roosevelt
went. And for a long period of time, when he was two or three
years old, she massaged his legs several hours a day, which is
hard to imagine if you remember toddlers. And that is why he is
able to walk today. Thousands of others are not so lucky.
Following the introduction of a vaccine in 1955, polio was
eliminated in the United States in 1979, and since then, from
every country in the world except three. Polio is just one of
the diseases we have eradicated in the United States thanks to
vaccine. Before the vaccine for measles was developed, up to
four million Americans each year contracted the highly
contagious, airborne virus. In 2000, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, CDC, declared measles eliminated from
the United States. In the 1980s, smallpox was declared
eradicated from the world by the CDC and the World Health
Organization. These stories of polio and measles and smallpox
are a remarkable demonstration of what modern medicine can
accomplish in the lives of millions of people in our country
and in the world.
Four years ago, this Committee held a hearing on vaccines.
That was following the 2014 outbreak of measles, the worst
outbreak since the disease was declared eliminated in 2000.
Even though 91 percent of Americans had been vaccinated for
measles in 2017, according to the CDC we continue to see
outbreaks of this preventable disease because there are pockets
in the United States that have low vaccination rates. Last
year, there were 372 cases of measles, the second highest
number since 2000.
So far this year, there have been 159 cases reported and
outbreaks confirmed in Washington State, New York, Texas, and
Illinois. We know some Americans are hesitant about vaccines,
so today I want to stress the importance of vaccines. Not only
has the Food and Drug Administration found them to be safe, but
vaccines save lives. Vaccines have been so successful that
until recently, Americans have lived without fear of getting
measles, polio, or rubella. We have made significant strides in
improving vaccination rates. In 2009, about 44 percent of
Americans had received vaccines for seven preventable diseases,
all of which I will now try to pronounce, diphtheria, tetanus,
pertussis, polio, measles, mumps, and rubella, haemophilus,
influenza type B, hepatitis B, chickenpox, and pneumococcal
according to the CDC. Today, over 70 percent of Americans are
vaccinated against all seven of these diseases.
Vaccines protect not only those who have been vaccinated,
but the larger community. This is called herd immunity. There
is some young people who cannot be vaccinated. They are too
young, or they have a weak immune system because of a genetic
disorder, or they are taking medicine that compromises their
immune system like cancer treatment. Vaccines protect those who
cannot be vaccinated by preventing the spread of disease.
However, low immunization rates can destroy a community's herd
immunity. While the overall vaccination rate nationwide is high
enough to create this herd immunity, certain areas, the pockets
of the country where vaccination rates are low, are vulnerable
to outbreaks.
There is a lot of misleading and incorrect information
about vaccines that circulates online throughout social media.
Here is what I would like for parents in Tennessee to know--
parents in Washington, parents in Texas, everywhere in the
country. Vaccines are approved by the Food and Drug
Administration. They meet the Food and Drug Administration's
gold standard of safety. The advisory committee on Immunization
Practices makes recommendations on the use of vaccines in our
country and annual child and adult vaccine schedules. This
advisory committee is made up of medical doctors and public
health professionals from medical schools, hospitals, and
professional medical organizations from around the country.
They are among the best our country has to offer. They have
dedicated their lives to helping others. These recommendations
are reviewed and approved by the CDC Director, and are
available on the CDC website. There is nothing secret about any
of these signs, and countless studies have shown that vaccines
are safe.
Internet fraudsters who claim that vaccines are not safe
are preying on the unfounded fears and daily struggles of
parents, and they are creating a public health hazard that is
entirely preventable. It is important for those who have
questions about vaccines, especially parents, to speak with a
reputable health provider. As with many topics, just because
you found it on the internet, does not mean that it is true.
The science is sound. Vaccines save lives, the lives of those
who receive vaccines and the lives of those who are too young
or vulnerable to be immunized. Before I turn this over to
Senator Murray, I want to add that the National Childhood
Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 required the Department of Health
and Human Services to submit a report to Congress within two
years after the legislation was signed into law.
The HELP Committee has received two reports from the
Department submitted to Congress May 4th, 1988 and July 21,
1989. I ask consent that the reports be submitted to the
Committee record so they can be more accessible to the public.
[The following information can be found on pages 54 and 126
in Additional Material:]
The Chairman. Senator Murray.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MURRAY
Senator Murray. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
As Washington State and several other states grapple with
measles outbreaks, this issue cannot be more timely. I remember
in 2000, when measles was officially eliminated from the United
States, and what welcomed news that was for families across
this country. And I remember the years of efforts that actually
led to that victory.
Before the vaccine was available, measles outbreaks used to
spread through communities like wildfire. If you were old
enough to drive, odds were, you had already had measles. But
today, vaccines that protect against measles have been in use
for over 50 years. Like other vaccines, we know the vaccine is
safe, it is effective, and it saves lives. Which is why today a
generation of students are starting College, almost none of
whom had to worry about a measles outbreak at school. It also
means a generation of new parents may not appreciate just how
dangerous measles is.
Before introduction of the measles vaccine and widespread
vaccination, millions of people caught measles annually,
meaning thousands were hospitalized, hundreds of people died,
mostly children under 5 years old. But measles is not just
deadly, it is also one of the world's most contagious diseases.
It is easily transmitted through coughing and sneezing. It can
linger in the air and on infected services for two hours. It is
already contagious four days before an infected person develops
a rash, and then another four days after. 9 out of 10
unvaccinated people exposed to measles catch it. That is why
the measles vaccine is so important in providing protection.
Experts say, in order to establish herd immunity against
measles, in order to prevent an outbreak from occurring within
a community, at least 95 percent of people should be
vaccinated. Meeting that threshold is crucial to protect people
who are unable to get vaccinated, infants, those with certain
medical conditions.
Unfortunately, while the national vaccination rate remains
high in communities across the country, we are falling behind.
Vaccine coverage rates are declining in certain areas,
contributing to the rise in preventable outbreaks like in Clark
County, Washington, where public health officials continue to
respond to a measles outbreak. The immunization rate among
children in that community is less than 70 percent, far below
what is needed to keep families safe. The result is a true
public health emergency, over 70 confirmed cases and counting.
And the majority of cases have affected children under 10 years
old, who are unvaccinated. Each case is not just a concern for
family members who are worried about their loved ones who are
seriously sick, it is a threat to neighbors and communities
left struggling to get an incredibly contagious disease under
control. It is a terror for parents with newborns who cannot
yet get vaccinated, and a strain on our public health system as
hundreds of staff in Washington State are pulled from critical
public health roles to respond to this crisis. And the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention stretches to support the
response to outbreaks in Washington and several other states.
Measles is not the only disease that deserves our attention
amidst slipping vaccination rates. Diseases like the Chairman
mentioned, mumps, pertussis, or whooping cough are also cause
for concern. These outbreaks are a clear sign we have to do
more to address vaccine hesitancy, and make sure parents have
the facts they need to understand the science. Vaccines are
safe, and effective, and life-saving. Parents across the
country want to do what is best for their families to keep them
safe, which is why they need to be armed with knowledge about
the importance of vaccination. And why we need research into
vaccine communication tools and strategies to help us better
educate people to address vaccine hesitancy and build vaccine
confidence.
We also need to understand the roles social media and
online misinformation play in spreading dangerous rumors and
falsehoods, and we need to better prepare the full spectrum of
health care providers, who are often the professionals people
trust most, to counter vaccine hesitancy and promote
vaccination. That is important not only for parents, but also
for expectant parents who may already be deciding whether or
not they plan to vaccinate, and for promoting adult vaccines
and encouraging people to protect themselves and others
throughout their lives.
I look forward today to hearing from Dr. Wiesman about how
Washington State is working now to get parents reliable
information about the importance of vaccination. And from all
of our witnesses who are here today about how the Federal
Government and other partners can promote vaccines and prevent
the spread of misinformation. And while we are now fighting
multiple measles outbreaks, it is important we also educate
people on the HPV vaccine's role in preventing sexually
transmitted diseases and lowering cancer risks. The flu
vaccine, particularly on the heels of one of the most deadly
flu seasons in years, the whooping cough vaccine specially for
those around infants who are particularly susceptible to the
disease, and the value of other recommended vaccines.
We also need to make sure we are approaching the public
health challenges like this from a global perspective because
we know diseases are not stopped by borders or walls or bans.
They are stopped by doctors, and nurses, and vaccines, and
public health awareness. And are stopped by strong investments
in public health systems here at home and abroad. They say an
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. That is certainly
the case here. A dose of MMR vaccine covering measles, mumps,
and rubella is about $20, meanwhile Washington State has spent
over $1 million already addressing the current measles
outbreak. Investing in prevention is not just more effective in
keeping our families and communities healthy, it is also more
affordable as well. The vaccines for children program is
another great example of this. Over 25 years now, it has helped
kids in low-income families get shots at no cost. It has saved
$1.6 trillion, prevented 380 million illnesses, and saved
860,000 lives. That is more people than live in Seattle.
I hope we can work together in a bipartisan way to build on
programs like this with strong steps to help address public
health crisis, and better yet, to prevent them from happening
in the first place. And I am glad to have this opportunity to
learn more about how we can do that, and to consider how to
make sure people across the country understand that vaccines
are safe and effective to keep their families and their
community healthy.
Mr. Chairman, I would ask that a letter from the National
Association of County and City Health Officials be submitted
for the record. It speaks to the important role of our local
health departments across the country in responding to vaccine-
preventable disease outbreaks and other emergency health
threats.
The Chairman. So, ordered.
[The following information can be found on page 178 in
Additional Material:]
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murray. We will now
introduce our witnesses. Each one of you will have up to five
minutes for questions and answers. I will ask the Senators,
just try to keep questions and answers within the 5-minute
period of time so everyone can have a chance to participate.
Senator Murray will introduce the first witness.
Senator Murray. Well, thank you again Mr. Chairman. From my
home State of Washington, I am very pleased to introduce Dr.
John Wiesman. Dr. Wiesman was appointed as Washington State's
Secretary of Health back in 2013, and his service there is just
the latest in a 22-year career working to keep our families and
communities healthy. Throughout his career, he has worked at
four different health departments, including Clark County
Public Health in Vancouver, which is the current frontline of
our measles outbreak in our state.
Dr. Wiesman, I know some of my colleagues on the Committee
will appreciate learning that before you came to my state to
work in our public health system, you got your education in
theirs, receiving your bachelor's degree in Wisconsin, your
Masters in Connecticut, and your PhD in North Carolina. I am
glad we have you now in Washington State, working to help keep
our families safe and healthy, and respond to public health
threats as we currently are. And I appreciate so much you
coming all the way out here from our other Washington.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murray. Senator Isakson,
will you introduce our second witness.
Senator Isakson. Thank you very much, Chairman Alexander. I
am very pleased to introduce to the Committee and everyone here
today Dr. Saad Omer--and I believe that is the right
pronunciation, is not?
Dr. Omer. Close enough.
Senator Isakson. Close enough, good. Well, mine is Isakson
and I just want to make sure we got it right.
[Laughter.]
Senator Isakson. We are very delighted to have him here
today as an expert on the subject we are discussing. Dr. Omer
is a William H. Foege Professor of Global Health and Professor
of Epidemiology and Pediatrics at Denver University School of
Public Health and Medicine. Dr. Omer also works in the Emory
Vaccine Center, making him a well-qualified witness for today's
hearing.
His research includes studies in the United States and
internationally, including clinical and P.O. trials to estimate
the efficacy of influenza, polio, measles, and other
vaccinations. Dr. Omer has published approximately 250 papers
in peer-reviewed journals and has served on several respected
advisory committees and panels, including U.S. National Vaccine
Advisory Committee. He has also mentored over 100 junior
faculty members, clinical and research postdoctoral fellows,
and PhD and other graduate students, playing an important role
in ensuring that the pipeline of qualified scientists is well
stocked in the United States of America. Dr. Omer, welcome to
the Committee today. We are here for your expertise. We
appreciate your testimony, and ``go Emory.''
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Isakson.
Third, we will hear from Dr. Jonathan McCullers. He is
Chair of the Department of Pediatrics of the University of
Tennessee Health Science Center. Services as Pediatrician and
Chief at the remarkable Le Bonheur Children's Hospital in
Memphis. Received his medical degree and completed his
internship and residency at the University of Alabama at
Birmingham. In 1999, he was named a St. Jude's scholar in the
Physicians Scientist Development Program and joined the St.
Jude's faculty in the Department of Infectious Diseases, where
he spent 13 years managing a translational research lab
studying influenza viruses and bacterial pneumonia. In 2012, he
joined Le Bonheur. He has published more than 150 peer-reviewed
articles.
Fourth, John Boyle. He is President and CEO of the Immune
Deficiency Foundation in Towson, Maryland, which is focused on
meeting the needs of people with primary immunodeficiency
disease. Prior to joining the foundation, he worked for the
Children's National Medical Center and the Platelet Disorder
Support Association. He received his Bachelor of Science from
Boston University. A Master in nonprofit management from Notre
Dame of Maryland University.
Finally, we welcome Ethan Lindenberger. Mr. Lindenberger is
currently a student at Norwalk High School in Norwalk, Ohio. He
is here to share his experience seeking out information about
vaccines and making decisions about whether or not to become
vaccinated.
Welcome again to all our witnesses.
Dr. Wiesman, let us begin with you.
Dr. Wiesman. Great.
The Chairman. Dr. Wiesman, excuse me.
STATEMENT OF JOHN WIESMAN, DRPH, MPH, SECRETARY OF HEALTH,
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, OLYMPIA, WA
Dr. Wiesman. Very good. That is good. Chairman Alexander,
Ranking Member Murray, and distinguished Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss public
health's work in protecting people from vaccine-preventable
diseases.
Vaccines are safe, effective, and the best protection we
have against serious preventable diseases like measles.
Vaccinating children in the United States has saved millions of
lives, increased expectancy, and saved our society trillions of
dollars. My admission as Washington's Secretary of Health is to
protect and promote the health of all its people and ensure our
public policy is based on best available science. I want to
speak directly to the parents who have children with serious
health issues, and who have been attending our hearings in
Washington State and are watching this hearing today. I see
your pain and your desire for answers to your children's health
issues. Your mission to protect and promote the health of your
children is one we share.
While the science is clear that vaccines do not cause
autism, we do need to better understand its causes. We need to
develop together, affected families, scientists, and public
health officials, research agendas to get the answers we need.
State, territorial, and tribal, local public health agencies
are on the front lines. In Washington State, we provide all
recommended vaccines without charge to all children under the
age of 19. We provide an electronic immunization information
system for healthcare providers to track vaccine dose
schedules, provide reminders when patients are overdue, and
measure immunization rates. We help parents make informed
decisions by sending them the information they need to keep
children healthy and publish plain talk about childhood
immunization. And we assist school nurses by giving them access
to the electronic immunization records.
As of yesterday, Washington State's measles outbreak had 71
cases, plus 4 cases associated with our outbreak in Oregon and
one in Georgia. Containing a measles outbreak takes a whole
community response led by governmental public health. The
moment a suspected case is reported, disease investigators
interview that person to determine when they were infectious,
who they were in close contact with, and what public spaces
they visited. If still infectious, the health officer orders
them to isolate themselves so they do not infect others,
notifies the public--the community about the public places that
they were in when they were infectious, and stands-up a call
center to handle questions.
We also reached out to individuals who were in close
contact with the patient. If they are unvaccinated and without
symptoms, we ask them to quarantine themselves for up to 21
days. That is how long it can take to develop symptoms, and we
monitor them so that we quickly know if they develop measles.
If they show symptoms, we get them to a healthcare provider and
obtain samples to test for measles. And if they have measles,
we start the investigation process all over again. This is a
staff and time intensive activity, and it is highly disruptive
to people's lives. Responding to this preventable outbreak has
cost over $1,000,000 million and required the work of more than
200 individuals.
What do we need from the Federal Government? First, we need
sustained, predictable, and increased Federal funding. Congress
must prioritize public health and support the Prevention and
Public Health Fund. We are constantly reacting to crisis rather
than working to prevent them. The association of state and
territorial health officials in over 80 organizations are
asking you to raise the CDC budget by 22 percent by FY2022.
This will immediately bolster prevention services, save lives,
and reduce health care cost.
Second, our response to this outbreak has benefited greatly
from the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act, so thank
you. The Public Health Emergency Preparedness Cooperative
Agreement and the Hospital Preparedness Programs authorized by
this law are currently funded $400 million below funding levels
in the 2000s. More robust funding is needed, and I strongly
urge you to quickly reauthorized PAHPA because many of the
authorizations expired last year.
Third, the 317 Immunization Program has been flat funded
for 10 years. Without increased funding, we cannot afford to
develop new ways to reach parents with immunization
information, nor maintain our electronic immunization systems.
Fourth, we need Federal leadership for a national vaccine
campaign spearheaded by CDC in partnership with states that
counter the anti-vaccine messages similar to successful Truth
Tobacco Prevention campaign. We have lost much ground. Urgent
action is necessary. Everyone has a right to live in a
community free of vaccine-preventable diseases. To make this a
reality, we must continue to invest in and strengthen our
public health system.
Thank you.
[The statement of Dr. Wiesman follows:]
prepared statement of john wiesman
Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and distinguished
Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear
before the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions
today to discuss an issue of significant importance to the lives of the
American people--protecting people from vaccine-preventable diseases.
State, territorial, tribal, and local public health agencies are on the
front lines implementing vital public health programs, including
immunization programs, and responding to a wide array of public health
emergencies such as disease outbreaks.
One of our objectives in public health is to share accurate,
science-based information. To that end, allow me to say at the onset,
vaccines are safe, effective, and the best protection we have against
serious preventable diseases like measles. Vaccinating children in the
United States has saved millions of lives, increased life expectancy,
and saved trillions of dollars in societal costs. \1\ Yes, like any
medication, vaccines have some minor side effects and can have rare
serious complications. \2\ They can also eradicate diseases from our
planet, like they did with smallpox and hopefully soon with polio. \3\,
\4\ And in the United States, we have eliminated a number of vaccine
preventable diseases. In 2000 we thought the United States had
eliminated measles, but that is no longer the situation with the number
of outbreaks we have had since then. \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
Whitney, C. G., Zhou, F., Singleton, J., & Schuchat, A.
(2014). Benefits from immunization during the vaccines for children
program era--United States, 1994-2013. MMWR 2014;63(16): 352-355.
\2\
McLean HQ, Fiebelkorn AP, Temte JL, Wallace GS. Prevention of
Measles, Rubella, Congenital Rubella Syndrome, and Mumps, 2013: Summary
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP). MMWR 2013; 62(RR04):1-34. Available at https://www.cdc.gov/
mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr6204a1.htm
\3\
https://www.who.int/csr/disease/smallpox/en/ (accessed March
1, 2019)
\4\
https://www.who.int/features/factfiles/polio/en/ (accessed
March 1, 2019)
\5\
Papania, M. J., Wallace, G. S., Rota, P. A., Icenogle, J. P.,
Fiebelkorn, A. P., Armstrong, G. L., ... & Hao, L. (2014). Elimination
of endemic measles, rubella, and congenital rubella syndrome from the
Western hemisphere: the US experience. JAMA pediatrics, 168(2), 148-
155.
As secretary of health for Washington State, my mission is to
protect and promote the lives of all the people in our state and when
making public policy to ensure that it is based on the best science
available to us. To that point, I want to speak directly to the parents
who have children with autism and other serious health issues and who
have been attending our hearings in Washington State and who are
watching this hearing today. I see you and your children. I see your
pain, your desire for answers to your children's health issues, your
skepticism of government and the pharmaceutical industry, your mission
to give your children the best life they can have and your desire to
prevent other parents from the pain and suffering you and your children
experience. Your mission to protect and promote the health of your
children is a mission I share. And I know on this point, some of you
will strongly disagree with me: the science demonstrates that autism is
not caused by vaccines. But while the science on that is clear, we do
need to better understand the causes of autism and other diseases
better than we do today. We need to develop together--scientists,
public health officials and affected families--research agendas to get
the answers we all need. We need to create an environment where we can
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
respectfully listen to each other and engage.
Public health systems at every level are struggling due to chronic
underfunding, increasing population size, and the emergence of new
threats. We find ourselves constantly reacting to crises, rather than
working to prevent them. It is therefore incumbent upon all of us at
the federal, state, and local levels to provide the sustained,
predictable, and increased resources necessary to focus on health
promotion and disease prevention work as well as respond to emerging
and reemerging diseases.
Measles Outbreak
Currently, there are six ongoing but completely preventable measles
outbreaks in the U.S., including one in Washington, three in New York,
one in Texas and one in Illinois. \6\ Over the last 10 years,
Washington State has had three measles outbreaks, one of which included
the death of an immunocompromised person exposed to measles in a clinic
waiting room. \7\ The current outbreak is larger and infecting people
faster than those in recent history. Between the end of December 2018
to March 1, 2019, Washington State has had 69 measles cases in our
outbreak, plus four additional cases associated with our outbreak in
Oregon and one in Georgia. Of the 69 Washington cases, 60 were
unvaccinated, two had one dose of the measles vaccine and seven have an
unverified immunization status. Two cases were hospitalized.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\
https://www.cdc.gov/measles/ (accessed March 1, 2019)
\7\
https://www.doh.wa.gov/Portals/1/Documents/5100/420-004-
CDAnnualReport2015.pdf (accessed March 1, 2019)
In a global society with increased air travel, a disease outbreak
in one part of the world can easily be transmitted to another by
travelers. Our best protection against these preventable diseases is
quite simple--vaccination. Currently, many countries in Europe are
experiencing significant measles outbreaks. \8\ In this latest outbreak
in Washington, we know that an individual traveled to Washington State
from Europe who was already infected, but not yet symptomatic, with a
wild strain of the measles virus circulating there. \9\ Fighting
disease outside the U.S., as well as inside, promotes health security
for everyone. Research shows every dollar invested in global
immunization programs in the world's poorest countries saves $16. \10\
This is why we must fully fund the CDC and other health organizations
to maintain disease-control activities globally.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\
http://www.euro.who.int/en/media-centre/sections/press-
releases/2018/measles-cases-hit-record-high-in-the-european-region
(accessed March 1, 2019)
\9\
https://www.clark.wa.gov/public-health/measles-investigation
(accessed March 1, 2019)
\10\
Ozawa, S., Clark, S., Portnoy, A., Grewal, S., Brenzel, L., &
Walker, D. G. (2016). Return on investment from childhood immunization
in low-and middle-income countries, 2011-20. Health Affairs, 35(2),
199-207.
According to the CDC, measles can be serious for all age groups.
However, children younger than five years of age and adults over 20
years of age are more likely to suffer from measles complications.
Common complications from the measles include ear infections, which can
lead to permanent hearing loss, and diarrhea. However, some people may
suffer from severe complications such as pneumonia and encephalitis.
Finally, for every 1,000 people who get measles, one or two will die
from it. \11\ Measles is so contagious that if one person has it, 9 out
of 10 people of all ages around him or her will also become infected if
they are not protected. \12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\
https://www.cdc.gov/measles/about/complications.html
(accessed March 1, 2019)
\12\
https://www.cdc.gov/measles/about/transmission.html (accessed
March 1, 2019)
Even though there is an effective vaccine, measles still caused
110,000 measles deaths worldwide in 2017, mostly among children under
five years of age. \13\ In 1963, prior to the United States measles
vaccination program, three to four million people a year were estimated
to get measles, resulting in 48,000 hospitalizations and 450 to 500
measles deaths a year. \14\ From 1989 to 1991, a resurgence of measles
in the United States resulted in more than 55,000 cases and 120 deaths.
\15\ More than half of the children had not been vaccinated, even
though they had seen a healthcare provider. In response, Congress
created the Vaccine for Children program, which covers vaccines for
those under 19 years of age on Medicaid, uninsured, underinsured, and
American Indian/Alaskan Native. \16\ In addition, the Advisory
Committee on Immunization practices recommended the second dose of MMR.
\17\ We must continue the forward progress we have made protecting
people from vaccine-preventable diseases.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/measles
(accessed March 1, 2019).
\14\
https://www.cdc.gov/measles/downloads/
measlesdataandstatsslideset.pdf (accessed March 1, 2019)
\15\
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/meas.html
(accessed March 2, 2019)
\16\
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/about/ (accessed
March 2, 2019)
\17\
CDC. Measles prevention: recommendations of the Immunization
Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1989;38(No.S-9):1-18.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/Mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00041753.htm
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vaccine Effectiveness
The widespread use of measles vaccine led to a greater than 99
percent reduction in measles cases compared with the pre-vaccine era.
\18\ Two doses of the measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccination are
97 percent effective against measles. \19\ And it is estimated
worldwide that because of the measles vaccine, 20.5 million deaths were
prevented between 2000 and 2016. \20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\
https://www.cdc.gov/measles/vaccination.html (accessed March
1, 2019)
\19\
https://www.cdc.gov/measles/hcp/index.html
\20\
https://www.cdc.gov/measles/downloads/
measlesdataandstatsslideset.pdf (accessed March 1, 2019)
It is important to note however, that some vaccines are not as
effective as we would like. For example, according to the CDC the
overall effectiveness of the 2017-2018 flu vaccine against both
influenza A and B viruses was estimated to be 40 percent. This means
the flu vaccine reduced a person's overall risk of having to seek
medical care at a doctor's office for flu illness by 40 percent. \21\
While the effectiveness of the flu vaccine can vary, it is still the
best protection against this annual illness, and was estimated to
prevent about 110,000 flu hospitalizations, and 8,000 flu deaths during
the 2017-18 season. \22\ A more effective vaccine would save even more
lives. Similarly, protection from the current pertussis vaccine has
been shown to wane during the five years after completion of the 5th
childhood dose. \23\ As a nation, we must continue to invest in
critical research and vaccine technology to improve vaccine
development.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/season/flu-season-2017-2018.htm
\22\
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/burden-averted/index.htm
\23\
Cherry JD. The 112-year odyssey of pertussis and pertussis
vaccines--mistakes made and implications for the future. JPIDS. 2019;
XX(XX):1-8.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consequence of Vaccine Success
Due to the success of vaccines, fewer people have witnessed the
complications and severity of vaccine preventable diseases.
Unfortunately, this means that some parents may believe that
vaccination is no longer necessary or that the minor or rarely severe
complications from vaccines are somehow worse than getting the disease,
resulting in some parents not vaccinating their children. Discredited
and fraudulent research has been used as a basis to claim a link
between MMR and autism. \24\ Moreover, public health officials
throughout the country are gravely concerned about the latest
misinformation originating from a well-organized and orchestrated anti-
vaccination movement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\
Eggertson, L. (2010). Lancet retracts 12-year-old article
linking autism to MMR vaccines. Canadian Medical Association. Journal,
182(4), E199.
In communities across Washington State and our nation, there are
pockets of children who are not fully vaccinated or not vaccinated at
all. This puts them at risk to contract measles and unintentionally
spread it to others, especially since one is infectious with measles
four days before the rash develops. It is absolutely paramount that
public health and healthcare professionals across the nation join
together to share the science about the safety and efficacy of vaccines
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
with the public. And we must equip health care
providers to be able to effectively answer the questions their
patients may have about vaccines, as we do want parents with questions
to engage their trusted health care provider. The health concerns that
parents have over the risks of vaccination must be addressed with
compassion, care, and evidence-based practice so that informed
decisions can be made, and so that people can protect themselves and
their loved ones from dangerous, vaccine-preventable disease.
Communications Challenges
Public health and healthcare professionals face significant
communications challenges with those who are uncertain about
vaccinations because of fear, distrust, and/or misinformation. The
increasing influence social media has over personal health decisions by
promoting false information is alarming.
Admittedly, public health officials must be smarter in using media
of all types to share factual, credible information. We must call on
social media companies such as Twitter, Facebook, and Google to use
whatever mechanism they have available to stop promoting pseudoscience.
And the problem isn't limited to social media, traditional media can
spread this false information as well. As public health officials, we
often partner with traditional media outlets to spread critical life-
saving information to the public. When traditional media invites and
promotes celebrity spokespeople who question the validity of
immunizations and remain blind to the body of scientific evidence, it
makes our jobs all the more difficult, and frankly, puts the public's
health at risk.
Civic discourse on vaccinations must be improved. Individuals
opposed to vaccinations are extremely well organized across the
country. In Washington, State lawmakers who proposed legislation to
remove the personal exemption from vaccination have received death
threats and been stalked. A health care professional who recently
testified in support of removing philosophical exemptions for school
entry vaccination has been vilified on their health practice website
and in nasty social media posts.
For my part, I recently received an email from a parent who does
not vaccinate their child concerning a social media post from my
agency. Many of you have probably seen the post as it was going around
many people's social media accounts during valentine's day. It's a
cartoon of a school boy asking a school girl if she will be his
valentine, and she asks if he has been vaccinated. While this social
media post had one of our most shares ever and most likes, laughing
faces, and angry faces, I have come to understand how this post just
furthers the divide. I can do better, we all can do better. In fact, we
must do better to focus on our mutual interest of keeping kids healthy.
I completely agree with CDC Director Robert Redfield who said we
need to change the hearts and minds of people in this country to not
leave science on the shelf. \25\ Additional
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ https://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/health/cdc-director-
federal-health-officials-stress-importance-of-measles-vaccinations/
(accessed March 1, 2019)
federal funds should be provided to determine how best to
communicate with vaccine hesitant parents and to counter the
misinformation currently being spread.
Washington State's Vaccine Program
Each year Washington State receives $105 million in federal funding
and $66 million in state funding to support a comprehensive
immunization system. Federal funding has a critical role in achieving
national immunization coverage targets. It supports immunization system
infrastructure and the purchase of vaccines for children who qualify
and adults without health insurance. Our state supplements these
federal funds to support health care providers and facilities, help
parents make informed decisions, and partner with schools.
During my tenure we've worked hard to keep communities protected,
ensure stable funding for vaccines and build public/private
partnerships to strengthen the immunization infrastructure. For
example, we have increased the number of 13 to 17 year olds who started
human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination series from 46 percent in 2015
to 61 percent 2018. This means that more youth in Washington are
protected from the many cancers that HPV can cause.
One of the biggest challenges with childhood immunization in
Washington is the percentage of students out-of-compliance with state
law because the parents have not submitted immunization documentation
or exemption paperwork with the school. In the 2017-2018 school year,
8.0 percent of kindergarten students lacked appropriate paperwork and
were out-of-compliance. We believe this is largely because of the
administrative burden on schools to staff this health work and track
the paperwork from parents. To address this, we need to adequately fund
school nurses. Our schools today are woefully understaffed with school
nurses. This does not put our children first. Public health needs to
partner with school nurses to ensure kids are vaccinated and keep our
kids safe and healthy, especially during disease outbreaks. We are also
working on health technology solutions to help school personnel easily
access immunization records in our state immunization registry, which
reduces duplicate data entry and allows for the easy use of report
writing functions to track the immunization status of students.
In addition, Washington is one of 17 states that allow parents to
send their children to school and child care unvaccinated for personal
or philosophical reasons. Two state lawmakers from Clark County have
each introduced legislation designed to protect more children from
vaccine preventable disease and increase the safety of these
environments. One bill would eliminate the philosophical exemption for
the MMR vaccine. The other would eliminate that exemption for all
vaccines required for school or child care entry. This approach honors
the responsibility we all have to protect each other. This proposed
policy change is a good step forward and one I support. Vaccines are
the best protection we have: they are safe, readily available, given
without charge to all kids under 19 years of age in Washington State
and proven to be effective. And I believe that parents want safe
schools and childcare centers for all kids and those
adults who serve them, including those who can't be vaccinated for
medical reasons or who have lost their immunity due to serious medical
conditions.
Public Health Response to a Measles Outbreak
In Washington, Governor Jay Inslee issued a Public Health Emergency
Proclamation on January 25, 2019 to support the response efforts to our
measles outbreak. \26\ This proclamation allowed mutual aid assistance
through the Emergency Management Assistance Compact enabling the state
to request public health responders from other states to support the
outbreak response. North Dakota, Idaho, and Oregon provided staff to
assist with the outbreak response.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\
https://www.governor.wa.gov/news-media/inslee-declares-local-
public-health-emergency-after-identifying-outbreak-measles (accessed
March 1, 2019)
To date, this preventable outbreak has cost over $1 million and
required the work of more than 200 individuals contributing over 10,000
hours of work. These estimates do not take into account the health care
costs of those ill, the cost to schools and businesses as they
responded to the event, the cost to student learning for those
unvaccinated children excluded from school, and to the lost
productivity of their workers. In comparison, the cost of an MMR
vaccine dose is about 20 dollars. \27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/awardees/vaccine-
management/price-list/index.html (accessed March 1, 2019)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Importance of Federal Funding and Programs
Our response to this outbreak has benefited greatly from the
Federal Government. The Pandemic and All Hazards Preparedness Act
(PAHPA) authorities and funding over the years have allowed us to
train, build, and maintain a strong Incident Management Team, which has
ably led the response, and it has allowed us to develop strike teams to
send into the response to carry out public health functions.
The public health system is often invisible to most Americans when
it is working well. It is when an emergency or a disaster or an
outbreak strikes where the fragility and chronic underfunding of the
public health system is laid bare. As just one example, in Washington,
Clark County repurposed their home visiting nurses to address this
outbreak. The day to day job of the home visiting nurses is to assist
expectant and new mothers, many in high-risk situations, to help
improve birth outcomes and raise healthy children. By redirecting their
work, families are going without this critical service and increasing
the risk for bad health outcomes. \28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\
https://www.columbian.com/news/2019/feb/25/nurse-family-
partnership-takes-on-intangible-costs-of-measles-outbreak/ (accessed
March 2, 2019)
In public health, we see the need to modernize. We do our best to
make the most with the limited budgets we have. This is why federal
funding is foundational for state, territorial, tribal and local health
agencies to provide a comprehensive immunization system and emergency
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
preparedness and response capability.
In this case, federal funds from Section 317 of the Public Service
Act are used to support the immunization grant program and provide
vital resources to support our comprehensive system. Section 317
funding provides support for our state to educate and inform the
public, monitor vaccine effectiveness, account for the use of federal
and state dollars, decrease ethnic and racial disparities, have strong
outbreak investigation, improve tracking systems, and continue to
provide the necessary support to health care professionals. Yet, the
317 immunization grant program has been flat funded since 2009. Without
increased funding, we cannot afford to develop new and innovative ways
to increase immunization rates especially in light of the anti-vaccine
movement. Research shows every dollar spent on childhood vaccines saves
10 dollars, so this is a worthwhile investment. \29\ Additional funding
would help address growing gaps in immunization coverage and strengthen
the scientific foundation for vaccine policy decision making.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\
Remy, Vanessa, York Zollner, and Ulrike Heckmann.
``Vaccination: The cornerstone of an efficient healthcare system.''
Journal of market access & health policy 3.1 (2015): 27041.
The Pandemic and All Hazards Preparedness Act (PAHPA) provides a
framework and resources to support our emergency preparedness and
response. Funds from the Public Health Emergency Preparedness
Cooperative Agreement Program allows state health departments to build
and strengthen our ability to respond to public health emergencies.
Without this funding, state and local public health agencies would have
been significantly delayed in identifying and containing this measles
outbreak. This program is currently funded $400 million below funding
levels in the 2000s. More robust funding would allow public health
agencies to not have to reallocate resources from other vital public
health programs to respond to urgent public health emergencies like
measles outbreaks or other disasters. Despite this Committee's action
to reauthorize the law last year, it has now lapsed; I ask you to move
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
quickly to reauthorize PAHPA.
The Prevention and Public Health Fund is the nation's first
mandatory funding stream dedicated to improving our nation's public
health system. The purpose of the fund was to supplement core public
health programs with increased investment in disease prevention, yet it
has primarily been used to backfill the funding of core public health
programs. Currently 47 percent of the 317 immunization program is
funded by the Prevention and Public Health Fund. Research shows every
dollar invested in community-based prevention saves $5. \30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\
Prevention for a Healthier America: Investments in Disease
Prevention Yield Significant Savings, Stronger Communities, Trust for
America's Health, 2009.
I'm here to make clear the threat of these vaccine preventable
illnesses, so we can respond together to restore health to the very
part of our system responsible for prevention. One immediate response
Congress can take is to raise the budget of the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention by 22 percent by 2022, as requested by the
Association of State and Territorial Health Officials and over 80 other
organizations. \31\ Doing so will immediately begin to save lives,
promote optimal health for all, bolster our prevention services and
reduce healthcare costs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\
http://www.astho.org/Advocacy-Materials/22-by-22/ (accessed
March 1, 2019)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion
Vaccines are a testament to human ingenuity to ward off morbidity
and mortality. Vaccines activate the natural human immunity system. The
science is clear that vaccines are safe and effective. Vaccines can
eradicate diseases. Vaccine programs are one of public health's
greatest accomplishments. They are under great threat and we need to
reverse course.
I thank you for holding this hearing and increasing awareness about
the importance of vaccines and public health. Everyone has a right to
live in a community free of vaccine-preventable disease. We must
continue to invest in and strengthen our public health system.
______
[summary statement of john wiesman]
Vaccines are safe, effective, and the best protection we have
against serious preventable diseases like measles. Vaccinating children
in the U.S. has saved millions of lives, increased life expectancy, and
saved trillions of dollars in societal costs. \1\ Yes, like any
medication, vaccines have some minor side effects and can have rare
serious complications, but they do not cause autism. \2\, \3\ They can
also eradicate diseases from our planet, like they did with smallpox
and hopefully soon with polio. \4\,\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
Whitney, C. G., Zhou, F., Singleton, J., & Schuchat, A.
(2014). Benefits from immunization during the vaccines for children
program era--United States, 1994--2013. MMWR 2014;63(16): 352-355.
\2\
McLean HQ, Fiebelkorn AP, Temte JL, Wallace GS. Prevention of
Measles, Rubella, Congenital Rubella Syndrome, and Mumps, 2013: Summary
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP). MMWR 2013; 62(RR04):1-34. Available at https://www.cdc.gov/
mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr6204a1.htm
\3\
Eggertson, L. (2010). Lancet retracts 12-year-old article
linking autism to MMR vaccines. Canadian Medical Association. Journal,
182(4), E199.
\4\
https://www.who.int/csr/disease/smallpox/en/ (accessed March
1, 2019)
\5\
https://www.who.int/features/factfiles/polio/en/ (accessed
March 1, 2019)
There are six ongoing but preventable measles outbreaks in the
U.S., one in Washington, three in New York, one in Texas, and one in
Illinois. \6\ Washington's outbreak has cost over $1 million compared
to the $20 cost of an MMR vaccine dose. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\
https://www.cdc.gov/measles/ (accessed March 1, 2019)
\7\ https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/awardees/vaccine-
management/price-list/index.html (accessed March 1, 2019)
Due to the success of vaccines, fewer people have witnessed the
complications and severity of vaccine preventable diseases. Therefore,
some parents may believe that vaccination is no longer necessary or
that the minor or rarely severe complications from vaccines are somehow
worse than getting the disease, resulting in some parents not
vaccinating their children. Moreover, a well-organized and orchestrated
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
anti-vaccination movement is a threat to the public's health.
Section 317 funding provides immunization program support for
states and it has been flat funded since 2009, despite the threats
noted above. We need increased funding to develop new ways to increase
immunization rates. Currently 47 percent of the 317 immunization
program is funded by the Prevention and Public Health Fund, a fund that
was intended to add prevention capacity, not backfill.
The Pandemic and All Hazards Preparedness Act (PAHPA) provides
essential support for response efforts, but it is currently funded $400
million below funding levels in the 2000s. More robust funding is
needed to respond to urgent public health emergencies. And I ask you to
quickly reauthorize PAHPA.
One immediate response Congress can take is to support public
health is to raise the budget of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention by 22 percent by 2022, as requested by the Association of
State and Territorial Health Officials and over 80 other organizations.
\8\ Doing so will immediately begin to save lives, promote optimal
health for all, bolster our prevention services, and reduce healthcare
costs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\
http://www.astho.org/Advocacy-Materials/22-by-22/ (accessed
March 1, 2019)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Wiesman.
Dr. Omer.
STATEMENT OF SAAD B. OMER, MBBS, MPH, PHD, WILLIAM H. FOEGE
PROFESSOR OF GLOBAL HEALTH, PROFESSOR OF EPISTEMOLOGY AND
PEDIATRICS, EMORY UNIVERSITY, ATLANTA, GA
Dr. Omer. Thanks for the opportunity for me to talk about
vaccines in this forum.
Elimination of endemic measles transmission from the U.S.
in 2000 is a significant public success. Since then, most of
the cases have occurred through U.S. travelers going outside
and bringing it back. While recent measles outbreaks have been
contained, the frequency and size of these outbreaks have been
particularly alarming for those of us who follow these trends.
The rest of this testimony will be focused on answering some of
the salient questions that have been coming up.
The first question is, why haven't we seen a national level
outbreak in the U.S.? And we cannot take this for granted.
Countries with similar development status like Germany, France,
and Italy specifically more recently, have had national level
outbreaks. And it is not a coincidence that we have not seen
similar national outbreaks, and there are several reasons for
it. First of all, our laws, school level mandates, work. And
they work by changing the balance of convenience.
In most states, they work by changing the balance of
convenience for vaccination compared to non-vaccination by
having physician counseling, or by having parents go through a
video that talks about vaccines and the benefits of vaccines,
etc. And the third thing is, in our country, medical societies
like the American Academy of Pediatrics and the Infectious
Disease Society of America have been very prominent in vaccine
advocacy, and it is important because it is based on the fact
that physicians are the most trusted source of vaccine
information.
We have talked about the role measles has played--vaccine
refusal has played in these outbreaks, and I will just give a
few numbers. For example, more than half of the cases since the
elimination have been unvaccinated, and approximately 70
percent of them--of unvaccinated due to vaccine refusal are
non-medical exemptions. So, there is a contribution of vaccine
refusal in our epidemiology of measles. And vaccine mandates
have been an effective tool in changing that balance of
convenience that I was talking about. But that is a state level
issue. I will focus on some of the things the Federal
Government can do.
In my written testimony, I have provided a few more details
on that specific issue and I would be happy to answer
questions. So, there are a few things the Federal Government
can do. First, consider making vaccine counseling reimbursable.
And I have worked on vaccine research in multiple countries, in
multiple states in the U.S. There are a lot of local factors
that are specific, but there is one constant, vaccine
providers--health care providers, specifically physicians, are
the most trusted source of vaccine information even amongst
those who are a little bit skeptical of vaccines. So, we need
to use that tool more effectively.
On the practical side, physicians do not have the time to
properly counsel patients using evidence-based approaches, and
part of the reason, not all of the reason, is the fact that
this is not reimbursable. So, physicians lose money on this
kind of important public health education. We should as a
country, the second point is, invest in high-quality vaccine
acceptance and communications research. And I often say that if
you do not accept half-baked vaccine development science--and
we do not. The FDA goes through evaluation of the science from
trials and basic sciences, etc. We should not be accepting of
half-baked vaccine communication and behavioral science. And we
have precedent in this country. For example, NIH's cancer
prevention initiatives are a gold standard in these kinds of
interventions and evidence-based communications strategy.
NIAID, national institute for immunology--I am sorry,
national institute for infection and allergy, has--they have
had very effective intervention development in the area of HIV,
AIDS behavior. So, we have that precedent in this country, and
we need to invest in actual research. And before we develop
evidence, while we develop evidence, there is an existing
blueprint of interventions that the National Vaccine Advisory
committee put together, and unfortunately not all of its
interventions and its recommendations have been implemented. So
that is ready to be implemented.
CDC plays this important role in fighting these fires,
working with state and local health departments, which is
somewhat unique in the developed world and we need to support
their mission. And we should continue to prioritize vaccine
safety research, and I would want to thank you for bipartisan
and consistent support for vaccines because that matters. And
that shows that there is broad societal support for vaccines,
and those of us who work to protect children from these
infectious diseases really appreciate that.
[The statement of Dr. Omer follows:]
prepared statement of saad b. omer
I am Saad B. Omer, the William H. Foege Professor of Global Health
and Professor of Epidemiology & Pediatrics at Emory University, Schools
of Public Health and Medicine. I have served on several scientific and
public health advisory committees including the National Vaccine
Advisory Committee and the Public Health Committee of the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. My research has focused on vaccines--
including clinical/field trials, vaccine safety studies, and studies of
interventions to increase vaccine acceptance.
I want to thank the Committee for the opportunity to share my
perspective on vaccine preventable diseases, the current epidemiology
of measles, and the importance of vaccines. In my testimony, I will
attempt to answer a few salient questions on this topic. My statement
substantially draws from my previous writings and research.
Should we be concerned about the recent measles outbreaks?
The elimination of endemic transmission of measles from the United
States in 2000 is considered a significant public health success. Since
then, measles has mostly occurred as outbreaks--either because of
imported cases (mostly from U.S. travelers returning home with the
infection) or among those who come in contact with these cases.
Are the recent cases and outbreaks sporadic, or are we on the verge
of the return of widespread measles? While recent measles outbreaks
have been contained, the frequency and size of these outbreaks is
alarming. For example, according to a CDC study, the annual median
number of cases and outbreaks more than doubled during 2009-2014
compared to the earlier post-elimination years (Fiebelkorn et. al.; J
Pediatric Infect Dis Soc.; 2017). This trend has continued since the
publication of the CDC study. A return of widespread measles is not
inevitable, but to ensure we prevent it, we need to seriously address
causes of non-vaccination including vaccine refusal.
Notably, each year there are children not vaccinated against
measles. These nonimmunized children join the ranks of all other
susceptible children from years past, increasing the population of
susceptible people. With the slow and steady accumulation of people who
haven't been immunized, we may only be delaying a large measles
outbreak. In fact, in an epidemiological study my research
collaborators and I published in 2016, we estimated that 1 in 8
children younger than 18 are susceptible to measles (Bednarczyk,
Orenstein, & Omer; American J. Epi, 2016).
Importantly, we found that the rate of protection against measles
is hovering dangerously close to the ``herd immunity threshold''--
computed as the proportion of people who need to be immune to prevent
outbreaks. Similar findings have been subsequently reported by other
researchers, highlighting the need for interventions to improve measles
vaccination rates. If vaccine refusal is left unchecked, more people
will be susceptible to this disease, leading to larger outbreaks and
possibly resumption of sustained transmission.
Why haven't we seen a national level measles outbreak in recent years?
A national outbreak, or an outright national-level measles
resurgence, would not be out of the ordinary for a Western country. In
recent years, there have been several large sustained outbreaks in
Europe. In Italy, for example, approximately 5,000 measles cases were
reported from February 2017 to January 2018. Similarly, large national-
level outbreaks have occurred in Britain, Germany, and France. In 2008,
the World Health Organization reported approximately 60,000 measles
cases from countries included in its European region. While most
European countries, including Britain, have been certified as having
eliminated measles, the disease is still considered endemic in Italy,
Germany, and France.
It's not just luck that the United States hasn't seen a similar
resurgence. There are many things the United States does right in
vaccine policy, compared to Europe. For example, the United States has
a tapestry of school-entry vaccine requirements that work. These
requirements, based in state laws, have contributed to maintaining high
immunization rates and keeping rates of vaccine noncompliance low. In
the U.S., the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
aggressively monitors and responds to emerging outbreaks--an
epidemiological firefighting function it performs with state and local
health departments. In Europe, on the other hand, the effectiveness of
public health agencies is uneven. The European Centre for Disease
Prevention Control, a much smaller and newer agency compared to the
American CDC, lacks the resources and mandate to perform a similar
function. U.S. professional medical societies such as the American
Academy of Pediatrics and the Infectious Diseases Society of America
have been at the forefront of vaccine advocacy--leveraging the fact
that physicians are the most trusted source of vaccine information.
But while a national measles resurgence in the United States has
been so far kept at bay, we cannot be complacent. With the steady
accumulation of susceptible individuals in our communities, efforts are
required at the national, state, and local level to ensure that this
dangerous disease does not return in full force.
What is the role of vaccine refusal in measles outbreaks?
In a 2016 paper, my colleagues and I evaluated the association
between vaccine delay, refusal, or exemption and the epidemiology of
measles in the United States (Phadke et al.; JAMA, 2016). We found that
since the elimination of measles from the United States in 2000, more
than half (56.8 percent) of measles cases had no history of measles
vaccination. Among the unvaccinated, age-eligible measles cases for
whom the reason for non-vaccination was available, 70.6 percent had a
nonmedical exemption to vaccination.
One tool epidemiologists use to chart the temporal course of
outbreaks is the epidemic curve in which the daily cases of a disease
are plotted against time. In the 2016 paper, we created a cumulative
epidemic curve comprising of all measles outbreaks since 2000 for which
relevant data were available. According to this cumulative epidemic
curve, unvaccinated individuals made up a greater proportion of measles
cases in early parts of epidemics--meaning that unvaccinated people
provided the tinder to start the fires of these epidemics.
In an earlier national study, the risk of measles among children
with vaccine exemptions was 35 times that of the vaccinated population
(Salmon et.al; JAMA, 1999). Equally importantly, higher rates of
vaccine exemption in a community are associated with greater measles
incidence in that community, among both the exempt and nonexempt
population. One reason for ongoing outbreaks is the epidemiological
phenomenon of clustering of susceptible individuals--which happens when
a group of unvaccinated individuals in a specific area grows large
enough to render protection from overall high immunization rates less
effective.
Is vaccine refusal the only reason for recent outbreaks?
While vaccine refusal is an important risk factor for vaccine
preventable disease outbreaks, it is not the only reason why these
outbreaks occur. For example, CDC reported insurance status is an
important factor in non-vaccination (Hill et al.; MMWR; 2018).
Similarly, while vaccine refusal plays a role, waning immunity is an
important cause of decline in pertussis (whooping cough) vaccine
effectiveness and subsequent outbreaks (Klein et al.; NEJM; 2012).
Are vaccine mandates a useful policy option for controlling vaccine-
preventable diseases?
State laws in the United States mandate that every child entering
kindergarten either provide proof of being immunized or file for an
exemption. All 50 states allow for medical exemptions from mandated
vaccinations. Eighteen states allow religious and personal belief
exemptions, 30 states permit religious exemptions only, and 3 states
only allow medical exemptions. Mandates have played a key role in
keeping disease rates low. Because vaccination and exemption laws are
established at the state level, there is substantial variation in
immunization requirements, types of nonmedical exemptions offered (i.e.
personal belief exemption vs. only religious exemption), ease of
obtaining an exemption, and enforcement of immunization legislation
across the United States (Omer et al.; NEJM; 2009).
The amount of administrative effort needed to complete the
exemption process varies by state. Vaccine laws in the U.S. work by
changing the balance of convenience in favor of vaccination and away
from non-vaccination. Ease of obtaining a nonmedical exemption has been
shown to be associated with state vaccine exemption rates--and, more
importantly, higher rates of vaccine-preventable diseases. In a 2006
study published in The Journal of the American Medical Association, for
example, we documented that states with easy procedures for granting
nonmedical exemptions had higher rates of vaccine refusal and
approximately 50 percent higher rates of whooping cough (Omer et al.;
JAMA; 2006). The association between ease of exemption and vaccine
refusal rates has been consistent in our subsequent studies as well
Omer et al.; NEJM, 2012 & Omer et al.; Open Forum Infect Dis.; 2017).
The policy option of eliminating all nonmedical exemptions is being
discussed in a few states. However, the evidence on the impact of this
option is nuanced and evolving. Until recently, West Virginia and
Mississippi were the only two states that did not allow any nonmedical
exemptions. These states have traditionally had some of the highest
immunization rates in the country. California recently eliminated
nonmedical exemptions. The initial results from this policy change
(through California law SB277) are nuanced. In addition to the
implementation of this law, there was a state-level administrative
initiative to correctly apply ``conditional entrance'' requirements--a
category meant for children who had started but not completed their
vaccine schedule or had temporary medical exemptions. Prior to the
enforcement initiative, this category was inconsistently applied and,
sometimes, misused. While there has been an increase in the percentage
of California kindergartners entering school fully vaccinated, publicly
available data suggest that this increase may by mostly due to the pre-
SB277 education- and enforcement-based effort to correctly apply the
conditional entrance requirements. Importantly, there is evidence of an
emerging replacement effect as a result of increase in children being
not up-to-date for vaccines due to other categories e.g. through
increase in medical exemptions.
Irrespective of emerging evidence from California, states have
other policy options short of eliminating all nonmedical exemptions.
For example, states can tweak their rules to make sure parents are as
informed as possible by adding a legally mandated physician counseling
requirement for those seeking exemptions. This approach has been
effective in reducing nonmedical exemptions (Omer et al.; Pediatrics;
2018). Moreover, states can reconfigure their immunization requirements
to tilt the balance of convenience in favor of vaccination (Omer et
al.; NEJM; 2019).
Vaccine mandates are implemented at the state level. Can the federal
government do anything about vaccine acceptance and controlling
outbreaks?
I believe the federal government has a substantial role to play in
increasing vaccine acceptance. While vaccine mandates are a state-level
issue, there are many policy options within the purview of the federal
government. I will highlight a few of them:
1. Consider making vaccine counseling reimbursable:
Several factors associated with vaccine acceptance vary by
location and demographics. But there is one constant:
healthcare providers, particularly physicians, are the most
trusted source of vaccine information--even among those who
refuse vaccines (e.g. Freed et al.; Pediatrics; 2011). A strong
physician recommendation for vaccines is an extremely useful
tool for immunization acceptance. However, having an effective
conversation with vaccine hesitant parents requires time and
effort. Unfortunately, the time spent on vaccine hesitant
patients is not billable--further dis-incentivizing physicians
from having this difficult but useful conversation.
2. Invest in vaccine acceptance/communication research:
While vaccine communication and acceptance interventions are an
active area of research, a lot more needs to be done. In recent
years, several promising leads have emerged--many from
federally funded research. For example, research on
``presumptive communication'' leverages power of verbal
defaults-based ``nudges'' for framing vaccine conversations
Opel & Omer; JAMA Pediatr.; 2015). Similarly, motivational
interviewing--a well-established counseling technique that has
been evaluated to increase vaccine acceptance--works through
people's internal motivation for desirable health behavior
(Dempsey et al.; JAMA Pediatr.; 2018). In my research group,
multi-tiered practice-provider-patient based interventions (the
so called P3 model) have shown promise. However, current
vaccine acceptance research is sporadic and a focused, high
priority research program is needed. Fortunately, there are
examples of similar high priority behavioral and communication
research that can be emulated. These examples and potential
templates include National Cancer Institute's Behavioral
Research Program--a comprehensive program of research to
increase the breadth, depth, and quality of behavioral research
in cancer prevention and control. Given its role as the
nation's premier biomedical and behavioral health research
agency, it would be natural for NIH to have a leading role in
guiding these investments.
3. Implement the National Vaccine Advisory Committee's
recommendations:
While there is need for new research, there are existing
approaches that can increase confidence in and acceptance of
vaccines. Fortunately, an evidence-based blueprint exists in
the form of recommendations published in 2015 by the National
Vaccine Advisory Committee, an independent committee charged
with the advising the Department of Health and Human Services
(NVAC; Public Health Rep.; 2015). These recommendations focus
on evidence-based strategies for increasing confidence in
vaccines. Unfortunately, these recommendations have not been
fully implemented.
4. Support CDC's mission of controlling measles outbreaks:
As I mentioned earlier, CDC--in collaboration with state and
local health departments--plays an important role in
controlling outbreaks of vaccine preventable diseases such as
measles. Responding to these outbreaks is costly and time and
labor-intensive. Ensuring that CDC continues to have adequate
resources will help with maintaining adequate outbreak response
capabilities in the face of increasing outbreaks.
5. Continue to prioritize vaccine safety research:
Over the years, the U.S. has developed a robust vaccine safety
research infrastructure. CDC's Vaccine Safety Datalink system
utilizes data from 9 HMOs from across the country to conduct
active epidemiologic surveillance for vaccine safety. The
Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System maintained by the CDC
and the FDA captures spontaneous reports of potential vaccine
side effects. The FDA's Sentinel is the largest system
available in the U.S. for vaccines adverse event surveillance.
Similarly, the FDA's pre-licensure and post licensure safety
review of vaccines is useful in ensuring vaccine safety.
Continued support for these vaccine safety initiatives is not
just useful for ensuring confidence in vaccines but, more
importantly, it's the right thing to do. However, it is
important that assessment of vaccine safety continues to be
science-based.
6. Maintain bipartisan and vociferous support for vaccines:
This committee has previously expressed strong support for
vaccines--through statements supporting vaccines. Such
statements matter. They indicate broad social support for
vaccines and signal to the so-called fence sitters that
vaccination is the social norm. As someone who has spent his
professional life ensuring children and adults are protected
from infectious diseases, I personally thank you for these
statements.
We have a history of bipartisan action for vaccines
In the aftermath of the last measles resurgence in the United
States in 1989-1991, there was a remarkably bipartisan effort to
address the main cause of that resurgence: vaccine access. President
Bill Clinton and congressional Republicans and Democrats came together
to establish the Vaccines for Children program to remove affordability
as a barrier to vaccination. This program was effective in addressing
inequities in immunization coverage. Preventing the next potential
resurgence of measles will require a similar broad-based response.
Acknowledgements and disclosures: I want to acknowledge the work by
members of my research group and collaborators on some of the research
and synthesis I shared. Part of the content in this testimony has
previously appeared in peer-reviewed publications and op-eds (e.g. my
February 11 Washington Post op-ed with my colleague Bob Bednarczyk). I
have received funding for my research from federal agencies (e.g. NIH,
CDC, AHRQ), international public health agencies (the World Health
Organization, Gavi-the vaccine alliance), and philanthropic foundations
(e.g. the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Thrasher Research Fund). I
do not receive funding from vaccine manufacturers.
______
[summary statement of saad b. omer]
Elimination of endemic transmission of measles from the United
States in 2000 is a significant public health success. Since then,
measles has mostly occurred either because of imported cases (mostly
from U.S. travelers returning home) or among their contacts. While
recent measles outbreaks have been contained, the frequency and size of
these outbreaks is alarming. For example, according to a CDC study, the
annual median number of cases and outbreaks more than doubled during
2009--2014 compared to 2000--2008.
Why haven't we seen a national level measles outbreak in recent
years?
Because school-entry vaccine requirements keep rates
of vaccine noncompliance low.
CDC aggressively responds to emerging outbreaks--an
epidemiological firefighting function it performs with state
and local health departments.
Medical societies such as the American Academy of
Pediatrics and the Infectious Diseases Society of America have
been at the forefront of vaccine advocacy.
What is the role of vaccine refusal in measles outbreaks?
Since the measles elimination, more than half of
measles cases had no history of measles vaccination.
Among the unvaccinated, age-eligible measles cases
for whom a reason was available, 70.6 percent had a nonmedical
exemption to vaccination.
Unvaccinated individuals make up a greater proportion
of measles cases in early parts of epidemics--indicating that
unvaccinated people often provide the tinder to start the fires
of these epidemics.
Vaccine refusal is not the only reason for non-
vaccination e.g. insurance status is an important factor.
Are vaccine mandates a useful policy option for controlling
vaccine-preventable diseases?
Most state-based vaccine mandates in the U.S. work by
changing the balance of convenience in favor of vaccination and
away from non-vaccination.
Ease of obtaining a nonmedical exemption is
associated with higher state-level vaccine exemption rates and
higher rates of vaccine-preventable diseases.
States have a range of policy options vis-`-vis
mandates--ranging from eliminating nonmedical exemption to
adding requirements such as legally mandated physician
counseling.
Vaccine mandates are implemented at the state level. Can the
federal government do anything about vaccine acceptance and controlling
outbreaks?
There are many policy options within the purview of the federal
government; these options include:
1. Consider making vaccine counseling reimbursable.
2. Invest in vaccine acceptance/communication research.
3. Implement recommendations from National Vaccine Advisory
Committee's vaccine confidence report.
4. Support CDC's mission of controlling measles outbreaks.
5. Continue to prioritize vaccine safety research.
6. Maintain bipartisan and vociferous support for vaccines.
We have a history of bipartisan action for vaccines
In the aftermath of the last measles resurgence in the United
States in 1989--1991, there was a remarkably bipartisan effort to
address the main cause of that resurgence: vaccine access. Republicans
and Democrats came together to establish the Vaccines for Children
program to remove affordability as a barrier to vaccination. This
program was effective in addressing many inequities in immunization
coverage. Preventing the next potential resurgence of measles will
require a similar broad-based response.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Omer.
Dr. McCullers, welcome.
STATEMENT OF JONATHAN A. MCCULLERS, MD, PROFESSOR AND CHAIR,
DEPARTMENT OF PEDIATRICS, UNIVERSITY OF TENNESSEE HEALTH
SCIENCE CENTER, PEDIATRICS-IN-CHIEF, LE BONHEUR CHILDREN'S
HOSPITAL, MEMPHIS, TN
Dr. McCullers. Thank you.
Good morning Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray,
other Members of the Committee. My name is John McCullers. I am
the Chair of Pediatrics at the University of Tennessee and the
Pediatrician-in-Chief at Le Bonheur Children's Hospital in
Memphis. As someone who has devoted his career to the child
health sphere, I truly believe there is no more precious
resource than our children, and they should be protected by all
means available to us. They really are the future of this
Nation.
The Childhood Vaccination Program in the United States has
proven to be one of the most powerful public health
achievements in our history. In the first half of the 20th
century there were more than 1 million infections and more than
10,000 deaths every year in this country from diseases which
are now preventable by childhood vaccines. Measles alone costs
more than a half-million illnesses every year. Measles is a
highly contagious viral respiratory disease characterized by
fever, cough, sore throat, and a rash. It is a very dangerous
disease. About 1 in 1,000 infected persons develop
encephalitis, an infection of the brain. 1 in 1,000 develop
severe pneumonia, and about half of those with those severe
complications die. There is no specific treatment for measles,
so vaccination is the only means of preventing these outcomes.
With the introduction of a safe and effective vaccine for
measles in 1963 and improved public health efforts to see that
nearly every child received it, new cases of measles arising in
the United States were entirely eliminated by the year 2000.
Unfortunately, the issues of vaccine opposition and vaccine
hesitancy are now impairing our ability to effectively ensure
coverage aided by state laws that make it easier to avoid
vaccination. The last decade has brought numerous outbreaks to
the United States, including several that are ongoing at
present. These outbreaks are strongly linked to vaccine
refusal, and in particular, to clustering of unvaccinated
individuals in specific communities or regions.
This problem is not limited to the United States, however.
Countries worldwide are dealing with similar outbreaks. As a
single example for the Committee, there was zero cases of
measles in Brazil in 2017, but more than 10,000 cases occurred
on a countrywide level in 2018, when infected travelers brought
measles into that country. The vaccine against measles is very
safe and very effective. One dose provides complete protection
in about 93 percent of individuals, while a second dose raises
that level of protection to 97 percent. Very few side effects
occur. About 1 in 10 children experience fever for 1 to 2 days
after vaccination. And about 1 in 3,000 to 1 in 4,000 have a
simple seizure associated with fever with no lasting effects.
Allergic reactions are very rare and typically very mild.
When compared to the outcomes of the disease itself, it is
easy to see why doctors and public health officials universally
recommend on time and complete vaccination. Unfortunately,
vaccine refusal is high and getting worse in many states. This
issue is complicated by the variety of state policies regarding
exemption from vaccination and the methods of counseling about
vaccines. The rate of parents claiming non-medical exemptions
is about 2.5 times higher in states that allow both religious
and philosophical objection. Evidence seeing that multiple
pathways for exemption really worsens this problem. Social
media is now driving a new phenomena somewhat distinct from
vaccine opposition termed vaccine hesitancy. When parents get
much of their information about health care issues such as
vaccines from the internet or from social media platforms such
as Twitter and Facebook, reading uninformed opinions in the
absence of accurate information can lead to really
understandable concern and confusion in these parents. They may
be hesitant to get their children vaccinated without being
provided with more information.
The role of the pediatrician is very important therefore
with these families. We must do a better job of communicating
at many levels, but particularly at the point of contact at the
well-child visit when vaccination should take place. About half
of the time when counseled appropriate, parents with vaccine
hesitancy will agree to have their children vaccinated on time.
And the other half, little seems to help at that stage. The
solution must be earlier either in the form of policy or
broader educational efforts.
In closing, I would like to thank the Committee for
addressing this important issue. Vaccine refusal is one of the
growing public health threats of our time. If we continue to
allow non-medical exemptions to vaccination, the rates of
vaccine will continue to fall, more outbreaks will undoubtedly
follow. As a leader at a children's hospital, I have a unique
perspective on this. These children's hospitals are regional
and sometimes national resources. Le Bonheur Children's
Hospital sits in the corner of Tennessee next to Arkansas and
Mississippi. These three states all have very different
policies for granting exemptions to vaccines, which creates a
tremendous problem for us and a threat to the children we
serve, many of whom are too young to be vaccinated or
immunocompromised, and more prone to severe diseases.
I urge the Committee to consider solutions that will both
harmonize public health policy in this area and will also
protect children as they grow up to become the next generation.
Thank you.
[The statement of Dr. McCullers follows:]
prepared statement of jonathan a. mccullers
Good Morning Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, other
Members of the Committee, and interested parties. I am Dr. Jon
McCullers, the Chair of the Department of Pediatrics at the University
of Tennessee Health Science Center and the Pediatrician-in-Chief at Le
Bonheur Children's Hospital in Memphis. As someone who has devoted his
career to the child health sphere, I firmly believe that there is no
more precious resource than our children, and that they should be
protected by all means available to us. They truly are the future of
this nation. As the lead pediatrician for one of our nation's top
Children's Hospitals, I feel it is my duty and privilege to advocate on
behalf of children everywhere. The declining rates of childhood
vaccination in this nation and, indeed, worldwide, now prove to be a
threat to this future.
The childhood vaccination program of the United States has proven
to be one of the most powerful public health achievements in our
history. In the first half of the 20th century, there were more than 1
million infections and more than 10,000 deaths every year from diseases
which are now preventable by childhood vaccines. To put that into
perspective in the current day, without childhood vaccines the States
of Tennessee and Washington would be dealing with between 24,000 and
37,000 vaccine preventable diseases in an average year, and between 250
and 275 children would die, most of them under the age of 5. Measles
alone caused more than a half million illnesses every year in the first
half of the last century, and between 450 and 500 children died
annually. Measles is a viral respiratory disease, characterized by
fever, cough, sore throat, and a rash. It is a very dangerous disease--
about 1 in a thousand infected persons develop encephalitis, an
infection of the brain, 1 in a thousand develop severe pneumonia, and
about half of those with these severe complications die. Measles is
also highly contagious - while some individuals infected with some
severe infectious agents like influenza only infect 1-2 other persons
on average, a person infected with measles infects 20-30 other people
on average if they are unvaccinated. There is no specific treatment for
measles, so vaccination is the only means of preventing these outcomes.
With the introduction of a safe and effective vaccine for measles in
1963 and improved public health efforts to see that nearly every child
received it, new cases of measles arising in the United States were
entirely eliminated by the year 2000. 2006 saw our lowest case number
with only 55 illnesses, all imported from other countries, and no
deaths.
Unfortunately, the issues of vaccine opposition and vaccine
hesitancy are now impairing our ability to effectively insure
appropriate vaccine coverage, aided by state laws that make it easier
to avoid vaccination. The last decade has brought numerous outbreaks in
the United States, including several that are ongoing at present. These
outbreaks are strongly linked to vaccine refusal, and in particular to
clustering of unvaccinated individuals in specific communities or
regions. Cases are introduced from unvaccinated individuals traveling
here from other countries, and spread rapidly through communities with
vaccination rates under the level needed for herd immunity. 372 persons
contracted measles during 17 different outbreaks in the United States
in 2018, and 159 have been infected in the first 7 weeks of 2019. This
problem is not limited to the US . . . many countries worldwide are
dealing with similar outbreaks. As a single example, there were 0 cases
of measles in Brazil in 2017, but more than 10,000 cases occurred in
2018 when infected travelers brought measles into that country.
The vaccine against measles is very safe and very effective. One
dose provides complete protection in about 93 percent of individuals,
while a second dose raises that level of protection to 97 percent. Very
few side effects occur. About 1 in 10 children experience fever for 1-2
days, and about 1 in 3000 to 1 in 4000 have a simple seizure associated
with fever with no lasting effects. Allergic reactions are very rare
and typically very mild. No reactions or adverse effects of a more
severe nature have been associated with the vaccine, despite extensive
use, monitoring, and study for many decades. When compared to the
outcomes of the disease itself, it is easy to see why doctors and
public health officials universally recommend on time and complete
vaccination.
Unfortunately, vaccine refusal is high and getting worse in many
states. This issue is complicated by the variety of state based
policies regarding exemption from vaccination and the methods of
counseling about vaccines. Three states currently only allow medical
exemptions from vaccination--California, Mississippi, and West
Virginia. These states all have vaccination rates for measles at the
age of school entry at 97 percent or better--above the 96 percent level
needed for herd immunity. Thirty states allow for religious exemptions
to vaccines, and 17 allow both religious and personal exemption. The
rate of parents claiming non-medical exemptions to vaccines is 2.5
times higher in states that allow both religious and philosophical
exemptions compared to religious exemptions alone--evidence that
allowing multiple pathways to exemption worsens this problem. Of the 5
states that have less than 91 percent vaccination rates, Colorado,
Idaho, Indiana, Kansas, and Washington, three allow both types of
exemption. Although some states such as Tennessee have reasonable rates
currently (97 percent) while allowing religious exemptions only, the
rate of non-medical exemptions has nearly tripled under this policy in
the past decade, and it can be predicted that this will continue to
rise. California is an illustrative case . . . that state allowed both
types of exemptions earlier in the decade, but non-medical exemptions
rose to 3.3 percent in 2013, the overall level of vaccination dropped
below the level needed for herd immunity, and the state experienced a
large outbreak of measles in 2014-2015 with spread of the disease in
Disneyland the park theme parks. California subsequently eliminated
non-medical exemptions and the vaccination rate has returned to 97
percent. The American Academy of Pediatrics has suggested that the
practice of delaying or spacing out childhood vaccines contributed to
that outbreak.
Opposition to vaccines began in England in the early 19th century
after introduction of Jenner's cowpox vaccine for the dangerous disease
smallpox. People objected on religious grounds and due to the
irrational fear of becoming a cow. Opposition in the United States
became common in the 1850s, resulting in lawsuits against states that
mandated vaccination, culminating in a Supreme Court opinion in 1905
that found in favor of states' right to enforce mandatory vaccination
as a public health tool. Although the concept of vaccination opposition
is not new, the rise in frequency and ease of rapid international
travel has made it much more dangerous today than it was a century ago
when vaccine refusers may have been isolated from others. The reasons
for refusing vaccination have historically been very heterogenous. In
1998 the Wakefield Hoax unified many vaccine refusers by providing a
single platform for them using a false narrative--that childhood
vaccines caused unsuspected, long term medical problems that had been
missed by scientists. In response, a great deal of scientific work was
done to prove that there is no link between vaccines and conditions
such as autism. The Institute of Medicine has now declared that the
evidence is thorough and convincing on this point. The anti-vaccination
movement at this time, therefore, no longer has a platform or any
credibility and has returned to a more heterogeneous group of
objections.
In the present day, however, social media and the amplification of
minor theories through rapid and diffuse channels of communication,
coupled with instant reinforcement in the absence of authoritative
opinions, is now driving a new phenomenon somewhat distinct from
vaccine opposition, termed vaccine hesitancy. When parents get much of
their information from the internet or social media platforms such as
twitter and Facebook, reading these fringe ideas in the absence of
accurate information can lead to understandable concern and confusion.
These parents may thus be hesitant to get their children vaccinated
without more information. The role of the pediatrician is very
important with these families--we must do a better job of communicating
at many levels, but particularly at the point of contact in the well
child visit when vaccination should take place. Half of the time when
counseled appropriately, those with vaccine hesitancy will agree to
have their children vaccinated on time. In the other half, little seems
to help at that stage, so the solution must be earlier, in the form of
policy or broader educational efforts.
In closing, I would like to thank the Committee for addressing this
important issue. Vaccine refusal is one of the growing public health
threats of our time. If we continue to allow non-medical exemptions to
vaccination, rates of vaccination will continue to fall and more
outbreaks will undoubtedly follow. As a leader at a Children's
Hospital, I have a unique perspective on this, as Children's Hospitals
are regional and sometime national resources. Le Bonheur Children's
Hospital sits in the corner of Tennessee next to Arkansas and
Mississippi, and serves a large number of children from 7 different
states as well as providing high level specialty care for select
diseases to children across the United States. Tennessee, Arkansas, and
Mississippi all have different policies for granting exemptions to
vaccines, which creates a tremendous problem to us and a threat to the
children we serve, many of whom are too young to be vaccinated or are
immunocompromised and more prone to severe diseases. I urge the
Committee to consider solutions that will both harmonize public health
policy in this area and will also protect children as they grow up to
become the next generation.
______
[summary statement of jonathan a. mccullers]
Good Morning Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and other
Members of the Committee. I am Dr. Jon McCullers, the Chair of the
Department of Pediatrics at the University of Tennessee Health Science
Center and the Pediatrician-in-Chief at Le Bonheur Children's Hospital
in Memphis. As someone who has devoted his career to the child health
sphere, I firmly believe that there is no more precious resource than
our children, and that they should be protected by all means available
to us. They truly are the future of this nation. The declining rates of
childhood vaccination in this nation and, indeed, worldwide, now prove
to be a threat to this future.
The childhood vaccination program of the United States has proven
to be one of the most powerful public health achievements in our
history. In the first half of the 20th century, there were more than 1
million infections and more than 10,000 deaths every year from diseases
which are now preventable by childhood vaccines. Measles alone caused
more than a half million illnesses every year in the first half of the
last century, and between 450 and 500 children died annually. Measles
is a highly contagious viral respiratory disease, characterized by
fever, cough, sore throat, and a rash. It is a very dangerous disease -
about 1 in a thousand infected persons develop encephalitis, an
infection of the brain, 1 in a thousand develop severe pneumonia, and
about half of those with these severe complications die. There is no
specific treatment for measles, so vaccination is the only means of
preventing these outcomes. With the introduction of a safe and
effective vaccine for measles in 1963 and improved public health
efforts to see that nearly every child received it, new cases of
measles arising in the United States were entirely eliminated by the
year 2000.
Unfortunately, the issues of vaccine opposition and vaccine
hesitancy are now impairing our ability to effectively insure
appropriate vaccine coverage, aided by State laws that make it easier
to avoid vaccination. The last decade has brought numerous outbreaks in
the United States, including several that are ongoing at present. These
outbreaks are strongly linked to vaccine refusal, and in particular to
clustering of unvaccinated individuals in specific communities or
regions. Cases are introduced from unvaccinated individuals traveling
here from other countries, and spread rapidly through communities with
vaccination rates under the level needed for herd immunity. This
problem is not limited to the United States - countries worldwide are
dealing with similar outbreaks. As a single example, there were 0 cases
of measles in Brazil in 2017, but more than 10,000 cases occurred in
2018 when infected travelers brought measles into that country.
The vaccine against measles is very safe and very effective. One
dose provides complete protection in about 93 percent of individuals,
while a second dose raises that level of protection to 97 percent. Very
few side effects occur. About 1 in 10 children experience fever for 1-2
days, and about 1 in 3000 to 1 in 4000 have a simple seizure associated
with fever with no lasting effects. Allergic reactions are very rare
and typically very mild. When compared to the outcomes of the disease
itself, it is easy to see why doctors and public health officials
universally recommend on time and complete vaccination.
Unfortunately, vaccine refusal is high and getting worse in many
states. This issue is complicated by the variety of state based
policies regarding exemption from vaccination and the methods of
counseling about vaccines. Three states currently only allow medical
exemptions from vaccination, while 30 states allow for religious
exemptions to vaccines, and 17 allow both religious and personal
exemption. The rate of parents claiming non-medical exemptions to
vaccines is 2.5 times higher in states that allow both religious and
philosophical exemptions compared to religious exemptions alone -
evidence that allowing multiple pathways to exemption worsens this
problem. California is an illustrative case . . . that state allowed
both types of exemptions earlier in the decade, but non-medical
exemptions rose, the overall level of vaccination dropped below the
level needed for herd immunity, and the state experienced a large
outbreak of measles in 2014-2015 with spread of the disease in
Disneyland the park theme parks. California subsequently eliminated
non-medical exemptions and the vaccination rate has returned to 97
percent.
Social media is now driving a new phenomenon somewhat distinct from
vaccine opposition, termed vaccine hesitancy. When parents get much of
their information from the internet or social media platforms such as
twitter and Facebook, reading fringe ideas in the absence of accurate
information can lead to understandable concern and confusion. These
parents may thus be hesitant to get their children vaccinated without
more information. The role of the pediatrician is very important with
these families - we must do a better job of communicating at many
levels, but particularly at the point of contact in the well child
visit when vaccination should take place. Half of the time when
counseled appropriately, those with vaccine hesitancy will agree to
have their children vaccinated on time. In the other half, little seems
to help at that stage, so the solution must be earlier, in the form of
policy or broader educational efforts.
In closing, I would like to thank the Committee for addressing this
important issue. Vaccine refusal is one of the growing public health
threats of our time. If we continue to allow non-medical exemptions to
vaccination, rates of vaccination will continue to fall and more
outbreaks will undoubtedly follow. As a leader at a Children's
Hospital, I have a unique perspective on this, as Children's Hospitals
are regional and sometime national resources. Le Bonheur Children's
Hospital sits in the corner of Tennessee next to Arkansas and
Mississippi. These three states all have very different policies for
granting exemptions to vaccines, which creates a tremendous problem to
us and a threat to the children we serve, many of whom are too young to
be vaccinated or are immunocompromised and more prone to severe
diseases. I urge the Committee to consider solutions that will both
harmonize public health policy in this area and will also protect
children as they grow up to become the next generation.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. McCullers.
Mr. Boyle, welcome.
STATEMENT OF JOHN G. BOYLE, PRESIDENT AND CEO, IMMUNE
DEFICIENCY FOUNDATION, TOWSON, MD
Mr. Boyle. Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me here to
testify in the importance of herd immunity, or community
immunity as we like to say, for vaccine-preventable diseases.
My name is John Boyle and I am the President and CEO of
Immune Deficiency Foundation, a not for profit patient
organization that represents people with primary
immunodeficiency disease or PI. Primary immunodeficiency
diseases are a group of more than 350 rare and chronic
disorders in which parts of the body's immune system are either
missing or functioning improperly.
There is an estimated 250,000 people diagnosed PI in the
U.S. alone. That is about 1 and 1,200 of your constituents.
These disorders are caused by genetic defects and are not
contagious. Now there is a variety between the different forms
of PI, but one thing unites all of us, we are immunocompromised
meaning that we are potentially vulnerable to even common
viruses and bacteria. Now, I have a form of PI known as X-
linked agammaglobulinemia or XLA. I was diagnosed with it when
I was six months old, when a respiratory infection nearly
killed me. In short, I do not produce antibodies, but I am able
to be here with you today because I receive weekly infusions of
antibiotics from other people through a blood plasma product
called immunoglobulin or IG. These infusions give me back some
of what I am missing, but I am still susceptible to infections.
Now, because I was diagnosed early and I receive IG
therapy, my health is better than most others with PI. However,
a simple cold can wreak havoc with me or many other members of
our community. We are incredibly vulnerable to communicable
illnesses. Now for some members of our community, infections
are truly a life-and-death matter. I think all of you probably
remember David Vetter, affectionally known as the boy in the
plastic bubble, who was born with severe combined immune
deficiency or SCID. Children diagnosed with SCID, XLA, or any
other form of PI face multiple challenges with simple everyday
pathogens. Exposing these children to something as severe as
measles could be life-threatening. Parents and communities
where vaccine use is being questioned are afraid to send their
children outside. They are afraid because they know the
history, the science, and the math, and they know the stakes.
If people stop vaccinating, the safety net of community
immunity will fall, and their children will be among the first
casualties.
Now, of course, this does not just affect children, it
affects adults too. While there is now newborn screening for
SCID, most members of our community go years or even decades
with serious or recurrent infections without knowing that they
have a compromised immune system. I am particularly concerned
for the health of this segment of our community, the
undiagnosed. If community immunity fails, they do not even know
that they need to take precautions. Those of us who know that
we have PI do what we can to avoid exposure to infections. But
the undiagnosed lack this basic knowledge and are even more at
risk. Now the reason that all of us are so dependent on
community immunity in the PI community is that vaccines do not
work with most of us who have forms of PI. Our systems either
do not remember the pathogens, or we physically cannot create
the antibodies.
A further complication is that there are some vaccines that
are actually dangerous to us, live vaccines. As a result, those
in the field of immunology have studied this issue thoroughly
to produce evidence-based guidelines to best safeguard those of
us with PI. An article that I shared with the Committee
discusses the issue surrounding which vaccines are either
indicated or not, but it also addresses the growing neglect of
societal adherence to routine vaccinations, what we are here
talking about today. It states how important it is for family
members and then those around patients with immunodeficiencies
to receive all available standard immunizations in order to
protect the family member who has PI.
Now in closing let me say this, my life along with the
lives of hundreds of thousands of others who are
immunocompromised depend on community immunity. We depend on
vaccines. I understand from the concern that some new parents
have, particularly given the misinformation on social media.
But that fear cannot override the facts.
History has shown us that vaccines work. Science has shown
us that vaccines are necessary. And mathematics has shown us
that the odds of children having a healthy life are magnitudes
greater if they have had their vaccines. The current decline in
vaccine usage is literally bringing back plagues of the past.
All those of us who are immunocompromised will suffer first and
suffer more. The loss of community immunity is a threat to all
of us.
We need to band together to dispel the myths, combat
misinformation campaigns, and help ensure that measles and
other vaccine-preventable diseases are once again put in their
place, in history books and not in our communities.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Boyle follows:]
prepared statement of john g. boyle
Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and Members of the
Committee:
Thank you for inviting me to testify on the importance of herd
immunity for vaccine preventable diseases.
My name is John G. Boyle, and I am the President and CEO of the
Immune Deficiency Foundation. IDF is a not-for-profit patient
organization representing people with primary immunodeficiency
diseases, or PI.
Primary immunodeficiency diseases are a group of more than 350
rare, chronic disorders in which part of the body's immune system is
missing or does not function properly. There are an estimated 250,000
people diagnosed with a form of PI in the U.S. alone. That's
approximately 1 in 1,200 of your constituents.
These disorders are caused by genetic defects and are not
contagious. Many are first recognized shortly after birth or in early
childhood, but many more are not diagnosed until much later in life.
There is some variety between the different forms of PI, but one
thing unites all of us: we are immunocompromised, meaning that we are
potentially vulnerable to even the most common viruses and bacteria. We
all struggle, to varying degrees, with recurring infections and
persistent illnesses even when treatments are available that lessen the
impact of our diagnoses.
I have a form of PI known as X--Linked Agammaglobulinemia, or XLA.
I was diagnosed with it when I was six months old after a respiratory
infection nearly killed me. In short, I don't produce antibodies. I'm
able to be with you today because I receive weekly infusions of
antibodies from other people through a blood plasma product called
immunoglobulin, or Ig.
These infusions give me back some of what I'm missing, but I'm
still very susceptible to infections.
Because I was diagnosed early and receive Ig therapy, my day-to-day
health is better than many others with PI. However, a simple cold can
wreak havoc with the lives of many members of our community. Without a
fully-functioning immune system, we're incredibly vulnerable to
communicable illnesses.
For some members of our community, infections are unquestionably a
life and death matter. I suspect that all of you recall David Vetter,
affectionately known as the ``boy in the bubble,'' who was born with
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency or SCID, one of the most severe forms
of PI. Infants born with SCID are missing vital portions of their
immune system, and their survival is based on receiving a bone-marrow
transplant or gene therapy in their first few months of life.
Children diagnosed with SCID, XLA, or any other form of PI face
multiple challenges with simple, everyday pathogens. Children with PI
regularly fall ill and miss school because of Rhinovirus and other
diseases that are not that serious to most people. Exposing these
children to something as severe as measles could be life threatening.
Parents who live in communities where vaccine use is being questioned
have shared that they are afraid to send their child to school--even
when their child is not sick and should be able to participate.
They're afraid because they understand the science, the math, and
the history. They know the stakes: if people stop vaccinating and the
safety net of ``community immunity'' fails, their children will be
among the first casualties.
As a father, I gravitate to talking about children first. But this
issue affects adults too. While there is now newborn screening for SCID
in all 50 states, most members of our community go years or even
decades dealing with serious and recurrent infections without knowing
they have a compromised immune system. Because of this, we know there
are many people living with PI who are undiagnosed. I am particularly
concerned for the health of this segment of our community, the
undiagnosed. If community immunity fails, they do not know that they
need to take precautions. Those of us who know we have PI do what we
can to avoid exposure to infections. But the undiagnosed lack this
basic knowledge and are even more at-risk.
The reason that all of us, young and old, diagnosed or undiagnosed
are so dependent on community immunity is that vaccines do not work for
most of us with PI. The basic concept of a vaccine is to expose the
body's immune system to an inert version of a pathogen so it can
``remember'' that pathogen and make antibodies when necessary. This
does not work with us because our systems either don't remember the
pathogens or we physically can't create the antibodies.
A further complication is that being immunocompromised as we are
there are some vaccines that could actually be dangerous to us,
particularly ``live'' vaccines. As a result, those in the field of
immunology have studied this issue thoroughly to produce evidence-based
guidelines to best safeguard those with PI.
In 2014, the IDF Medical Advisory Committee published an article in
The Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology called ``Recommendations
for live viral and bacterial vaccines in immunodeficient patients and
their close contacts,'' to help clarify which vaccines can be given to
patients with PI. While the primary purpose of the article was to
provide clarity about which vaccines were either indicated or
contraindicated for people with various PI diagnoses, it also addressed
the growing neglect of societal adherence to routine vaccinations, a
topic particularly relevant to this morning's discussion. I would like
to submit the full copy of this article for the committee report.
The authors clearly recommend, ``Education about the critical need
for maintenance of herd immunity (community immunity) in the population
at large.'' In essence, community immunity offers valuable protection
to patients with PI who are unable to mount protective antibody
responses. It is particularly important for family members of patients
with T and B cell immunodeficiencies, such as Common Variable Immune
Deficiency (or CVID), SCID, and XLA to receive all of the available
standard immunizations in order to protect their family member with
these types of PI. I will note that any person with PI should consult a
healthcare provider, particularly an immunologist, to discuss whether
there should be any adjustments to the specifics of their vaccination
care plan depending on their diagnosis. Of course, consulting a
healthcare provider is what everyone should do when it comes to
discussing vaccine-related questions. They can answer your questions,
and--I hope--allay concerns and put things into perspective.
In closing, let me say this: my life, along with the lives of
hundreds of thousands of others who are immunocompromised depend upon
herd immunity. We depend on vaccines. I understand the concern that
some new parents have particularly given the misinformation on social
media, but that fear can't override facts. History has shown us that
vaccines work. Science has shown us that vaccines are necessary. And
mathematics has shown that the odds of children having a healthy life
are magnitudes greater if they've had their vaccines.
The current decline in vaccine usage is literally bringing back
plagues of the past. While those of us who are immunocompromised will
suffer first and suffer more--the loss of community immunity is a
threat to us all. We need to band together to dispel myths, combat
misinformation campaigns, and help ensure that measles and other
vaccine-preventable diseases are once again put in their place--in
history books, not in our communities.
I thank you for inviting me to testify, and I look forward to any
questions you may have.
______
[summary statement of john g. boyle]
For someone with any one of these disorders--particularly those who
are untreated--what may be a modest cold or virus for most people could
be a serious or even fatal condition. Severe infections, such as the
measles, pose even more risk for immune compromised people, and
community immunity represents the best way to effectively prevent what
could be a life-threatening situation. People with PIs are unable to
mount adequate protective antibody responses to infections so most
people with these conditions cannot get vaccines themselves.
As outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases have increased over
the years, the PI community has grown concerned. When the safety net of
community immunity fails:
Parents of children with PI are concerned about
sending their children to school where they have no protection
from contagious diseases, even when they are otherwise healthy
enough to participate.
Many people, including adults, who have not yet been
diagnosed with a PI, are at high risk because they do not know
to take precautions to avoid infections.
The lives of hundreds of thousands of individuals who are
immunocompromised depend on herd immunity--they depend on their
community being vaccinated. When people opt to not immunize--absent
sound medical information or other compelling reasons--it creates a
dangerous situation that is particularly harmful for individuals with
primary immunodeficiency and to others with compromised immune systems.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Boyle.
Mr. Lindenberger, welcome.
STATEMENT OF ETHAN LINDENBERGER, STUDENT, NORWALK HIGH SCHOOL,
NORWALK, OH
Mr. Lindenberger. Thank you, Chairman Alexander, Senator
Murray, and distinguished Committee Members for the opportunity
to speak today.
Good morning everyone. As was stated, my is Ethan
Lindenberger and I am a senior Norwalk High School, and my
mother is an anti-vax advocate that believes vaccines cause
autism, brain damage, and do not benefit the health and safety
of society despite the fact such opinions have been debunked
numerous times by the scientific community. I lived my entire
life without numerous vaccines against diseases such as
measles, chickenpox, or even polio. However, in December 2018,
I began catching up on my missed immunizations, despite my
mother's disapproval, eventually leading to this story and
being able to speak here today. And I am very happy for that,
so thank you.
Now, to understand why I have come here and what I really
want to talk about, I have to talk about my home life and my
upbringing. I grew up understanding my mother's believes that
vaccines are dangerous, and she would speak openly about these
views. Both online and in person, she would voice her concerns,
and these beliefs were met with strong criticism.
Over the course of my life seeds of doubt were planted and
questions arose because of the backlash my mother would
receive, but over time that really did not lead anywhere. Now
it is important to understand that as I approached high school
and began to critically think for myself, I saw that the
information in defense of vaccines outweighed the concerns
heavily. I began leading debate clubs at my school and pursuing
truth above all else, and I realized one certain quality to
debates and to conversations in general when it comes to
controversial discussions, which is that there seems to always
be two sides to a discussion. There always seems to be a
counterclaim or rebuttal and always something to strike back
with in terms of debate. Though this may seem true in all
instances, this is not true for the vaccine debate, and I
approached my mother with this concern that she was incorrect.
I approached my mother numerous times trying to explain
that vaccines are safe and that my family should be vaccinated.
Approaching even with articles in the CDC explicitly claiming
that ideas that vaccine cause autism and extremely dangerous
consequences were incorrect. In one such instance where I
approached my mother with information from the CDC that claims
vaccines do not cause autism, she responded with, that is what
they want you to think. Skepticism and worry were taking the
forefront in terms of information. Now, conversations like
these reaffirmed that evidence in defense of vaccines was, at
least on an anecdotal level, much greater than the deeply
rooted misinformation my mother interacted with. And that is
what I want to focus on today.
To combat preventable disease outbreaks, information is, in
my mind, the forefront of this matter. My mother would turn to
anti-vaccine groups online and on social media, looking for her
evidence in defense, rather than health officials and through
credible sources. This may seem to be in malice because of the
dangers that not vaccinating imposes, but this is not the case.
My mother came, in the sense of loving her children and being
concerned. This misinformation spreads and that is not
necessarily justifiable, but I carry this knowledge with me
that it was with respect and love that I disagreed with my
mother. And with the information she provided, I continued to
try and explain that it was misinformed. Ideas that, again
vaccine cause autism, brain damage, and also that the measles
outbreak is of no concern to the society and to America, were
ideas that were pushed by these sources that she would go to.
And for certain individuals and organizations that spread this
misinformation, they instill fear into the public for their own
gain selfishly and do so knowing that their information is
incorrect.
For my mother, her love, affection, and care as a parent
was used to push an agenda to create a false distress. And
these sources, which spread misinformation, should be the
primary concern of the American people. Although change is
already in place, more strides can be done. Almost 80 percent
of people according to Pew Research Center, turn to the
internet for health related questions. I further explained some
more statistics and evidence in my written testimony. Now, in
terms of what I would like to walkway with today and kind of
finalize with, although my mother would turn to very
illegitimate sources and sources that did not have peer-
reviewed evidence or information, I quickly saw that the
evidence and claims for myself were not accurate. And because
of that and because of my health care professionals I was able
to speak with and the information provided to me, I was able to
make a clear, concise, and scientific decision.
Approaching this issue with the concern of education and
addressing misinformation properly can cause change, as it did
for me. Now, although the debate around vaccines is not
necessarily centered on information and concerns for health and
safety, this is why education is important, and also
misinformation is so dangerous.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Lindenberger follows:]
prepared statement of ethan lindenberger
Thank you Chairman Alexander, Senator Murray, and distinguished
Committee Members for the opportunity to speak today.
Good morning, everyone. My name is Ethan Lindenberger and I am a
senior at Norwalk High School. My mother is an anti-vaccine advocate
that believes vaccines cause autism, brain damage, and do not benefit
the health and safety of society despite the fact such opinions have
been debunked numerous times by the scientific community. I went my
entire life without vaccinations against diseases such as measles,
chicken pox, or even polio. However, in December of 2018, I began
catching up on my missed immunizations despite my mother's disapproval,
eventually leading to an international story centered around my
decisions and public disagreement with my mother's views.
To understand why I am here and how I have come to this point, I
first must share some details about my upbringing and household. I grew
up understanding that my mother believed vaccines are dangerous, as she
would speak openly about her views both online and in person. These
beliefs were met with strong criticism, and over the course of my life
seeds of doubt were planted and questions arose because of the backlash
my mother received when sharing her views on vaccines.
These questions and doubts were minor and never led to a serious
realization of how misinformed my mother was. As these thoughts grew, I
continued to attend high school and remained undecided in my opinion of
vaccinations for many years. At my high school, I ran a debate club and
learned about the importance of finding credible information both
through my own pursuits in leading this club and through the fantastic
teachers at Norwalk.
This is important to understand, as learning to find credible
research and information is fundamental to finding truth in a world of
misleading facts and false views. Through leading my debate club, I saw
there are almost universally two or more sides to every discussion. To
every claim there is a counterclaim, and to every statement there was
always a rebuttal. Though this may seem to be true in all instances,
the scientific studies and evidence that analyze the benefits and risk
of vaccinations are separate from this truth. In its essence, there is
no debate. Vaccinations are proven to be a medical miracle, stopping
the spread of numerous diseases and therefore saving countless lives.
I remember speaking with my mother about vaccines, and at one point
in our discussion she claimed a link existed between vaccines and
autism. In response, I presented evidence from the CDC which claimed
directly in large bold letters, ``There is no link between vaccines and
autism.'' Within the same article from the CDC on their official
website, extensive evidence and studies from the institute of medicine
(IOM) were cited. Most would assume when confronted with such strong
proof, there would be serious consideration that your views are
incorrect. This was not the case for my mother, as her only response
was, ``that's what they want you to think.''
This is only one example amongst a myriad of conversations where
such evidence was disregarded and ignored. And this response is
representative of the entire discussion around vaccines, where one side
is based in scientific evidence and truth while the other is based in
skepticism and falsities.
Conversations like these were what reaffirmed the evidence in
defense of vaccinations and proved to me, at least on an anecdotal
level, that anti-vaccine beliefs are deeply rooted in misinformation.
Despite this, a necessary clarification must be made when discussing
this misinformation: anti-vaccine individuals do not root their
opinions in malice, but rather a true concern for themselves and other
people. Although it may not seem to be true because of the serious
implications of choosing not to vaccinate, the entire anti-vaccine
movement has gained so much traction because of this fear and concern
that vaccines are dangerous.
According to a study analyzing the views and beliefs of the dangers
imposed by vaccinations by the Pew research center on February 5th,
2017, ``About half (52 percent) of parents with children ages 0 to 4
say the risk of side effects is low, while 43 percent say it is medium
or high. By contrast, seven-in-ten adults with no minor-age children
(70 percent) rate the risk of side effects from the [MMR] vaccine as
low.'' That means that nearly 20 percent of Americans which previously
believed vaccines posed a low risk for children of a young age begin to
raise concerns once they have a child. Such is the case for my mother.
This does not justify spreading misinformation, and I carried this
knowledge with me as I pursued vaccinations without my mother's
approval. Her beliefs were not true, and propagating these lies is
dangerous. However, it is not necessarily ill-natured. This was the
foundation for the respectful disagreement between us as I publicly
expressed concerns for her misinformed beliefs.
I speak here today to first express this concept, that anti-vaccine
parents and individuals are in no way evil. With that said, I will
state that certain individuals and organizations which spread
misinformation and instill fear into the public for their own gain
selfishly put countless people at risk. If one agrees that vaccines are
safe and substantially benefit the health and safety of the public,
you'd see the anti-vaccine leaders and proponents of misinformation
which knowingly lie to the American people are the real issue. Using
the love, affection, and care of a parent for their children to push an
agenda and create false distress is shameful. The sources which spread
misinformation should be the primary concern of the American people.
Change is already taking place, as the largest source of
misinformation comes from private social media platforms. In a 2011
study by the pew research center, 80 percent of Americans turn to the
internet for health related questions. This is dangerous due to the
sources which spread misinformation online, and the surprising
influence they hold. The Atlantic examined vaccine related posts on the
social media platform Facebook from 2016--2019. In their article, they
found that ``Just seven anti-vax pages generated nearly 20 percent of
the top 10,000 vaccination posts in this time period.'' This echo-
chamber that a handful of sources generate create the majority of anti-
vaccine information on these platforms, and with my mother it continues
to influence her views along with countless Americans.
My mother would turn to some of the cited sources in this article
by The Atlantic, using their information as a basis for her views. This
was problematic, as with a quick inspection of the claims and evidence
of these sites their intentions are revealed. Information is not
properly cited, and data is skewed to create false claims. In one video
published by the website ``stopmandatoryvaccines.com'' (which was
listed as one of the top contributors of anti-vaccine information by
the Atlantic), the measles outbreak was made out to be a unfounded
panic created by big pharmaceutical companies and meant to push
legislative agendas. Del Bigtree, a celebrity in the anti-vaccine
movement, spoke with ``Dr. Bob Sears.'' My mom and I sat down, watching
this video so she could prove her beliefs were not unfounded.
In this video, Dr. Bob Sears claims that in the past 15 years there
hasn't been a single death to the measles. In contrast, 449 people have
had fatal reactions to the MMR vaccine. This completely ignores that if
the measles disease was left to its own devices, it could cause an
incomparable amount of deaths. The World Health Organization (W.H.O)
estimates that ``During 2000-2017, measles vaccination prevented an
estimated 21.1 million deaths making measles vaccine one of the best
buys in public health.'' I bring this up to show how in my own personal
life this misinformation reached my family. Not only that, it led to
the people I care about being put at risk.
In school, I was pulled out of class every year and told that if I
did not receive my shots, I wouldn't be able to attend my high school.
But, every year, I was opted out of these immunizations and, because of
current legislation, I was allowed to attend a public high school
despite placing my classmates in danger of contracting multiple
preventable diseases.
The debate around vaccinations is not centered around information,
but instead concerns on the health and safety of society. We must
distinguish the difference between a personal view and a medical
concern, a safety concern, and the dangers of such rhetoric. The
information leading people to fear for their children, for themselves,
and for their families is causing outbreaks of preventable diseases.
Therefore, combating this information while also working towards
legislative changes may help protect our nation from needless deaths.
My story highlights this misinformation and how it spreads. Between
social media platforms, to using a parent's love as a tool, these lies
cause people to distrust in vaccination, furthering the impact of a
preventable disease outbreak and even contributing to the cause of
diseases spreading. This needs to change and I only hope my story
contributes to such advancements.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Lindenberger. And thank you
for coming from Ohio to let us hear what you have to say. Now
we will begin 5-minute round of questions. I would--if many
Senators interested, I would ask the Senators to keep the
combination of questions and answers within five minutes. Dr.
McCullers, you are a Pediatrician-in-Chief at one of our
country's leading children's hospital, so your business is to
talk every day during your career with lots of parents about
their children. So, what do you say to parents, to a parent who
comes to you in Memphis and said, I have heard on the internet
or I have read that vaccines cause autism and I do not want my
child to be vaccinated? What do you say to that parent?
Dr. McCullers. Well, what we find when we look at this is
that parents really have a very complex set of issues that they
are concerned about. That is one of them but there is a lot of
other things that they think about and that they bring to us.
So, it is not one issue that we have to talk about, it is many,
many issues.
The Chairman. But what--I want to focus on autism. What if
they say that to you?
Dr. McCullers. This was a concern that was raised about 20
years ago when there was a fraudulent paper published linking
vaccines to autism.
The Chairman. That paper was published in the United
Kingdom, correct?
Dr. McCullers. It was published in the United Kingdom----
The Chairman. In a respected journal, is that correct?
Dr. McCullers. It was a respected journal. It was a
physician who published it, and he was, unfortunately, paid by
a set of attorneys more than #400,000 to falsify information
because they were suing the government of England against
vaccines. So, this was found to be wrong. It was retracted. He
lost his medical license----
The Chairman. What did the journal do about it?
Dr. McCullers. The journal retracted the paper and said it
no longer is valid.
The Chairman. Have there been other papers or journals that
agreed with that physician's----
Dr. McCullers. There have not been that agreed with that
position. There has been numerous scientific research done in
the interim that have shown the opposite, that these vaccines
are not linked. And the Institute of Medicine here in the
United States, our highest authority on these sorts of issues,
has declared that they are--it is a uniformly, basically, a
closed issue now.
The Chairman. As you talk with parents, so is that
persuasive with a mother who is concerned about her child and
who has heard that vaccines cause autism?
Dr. McCullers. I think if there is a rapport with the
physician and a mutual respect, they are both for the opinion
of the parent but then also for the position of the physician,
you can say things like that and say the evidence is clear, I
believe this, you should do this, and they will trust that
information.
The Chairman. In your opinion, there is no evidence,
reputable evidence, that vaccines cause autism?
Dr. McCullers. There is absolutely no evidence at this time
that vaccines cause autism.
The Chairman. Dr. Omer, do you agree with that?
Dr. Omer. Absolutely.
The Chairman. Dr. Wiesman, do you agree with that?
Dr. Wiesman. I do.
The Chairman. Mr. Boyle, do you agree with that?
Mr. Boyle. I do.
The Chairman. Mr. Lindenberger?
Mr. Lindenberger. I do.
The Chairman. Dr. Wiesman, what about state exemptions? You
are a state public health officer and as a former Governor, I
generally have a biased toward Washington not telling states
what to do on many on----
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. With Washington, DC not telling states what
to do. Senator Murray is correcting me here. So, what advice do
you have about state exemptions and the effect on the concern
we see today in pockets of measles across the country?
Dr. Wiesman. I think as we heard earlier that the choice to
sort of make exemptions more difficult to get, to be sort of as
burdensome as sort of not getting the vaccine, is incredibly
important. In Washington State, as you know, we have two bills
right now that are looking to remove the personal exemptions
from vaccine for school entry and for childcare entry. I think
that is one of the tools that we have and that we should be
using for this. I will also say in Washington State another
problem we have is that about 8 percent of our kids are out of
compliance with school records so that we do not even know if
they are vaccinated or would like exemptions. And we have to
tackle that problem as well, which really is a resource issue
for schools and public health.
The Chairman. I am going to stay within my time. Senator
Murray.
Senator Murray. Thank you very much. Dr. Wiesman, I really
appreciate everything you and your state and local colleagues
are doing on the frontlines of this measles outbreak in
Washington State confirming and managing the cases, tracing
potential contacts, identify exposures sights, crafting
community messages. There is a lot going on, but it is really
scary to imagine how much worse this outbreak would be if not
for all the tireless work of so many public health officials on
the ground. But we all hope we are able to not just respond to
outbreaks, but also focus on preventing them in the first
place. And I want to ask you, how have initiatives like the
public-private partnership Vax Northwest and your department's
proactive communication with parents of young children helped
in building confidence?
Dr. Wiesman. Great, thanks. Yes, we do believe that the
child profile mailings that go out to parents, to kids up to
age 6, they go out at points in time that are appropriate to
the development of the child, are incredibly important. It is a
trusted source of information, not just on vaccines, but on
childhood development. And it is that relationship that we
build with parents through that mailing that I think is
incredibly important.
When I go out to the public and I see a new parent, I will
often ask them, hey, do you get this little mailing from the
health department? And they say, I do, we love, it is great
information. So, I think that trusted source is really
important. The public-private partnership that we have with Vax
Northwest is actually a research initiative to try and best
understand how we actually address vaccine hesitancy. There
have been two studies done. One looking with health care
providers on how to best train them around communication with
their patients. Unfortunately, that work did not find that it
made a difference in terms of addressing vaccine hesitancy nor
necessarily health care providers efficacy around feeling
confident in those conversations. The other piece was one with
parents and parents who were interested in vaccine advocacy,
training them on how to have conversations with parents, how to
share information at PTA meetings, etc. And that did find that
it increased parents' knowledge of vaccines and reduced their
hesitancy.
Senator Murray. Okay, thank you. And, Dr. Omer, as
vaccination rates in some areas drop to low levels, we need to
keep each other safe. Your research on vaccine hesitancy and
likewise is really critical. And we know that some parents are
making decisions about whether or not to vaccinate before they
even have their child. I wanted to ask you, what are the
implications of some of these early decisions and what have you
learned about the key factors that lead some parents to
hesitate to vaccinate?
Dr. Omer. Thank you for the question. And you rightly
pointing out that a lot of this--that there is evidence to
suggest that a lot of parents are making the decisions on
vaccines before the baby is born. After the baby is born, it is
like a fast moving train, and parents go through this extended
jet-lag. And so, before that, there is a lot of discussion
happening, etc. And there are several reasons for this. The
first one is, the big picture reason is that vaccines are a
victim of their own success, and as the rate of vaccine
preventable diseases go down, because of vaccines, successive
cohorts of parents see and hear about real or perceived adverse
events and not the disease. And what happens is that mental
calculus changes. And in that milieu, there are several that
interact with several local factors, and in the U.S. for
example, due to that sort of change in the disease rates, which
is a good thing, we have less appreciation of vaccines
susceptibility and severity and more questions about vaccine
safety.
Senator Murray. Because we do not see it.
Dr. Omer. In that context, focusing on not just childhood
but before the baby is born, we are working for example, our
group is doing a randomized controlled trial in collaboration
with University of Colorado and John's Hopkins, where we are--
you now and this is due to an investment, due to funding from
the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
where we are looking at bringing together the best evidence and
packaging it and seeing if that has an impact in not just
maternal vaccination, but this intervention being performed in
pregnancy, leading to childhood vaccination rates increase. And
so, the initial results from them are promising, but to come
back to the idea that we need to continue to invest in the best
science for vaccine behavior and communication as we do for
vaccine safety and vaccine efficacy.
Senator Murray. Okay, thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murray. Senator Isakson.
Senator Isakson. Thank you, Chairman Alexander. Thank you
all for your testimony. Mr. Lindenberger, what year in school
are you?
Mr. Lindenberger. I am a senior in high school.
Senator Isakson. When did you start doing the investigation
and research on vaccination?
Mr. Lindenberger. From my mother specifically, I mean she
would vocalize her views on vaccines throughout my entire life
and it was a slow progression to start to see evidence as I
would see people, I suppose, trying to counterclaim with her
and argue online. I would see that she would have this backlash
as she would share information. So, on Facebook, she shared a
video and people would be like that is incorrect, this is
false. And so, as a child that intrigued me that people
disagreed with my mom and I started to look into it over the
course of multiple years.
Senator Isakson. That is the second time you have used
online in your answer. I want to ask, does your mother get most
of her information online?
Mr. Lindenberger. From what she has presented, yes. Either
through Facebook or through sites that use the social media
platforms, like Facebook--mainly Facebook, I mean.
Senator Isakson. Where do you get most of your information?
Mr. Lindenberger. From not Facebook. I mean, from CDC, the
World Health Organization, scientific journals, and also cited
information from those organizations like the Institute of
Medicine. I try my best also to look at credited sources.
Senator Isakson. I would love to be guest at Thanksgiving
dinner at your house. That would be----
[Laughter.]
Senator Isakson. It would be a heck of a discussion
everybody would have. I know that. Dr. Omer, thank you for
being here and thanks for the work that Emory does. Emory does
a phenomenal job in infectious disease and all kinds of things
like that. What currently--are there any things on the horizon
that would join this group of people, that we might want to
immunize for later on?
Dr. Omer. There are several exciting developments, and one
of the big gaps in vaccine has been the fact that there is a
gap of vulnerability between the baby is born and when we start
vaccinating them. And that is due to immunological reasons. And
one of the most exciting developments in this area is the area
of maternal immunization where you vaccinate mom. And I had the
privilege of being involved in some of those trials, etc. to
protect not just the mother but the baby as well. So, there are
vaccines against the respiratory syncytial virus, which is the
biggest cause of viral pneumonia in the world on the horizon.
So, there is a variety of vaccines being developed. There is a
vaccine that is being developed against group B streptococcus,
etc. So, there are several vaccines on the horizon. The field
is expanding.
Senator Isakson. Now would those vaccinations take place in
the mother before the baby is delivered?
Dr. Omer. Yes.
Senator Isakson. It transfers to the baby during the course
of gestation?
Dr. Omer. Exactly. And our first trial had a name of
``mother's gift'' ages ago, and I think it is an appropriate
name for this kind of first strategy where maternal antibodies
protect the baby.
Senator Isakson. You know, I have been to Africa with CDC a
number of times and seen your work, the work in the field that
they do. I do not know of any organization that does more for
health care in other countries that CDC does. How much do you
use CDC as a resource in your work at Emory?
Dr. Omer. A lot. The CDC is a national treasure. And the
firefighting function that I talked about they perform with the
state and local health department is somewhat unique. For
example, the European CDC is relatively new and has a very
narrow mandate. And people who have looked at the effectiveness
of national public agencies in Europe, have clearly come out
with the understanding that our CDC is very strong. And I am
not trying to put down any other country's public agencies,
because they are trying their best, but the kind of investments
that have gone into building this cooperative framework of the
CDC being the premier technical public agency but working
closely with the state and local health department has served
us really well, including in this area.
Senator Isakson. I do not think you are putting them down
at all. In fact, to tell you the truth, it is the world's
health care center, the CDC, and we are lucky to have it in the
United States of America, but the world considers it their
health center. And they are doing better job--CDC is doing a
better job incubating CDCs in other countries now to replicate
what they do in countries that are more developed and populated
so----
Dr. Omer. Absolutely.
Senator Isakson. They are a great resource, great help, and
a great service. And I thank all of you for being here today
and Mr. Lindenberger, do not forgot that I will come to your
Thanksgiving dinner one day and just meet you and your mom.
[Laughter.]
Senator Isakson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, or Madam
Chairman.
Senator Murray. [Presiding] Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you. In 2015, this Committee held a
similar hearing to discuss the resurgence of vaccine-
preventable diseases in response to a multi-state measles
outbreak. Our Nation's vaccination program has saved lives by
preventing and reducing the outbreak of vaccine preventable
diseases like measles, which has one of the most effective
vaccines. So, I am troubled that we are here again facing
another preventable outbreak in several states that has
similarly been exacerbated by a surge of misinformation
surrounding vaccine safety. I believe we must do a better job
to prioritize investments in cutting edge science and public
education surrounding vaccine safety. Younger children and
those with compromised immune systems have a higher risk of
measles complications. And with the breath of misinformation
proliferating in the media and online about the science behind
vaccines Dr. Wiesman,
Dr.--is it Omer?
Dr. Omer. Yes.
Senator Baldwin. Dr. Omer, what role do state health
departments play in our main community leaders like school
officials and providers with accurate information and
scientific resources on vaccine safety? And as a follow-on,
what can Congress do to improve the public health education, so
we do not see another preventable outbreak in the future?
Dr. Wiesman. Thank you for that question. Yes, so states
and local health departments really are the leaders in
communities around these health strategies to engage their
communities around vaccine information. They help provide the
health education. They work with the school systems. They work
with health care providers to make sure that health care
providers have the information they need. It really takes a
sort of coordinated effort.
Honestly, that system is crumbling. The sort of resources
that are going into prevention in our state, local, tribal, and
territorial health agencies has been decreasing. And we are
really not up to the task. For example, I had a call with CDC a
number of months ago. State health officials, we do this every
two weeks, and CDC was on the call talking about a hepatitis A
outbreak that is occurring throughout the country in many
communities. They are encouraging us to do proactive
vaccination campaigns with homeless and injection drug users,
which is where this is being seen. I do not have the resources.
I asked my staff, what would a plan look like? It would
probably cost us $5 million. I do not have those resources. I
do not have the staff that are there. That is very, very
concerning to me. And, I forgot your second question, but----
Senator Baldwin. How can Congress help? So, I am thinking--
--
Dr. Wiesman. I sort of helped answer that right there.
Senator Baldwin. That is right. That is right.
Dr. Wiesman. Including, I think, in research around how do
we--the social research around how is it we communicate with
folks about vaccines, and then have a national campaign. We
really need to get on this.
Dr. Omer. Just to add to that, in addition to research,
investment in high quality research, I think Congress can work
on making vaccine counseling reimbursable. So that is a
specific tool that physicians can use at the periphery, at the
frontlines of these conversations that are happening every day.
Then sort of take the blueprint that I mentioned that is
already there, that was developed by the National Vaccine
Advisory committee, that has very specific science-based
recommendations to have that kind of implementation out there.
To continue to support CDC's mission of this controlling
outbreaks, etc. That should not be taken for granted. And the
last thing in this stream of specific things is, continue to
prioritize the vaccines safety research enterprise that we
have, which is not just a template for this country, but
everywhere else as well. So, having a robust vaccine safety
system is not only a tool to maintain confidence in vaccines,
but it is just the right thing to do. So, these are some of the
specific things Congress and the Federal Government can do.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you. I have only a few seconds left.
I am going to ask a question. Maybe if we run out of time, you
can submit information for the record. But I follow of course
some of the advancements that happen in my state and some of
the interesting things that are happening.
Since 2007, a company called FluGen in Madison, Wisconsin
has been working to develop a more effective flu vaccine based
on technology that was discovered and invented at the
University of Wisconsin. As we have heard today, highly
effective vaccines have played a critical role in advancing
public health around the world, and I think there is more that
we could do to support the development of better vaccines to
protect individuals from an illness that results in literally
thousands of deaths each year. Mr. Boyle, can you describe why
it is important for Congress to continue to support this
medical research that advances the development of more
effective vaccines for common illnesses like the flu, and
specifically for vulnerable populations?
Mr. Boyle. Sure, let me try. One of the challenges that I
see when I even think about my colleagues and friends who
sometimes struggle with whether to get the flu vaccine is basic
issues of fears of things like needles. They do not want to get
a shot. They are scared of that. For that reason, I know that
things like the flu-mist and others are attractive, the problem
is within our community a live virus, such as that has been
used in the past, is a problem.
We are a little bit torn in that we want something to be
easy and efficacious and something that is going to be widely
adopted, but at the same time we have to be concerned about
those who are especially undiagnosed. So, there is a little bit
of a balance there and further investigation to help understand
what new technologies could be made to reduce the burden of
getting a vaccine, be it for the flu or anything more
communicable, would be phenomenal. At the same time, we will
have to work with the CDC and others in order to balance out
the needs of those who are actually going to be affected by
that negatively. But we are all in it together.
The continued conversation and exploration is important,
and our community and other immunocompromised communities would
I think be delighted to be part of these conversations.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you.
Senator Cassidy. [Presiding] Dr. Paul.
Senator Paul. Thank you. Thank you for your testimony. For
much of modern history, science and freedom have lived in
relative harmony. Traditionally as medical discoveries came
about like the smallpox, or polio vaccine, antisepsis or
antibiotics, the results were so overwhelming that overtime the
vast majority of the public accepted these advances
voluntarily.
In fact, innovations like the smallpox vaccine had to
overcome initially great public prejudice. Dr. Zabdiel Boylston
learned about the Middle Eastern technique from his servant for
the famous Pastor Cotton Mather. His first patient was actually
his son, an incredibly brave choice. The consensus of the
medical community though was entirely opposed to him at the
time. The vaccine was a live vaccine, and as Dr. Boylston
learned about 1 and 50 of those inoculated would die from the
vaccine. And yet, the death rate from smallpox was
approximately 50 percent. The Government did not mandate the
vaccine though, but within two generations it was accepted
enough that George Washington insisted that Martha be
vaccinated with the smallpox vaccine before visiting him in the
military camps.
Today though, instead of persuasion, many governments have
taken to mandating a whole host of vaccines, including vaccines
for non-lethal diseases. Sometimes these vaccine mandates have
run amok, when the Government mandated a rotavirus vaccine that
was later recalled because it was causing intestinal blockage
in children. I am not a fan of Government coercion, yet given
the choice, I do believe that the benefits of most vaccines
vastly outweigh the risks. Yet, it is wrong to say that there
are no risk to vaccines. Even the Government admits that
children are sometimes injured by vaccines.
Since 1988, over $4 billion has been paid out from the
Vaccine Injury Compensation Program. Despite the Government
admitting to it in paying $4 billion for vaccine injuries, no
informed consent is used or required when you vaccinate your
child. This may be the only medical procedure in today's
medical world where an informed consent is not required.
Now proponents of mandatory Government vaccination argue
that parents who refuse to vaccinate their children risk
spreading these disease to the immunocompromised community.
There does not seem to be enough evidence of this happening to
be recorded as a statistic, but it could happen. But if the
fear of this is valid, are we to find that next we will be
mandating flu vaccines? Between 12 and 56,000 people die from
the flu or have been said to have died from the flu in America,
and it is estimated to be a few hundred for measles. So, I
would guess that those who want to mandate measles will be
after us on the flu next. If the current science only allows
for educated guessing when it comes to the flu vaccine, each
year before that year's flu vaccine or strain is known, the
scientist put their best guess into that year's vaccine. Some
years it is completely wrong. We vaccinate for the wrong
strand--the wrong strain of flu vaccine. Yet, five states
already mandate flu vaccines. Is it really appropriate to
mandate a vaccine that more often than not vaccinates for the
wrong flu strain?
As we contemplate forcing parents to choose this or that
vaccine, I think it is important to remember that force is not
consistent with the American story, nor is force consistent
with the liberty our forefathers sought when they came to
America. I do not think you have to have one or the other
though. I am not here to say, do not vaccinate your kids. If
this appearing is for persuasion, I am all for the persuasion.
I have vaccinated myself. I have vaccinated my kids. For myself
and my children, I believe that the benefits of vaccines
greatly outweigh the risks, but I still do not favor giving up
on liberty for a false sense of security.
Thank you.
Senator Cassidy. Do you yield back?
[Applause.]
Senator Paul. I yield back.
Senator Cassidy. Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, we have heard
today about how important vaccines are to preventing and
controlling many diseases. And, I want to see, row in on one
that we are battling right now in Massachusetts. Since last
April, 318 outbreak associated cases of acute hepatitis A virus
have been reported in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Hep A
is a contagious virus that causes liver infection. Older
children and adults who acquire the hepatitis A virus can
experience a slew of incredibly unpleasant symptoms, fever,
nausea. And in rare cases, the virus can even lead to death.
In Massachusetts, four people have already died since the
outbreak began. Now, we did not use to have a hepatitis A
vaccine at all, but in 1995 and '96 the Food and Drug
Administration approved two hepatitis A vaccines, and soon
after CDC recommended vaccination for certain populations,
including routine vaccinations of children living in areas with
elevated rates of the virus. Dr. McCullers, you study
infectious diseases, what impact did the introduction of the
hepatitis A vaccine have on the national rates of the virus?
Dr. McCullers. Well, thank you very much Senator Warren.
Yes, hepatitis A can be a very sever disease in particular high
risks groups. The vaccine that came out in the late 1990s is a
very safe, very effective vaccine, and as we have increased
vaccination rates, we have seen a tremendous decrease in the
rate of the disease. We have seen more than a 50-fold decrease
nationally over those years, primarily eliminating a lot of the
disease in children as well as some of the food-borne
outbreaks. But there is still a lot of public health work to do
as it is illustrated by your current outbreak.
Senator Warren. That is the question I want to ask. We have
developed a vaccine, the rate goes way down, so we now have a
vaccine-preventable virus here. Why are we seeing so many
hepatitis A cases emerging now?
Dr. McCullers. Well, what we are seeing is the vaccines
administered in childhood. It has only been around for about 20
years so if you are 21 years or older, have not had it. Now it
is recommended that high-risk groups such as recreational drug
users as is part of the problem in Massachusetts, be vaccinated
and we have not gotten all those groups yet. So, efforts to
really find the high-risk individuals, which are well-defined,
and to get them the vaccine would help prevent these outbreaks
in the future.
Senator Warren. Yes, and this is part of what is happening
in Massachusetts. We have been battling the Opioid Crisis for
years, and hepatitis A is just another place we need to fight
on this. But we are learning from this. Just this past October,
the same CDC committee whose recommendations in the 1990s
helped the rates of the virus decline sharply, added persons
experiencing homelessness to the list of those who are
recommended to get hepatitis A vaccine. I see you are all
nodding, right.
In Massachusetts, our public health workers, our community
health centers, and our jails have sprung into action to try to
get the vaccine to those who are most at risk. Dr. Wiesman, as
Secretary of the Washington State Department of Health, you
overseer your state's public health response. What can we be
doing to ensure that local public health officials have the
resources they need to be able to do their work?
Dr. Wiesman. Yes, thank you. So, really part of this is
making sure that the prevention public health fund is funded
and that we look at funding the CDC. We have been asking ASTHO,
the Association of state and Territorial Health officials and
local public health for increasing the CDC budget 22 percent by
FY2022.
Senator Warren. Alright. So, we are talking money now.
Dr. Wiesman. We are talking money.
Senator Warren. We are talking money, and whether it is a
situation like hepatitis A outbreak in Massachusetts or the
measles outbreak in Washington State, how do the preventive
costs of a vaccine program compare to the containment and
treatment cost of an outbreak?
Dr. Wiesman. Well in general we do know that for about
every dollar spent on vaccines, you save about 10, so it is
definitely a cost-effective intervention.
Senator Warren. Good. So, the more we do on the front-end
to ensure that everyone gets access to the vaccines, the less
we will see individuals contracting hepatitis A, measles,
whopping cough, all of the other vaccine-preventable diseases.
This Administration has repeatedly sought to cut the
Prevention and Public Health Fund, which supports key
immunization programs, and they have continued their efforts to
weaken the Medicaid program, which covers all of the
recommended vaccines for children and for many adults as well.
I am glad that most of my colleagues are on the same page about
the importance of vaccines.
Now let us make sure we are also on the same page about the
importance of the public health funding, so people get access
to those vaccines.
Thank you.
Senator Cassidy. Senator Roberts.
Senator Roberts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to go
a little crosscurrent here, and I want to state that the
importance of vaccine in infants and young people cannot be
overstated. I understand that. But I want to talk about the
seniors who are also at increased risk of experiencing serious
and life-threatening effects of vaccine preventable diseases.
We have quite a few octogenarians in the Senate that get
vaccinated. More specially with flu. Mr. Boyle, you touched on
this with your reference to this topic on the effect of a herd
immunity syndrome, which I appreciate, particular settings in
which adults and seniors are more susceptible to infectious
diseases if they are not vaccinated.
But to figure out if we can look for ways that Federal
programs can help by removing barriers to services like
vaccines and providing the right incentives for people to use
them. And, what procedural barriers exist to ensuring that
seniors have proper access to vaccines? Do we need more
education so seniors provide--overcome these challenges? I want
to give you a personal illustration. A young lady, but she was
in her 80s, but she was young.
[Laughter.]
Senator Roberts. She makes sure that all six of her
children got flu shots, had in turn all of her grandchildren
and that was a bunch of folks. And yet, she got the flu in
Kansas this time around--bad just a very bad flu season. And
for some reason, she did not get a flu shot. So here she is, a
mother who has told her kids to get vaccinated and made sure it
happened. And then, in her own situation, she did not get a flu
shot along with her husband. We lost both. The sniffles became
flu, the flu became serious, and we get into pneumonia, and we
get into all sorts of other problems.
I am not going to go into what kind of treatment they
received, but they were very important folks and they were
pillars of their community, and they were still very active. I
sometimes think that the octogenarian caucus in the, well in
the Senate, we are known as potted plants.
[Laughter.]
Senator Roberts. We are also known as chairmen of the
various committees around here.
Dr. Omer, you have written about vaccine confidence. And I
am interested in how this applies to adults in recent years,
who have seen outbreaks of vaccine preventable diseases in
which unvaccinated adults are an important factor. CDC also
noted that a drop in the immunization rate contribute to rise
in hospitalization and deaths during the last flu season. I do
not get it. I do not understand why in a period of your life
when you would be obviously saying I need a flu shot and then
respond to why you did not do it, well we just did not get
around to it. I do not know.
If any of you would like to offer any opinions. We are
talking about young people all the time but there are people
who still contribute to this society even though there is no
bar graph after 80 for anything. We are just out there. Anybody
want to comment? Dr. Omer.
Dr. Omer. Thank you Senator, and the story that you noted
is not unique, unfortunately, in this country and throughout
the world.
The elderly are one of the highest risk groups for count
complications after influenza. The vaccines are slightly less
effective in the elderly, but that is the reason we need more
of them to be vaccinated. And this is one of the gaps that I
was talking about, that we do not have evidence-based to
communicate to several groups, including the elderly. And this
is not a group that is actively opposed to vaccines. They have
the concept of vaccines, and they have seen what infectious
diseases can do. But the--at that time when a lot of the
discussion has revolved around childhood vaccines, we need
evidence-based strategies to communicate to not just the
elderly, but also to their health systems. The providers, who
deal with the elderly do not have, unfortunately, the muscle
memory to talk about vaccines and to make it part of their
routine clinical practices. There is a lot to be done and thank
you for highlighting that issue.
Senator Roberts. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. I want
you to know that we did not plan this, Dr. Omer and myself
before the Committee hearing, but he certainly hit the nail on
the head. I think it is an issue that we overlook. Thank you.
Senator Cassidy. Thank you.
Senator Kaine.
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the
witnesses. This has been a fascinating topic. Timely, I noticed
yet another study has come out just in the last 24 hours, a
study dealing with a very significant longitudinal study with a
big chunk of children in Denmark that also, again, demonstrates
no link between the MMR vaccine and autism, and so it is a
timely date to have this hearing. I want to ask a question
about--begin with a question about vaccination shortages, which
as a former governor, worries me a lot. Problems in the supply
chain that could lead to shortages of important medications.
In 2017, outbreaks of hepatitis A increased demand and lead
to constraints supplies of that vaccine. Many constituents have
contacted my office about their inability to access the
shingles vaccine, shingrix. So, last year I joined the
bipartisan group of Members of this Committee in a letter to
commissioner Gottlieb of urging him to convene the drug
shortage task force to develop a report on the root shortage of
drug vaccines. I look forward to reading that report and I
think it may be on the verge of being published. I think the
Committee has completed the work and it is very close to
publication. It might be worthy of some Committee consideration
when it is done.
What more can we do, and I guess I will direct it
specifically to Dr. Omer and Dr. Wiesman, what more could we do
at the Federal level to make sure there is an adequate supply
of vaccines?
Dr. Wiesman. Well, just to start out and then turn it to my
colleague. So, one, we would need to continue investing in
vaccine research figuring out new technologies for producing
vaccines. We use sort of egg technology and it is a very long,
laborious process in many of these. So, we have to move towards
new technologies, I think, around cell-based or recombinant
vaccines, so that we can produce them more quickly and assure
the safety. And it is a problem with the vaccine shortages.
Dr. Omer. Yes, so one of my mentors has said a few times
that it is not--vaccine is in a vial, that remains in a vial,
is 100 percent safe, but 0 percent effective. And so, inventing
a vaccine or developing a vaccine or licensing a vaccine is not
sufficient. We need to have a stable supply of vaccines. And
that requires A. a Federal-wide thinking and response from
regulation to working with our research entities to say that
there is a robust pipeline of new vaccines, and there are
multiple approaches.
Infectious diseases attack our bodies through multiple
mechanisms, therefore there are multiple vulnerabilities. What
it does is that it creates an intellectual marketplace of ideas
so that if there is more than one strategy that we are focusing
on at the science level, we have more likelihood of having
multiple products that compete with each other and have a--sort
of give us more options as a country. Then working with
manufacturers. Sort of ensuring that we understand that there
is a stable manufacturing pipeline.
The third thing is sometimes in certain specially
pandemics, etc., one policy intervention is BARDA, which invest
in preparedness related interventions. And for example, some
flu vaccines that would be required in a pandemic, there it is
in our interest to ensure a stable seasonal flu pipeline. And
so, there are interventions and investments which are a little
bit more direct that sort of straddle that divide between
emerging and routine vaccination, etc. So, it will require a
nationwide--a national response, not just a Federal response in
this sense, that sort of bringing in states and other partners
as well.
Senator Kaine. Thank you for that. Yes, Dr. McCullers. You
need to be quick because I have one more question.
Dr. McCullers. Alright, very quickly then. Three quick
issues, one is that these are for-profit companies generally
that create the vaccines, so having a Federal buy that gives
them some surety will make them produce more, which will help
the vaccine shortages. The second is, we really have a problem
not so much with shortage but with maldistribution, so it
becomes a logistics effort and we can do better at that at the
local level, being able to make sure every physician, practice,
or hospital has that. And the third is to reinforce the
importance of the strategic national stockpile, which again
keeps these vaccines in reserve when we might need them. Thank
you.
Senator Kaine. Thank you. I just in my last minute Mr.
Lindenberger, I just want to compliment you. We revere
Jefferson in Virginia and one of the things that he said that
still is so powerful is, ``progress and Government and all else
depends upon the broadest possible diffusion of knowledge to
the general population.'' He believed that the diffusion of
knowledge and giving people knowledge would enable them to make
the right decisions. Now, fake knowledge, misinformation,
intentionally misleading information can also be disseminated.
In this social media age with the internet, the competition
between the true and the valid, and the fake and the dangerous,
even the manipulated by people who want to do us harm is very
difficult, but I think it is interesting probably both your
mother and you reached your conclusions because you had an
internet and tools to do your own research. And so, the
different between, your mom and you, you are using some of the
same tools and reaching different conclusions, but I applaud
your critical thinking skills and your willingness to share
your story.
Mr. Lindenberger. Thank you. I do not want to go overtime,
but just to comment on that very quickly, I think part of the
issue is being able to inform people about how to find good
information because with my mother it was not that she did not
have the information, but she was manipulated into disbelieving
it. And that is part of the attack, which is that the CDC was
made out to be a fraudulent group that was pushing vaccines for
its own demand and--but that is not the case and the evidence
proposed is genuine. And so, I just want to comment on that.
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Cassidy. My turn. Let me give some color to what
Senator Paul said. You may or may not know I am a physician,
and I have seen people who have not been vaccinated. Who have
required liver transplantation because they were not, and or
who ended up with terrible diseases because of no other reason,
they just for whatever reason did not understand that
vaccination was important. It is important to point out that
even a flu shots are not completely effective, they do
mitigate.
There is a cross benefit that will decrease the severity,
number one. Number two, hospitals commonly require their
employees to be immunized because they understand that herd
immunity is important, and if the nurse's aide is not
immunized, she can be a typhoid Mary, if you will, bringing
disease to many who are immunocompromised, as Mr. Boyle points
out. And as regards to the Federal Government requiring, there
is a Federal statute requiring that vaccine information
statements should be given, that is a Federal requirement. And
in the name of liberty we should rely therefore upon states and
localities to make a further requirement, but they typically do
require informed consent.
That is important to note, not to be misled by--not to be
misled regarding that. Secondly, I think our next--I think we
should point out that in terms of requirement, the requirement
is just that you cannot enter school unless you are vaccinated.
Now, if you are such a believer of liberty, that you do not
wish to be vaccinated, then there should be a consequence, and
that is that you cannot infect other people.
Mr. Boyle, if your child is born with immunodeficiency, and
someone comes to your school who is not vaccinated, and the
lack of herd immunity means that your child, who no fault of
their own, cannot be immune, is it a victimless crime that
somebody does not get vaccinated and your child dies? I mean,
my gosh, you are the guy who is representing those people, who
for whatever reason the vaccine does not work, and they are
particularly susceptible. Now, Dr. Wiesman, I seem to remember
a particularly tragic case in Washington State from about six
years ago of a child who was immunocompromised on steroids
chemotherapy for cancer, and someone brought measles to the
school and I think I remember that child died. Do I remember
that correctly?
Dr. Wiesman. If we are talking about the same child, yes,
he dies a number of years later from a follow-up reaction.
Senator Cassidy. Now, so the parent has had the child
vaccinated, but now she is on cancer chemotherapy and she is
immunocompromised, and she is in school thinking that she can
be a normal child, even though she is on cancer chemotherapy,
but because someone else has made a decision not to vaccinate
their child, her child dies. Now, do you believe in liberty?
That is fine. Do not get immunized, but I do not think you need
to necessarily expose others to disease. Dr. McCullers, tell
me, you are in a state--you mentioned a practice where you have
people from three different states, and hats off to
Mississippi, they always have the highest immunization rate.
You did not elaborate. What are the differences between the
patients from these three different states in terms of, okay,
Mississippi is always immunized, do you imply that maybe
Tennessee and Arkansas are not?
Dr. McCullers. Alright, so Mississippi does not allow any
non-medical exemptions and they have nearly a 100 percent rate
of immunization at school entry. They pay a lot of attention to
it. Tennessee is in the middle. They allow religious exemptions
but not philosophical exemptions. In Tennessee we have about a
97 percent vaccination rate at kindergarten entry, but we have
seen the rate of non-medical exemptions under religious
exemption triple in the last 10 years, so you can predict where
that is going. Arkansas on the other hand allows both religious
and philosophical exemptions and has a rate that is around 93
to 94 percent, below the level for community immunity.
Senator Cassidy. In what state do you see the most vaccine-
preventable diseases, nonetheless, presenting themselves?
Dr. McCullers. Well, all of these are rare, and we see them
from all--we see things from all the states. Tennessee, we get
about one a year measles case, always imported from outside the
United States.
Senator Cassidy. We have adequate herd immunity that would
still protect even if people are coming in and bringing another
disease?
Dr. McCullers. To this point the problem is as you have
seen in California, in Oregon, and Washington, is that there
are pockets where it low and it could happen easily in
Tennessee next week. Even though we are 97 percent, there is
plenty of communities that are below that level, and we might
see the outbreak in that community.
Senator Cassidy. Now, Mr. Lindenberger, so obviously we
have a bunch of Docs or people who I cannot help but notice
that your beard is not as heavy as the other peoples'.
[Laughter.]
Senator Cassidy. This was not total--you do not have to be
an MD or PhD, or a Master of Public Health to understand these
issues, correct?
Mr. Lindenberger. Correct.
Senator Cassidy. You just need to bring your critical
faculty to it, and look at it, and understand it is not just
the individual who is affected but it is the individual whom
the person goes to school with, correct?
Mr. Lindenberger. As I have stated before, my decision to
get vaccinated was based on the health and safety of myself and
other people. And I approached my family physician. I spoke to
her. She encouraged me to get vaccinated. Even at school, I was
told I would not be able to attend if I did not get my vaccines
but was opted-out. And so, my school viewed me as a health
threat. And so that for me also pushed me to getting my
vaccines despite my mother's beliefs because I saw the threat
that was being imposed.
Senator Cassidy. I am out of time, although I am the Chair.
I will nonetheless defer to myself.
[Laughter.]
Senator Cassidy. But I thank you very much. And Mr.
Lindenberger thank you for caring for the people you went to
school with, as much as you cared for yourself.
Mr. Lindenberger. Thank you.
Senator Cassidy. I yield my time. Senator Hassan.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you Mr. Chair and Ranking
Member Murray for having this hearing. Thank you all for being
here. I had the great good fortune of having a grandfather who
was a pediatrician, and he practiced medicine from 1921 to
about 1985. And my childhood was filled with his accounts on
the changes that he saw on the medical landscape over the
course of his career. I still remember him describing what it
was like to see somebody suffer from lockjaw, which is tetanus.
The jaw locks, the swallowing stops, the breathing stops, the
muscles spasm, and he was talking about what a difference it
made when the tetanus vaccine became available.
I remember my mother who had three children, youngest one
born in 1960, remarking during my childhood that now that there
was a vaccine against rubella, German measles, pregnant women
did not have to worry nearly as much about going out of their
house during pregnancy, accidentally contracting German measles
which could be so damaging to the fetus.
I think it is incumbent on all of us to remember these
stories because a number of you have made the point that
without this experience of what these diseases actually do and
mean, we have gotten less vigilant as a society about the
importance of this, the importance of vaccinations. Dr. Omer, I
wanted to follow-up with you. You talked about the importance
of work you are doing on helping pregnant women get vaccinated.
We know that in the United States, almost all vaccines are
administered to infants once they are at least 2 months old.
So, for the first two months of their lives, infants rely on
the antibodies of their mothers. The antibodies that moms
transfer during pregnancy to protect them from preventable
diseases or viruses such as the flu.
We now that vaccines like the flu vaccine currently
available, not necessarily the new ones you are working on, are
critical for pregnant women and their babies. And we know that
these populations face a greater risk of complications due to
the flu, including premature birth delivery, hospitalization,
or in severe cases, death. But astonishingly, only about half
of women receive the flu vaccine during pregnancy. With infant
and mortality rates reaching startling numbers in the United
States in recent years, it is absolutely critical that we take
basic steps to help protect women and babies during pregnancies
and childbirth.
Dr. Omer, what do you think is the leading cause for the
lone number of vaccinated pregnant women, and what can we do
moving forward to help improve these numbers and keep mothers
and babies save?
Dr. Omer. There are several causes, and there are only few
women who are outright opposed to vaccines. And there is this
huge gap, this huge groove, which is the fenceter groove. And
so that is an opportunity to persuade, to educate, to have
these meaningful conversations. So, in terms of how to
intervene, we proposed a model called the P3 model. It is
practice, provider, and patient. We changed it at the third P
to pregnant women because pregnancy is not a pathology. It is a
very physiological state to be in and we advocate for and
evaluating strategies.
There is emerging evidence that there is promise to this
strategy to work with the practice, for example, things like
standing orders, which use behavioral economic studies concepts
to notch a practice into vaccinating, working on the supply
side issues, working on physicians communications, and
persuading pregnant women. In terms of the specific reasons,
there is this focus on the baby. And so, we have found this is
one of the other universal things, that mothers are both
motivated to protect the baby, and scared to harm the baby. And
as we generate safety evidence, which is very robust for
influenza vaccine, we need to find better ways and evidence-
based ways, as I alluded to, to communicate to pregnant women
as well.
Senator Hassan. Okay. Well, thank you. And maybe what I
will do then just with my limited time is also as, Dr.
McCullers, as a practitioner, I am curious about how you go
about communicating with parents who are having vaccination
hesitancy? Among parents who choose not to vaccinate their
children, what is their most common reason? And moving forward,
what can we do to really help ensure that parents are educated
about the importance of vaccinations?
Dr. McCullers. Yes. It is interesting. 10 years ago there
was one common reason and that was the fear of autism and these
bad things. Right now, there is really a polyglot of reasons.
They have all sorts of different minor concerns that come up.
And so, the most important thing for a pediatrician to do, or a
family practitioner, or an OB, is listen, understand, respect
what those concerns are because they are different for every
person.
Senator Hassan. Right.
Dr. McCullers. Then really individualize how you are going
to approach that and what education you are going to give
because there are a lot of concerns that are floating around
out there, and we need to have an individualized message. So it
is that rapport between the patient and the physician.
Senator Hassan. The sharing of best practices, I would
expect, among professionals about how to do this.
Dr. McCullers. Absolutely. Directed at what their
particular concern is, what that best practice is.
Senator Hassan. Right. Thank you very much, and thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Senator Cassidy. Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Ranking Member
Murray, and thanks all of you for being here. I really
appreciate it. So, in 2017, my home State of Minnesota
experienced the largest measles outbreak that we had seen since
1990, and between March and August of that year, we had 75
cases of measles and 21 related hospitalizations.
Of course, our State Department of Health, which is really
a model for great Departments of Health, stepped in and did a
really remarkable job working with children's hospitals and
Hennepin County, and a whole range of other partners. So, Dr.
Wiesman, I know you have been dealing with this in Washington,
and some of my colleagues have gotten at this, but could you
just tell us, summarize for us, like how best the Federal
Government can be a good partner as State Departments of Health
are dealing with these outbreaks?
Dr. Wiesman. Great. Well, first of all I would say that the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is amazing. They
have lent us their technical experts around measles, and have
actually sent people out to our state, in part based on our
request. So that is incredibly important. I think again we need
to be looking at how is it we get to the, as the CDC Director
said in my state last week, how do we get to the hearts and
minds of people around vaccines and to not put science on the
shelf. We need to have this national conversation and national
campaigns that is based on evidence and that we develop the
evidence on how to best communicate. It is a response effort
and it happens at the local level. I think we need to remember
that, which means we have got to fund our local health
departments adequately, so they have the staff resources to be
able to respond. But actually, frankly, also to prevent these.
Work with communities in advanced, these pockets of communities
that have these unvaccinated folks.
Senator Smith. This gets to another question related which
is that in Minnesota when we saw this measles outbreak, we saw
some communities that were disproportionately affected, and
there was--in order to communicate and hear well the concerns
and issues in these communities, it was important that we had
culturally competent specific kinds of outreach. Can you talk a
little bit about what you have seen that are good models in
that area?
Dr. Wiesman. Right. Well, I think the good model is having
folks on your staff who are actually culturally diverse. Who
know these communities inside and out as being really
important. So, we have to have employees who reflect the face
of the community, and that is a challenge for a lot of us and
we are not there. And then I think it is really this community
development outreach work, building the relationships with
informal leaders in communities, whether they be church
leaders, whether they be elders in tribal communities,
whatever, those trusted folks there that people listen to, and
engage them in health promotion work.
Senator Smith. Thank you. Thank you. Would anybody else
like to comment on that specific question of how we can have
culturally connected outreach in this area?
Dr. Omer. If I may add----
Senator Smith. Yes, please.
Dr. Omer. That that specific example stood out for many of
us because that community was targeted for misinformation. And
there were several visits by folks who were not particularly
enthusiastic about vaccines, and so the response is also an
example of to engage communities. So, the children's hospital,
not just the health department, but other partners came
together and worked with the community itself, to bring up the
rates of vaccination. They have the tools which are evidence-
based, and one of the evidence-based tool is that you have a
disease salient based approach. And you do not just talk about
the vaccine, which you talked about, but the disease itself,
because that is what it is what is all about.
Senator Smith. Mr. Lindenberger, did you want to say--add
to this?
Mr. Lindenberger. I would also add that when you were
talking about a diverse group of people also addressing
specific communities, one thing I would address in a biased
level at least, is that for young people, specially moving into
adulthood with their decisions on a medical level, is extremely
important because once you become of age, at least for me, most
of my friends did not even understand that they could get
vaccinated despite their parents' wishes. And once you move
into living on your own and starting your career, still that
push of explaining to young people that vaccines are important
is especially important. So, I would just add that.
Senator Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Boyle.
Mr. Boyle. If I may, just to add on to that as we are
talking about the cultural issues here. One of the things that
I found, while I love most of what the CDC and others provide,
one of the pieces of the communication that I find missing are
stories. There is precious little that really connects the
person, if they are not swayed by facts, to the needs. And so,
if someone's tia or aunty is receiving chemotherapy and is
immunocompromised, tying it back to the personal in their
community, I think is a piece that I have not seen much. And I
think that as we talk about these sort of campaigns and needed
next steps, that is another layer to add in to everything else
that needs to happen.
Senator Smith. Thank you.
Senator Cassidy. Senator Casey.
Senator Casey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
you, Dr. Cassidy, and Ranking Member Murray for presiding over
this hearing. It is an important set of issues. I want to start
with Mr. Lindenberger. I would like to be able to think that or
believe that when I was--you are a senior in high school now? I
would like to be able to believe that at that age, that I could
do what you have done today. I think the answer to that is
probably no. There may be some Members of the Committee that
could have, but I am not one of them. Second, I wanted to say I
know how difficult this would be no matter what age you are,
what station in life, because it is a difficult topic and you
also have a personal story to tell, which is difficult to even
tell in private and let alone in a public setting.
Thirdly, you have done something that we do not often do in
Washington. This is a town where people are pretty good at
demonizing and dividing, and we are really experts at being
categorical that someone who disagrees with us is always bad.
You have been able to be very clear about where you stand and
what you believe, and bear witness to the truth without being
categorical and without demonizing. So that is not only helpful
for this topic, but it is instructive for the rest of us here
in both parties in both Houses. I hope people are listening.
I wanted to ask if you could share additional ideas about
that you have developed over because of the experience you have
had, as to how to effectively reach out to parents and address
their concerns so that they are confident in the advice that
their doctors--advice of their doctors--and do not hesitate to
have their children immunized. You have spoken of this a little
bit already.
Mr. Lindenberger. Yes, thank you for that question actually
because there is a really important distinction that needs to
be made between the information provided as we discussed
earlier, were people do not resonate well with information and
data numbers, and they resonate better with stories. You see
that with a lot of the anti-vaccine community, that a large
portion of the foundation that they build to communicate with
parents is on a very anecdotal level, sharing stories and
experiences.
That speaks volumes to people because, at least for even my
family, my mom would reaffirm that her position was correct
because she knows people and she has seen stories. But
correlation does not equal causation and we do not know a lot
of factors involved. And even though I could say that, that
still does not resonate. And so, I have seen that a large
portion of what we have missed, and to address your question
even more accurately, just the stories of people suffering from
preventable diseases. The stories of preventable diseases
ravaging countries and nations is extremely important, and the
side effects and complications that these diseases impose. Even
when talking about measles, there is a huge misinformed belief
that measles is not a dangerous disease that spreads around the
anti-vaccine community. But measles is one of the biggest
killers of young infants because of the dangers it imposes to
young children. You see the upwards of an 80 percent of measles
death in certain statistics are from children five and under.
When convince parents that not that information is
incorrect, but that their children are at risk, that is a much
more substantial way to cause people to change their minds.
Senator Casey. Thank you. That is helpful and I appreciate
your testimony. I know we are a little low in time. I will just
ask one more. Dr. McCullers, I want to get to the issue of
prevention which we repeat over and over again is the best
cure. We know that vaccines provide the best type of prevention
not only for the individual, but for the population by way of
herd immunity, as we have heard so often today. I guess my
question for you though is, can you describe based upon your
own experience, your own work, your own research, both in terms
of your experience and research and in patient care, what are
some of the both symptoms and the outcomes of typical vaccine-
preventable diseases for children and adults?
Dr. McCullers. There is a wide spectrum depending on which
disease you are talking about. Obviously, these are diseases
that cause severe disease and death, or they would not have
been targeted 50 years ago for and longer ago for elimination.
I think one of the things that as physicians and as providers
that we do not realize really how bad it was. You know, I
trained at a time where haemopholis B, meningitis was a
scourge. Or varicella, every kid got varicella and came in with
chickenpox, and I can remember working in the emergency
department and seeing three or four kids a night coming in
almost comatose and with brain damage and some dying. That
vaccine came in while I was in my pediatric residency, and the
disease disappeared overnight. And so, trainees now do not see
that and do not understand just how bad these vaccine
preventable disease are because they have never experienced
them.
Senator Casey. Maybe because of the advancements.
Dr. McCullers. Absolutely. I think that education piece and
the ability to really spread that message that these really
were terrible things and it is good that they were eliminated,
and we have these vaccines, is important.
Senator Casey. Thanks, and I have more questions for the
panel, and we want to thank everyone for being here.
Senator Cassidy. I thank everyone for participating.
Ranking Member Murray, thank you. The hearing record will
remain open for 10 days. Members may submit additional
information for the record within that time if they would like.
Senator Cassidy. Thanks for being here. The Committee
stands adjourned.
ADDITIONAL MATERIALS
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[STATEMENT OF SENATOR CASEY]
Pennsylvania has worked hard to improve the percentage of
toddlers up-to-date on their Measles, Mumps, and Rubella (MMR)
vaccine from a recent low of 87 percent in 2012 to 93 percent
in 2016. 1A\1\ This seemingly small change is crucially
important, as measles is the most contagious serious childhood
infectious disease and population vaccination rates need to be
93 percent or higher to prevent community outbreaks. \2\
Keeping measles vaccine rates high is also essential for
populations that are especially vulnerable, such as children in
their first year of life (as the first dose can't be given
until age 1), people with immune system disorders, and people
taking medications that suppress their normal immune functions.
And measles is not the only vaccine-preventable disease that
regularly causes harm. The United States experienced 13,439
confirmed cases of Pertussis (``whooping cough'') in 2018,
including, and 10 children died as a result. \3\ Our health as
a nation is dependent upon a robust system of immunization to
keep us all healthy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
https://www.health.pa.gov/topics/HealthStatistics/
HealthyPeople/Documents/current/state/iid-7-4-measles-mumps-rubella-
mmr-vaccination-coverage-level-children-19-to-35-months.aspx
\2\
https://www.who.int/immunization/sage/meetings/2017/october/
2.--target--immunity--levels--FUNK.pdf
\3\
https://www.americashealthrankings.org/explore/annual/measure/
pertussis/state/PA
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
