- ANNUAL OVERSIGHT OF THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
[Senate Hearing 116-19]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-19
ANNUAL OVERSIGHT OF THE
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON RULES AND ADMINISTRATION
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MARCH 6, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Rules and Administration
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available on http://www.govinfo.gov
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-966
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON RULES AND ADMINISTRATION
FIRST SESSION
ROY BLUNT, Missouri, Chairman
MITCH McCONNELL, Kentucky
AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
DIANNE FEINSTEIN, California
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
CHARLES E. SCHUMER, New York
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
RICHARD J. DURBIN, Illinois
TED CRUZ, Texas
TOM UDALL, New Mexico
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
Fitzhugh Elder IV, Staff Director
Elizabeth Peluso, Democratic Staff Director
C
O
N
T
E
N
T
S
----------
Pages
Opening Statement of:
Hon. Roy Blunt, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from the State of
Missouri.......................................................
1
Hon. Amy Klobuchar, a U.S. Senator from the State of Minnesota...
2
Dr. Carla Hayden, Librarian of Congress, The Library of Congress.
3
Prepared Statement of:
Dr. Carla Hayden, Librarian of Congress, The Library of Congress.
18
Questions Submitted for the Record:
Hon. Roy Blunt, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from the State of
Missouri to Dr. Carla Hayden, Librarian of Congress, The
Library of Congress............................................
29
Hon. Amy Klobuchar, a U.S. Senator from the State of Minnesota to
Dr. Carla Hayden, Librarian of Congress, The Library of
Congress.......................................................
39
ANNUAL OVERSIGHT OF THE
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
----------
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 6, 2019
United States Senate,
Committee on Rules and Administration,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:30 a.m., in
Room SR-301, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Roy Blunt,
Chairman of the committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Blunt, Alexander, Klobuchar, Udall, and
Cortez Masto.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HONORABLE ROY BLUNT, CHAIRMAN, A U.S.
SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MISSOURI
Chairman Blunt. The Committee on Rules and Administration
will come to order. Good morning. Glad my colleagues, some whom
will be going in and out, are here to join me and we welcome
our witness Dr. Carla Hayden, the Librarian of Congress. My
notebook, Dr. Hayden, says the annual oversight of the Library
of Congress, so this is an indication we are off to a good
start here of us finding opportunities to be more partners in
what you are doing and hopefully advocates of what you are
doing, and on occasion, maybe even advisors as to what you
should be doing. But we are glad you are here.
Dr. Hayden is the 14th Librarian of Congress, but only the
third person actually to hold that job who was a librarian by
profession. I was fortunate enough to get to know Dr. Hayden
during her confirmation process in 2016. I certainly
appreciated then and have not been surprised by the energy and
enthusiasm she brings to the Library. The Library of Congress
is our Government's oldest cultural institution. It was created
in 1800 by the same act of Congress that moved the Capital from
Philadelphia to Washington, DC.
The Library was established to preserve our shared history,
promote and protect scholarship and creativity, and to become a
world-class repository of a vast collection of works. I think
the Library has succeeded in that mission. I believe the
Library continues to fulfill all these goals. When Dr. Hayden
was confirmed, I said the next Librarian of Congress will lead
an organization that has significant physical and technological
limitations and is struggling to adapt to the 21st century. Due
to a historic shortage of storage space, the Library has
millions of items stored improperly and at risk of degradation.
In addition, recent information technology management
challenges have raised questions about the Library's ability to
serve future generations as more and more collections need to
be digitally collected, preserved, and made available to the
public. I look forward to learning more about what you are
doing to meet those goals and your other ideas for the Library,
Dr. Hayden. Before we come to you, I would like to recognize
Senator Klobuchar, who is struggling with a cold today, but she
joins me in being interested in what you are doing and has an
opening statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HONORABLE AMY KLOBUCHAR, A UNITED STATES
SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA
Senator Klobuchar. Okay. Well, thank you so much, Chairman.
Thank you, Doctor Hayden for your great work.
I think I mentioned this before, but it was my childhood
dream to be a librarian. I even had a recipe box of Dewey
Decimal System cards of every book I read, but somehow my
career took a different turn. I want to thank you for your
work. I love libraries. I think they are more important than
ever to our civic infrastructure when you look at the access to
the web and the ability for people to go and get information
that would not otherwise be able to afford it. If we did not
have libraries, they would be even further back.
Your library holds 170 million items, do you know where
they all are? Has the world's largest collections of legal
materials, films, and sound recordings. Last year, nearly two
million people visited and there were 114 million recorded
visits to the Library's website, which is an interesting ratio
there and it shows how the websites are just even more
important. You became the Librarian two years ago. The
initiatives that you have established and the reforms you have
implemented speak to your vision of a library that is inclusive
and accessible to everyone. In recent years, strategic planning
and performance management has been among the top challenges
that the Library faces. You and I have talked about the need
for increased transparency and access. I am glad to see you
have placed a deliberate emphasis on that.
This new strategic plan guides the Library in further
expanding its reach and deepening its impacts. Investments in
the Library's information technology infrastructure, computing
facilities, and technology programs are essential. I look
forward to hearing about that. One thing I wanted to mention
was the U.S. Copyright Office modernization. As you know, your
Library is home to the U.S. Copyright Office, critical to our
economy. Last year copyright industries contributed more than
$1 trillion to our economy. If you are an inventor, author,
scientist, musician, filmmaker, or any one of the millions of
Americans who create original work, the Copyright Office is
your place.
Since you became Librarian, you have been working with the
Acting Register of Copyright, Karyn Temple, to make progress on
the long overdue modernization. You know, and it is our belief
that there has been years back a lot of neglect, and we
understand that meeting the IT needs will not happen overnight.
It is going to take a continued commitment from us here in
Congress and from you and Ms. Temple.
We thank you and look forward to working with you on that.
The last thing I want to mention is the National Library
Services, NLS, ensuring that those who cannot read printed
pages have access to modern braille devices. There have been
some significant delays associated with the manufacturing of
these devices, but I was happy to learn that the NLS has
advanced the pilot program and purchased 1,000 of the devices.
I look forward to hearing about that. Thank you.
Chairman Blunt. Thank you, Senator Klobuchar. Dr. Hayden.
If you would like to make whatever opening comments you want to
make, and we are glad you are here.
OPENING STATEMENT OF DR. CARLA HAYDEN, LIBRARIAN OF CONGRESS,
THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
Dr. Hayden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Raking Member
Klobuchar, and Senator Alexander, thank you for this
opportunity to represent the Library of Congress and its
services and its dedicated staff, and I would just like to
start by recognizing members of the Library's management team
who are with me today. Mr. Mark Sweeney, who is the Principal
Deputy Librarian; Bernard Barton, Chief Information Officer;
Karen Keninger, Director of the National Library for the Blind
and Physically Handicapped; Mary Klutts, our Chief Financial
Officer; Mary Mazanec, Director of CRS; Joe Puccio, Acting
Associate Librarian for Library Services; Jane Sanchez, Law
Librarian of Congress and Acting Deputy Librarian for Library
Collections and Services; and Karyn Temple, Acting Register of
Copyright.
This is an exciting time for the Library, as we are moving
forward with significant ways to increase user access. Last
October, we did unveil a new strategic plan, enhancing and
enriching the library experience, and it will guide our
activities through the fiscal year 2023. The plan is committed
to being more user center and digitally enabled, and presents
four basic goals, to expand access, to enhance services, to
optimize resources, and very importantly, to measure our
impact. Since my confirmation, my goal has been to expand
users' access to the Library both onsite and online. When it
comes to the onsite efforts, my top priority has been to
enhance the visitor experience. In early 2018, I presented to
Congress an opportunity to enhance the visitor experience in
that flagship Thomas Jefferson Building to create a new and
engaging youth center, to improve our exhibit infrastructure
for a treasures gallery, and to provide more collection-based
civics and history education to our visitors, who are of course
your constituents.
Today I am delighted to present and provide you with a
first look-in of the plan, and it is seen on the easels around
the room. We will also have, in addition to the youth center,
treasures gallery, a welcoming orientation space where visitors
will learn more about the work of their agency, see Thomas
Jefferson's Library, and look up through an oculus to view the
sites of the magnificent main reading room. I want to express
my appreciation that Congress has committed to a public-private
partnership to provide $60 million for the project, $40 million
in appropriated funds to be matched by $20 million in private
funds raised by the Library. With those, two million annual
visitors to that building. Many of them are school children,
and we want them to be inspired by the Library and its vast
collections, to know more about the history of our country, the
origins of the Library, which is also part of Congress's story.
This project will showcase the unparalleled Library
collections, and I look forward to working with Congress in the
days ahead, because the Library's collection is its core and
our library services professionals take great pride in
addressing preservation and storage needs.
In fiscal year 2018, the Library reduced the special
collections processing arrearage by 2.5 million items, and we
are increasing the efficiency of our current storage spaces by
installing movable or compact shelving and obtaining new leased
or permanent collection space, including new modules at Fort
Meade, Maryland. We are also continuing to modernize our
information technology operations by centralizing IT services
and establishing best practices in IT investment and planning.
Importantly in our approach to IT modernization, there is one
thing that underlies all activities, three aspects, stabilizing
our core systems, optimizing our hosting environments, and
modernizing to provide scalable, flexible technology to all
Library units, including the Law Library, the Copyright Office,
and CRS. For instance, the Law Library is embracing
digitization, the Copyright Office is working in close
collaboration with the Library's chief information officer on a
5-year plan to modernize registration and recordation, and CRS,
who last year provided service to 100 percent of member offices
in standing committees, is modernizing its service.
To meet the needs of 21st century Americans who are blind,
visually impaired, or print disabled, NLS is driving to offer
accessible text in modern digital format. In closing, the
Library has made significant progress in many areas important
for our users, and we are excited about the work to be done. I
look forward to answering your questions and giving you more
information.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hayden was submitted for the
record.]
Chairman Blunt. Thank you, Dr. Hayden. I think we will
start with Senator Klobuchar.
Senator Klobuchar. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for that great report. I mentioned the National Library
Service plan to convert braille and talking books to modern
digital format. I met with the Minnesota Federation of the
Blind about this and the NLS work on a pilot program. Can you
give us an update about what is going on with that?
Dr. Hayden. I mentioned in my opening statement that we are
putting great emphasis on making sure the NLS services are able
to be more robust in the digital age. There have been pilot
programs. There is a two phase pilot program. Phase one was
completed with the Perkins School for the Blind in July of this
past year, and we gathered important information about how we
will be able to make that transition. There is a request for
proposal that is now being put out, and that we have another
network testing to start. I am very pleased today and I
mentioned that Ms. Keninger is here, and I think it might be
helpful for her to provide even more insight into the program.
Senator Klobuchar. Okay.
Dr. Hayden. If you would not mind.
Senator Klobuchar. No. That is fine.
Dr. Hayden. She is right here. This is exciting because we
are able to look at what is the next generation of service. You
can understand in the digital age being able to have the
services being offered in the most modern types of formats,
including e-readers, will be very helpful.
Senator Klobuchar. Yes. Okay. Ms. Keninger.
Ms. Keninger. Thank you, Dr. Hayden. Thank you very much
and thank you Senator Klobuchar for asking the question and for
following this so closely over the last couple of years.
We, as Dr. Hayden mentioned, conducted a pilot project with
Perkins School in 2017 and 2018, and the goal of that project
was to test the acceptance of our readers of a limited
functionality braille device. We ended up with 73 participants,
and the overwhelming response to the device and to the concept
of reading digital braille was that they were very, very
excited about having this become a permanent part of the NLS
program, and they talked about many of the advantages that they
found in it. One person talked very much about having the
ability to simply put her book reader in her purse and carry it
with her wherever she wanted instead of having to deal with the
bulk of braille and all of that. That continued through last
summer, and then was concluded.
In the meantime, NLS has been working to contract for
enough readers to be able to have a pilot that would test the
implementation throughout the NLS network. As you are aware, we
have some 100 libraries, and about 23 or 24 of those libraries
are braille lending libraries, and we want to make sure that in
implementing this new piece of equipment into the program is
going to be successful. We concluded a contract for devices in
September of last year. There was a protest and there were some
other issues, some anomalies, I will say, with the contract and
we decided to terminate for convenience and to rebid the
contract. That process is going on right now, and we will have
a--I think we will have a contract in place by March 25th.
At that point, we will need to spend time on development
and non-recurring engineering costs and processes. We expect to
have the first deliveries of the actual units in approximately
9 to 12 months after the contract is met.
Senator Klobuchar. Okay, very good.
Ms. Keninger. It is going to take some time to actually get
things in place.
Senator Klobuchar. Alright. Thank you so much. I just have
one last question, and we are looking forward to that contract
getting done. With all the cyber security, Dr. Hayden, going
on, with all the threats that we have seen on companies as big
as Sony and others, do you believe the modernization plan at
the Library, and within the Copyright Office particularly given
that people are submitting plans and various secretive material
for their own work, do you think that we're up for these
threats?
Dr. Hayden. Being able to deliver services and all types
of--all of our interactions, NLS, Copyright, CRS, all of them,
security is of paramount importance. The Library has been
involved with the legislative branch's cyber security grouping
and has instituted a number of security measures. Some were
outlined in the GAO report, and we have implemented not only
just closed those recommendations but implemented them and have
moved to have a more secure infrastructure to monitor what is
happening in all of our operations.
I just also wanted to add with NLS and what Ms. Keninger
mentioned, that during the same time, we have had a public
awareness campaign about NLS services. Actual things on the
radio and on television encouraging more people to use NLS
services. We have seen an increase in interest and people
registering, and we know that actually being able to deliver
digitally will be a great asset because more people are now
becoming aware of NLS services. You might have seen some of the
commercials.
Senator Klobuchar. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman Blunt. Senator Alexander.
Senator Alexander. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Hayden, welcome. It is good to see you. Thank you for
the terrific events that you have for Members of Congress with
prominent writers of American History. Thank you for the
cultural diversity you have shown by hiring the exhibit
director from the Country Music Hall of Fame to help you with
your new presentation. I would think that is a smart thing to
do, and I appreciated your efforts to expand the Alex Haley
collection. Maybe I will have more time to talk with you about
that in a minute.
But I want to talk with you for a moment about the Music
Modernization Act. There are very few pieces of legislation in
the United States Senate that get 82 co-sponsors, but it did.
It was a complicated bill and it has broad support. The goal
was to make it possible, among other things, for songwriters in
this internet age to be paid for their work and to be paid a
fair market value. A part of that--some of the implementation
for that, is under your supervision. What can you tell me about
your timeline for the implementation of the Music Modernization
Act?
Dr. Hayden. Thank you for that because the office, the
Copyright Office is committed to an open and transparent
designation process. The Acting Register, Karyn Temple, will
recommend entities to be designated by July 8, 2019. The office
opened and issued a notice of inquiry regarding the designation
of mechanical licensing collective and a digital licensing
coordinator. In looking at what will happen with the Music
Modernization Act, there have been big changes to the law, and
the office is continually updating its website to inform the
public of the changes and to issue notice of the implementation
dates.
Senator Alexander. Good. Thank you. Now, let me ask you a
more specific question. Sort of the genius of the Act, if I may
say it that way because it brought together the streaming
companies, and the music publishers, and songwriters, was this
new entity that will have the job of issuing a blanket license
for a song, and they go find the songwriter and make sure the
songwriter gets paid. Streaming companies like it because that
means they do not have to look around for some songwriter or
the songwriter's descendant and then get sued if they do not
find that person. The songwriters like it because the entity's
job is to find the songwriter and pay the songwriter.
The language of the law talked about the entity having
strong support from songwriters and music publishers, endorsed
by and enjoy substantial support from musical work copyright
owners, etc. Then the Copyright Office interpreted this to mean
that relevant support should come from the party's relevant
ownership interest in the copyright to musical work.
In contrast to the parties who do not possess any ownership
interest in the musical work, but rather the ability to
administer the work. In your opinion, what kind of support from
songwriters and publishers should this entity have? I am not
asking you to pick what the entity should be at this point, but
how are you going to assess whether the entity that is chosen
has the appropriate amount of support from songwriters and
publishers?
Dr. Hayden. Senator, in my role as librarian, I am
definitely responsible for making sure that the office carries
out its responsibilities efficiently and effectively, and in
terms of giving advice or making policy recommendations, I rely
on the Register of Copyright. If you would like some more
detail about the specifics of the operation of an----
Senator Alexander. Well, really, I just wonder what she
meant? How she understands the idea of ``support by songwriters
and music publishers'' as you select this entity?
Dr. Hayden. Now, Ms. Temple is here, and if you would like
her to address it now or record----
Senator Alexander. It is up to the Chairman.
Chairman Blunt. That would be absolutely fine.
Dr. Hayden. Ms. Temple, could you come up? I just want to
take this opportunity to commend her for her management of the
Copyright Office in an acting capacity. She has worked closely
with the chief information officer on the copyright
modernization. She has worked closely with me to make sure that
we are having the best copyright process, and during this time.
If Ms. Temple could come up, it would be very helpful.
Senator Alexander. I think it would be a good time to
pursue this topic so that would be fine. Ms. Temple, if you
would come up.
Dr. Hayden. Once again, being in an acting position is not
always easy, and she has done a commendable job.
Ms. Temple. Hello. Thank you very much. I appreciate the
opportunity to speak today. As you know, we did issue a notice
with the Federal Register on the designation of the MLC, the
Music Licensing Collective. One of the questions that we did
ask the parties who are going to be submitting to be designated
as the MLC, is to demonstrate to us how they do have the
support of the songwriting community so we will take that
information in once they do provide it to us to assess and
ensure that they do meet the statutory requirements and terms
of having that support of the songwriting community.
Senator Alexander. Good. I have heard no complaints. I just
want to underscore the importance of that because the entity--
the idea was to have an entity that knew what it was doing,
because it had the support of people whom it was serving. So as
long as you understand the importance of that to those who
passed the law, I think that is really Mr. Chairman all I
wanted to emphasize.
Ms. Temple. I would just add that you know, we do really
understand the importance. We are committed to a transparent
and open process in terms of the designation once we receive
the comments from the various parties that might be interested
in being designated. That information will be available through
the Federal Register so everyone will be able to see those
comments and will be able to assess on their own what we will
be assessing in terms of making that designation as well.
Senator Alexander. Mr. Chairman, in conclusion the
importance of this was over the last few years, what has
happened is now probably 60 percent of the revenues in the
music business are now from online sales. The mechanism for
finding the songwriters and paying them a fair market value was
about as old as a player piano. This was a very complex and
important law and it is one I would like to keep my eye on. I
appreciate the effort that you and Dr. Hayden are making to
give it your full attention. Thank you, Mr. Chairman for the
extra time.
Chairman Blunt. Thank you, Senator Alexander. Before we go
to Senator Udall, while you are at table, do you want to make a
little further report on what you have done over your time as
acting director and your sense of what we can do to do a better
job protecting intellectual property? I would be interested and
appreciate Dr. Hayden's comment about the difficulty of being
in that acting situation.
You know, we had thought at one time there was a potential
for even more independence in the direction and the choice, but
certainly all reports have been that Dr. Hayden's choice was a
really good one. But I would be pleased if you just take a
couple of minutes to talk about how you see this role
developing over the next few years and what you have done in
the time you have been acting director to prepare the Copyright
Office for that.
Ms. Temple. Thank you. I appreciate the question. It is
indeed sometimes difficult to serve in an acting role, but I
appreciate the help and support of both the internal Library
staff as well as the external stakeholders and communities that
we serve. You know we have been focusing on really trying to
move the office forward. We do a lot of discussion about
modernization of the office. One of the things that we make
clear is that in the view of the office, modernization is not
just IT, it includes modernization overall.
You know I have been very, very pleased at how active the
office has been not only on focusing on IT modernization but
ensuring that our regulatory practices are also up to date.
Over the course of the last 2 years, we have issued a number of
rulemakings to enhance our registration practices, to update
them and ensure that they are actually going to meet the needs
of our copyright communities. We have also focused on just
general operations, ensuring that our recordation and our
registration system are operating efficiently.
We are very, very pleased by the resources we have actually
received over the last few years in terms of being able to hire
additional staff. We have actually hired nearly 62 staff
members to work in our registration program over the last 5
years, and we have actually been able to see a very significant
improvement in both the number of workable claims that we have
on hand addressing our backlog, as well as our processing
times.
So, in terms of moving the office forward, I think that we
would continue that, focusing both on IT modernization, but
also focusing on modernizing the office as a whole in terms of
its practices and its processes as well.
Chairman Blunt. Great. Thank you. Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank very much, Mr. Chairman, and I really
appreciate you holding this hearing. I want to thank Dr. Hayden
for coming and testifying today.
I think oversight of the Library of Congress has an
important congressional responsibility, and I enjoyed listening
to your priorities Dr. Hayden in your opening statement. I will
focus some of my questions on the Copyright Office
modernization and then on some Native American initiatives that
I know that we have been working on together. Over the last
couple of years, I know the Library has made progress in
improving the Library's infrastructure, investment, and
operations, and importantly has made progress toward improving
IT operations in both modernization and efficiency.
I was excited to see a digital strategy listed as a
priority in the Library Strategic Plan. I hope we can continue
to see more progress as the months go on. How the Library and
the Copyright Office handle tribal issues is also of utmost
importance to me. Dr. Hayden, I hope we can work together on
significant issues like tribal engagement on the Music
Modernization Act as well as the Library's language resources
for tribes. I was happy to see a digital strategy as part of
your strategic plan. The By The People Project is of particular
interest to me. Can you update the committee on the progress of
the project?
Dr. Hayden. Yes and thank you very much because the Library
of Congress as you know has had a long tradition of stewardship
of Native American resources and materials, and with the
digitization project, one that we are very proud to advance as
the Ancestral Voices Project, digitizing stories and recorded
songs from indigenous communities that have never been heard
before, and also making sure that as we have special
initiatives, and we have several to engage with the indigenous
peoples, that we respect their cultural heritage. That is an
important aspect.
The By The People Project is very exciting. It was launched
on the anniversary of the Gettysburg Address and one of the
first--it is a cloud sourcing transcribing project where we are
inviting the American public, including young people, to help
us transcribe letters to Lincoln and bring them to life is one
of the projects. That was--since we launched that we had 28,000
letters to Lincoln that had not been really seen or heard in
years. 20,000 have been in 3 months, have been transcribed. A
little problem with cursive writing in young people----
[Laughter.]
Dr. Hayden. But that project is showing us that we can put
other collections up like Branch Rickey, the baseball scout,
his scouting reports are being put up, and also the papers of
Rosa Parks. That project really has been getting a lot of
national attention. I am proud to say that the current issue of
American libraries cover story is on the Library, it says
Elsie's New Digital Direction, and there is recognition about
the digital strategy and how we are opening up our resources,
digital resources. Very exciting to be part of that.
Senator Udall. Thank you. We are excited about all of those
initiatives. Dr. Hayden I know there is a desire by the
copyright community to have a more streamlined copyright
process. Could you explain how the copyright community will be
benefited by your digital initiative?
Dr. Hayden. Ms. Temple mentioned modernizing is part of the
main focus and it does involve making sure that we have the
most effective information technology aspects to help with
issues like recordation, which is right now a paper-based
system. Making that available online and streamlining that
similar to what people are used to in other aspects of their
lives, car titles, they are used to tax registration, all types
of things that we want to make sure that the copyright process
is using the most effective and modern technology. That has
been a major course. The Copyright Office has established a
Copyright Modernization Office within its unit, and it is
working very hard to make sure that information technology--the
next generation registration system as well as recordation will
happen within the next few years.
Senator Udall. Dr. Hayden, the Library of Congress will
play a role in the implementation of the Music Modernization
Act?
Dr. Hayden. Yes.
Senator Udall. Earlier this week High Country News
published an article about how the actual impact tribes and
then the pre-1970, 1972 recordings of cultural ceremonies held
by museums and universities. As vice chairman of the Senate
Indian Affairs Committee, I am aware that cultural knowledge,
who can access it, and when it can be accessed are important
considerations for tribes. I understand the Library has hosted
at least one consultation with tribal leaders on this issue so
far, but I want to make sure that feedback from Indian country
is being heard on this issue. What is the Library's plan to
make sure that tribes are engaged with the Copyright Office as
implementation of the Music Modernization Act? What feedback
have you heard from the tribes so far?
Dr. Hayden. The Library is working in collaboration with
other institutions the Smithsonian's Administration for Native
Americans and other Federal agencies to make sure that we are
using all of the available outreach techniques. I mentioned
making sure that we are also respecting the cultural heritage
as we participate in this area. We are working with, for
instance, the Veterans History Project of the Library to
collaborate with the National Museum of the American Indian to
reach out to veterans in that community as well. There are a
number of efforts to make sure that we are being respectful but
also using technology and getting the word out.
Senator Udall. Thank you so much. Chairman Blunt, thank you
very much for your courtesy to let me go a little bit longer.
There are so many important things that she is doing at the
Library of Congress. I think I could be here all day, but I
really appreciate that.
Chairman Blunt. Well, we are not going to be here all day,
but there would be time if you could stay----
Senator Udall. I will submit my questions for the record.
Okay. Thank you.
Chairman Blunt. That would be great. There will be a chance
for that and there will be a chance for a second round of
questions if we--in all likelihood. Dr. Hayden, on the visitor
experience, I think you made a proposal last year to the
Appropriations Committee for the first $20 million and I think
the Appropriations Committee gave you the first $10 million, $2
million of which you could use for planning and then the other
$8 million would be available once there was an approved plan.
I am looking forward to coming down later when we are done
with the hearing to see the sketching of what you are thinking
about doing. Would you talk a little more about the outside
support for that and how you are doing as you move toward a
plan would then be approved, what do you expect to ask for in
this year's Appropriations bill? Actually, I would be
interested in a little more thought about your concept of how
people come into the Library and what they will see when they
come in, where that will happen. We are all relatively familiar
with the Library, but it would be great for us to begin to
envision the Library you would like to have greater access to.
Dr. Hayden. Well, I have to start by thanking Congress for
approving this opportunity to have a public-private partnership
to enhance that flagship Thomas Jefferson building, the first
Federal building and the first library building 1897.
In this year's budget, there is a request for $10 million
to continue with the master plan that includes three basic
things, a treasures gallery that will allow people to, for the
first time, see all of the collections and their many formats,
and also, they will be able to have a new experience being
oriented to the Library, coming in into the Thomas Jefferson
building from the Visitor Center. Of that two million,
approximately a million visitors that come into that building,
60 percent come through that tunnel. We will have a streamline
entryway and people will go into one orientation center that
will include the Thomas Jefferson Library. There are 6,000
volumes, the foundation of the Library. Then they will look up
into the main reading room that has been called the circle of
knowledge from the foundation right there on the ground floor.
After that, people will be able to and 20 percent of the
people who enter the building on sight are under the age of 18.
As a former children's librarian, I am very excited about the
fact that we would be able to have a youth center to engage and
inspire young people. To have them make their own history and
interact with our collections. It is a very hands-on,
interactive learning labs as well. Those elements as you will
see around the room will give people a sense of what the
Library of Congress can offer, and also what can happen when
they return to their homes throughout the country. They will
know about the Veterans History Project. They will know about
NLS. They will know that they can download photographs from our
website. They will be very familiar with the services, and so
it is an exciting time and we really appreciate Congress's
support.
Part of the master plan that will be available on approval,
we hope, in June will be the resource plan for the fundraising
aspect. We right now in terms of the $20 million that is being
committed to be raised through private sources, we have verbal
commitments for about $11 million already and so on the
execution of the approval of the master plan, a resource plan
will go into effect, and we are working on that now with
outside consultants on development and fundraising. It is a
wonderful opportunity. People have already in terms of Trip
Advisor and these different sites that talk about the sites in
Washington DC, the Library of Congress, that building is
mentioned as one of the most beautiful, but we want to make it
one of the most inspiring buildings as well.
Chairman Blunt. Your vision, your plan would be that all of
these things would have to happen at the same time? Can they be
separated in terms of phase one and phase two?
Dr. Hayden. The funding stream would allow for the first
two aspects to be put into implementation. The Treasures
Gallery as well as the youth center would be the first two
aspects, and then the orientation experience and the access to
the main reading room would follow.
Chairman Blunt. In the Treasures Gallery, do you expect to
try to create a sense there of what you have in your vast
collection and have that----
Dr. Hayden. Yes. That is the challenge. Senator Alexander
mentioned our new Exhibit Director Mr. David Mandel, who has
been in charge of the envisioning of this. We will be able to
have a rotating aspect to the Treasures Gallery. There will be
some items, the Gutenberg Bible, some things that will be there
at all times, however, we will build it so that we can rotate
some of the treasures because there are so many. The Library of
Congress has the world's largest collection of Bibles, the
world's largest collection of baseball cards, photographs,
film, sound recordings, all of these maps, so there will be
different sections in the Treasures Gallery and in the visual
representation you see that we have made them transparent so
that you could look into a volume, and you will be able to get
a sense of it. Each time you return, let's say you return every
spring, you would see something different. We want to give
people a sense of just how vast, 171 million items, so we can
keep going for a little while.
Chairman Blunt. Exactly. Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Blunt.
Welcome. Thank you for being here. On that same vein, I know
fiscal year 2019 Congress appropriated funding for the
congressional research service to add additional staffing. I
think 20 new FTEs if I am not mistaken. Can you talk a little
bit about how this new staff will be able to support
congressional offices, and whether you believe that increases
in funding is enough to meet the demands of the CRS?
Dr. Hayden. We have been very pleased to receive funding
for staff members who can help with high demand areas. The
first allotment for staffing was to have almost a field team of
different junior level staff members. This current
appropriation has allowed us to give more depth to certain
areas, health, energy, things like that. We have already seen a
real impact in terms of our responsiveness. We also are looking
at modernization with our IT systems and CRS, congress.gov and
how we can make sure that we have the technical support for
CRS. We call CRS our special forces and of course that is our
first mission with the Library of Congress. Making sure that we
maintain a certain level of expertise and depth 24/7. Whenever
Congress is in session, CRS is available. Those staff members
have been critical to filling in for retirements and also for
supplementing for upcoming issues that Congress might be
considering.
Senator Cortez Masto. If I remember the last hearing, is
there--do you have concerns with a number of staffers aging out
that are leaving and so you are filling positions, is that
right?
Dr. Hayden. Right. Also, we are making sure that there is a
training that is going on that we are pairing more senior staff
members and analysts with less senior analysts. We are really
making sure that CRS maintains a certain level of expertise.
That is very important that we----
Senator Cortez Masto. Yes, I agree. Thank you. Thank you
for that and let me just followup, I knew, or I know that
Congress used to have an office of, if I remember correctly,
technology assessment years ago and it provided Members of
Congress with independent expertise on emerging technology and
it helped to inform our policies. The program ended in 1995 and
I am curious, do you have any recommendations for Congress on
how to ensure we can work with you to ensure we are getting the
independent analysis that we need to oversee and regulate
emerging technologies? For instance, several of the committees
I am on and a lot of my legislation focuses on smart
communities, privacy data, the use of this new technology, what
it means for security and utilization in the future. I do not
know if you think that there is a role somewhere where Congress
can play in helping as we develop the policy in that
independent, kind of technical area.
Dr. Hayden. One of the specialties of CRS in the way that
they look at forecasting what might be a policy issue or an
area that they need to either supplement the staff expertise
that they have or do additional research is to be able to say,
this is an area that Congress is interested in, and so that is
where they have that flexibility of being able to make sure
that they have analyst or they have access to the information
if it is presented to CRS.
Senator Cortez Masto. What I am hearing is that the
individual staffers that you bring onboard may have an
understanding or background in there, or know where to find it
to provide policy expertise in this emerging area, emerging
technology?
Dr. Hayden. Yes. That is the key to having the ability to
hire different staff members. In CRS, they have a policy
grouping, so you might have, and this is one of my favorites,
you might have a librarian embedded in the energy grouping. You
have a Ph.D. in energy policy, and you have different people
with different backgrounds as part of CRS too. When they see,
and that is part of what they do, is to keep their--really,
they are on the pulse of Congress and issues, and also, they
ask Congress and staffers what issues do you foresee or things
that you think that we need to look into.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, and I know my time is up.
Let me just say this. The short time that I have been here, 2
years, the staff that I have interacted with at the Library of
Congress is tremendous, and even on the research side as well.
I have been over there asking specific areas to help with
research and they were spot-on. Thank you very much. I
appreciate all the good work that the staff does as well.
Dr. Hayden. They are original search engines. They are
dedicated to Congress. You have your own search engine.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Chairman Blunt. Thank you, Senator. Senator Alexander.
Senator Alexander. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Hayden, I want
to talk with you for a minute about Alex Haley. I thank you for
arranging for me to come over and see the new collection last
year that you acquired of some of his things, and I have a
suggestion for you about Alex Haley. Sometimes we forget the
importance of what he did. He wrote two best-selling books of
the African American experience, ``The Autobiography of Malcolm
X'' and his book ``Roots''. There is some academic disdain for
``Roots'', and I have always thought it was because number one,
the disdainers did not write the book themselves. They were
jealous.
Second, they said that some of the facts that he had were
not exactly right, but you know ``In Cold Blood'' would not be
a good book if that were true. They are tremendously important
books about the African-American experience in America, and he
did a lot of his research at the Library of Congress. I was
wondering two things. One, have you been able to do anything
about the collection that you have got? I know you have lots of
collections and you are itemizing things and getting them in
order. That is one. My suggestion is, why not think about with
your expert new exhibit person, an exhibit about how Alex Haley
used the Library of Congress to write ``Roots''.
The commissioner of the National Football League told me
one time that the 10 best watched football--that the 10 best
watch television programs in history were nine Super Bowls and
the ``Roots'' series in the 1970's. I think it would be
interesting for people to see how he went to Africa and got the
story from a griot that took him back to his seventh generation
ancestor and how he went to the Library of Congress and found
the name and the date of the slave ship that actually brought
that ancestor to Annapolis. How in a speech in Iowa at a
college, he met the seventh generation descendant of the person
who bought his seventh generation descendant, on a farm at an
auction in Virginia.
I think all that would be fascinating to the American
people just as the ``Roots'' series was, and I think it would
help people understand how the Library of Congress can be so
useful to people who are trying to tell the story of our
country. One, what about his collection, how is that coming?
Two, what about the idea of an exhibit that says here is how
Library of Congress helped Alex Haley tell the story of
``Roots''?
Dr. Hayden. Sir, you have definitely previewed a part of
what we want to emphasize in either the orientation experience,
or the Treasures Gallery. How many notable films, books, have
started in research at the Library of Congress. We want to
emphasize the fact that Alex Haley did research. Also have
quotes about what it felt like to be in that reading room.
David McCullough, Doris Kearns Goodwin, we want to have almost
a roll call of recognizable names that people can really,
``wow'', they did their research at the Library of Congress and
then encourages them to do their own.
That collection is one of the collections that is being
prioritized with the very generous staffing that we received
last year to take care of the arrearage that I mentioned
earlier. That is one of the collections that is in the
processing line because we know there is quite a bit of public
interest. We also want to emphasize with young people in the
youth center that they can do history research and become
history detectives. Those types of aspects about what can the
Library of Congress do for you are what we are going to
emphasize with the new visitor experience.
Senator Alexander. Thank you very much. I remember he was
telling me the excitement he had when he actually was able to
find either the actual bill of lading or the newspaper report
of the ship Ligonier when it landed in Annapolis carrying his
seventh generation ancestor Kunta Kinte. Now that could have
been at the National Archives, but I am almost certain it was
at the Library of Congress. To go over those things, that years
of research and genealogy and the artifacts that are there. I
think that would be an interesting story. Thank you very much.
Dr. Hayden. It would stimulate people too. To think, wow,
what can I find, who are my ancestors. Genealogies is a big
part of our collections. We want people when they come into the
Library to think about what they might be interested in and see
right there, using technology, what the Library has about their
state.
Senator Alexander. Well, that is true. My time is up, but
maybe the most important effect of the ``Roots'' series in the
1970's was it filled up libraries all over America. People
began to go to libraries to find out about their own roots.
Chairman Blunt. Thank you, Senator. Just to ask a couple of
questions and there will be more questions for the record. The
Library has requested amendment to expand the American Folklife
Center's Board from 7 to 9, and the two specific additions
would be the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Director of
The Institute of Museum and Library Services, would you speak
to that for just a moment?
Dr. Hayden. I mentioned also Veterans Services in our
history project and our emphasis on making sure that we connect
with veterans in as many ways as possible. To add to the
American Folklife Center's Board, the Secretary of Veterans
Affairs would signal that importance in our oral history
projects and just making sure that that is front and center.
Also, to look at a closer connection with the Institute of
Museum and Library Services, the grant-making agency that
connects to public libraries, school libraries, and college
libraries for innovative projects. Having representatives from
those two entities would strengthen the Folklife Board, but
also deepen the relationship with those two entities.
Chairman Blunt. We will talk about that and see if we can
get that legislation moving in the direction you would like for
it to. In March 2015, this is one of the things I referred to
the day that we confirmed you as the director, the
technological challenges, the management challenges. The GAO
had the included 31 specific recommendations to the Library to
strengthen the management of its IT system. Do you have any
update on that, how you are doing approaching those 31 specific
recommendations?
Dr. Hayden. Mr. Barton is here, as I mentioned, our chief
information officer, and all those 31 recommendations, as of
today, the Library has closed and implemented 27. We also have
made great strides with the non-public recommendations. Most of
those have to do with security, and we have been at the
forefront in the legislative branch with working on the
security recommendations. The GAO report provided a road map
for us with IT improvements and so the centralization of our IT
efforts, the fiscal oversight of IT investments, has been a
major part of it as well. The 27 out of the 31 and the
remaining are at GAO waiting to be reviewed. All 31 have been
addressed. We are very pleased.
Chairman Blunt. We will get that on the record of the
hearing. What has happened, the 27 in place, the 4 you now have
over at GAO. The silos issue, we were hoping that you also
would eliminate the inability for everybody to get to all the
information they needed to get to.
Dr. Hayden. The security aspect was very important. We had
20 units that had security authorizing staff members. We have
consolidated that to one professional security officer who is
reviewing all the security requirements and needs of the
Library, and that has made quite a bit of difference. We have
started things like multi-factor authentication even with our
staff members.
Chairman Blunt. Well, and I think, you know, it was
anticipated there would be some significant cost benefit
analysis and we will ask about that as well. I have a handful
of things here we will get to, library and E-rates, and
Universal Service Fund, things like that we might have to have
you back quicker than----
Dr. Hayden. Well that would require a semiannual report
would be good.
Chairman Blunt. I think very few people volunteer to show
up more often, particularly here at first. We are glad that you
are here, Dr. Hayden. Thanks for coming. Thanks for bringing
your team today. I am also going to be asking back to Director
Keninger's comments about how long you think it will--and how
you will continue to make available more traditional technology
that many of the people you serve will want to have.
But I do think cost-effective, access effective, time
effective, the digital transfer, as other things have been
replaced over the years by what people have gotten used to now,
I think they are going to get used to this so pretty quickly. I
think there is some significant cost savings there for the
Library and for the taxpayers that support it. The record will
be open for 1 week from today. We ask you to respond quickly
when we get those questions to you.
[The information referred to was submitted for the record.]
Chairman Blunt. The committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:33 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]