- DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
[Senate Hearing 116-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
----------
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
NONDEPARTMENTAL WITNESSES
[Clerk's note.--The subcommittee was unable to hold
hearings on nondepartmental witnesses. The statements and
letters of those submitting written testimony are as follows:]
Prepared Statement of Aclara Technologies, LLC
As a leading technology provider to electric, gas and water
utilities, Aclara Technologies, LLC respectfully urges you to
prioritize smart water network infrastructure spending, as well as
funding to improve the performance, efficiency, and safety of our
Nation's energy and water distribution infrastructure in the Fiscal
Year 2020 Interior and Environment Appropriations bill. We thank you
for this opportunity to express our support for this funding and
appreciate your consideration.
Aclara Technologies, LLC (``Aclara'') provides smart infrastructure
technologies to electric, gas and water utilities, with offerings in
advanced metering, methane sensing, device networking and
communications, data management, analytics, and customer service. Over
1,000 utilities in 36 countries rely on proven Aclara solutions
We currently have 950 Aclara clients located in all 50 States and
employ over 1,600 staff in the United States and over 150
internationally. Smart technologies make energy and water use more
efficient and allow utilities to provide better services to their
clients. Companies like Aclara prove that smart technologies mean jobs,
not just at Aclara, but also at utilities in the form of installation
and monitoring jobs.
Aclara offers its strong support for the advancement of
technologies that can improve our Nation's energy and water
distribution networks by providing enhanced monitoring, detection, and
control capabilities. These technologies are an important and cost-
effective way to increase reliability, efficiency, and safety of our
ageing infrastructure. Supporting the advancement of these technologies
will be crucial as the country's energy and water distribution networks
continue to age and as the risks for utilities and network operators
rise.
Water Infrastructure
Although many of our Nation's water and wastewater systems have
been around for more than a century, water infrastructure spending has
received a significantly smaller and decreasing share of total
infrastructure investment. According to the Value of Water Campaign,
over the past 40 years the percentage of overall Federal infrastructure
spending has been steady for roads and bridges, but has decreased for
water infrastructure.\1\ The Congressional Budget Office found that
Federal spending on water infrastructure decreased from $76 per person
in 1977 to just $11 per person in 2014, and EPA estimates that the
country's water and wastewater infrastructure will need more than $650
billion over the next two decades to maintain current levels of
service. We are pleased that the administration's previous two budget
requests (fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019) retained funding for
important programs like WIFIA and the SRFs, and we urge you to
prioritize water infrastructure spending in fiscal year 2020 and
beyond.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://www.waterweek.us/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Value-of-
Water-Economic-Benefits-of-Investing-in-Water-Infrastructure.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moving and treating water requires an extensive infrastructure of
pipes and plants and offers opportunities for energy and water
efficiency at every step. Water leaks cost many cities as much as 10 to
30 percent loss of their water, leaks that also waste a lot of energy.
The EPA estimates that drinking water and wastewater systems account
for 30 to 40 percent of total energy consumed by municipalities. As
much as 8.4 billion kilowatts is wasted each year moving water
nationwide. Due to ageing infrastructure, significant energy savings
are possible through the use of leak detection and pressure monitoring
technologies.
Water system efficiency and smart water networks should be a
clearly stated goal of any investments made in our Nation's water
infrastructure. Water distribution systems should be modernized in a
way that increases water and energy efficiency and enables customers
and utilities to interact with it as never before. This will require
smart water networks that facilitate the collection of data via sensors
along distribution networks, advanced analytics, and the incorporation
of communications technologies to optimize performance, preempt
problems, and allow for rapid response.
The Environmental Protection Agency, through its Office of Water,
should help to advance the utilization of infrastructure solutions such
as distribution network leak detection, pressure monitoring, and
sanitary and combined sewer monitoring technologies during upgrades to
water and wastewater systems to optimize water delivery performance,
reduce energy usage, limit water waste in distribution systems, and
enhance modeling of sewer collection networks. This will help to
improve operations, maintenance, and capital expenditure in planning
and budgeting, and increase spatial and temporal monitoring data
available on U.S. water quality and quantity.
One key aspect of smart water networks is advanced metering
infrastructure (AMI). AMI can offer communities multiple advantages to
improve their management of water, reducing water and energy waste, and
decrease costs for distributors, operators, and consumers. AMI provides
benefits beyond those available from older automatic ``drive-by'' meter
reading (AMR) technologies that read meters monthly only to support
customer billing. Detailed consumption data provided by AMI can help
reduce water use in many ways, including:
--Detects system leaks--Non-revenue water costs utilities $4.9
billion per year. AMI can help drastically reduce water leaks
and associated costs by creating a continuous flow of
information from advanced meters, combined with advanced data
analytics, that enables water suppliers to rapidly and
precisely identify water losses and conservation opportunities.
--Helps consumers save water (and money)--AMI allows for hourly data
to be made available to end consumers. Providing this kind of
detailed water use information to consumers through an
associated consumer engagement application or customer portal
is proven to increase conservation, thereby saving consumers
money on their monthly water bills.
--Leverages existing advanced metering investments to reduce cost--
for example, Aclara's technologies can also leverage existing
gas metering infrastructure, eliminating some infrastructure
and deployment costs. California's major gas utilities have
already deployed Aclara, providing the umbrella infrastructure
for a ``hybrid'' communication system that water utilities can
use. Harnessing existing networks can significantly reduce
deployment time and allow rapid realization of conservation
benefits. In these shared networks, Aclara technology is used
to split meter reads for different utility companies, keeping
the costs of data collection low. Aclara, and its competitors
in the AMI space, offer the technology needed to separate the
collected data for each utility and provide the security to
prevent commingling of each utility's data.
--Enables smart pressure management to save energy--AMI enables
improved water pressure management of utility systems, which
consists of automatically modulating flow and pressure
according to water demand, keeping pressure constant at the
service points. Besides reducing leakage and bursts, smart
pressure management lowers operating costs by reducing site
visits and energy costs from maintaining unnecessary high
pressure. Smart pressure management requires a wireless
communications system including sensors that measure pressure
at critical points, software that analyses the pressure status
at such points and calculates responses to achieve a desired
pressure, and a controller device to prompt smart pumps or
valves whose use can save energy.
--Provides resilience during and following natural disasters--for
example, Aclara's system in New York City, which serves more
than 9 million people, weathered Hurricane Sandy with minimal
disruption. Aclara's water meter transmission units have a 20
year battery life and its data collectors offer a rugged,
weather-proofed design that stores 28 days of data with a 14
day back up battery life. Deployments offer redundancy so that
if an individual data collector is disabled, another collector
can continue to obtain meter data for that area, offering
resiliency critical after earthquakes, floods or other
disasters.
In addition to ensuring funds are dedicated to the advancement of
water efficiency technologies, we also urge you to support
appropriations for technologies to make our wastewater systems
``smarter,'' particularly when it comes to sanitary sewer overflows
(SSOs). SSOs can be extremely costly, and many wastewater system owners
don't know about spills until well after the fact, which can further
increase the cost of remediation. SSO monitoring technologies can help
to mitigate these costs and can help to prevent SSOs from happening in
the first place. For example, Aclara's solutions provide detailed
information about how sewer collection systems are operating and can
alert operators when part of the system is operating poorly, thereby
allowing proactive correction and pipe cleaning to prevent a spill. In
addition, the data can be used to generate reports needed for
regulatory concerns (thus decreasing overhead costs) and also allows
for enhanced modeling of sewer collection networks to improve
maintenance and capital expenditure planning and budgeting.
Aclara believes that technologies that improve the performance,
efficiency, and safety of the country's energy and water distribution
networks are essential to our economic growth, health and safety, and
overall resiliency. We urge you to ensure that fiscal year 2020
appropriations, as well as any potential infrastructure package put
together during this congress, includes funds for the advancement of
technologies that will make our water and natural gas distribution
networks smarter, safer, and more efficient. We urge a prioritization
of water infrastructure spending. Again, thank you for providing this
opportunity to submit testimony. We would also appreciate the
opportunity to brief you or your staff on the status of these
technologies and how additional research can help their advancement. We
look forward to working with you.
Contact Information
Kara Saul Rinaldi
Government Affairs Representative
Aclara
717 Kennebec Ave, Takoma Park MD 20912
[email protected]
[This statement was submitted by Kumi Premathilake, Senior Vice
President, Advanced Metering Infrastructure.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Alliance to Save Energy
fiscal year 2020 appropriations for the u.s. environmental protection
agency, energy star, and other voluntary programs
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony today in support
of fiscal year 2020 appropriations for ENERGY STAR and other voluntary
programs administered by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA).
The Alliance to Save Energy is a non-profit, bipartisan collation
of business, government, environmental, and consumer-interest leaders
that advocates for enhanced U.S. energy productivity to achieve
economic growth; a cleaner environment; and greater energy security,
affordability, and reliability. The Alliance enjoys the participation
of nearly 130 businesses and organizations that collectively represent
at least $615 billion in market capital. The Alliance was founded in
1977 by Senators Charles Percy (R-Illinois) and Hubert Humphrey (D-
Minnesota), and today has 14 Members of Congress serving on an Honorary
Board of Advisors.
Energy efficiency is our country's greatest energy resource--
creating jobs, stimulating economic activity, enhancing energy
security, lowering harmful emissions, and improving U.S.
competitiveness in global markets. Energy efficiency gains made since
1973 have cut energy waste dramatically to fuel the U.S. economy more
productively. Thanks in part to Federal energy efficiency programs,
including ENERGY STAR and other voluntary programs managed by the EPA,
the U.S. today generates twice as much gross domestic product (GDP)
from each unit of energy we consume when compared to 1980.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ In 1980, the U.S. consumed 78 quads (quadrillion British
thermal units (BTUs)) while GDP was $6.4 trillion, which produces an
energy productivity ratio of 82.6. This compares to energy productivity
of 176.4 in 2017 (i.e., 96.8 quads and GDP of $17 trillion). Energy
consumption data is from the Energy Information Administration. GDP
(real dollars, 2009) is provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As energy efficiency has increased, so have stable, good-paying
jobs. More than 2.3 million American workers design, manufacture,
install, and repair devices, appliances, equipment and buildings that
deliver cost-effective savings, representing one-third of the entire
energy-related workforce. Most of these are construction and
manufacturing jobs. In fact, members of the Subcommittee on Interior,
Environment, and Related Agencies represent over 735,000 Americans
employed in whole or in part in the energy efficiency sector (see Table
1).\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ National Association of State Energy Officials (NASEO) and
Energy Futures Initiative (EFI), ``Energy Employment By State--2019,''
March 2019, https://www.usenergyjobs.org. Last accessed May 14, 2019.
TABLE 1. ENERGY EFFICIENCY SECTOR JOBS IN STATES REPRESENTED BY SUBCOMMITTEE MEMBERS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Member
State
Jobs
Member
State
Jobs
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lisa Murkowski.................
Alaska............
4,617
Tom Udall.........
N.M...............
5,636
Chairwoman.....................
Ranking Member....
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lamar Alexander................
Tenn..............
53,006
Dianne Feinstein..
Calif.............
318,542
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Roy Blunt......................
Mo................
41,845
Patrick Leahy.....
Vt................
11,035
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mitch McConnell................
Ky................
25,530
Jack Reed.........
R.I...............
12,773
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shelley Moore Capito...........
W.Va..............
6,844
Jon Tester........
Mont..............
8,673
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cindy Hyde-Smith...............
Miss..............
15,403
Jeff Merkley......
Ore...............
42,547
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Steve Daines...................
Mont..............
8,673
Chris Van Hollen..
Md................
70,530
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Marco Rubio....................
Fla...............
118,412
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Energy Efficiency Sector Jobs: 735,393....................................................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The contributions of Federal energy efficiency programs to the long
history of economic, environmental and security benefits to our country
are difficult to overstate. And, notwithstanding the tremendous gains
already made, the opportunities to continue to drive cost-effective
energy efficiency improvements are even greater. Therefore, the
Alliance respectfully urges your support for fiscal year 2020
appropriations at or above current levels for ENERGY STAR and the
following voluntary programs:
ENERGY STAR
--The Alliance recommends at least $50 million for ENERGY STAR in
fiscal year 2020.
--The Alliance opposes the implementation of a fee-based funding
model for ENERGY STAR, which is unnecessary, and which would
erode the program's integrity.
--ENERGY STAR enjoys brand awareness of more than 90 percent, which
makes it the most widely recognized symbol for energy
efficiency, and is extremely cost-effective. For every extra
dollar Americans invested in energy efficiency under ENERGY
STAR, they reduced their energy bills by an average of $4.50.
Since 1992, managed jointly by EPA and the U.S. Department of
Energy, ENERGY STAR has helped families and businesses save
$450 billion on utility bills, while reducing greenhouse gas
emissions by 3.1 billion metric tons.
--ENERGY STAR serves broad constituencies across every State in the
country, working with over 16,000 partners. ENERGY STAR
includes almost 1,800 manufacturing partners of over 70
different product categories, who sold more than 300 million
qualified products in the U.S. in 2016. About 50 percent of the
commercial building floor space in the U.S. has been
benchmarked for tracking and analyzing energy consumption using
ENERGY STAR's Portfolio Manager. ENERGY STAR also counts almost
3,000 home builder partners who constructed over 1.9 million
certified new homes since 1995. In 2016, families living in
ENERGY STAR certified homes saved over $360 million on utility
bills, and 91,000 energy efficiency improvement projects on
existing homes were completed by Home Performance with ENERGY
STAR partners in 2017. More than 700 utilities, State and local
governments, and nonprofits across the country use ENERGY STAR
in their own energy efficiency programs and rely on it to
reliably and affordably meet their energy needs.
OTHER VOLUNTARY PROGRAMS THAT PROMOTE ENERGY EFFICIENCY
--The Alliance recommends at least level funding for Environmental
Programs and Management--Clean Air and--Water Quality
Protection in Fiscal Year 2020 accompanied by clear direction
to EPA to continue administering its portfolio of voluntary and
partnership programs that encourage energy efficiency practices
in industry and deliver savings across the energy sector.
--The Combined Heat and Power Partnership aims to reduce pollution
from electricity and thermal power generation by working with
industry and other stakeholders to develop new projects.
--The SmartWay Transport Partnership with the freight transportation
industry supports efforts to improve the fuel efficiency of
vehicles. This program has worked with more than 3,700 shippers
and logistics companies to save almost $33.4 billion in fuel
since 2004.
--Natural GasSTAR, which includes the Methane Challenge Program, is a
partnership with industry that supports the identification and
implementation of technologies that reduce methane pollution
and provides public recognition of high achievements.
--AgStar promotes the use of biogas recovery systems to reduce
methane emissions from livestock waste.
--WaterSense offers homeowners, consumers, and businesses information
about water-efficient products market by a recognizable and
trusted label.
--Other programs, such as the State and Local Energy and Environment
Program and the State and Local Energy Efficiency Action
Network, are important collaborations between the public and
private sectors that provide specific and tailored technical
assistance and platforms for sharing information and best-
practices.
NATIONAL VEHICLE AND FUEL EMISSIONS LABORATORY
--The Alliance recommends at least $117 million in Science and
Technology--Clean Air, including at least level funding in
vehicle and fuel standards and in greenhouse gas reporting,
--This laboratory is a global leader that oversees vehicle fuel
economy and emissions testing, which are closely related. The
laboratory manages programs that also address fuel economy
labels, the Green Vehicle Guide, fuel standards, and nonroad
engines.
The Alliance also urges the Subcommittee on Interior, Environment,
and Related Agencies to oppose the inclusion of any bill amendments or
report language that could undermine or prevent the EPA from continuing
to successfully manage ENERGY STAR and other voluntary programs.
Furthermore, in light of the Government Accountability Office
impoundment finding concerning the Advanced Research Projects Agency-
Energy program, the Alliance continues to recommend clear and direct
instructions to the EPA in report language to obligate and expend
appropriated funds consistent with Congressional intent and in a timely
manner. With respect to ENERGY STAR, the Alliance encourages the
subcommittee to reject the administration's proposal to implement a
fee-based mechanism to fund the program. Similar proposals have been
suggested by previous administrations and repeatedly denied by
Congress.
Unpredictable energy costs and growing consumer and business demand
make today's investments in energy efficiency ever more vital to
America's economic health and energy security. It is important to
emphasize that ENERGY STAR and these other EPA programs are voluntary
initiatives that work with private-sector partners and support their
efforts to increase business opportunities while reducing energy waste.
The wide-ranging benefits of ENERGY STAR and these other voluntary
programs, realized across the entire U.S. economy and accrued to even
those who do not choose to participate, are worthy of your support in
fiscal year 2020.
Thank you for your consideration.
______
Prepared Statement of the American Alliance of Museums
Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for allowing me to submit this testimony. My
name is Laura Lott and I am the President and CEO of the American
Alliance of Museums (AAM). We urge your support for at least $167.5
million each in fiscal year 2020 funding for the National Endowment for
the Arts (NEA) and the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH), as
well as sufficient funding for the Smithsonian Institution. We also
request your support for the Historic Preservation Fund, including at
least $60 million for State Historic Preservation Offices (SHPOs), $20
million for Tribal Historic Preservation Offices (THPOs) and $22.5
million for competitive grants to preserve the sites and stories of the
Civil Rights Movement. We request funding of $16 million for the Save
America's Treasures program. In addition, we would like to work with
you to explore ways to minimize the damage to our Nation's museums from
future government shutdowns.
Before detailing these funding priorities for the museum field, I
want to express my appreciation for the increases enacted in fiscal
year 2019. The additional funds for the NEH, NEA, and historic
preservation activities will enhance museums' work to enrich their
communities and preserve our many heritages. The subcommittee's choice
to make these investments in fiscal year 2019 speaks volumes about its
commitment to our Nation's cultural institutions and heritage. AAM
remains deeply troubled by continuous proposals from the current
administration to slash many of these priorities, and we look forward
to working with you-our bipartisan allies-to reject them.
Representing more than 35,000 museum professionals and volunteers,
institutions-including aquariums, art museums, botanic gardens,
children's museums, cultural museums, historic sites, history museums,
maritime museums, military museums, natural history museums,
planetariums, presidential libraries, science and technology centers,
and zoos-and corporate partners serving the museum field, the Alliance
stands for the broad range of the museum community.
Museums are essential in their communities for many reasons:
--Museums are economic engines and job creators.--According to
Museums as Economic Engines: A National Report, U.S. museums
support more than 726,000 jobs and contribute $50 billion to
the U.S. economy per year. The economic activity of museums
generates more than $12 billion in tax revenue, one-third of it
going to State and local governments. For example, the total
financial impact that museums have on the economy in the State
of Alaska is $280 million, including supporting 3,240 jobs. For
New Mexico it is a $298 million impact supporting 4,934 jobs.
This impact is not limited to cities: more than 25 percent of
museums are in rural areas. The import of these data is not the
numbers alone--but the point that museums give back
tremendously to their communities in numerous ways--including
economically. The Federal funding for NEA, NEH, and the other
programs does not stay in Washington, DC, but it goes back to
communities across the Nation. And it is leveraged many times
over by private philanthropy, and State and local investments.
--Museums are key education providers.--Museums spend more than $2
billion yearly on education activities; the typical museum
devotes 75 percent of its education budget to K-12 students,
and museums receive approximately 55 million visits each year
from students in school groups. Children who visited a museum
during kindergarten had higher achievement scores in reading,
math and science in third grade than children who did not,
including children most at risk for delays in achievement.
Museums help teach the State and local curriculum in subjects
ranging from art and science to history, civics, and
government. Museums have long served as a vital resource to
homeschool learners. It is not surprising that in a 2017 public
opinion survey, 97 percent of respondents agreed that museums
were educational assets in their communities. The results were
statistically identical regardless of political persuasion or
community size.
The National Endowment for the Humanities is an independent Federal
agency created by Congress in 1965. Grants are awarded to nonprofit
educational institutions-including museums, colleges, universities,
archives, and libraries-for educational programming and the care of
collections. NEH supports museums as institutions of lifelong learning
and exploration, and as keepers of our cultural, historical, and
scientific heritages that can foster critical dialogues on challenging
issues of our time.
In fiscal year 2018, as a whole, the National Endowment for the
Humanities awarded 826 grants totaling more than $67 million to
institutions across the U.S., including museums. Many of NEH's
divisions and offices support museums:
--The Office of Challenge Grants offers matching grants to support
much needed capacity building and infrastructure projects at
museums.
--The Division of Public Programs offers grants that bring the ideas
and insights of the humanities to life in museums by supporting
exhibitions, community conversations, and place-based history.
Additionally, Positions in the Public Humanities supplements
provide professional development opportunities for new museums
professionals.
--The Division of Preservation and Access provides funding to museums
for efforts to preserve and provide access to our Nation's rich
cultural heritage.
--The Division of Education Programs supports programs that bring
educators to museums for intensive summer training programs on
humanities topics.
--The Office of Digital Humanities offers grants to support
innovations in technology at museums, universities, and other
institutions.
--The Division of Research supports scholarly research that many
museums use to inform exhibitions and public programming.
In calendar year 2018, 218 NEH-funded permanent and traveling
exhibitions were open around the Nation, providing life-long learning
opportunities to a wide public audience. Humanities councils in every
State and U.S. territory sponsor family literacy programs, speakers'
bureaus, cultural heritage tourism, exhibitions, and live performances.
In 2018, 55 State councils supported 2,389 exhibitions, 10,097
discussion events, 166 preservation projects, and 769 local history
programs. In total, all State council programs reached an audience of
more than 137 million people. State councils also awarded more than
3,000 grants to partners in their communities.
Here are just two examples of how NEH funding was used to support
museums' work in your communities:
--The Pratt Museum in Homer, Alaska, received a $300,000 award for an
ongoing project through fiscal year 2019 to implement a
permanent exhibition in its new facility to explore the
interconnectedness of people and place in the Kachemak Bay
region of Alaska. This region is home to culturally diverse
coastal communities which make their living predominantly from
the sea.
--The Museum of Indian Arts and Culture in Santa Fe, New Mexico,
received a $460,000 award in fiscal year 2018 for Here, Now,
and Always: Renovation and Renewal--an implementation of a
reinterpretation of a permanent exhibition on Native American
art of New Mexico and the Southwest.
The National Endowment for the Arts makes art accessible to all and
provides leadership in arts education. Established in 1965, NEA
supports great art in every congressional district. Its grants to
museums help them exhibit, preserve, and interpret visual material
through exhibitions, residencies, publications, commissions, public art
works, conservation, documentation, services to the field, and public
programs.
Since 2010, the NEA has collaborated with Blue Star Families and
the U.S. Department of Defense on Blue Star Museums, a program which
provides free museum admission to active duty military and their
families all summer long. In 2018, more than 2,000 museums in all 50
States participated, reaching on average more than 900,000 military
members and their families.
In 2018, the NEA provided more than 100 awards directly to museums,
totaling more than $3.73 million. The Arts Endowment's report, U.S.
Trends in Arts Attendance and Literary Reading: 2002-2017, notes that
in 2017, 23.7 percent of U.S. adults (57.5 million people) visited an
art museum or gallery. That share of adults represents an increase of
12.9 percent from 2012 to 2017. Attendance rates were helped by
increases among: African Americans, 18-24 year-olds, 35-44 year-olds,
and adults who received only ``some college'' education. Communities'
demands on museums continue to climb, increasing pressure to serve more
people with limited financial and human resources. Receiving a grant
from the NEA confers prestige on supported projects, strengthening
museums' ability to attract matching funds from other public and
private funders. On average, each dollar awarded by the Arts Endowment
leverages up to $9 dollars from other public and private sources. The
Federal role of the NEA is uniquely valuable. No other funder-public or
private-funds the arts in every State and the U.S. territories. Forty
percent of NEA's grant funds are distributed to State arts agencies for
re-granting.
Here are two examples of how NEA funding was used to support
museums' work in your communities:
--In fiscal year 2019, the Anchorage Museum in Anchorage, Alaska,
received a $30,000 award to support SEED Lab, an artist and
designer residency program that will respond to community needs
through solutions, equity, energy, and design (SEED). SEED Lab
will be a space for exhibitions created by the resident artists
and designers, and will include free-access community programs,
studio spaces, and a lab to explore art and design solutions to
unique community challenges, including urban migration, threats
to traditional ways of life affected by the State's eroding
coastline, and the need for a new energy economy.
--In fiscal year 2018, the Wheelwright Museum of the American Indian
in Santa Fe, New Mexico, received a $30,000 award to support an
exhibition by sculptor and installation artist Rose B. Simpson
and an accompanying catalogue. Simpson is a member of Santa
Clara Pueblo's Naranjo family of artists and scholars and is
the daughter of acclaimed sculptor Roxanne Swentzell.
In addition to these direct grants, NEA's Arts and Artifacts
Indemnity program also allows museums to apply for Federal indemnity on
major exhibitions, saving them as much as $30 million in insurance
costs every year and making many more exhibitions available to the
public-all at virtually no cost to the American taxpayer.
The Smithsonian Institution comprises some of the most visited
museums in the world. The National Museum of African American History
and Culture has captivated audiences from around the globe,
underscoring the power of our national museums to educate and inspire.
We support funding increases that would allow these world-class museums
to undertake critical collections care, make needed technology
upgrades, conduct cutting edge research of every type, and increase
access for all.
The Historic Preservation Fund is the funding source of
preservation awards to States, Tribes, local governments, and
nonprofits. State and Tribal Historic Preservation Offices carry out
the historic preservation work of the Federal Government on State and
Tribal lands. These duties include making nominations to the National
Register of Historic Places, reviewing the impact of Federal projects,
providing assistance to developers seeking a rehabilitation tax credit,
working with local preservation commissions, and conducting
preservation education and planning. This Federal-State-local
foundation of America's historic preservation program was established
by the National Historic Preservation Act. Historic preservation
programs are not only essential to protecting our many heritages; they
also serve as economic development engines and job creators. We urge
you to provide at least $60 million for SHPOs and at least $20 million
for THPOs.
We applaud recent funding for the Save America's Treasures program,
and urge you to provide $16 million in fiscal year 2020 funding. From
1999 to 2010, total Federal funding of $315 million for 1,287 Save
America's Treasures projects leveraged an additional $400 million in
non-Federal funds, and created more than 16,000 jobs nationwide. These
projects protected some of America's most iconic and endangered
artifacts, including the American flag that inspired the Star Spangled
Banner. We also applaud the investment in competitive grants to
preserve the sites and stories of the Civil Rights Movement. Grants for
this initiative are currently helping museums and historic sites around
the country conserve endangered structures, document stories, and share
resources with the public. We support fiscal year 2020 funding of $22.5
million for these Civil Rights Movement grants.
I hope that my testimony helps make it clear why these priorities
are of critical importance to the Nation and how they provide a
worthwhile return on investment to the American taxpayer.
______
Prepared Statement of the American Battlefield Trust
introduction
Madame Chairman and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to submit testimony to you today. My name is James
Lighthizer, and I am the president of the American Battlefield Trust. I
respectfully request that the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee for
Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies fund the Battlefield Land
Acquisition Grants Program, administered by the National Park Service's
American Battlefield Protection Program, at its authorized amount of
$10 million.
The American Battlefield Trust is a national nonprofit organization
dedicated to preserving America's remaining Revolutionary War, War of
1812 and Civil War battlefields. Thanks to the generosity of our
300,000 members and supporters, the American Battlefield Trust has
protected more than 50,000 acres of critically important battlefield
land in 24 States.
The Battlefield Land Acquisition Grants Program is an authorized
competitive matching grants program that requires a 1 to 1 Federal/non-
Federal match, although on most occasions the Federal dollars are
leveraged much more than 1 to 1. The program promotes cooperative
partnerships between State and local governments and the private sector
to protect high priority battlegrounds outside existing National Park
Service boundaries.
outdoor classrooms and military training grounds
America's battlefields are irreplaceable parts of our shared
national heritage. When preserved, these battlefields serve as outdoor
classrooms to educate current and future generations about the defining
moments in our country's history. They are living memorials, not just
to the soldiers who fought and died there, but to all who have proudly
worn our Nation's uniform.
Preserved battlefields are also economic drivers for communities,
generating tourism dollars that are extremely important to State and
local economies. Battlefield visitors, who typically travel in groups
and as part of families, tend to stay longer and spend more than other
types of tourists.
Additionally, battlefields serve as training grounds for our men
and women in uniform in the form of customized battlefield tours known
as ``staff rides.'' Preserved battlefields are frequently used by the
modern military to place officers and enlisted ranks alike in the shoes
of combat commanders, asking them to make difficult choices, in the
face of daunting obstacles, over the same terrain. The American
Battlefield Trust is proud to work with the Marine Corps University
Foundation and others to host staff rides on battlefields we own and
have protected.
origins of the program
In 1990, Congress created the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
(CWSAC), a blue-ribbon panel composed of lawmakers, historians and
preservationists, to examine the status of America's Civil War
battlefields. Three years later, the Commission released a report
identifying the most important Civil War battlegrounds, prioritizing
them according to preservation status and historic significance. In
addition, the Commission also recommended that Congress establish a
Federal matching grant program to encourage private sector investment
in battlefield preservation. The Commission's proposal for Federal
matching grants was the genesis of today's Battlefield Land Acquisition
Grants Program.
In addition, the National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year
2015 (Public Law 113-291) reauthorized the battlefield acquisition
grants program and expanded its eligibility to include Revolutionary
War and War of 1812 battlefields, in addition to Civil War
battlefields. Similar to Civil War battlefields, funding for
Revolutionary War and War of 1812 battlefield preservation is targeted
toward sites reviewed and prioritized in a 2007 study by the National
Park Service.
Since the program was first funded in fiscal year 1999, grants have
been used to protect more than 32,000 acres of hallowed ground in 20
States. Among the battlefields that have been preserved using this
program are: Antietam, Maryland; Bentonville, North Carolina;
Brandywine, Pennsylvania; Champion Hill, Mississippi; Chancellorsville,
Virginia; Chattanooga, Tennessee; Gettysburg, Pennsylvania; Hanging
Rock, South Carolina; Harpers Ferry, West Virginia; Kettle Creek,
Georgia; Mill Springs, Kentucky; Prairie Grove, Arkansas; Princeton,
New Jersey; Sackets Harbor, New York; Wilson's Creek, Missouri; and
Wood Lake, Minnesota. It is important to note that grants are awarded
for acquisition of lands from willing sellers only; there is not--and
never has been--any eminent domain authority.
urgent need for funding
The American Battlefield Trust wishes to thank the subcommittee for
its previous support of this valuable program. We recognize that these
are difficult economic times and appreciate the constraints on this
subcommittee.
However, we must point out that the clock is ticking on the
remaining battlefields of the Revolutionary War, War of 1812 and Civil
War. The American Battlefield Trust estimates that, in the next decade,
most unprotected battlefield land will be either developed or
preserved. Further, with the commemoration of the 250th anniversary of
the American Revolution only a few years away, there is no better time
to preserve these historic shrines and prepare for the influx of
visitors expected at that time. The program has enjoyed full funding
for the past four fiscal years, and the Trust and its partners strive
diligently to put these funds to use in a timely manner. There is no
shortage of land that can be saved.
conclusion
The Revolutionary War, the War of 1812 and the Civil War were
defining moments in our country's history. America's battlefields are
important to understanding who we are as a nation, and where we come
from. They are open spaces and outdoor classrooms that commemorate the
sacrifices of those who fought and died on these fields, and those who
serve our Nation honorably in the armed forces. The Battlefield Land
Acquisition Grant Program has been an irreplaceable tool for preserving
these hallowed grounds.
Madame Chairman Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall, I sincerely
hope you and your subcommittee will consider our request to provide
funding of the American Battlefield Protection Program's Battlefield
Land Acquisition Grants Program at its authorized level of $10 million.
We look forward to working closely with you as we continue our
important work to preserve America's sacred battlefield lands. Thank
you.
[This statement was submitted by O. James Lighthizer, President.]
______
Prepared Statement of American Forests
Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to submit written testimony
on American Forests' fiscal year 2020 appropriations recommendations
for U.S. Forest Service programs.
American Forests was established at a pivotal time in the Nation's
history, barely 10 years after the Civil War and during a period of
tremendous development and industrial expansion. Forests were being cut
down at an alarming rate to make way for new farms, towns and railways,
and timber barons were exploiting what then seemed like an
inexhaustible resource. Since that time, we have supported progress,
but not at all costs. Instead, over the last 140+ years we have
advocated for using science to manage and conserve our forestlands so
they will be with us and work for us for generations. We have helped
develop the U.S. Forest Service and the national forest system. We have
funded more than 1,000 forest restoration projects in every State. We
have planted nearly 60 million trees, which has included expanding the
tree canopy in dozens of major cities and urban areas.
For years, we have testified to the economic value of our forests
from cities to wilderness and have underscored the importance of
addressing rising threats to forest health. We sincerely thank the
committee for fiscal year 2019 funding levels, which rejected the
drastic cuts proposed by the administration and provide the Forest
Service with important tools and resources to manage all our Nation's
forests.
This year, the Nation witnessed loss and destruction from wildfire
at levels we have never seen before. In fact, over the last decade,
each year has been worse than the last and this trajectory shows no
signs of changing. At American Forests, we believe our forests are
struggling to adapt to a 'new normal' of extremes: extreme drought, low
humidity, high winds, shortened 'cold spells'. These extremes produce
dramatic tree mortality and high intensity wildfire in the West, and
changing tree species composition and declining forest health in the
East.
To adapt forests to this 'new normal' will often require more
active forest management, including harvesting dead and dying trees,
reforestation, reintroducing controlled fire and other measures. More
active forest management will require increased Federal and private
investment and level of effort sufficient to halt this crisis. Consider
California's forests, where over 147 million trees have died since
2010, with roughly 85 percent of those located in the Sierra Nevada. If
we do nothing, many areas will experience fires so intense that they
cannot be reforested and will transition to a shrub ecosystem. The best
hope for sustaining forests like those in the Sierra will be to thin
areas with dead and declining trees, while restoring a more resilient
forest and using controlled burns more frequently. But it's not only
western forests. A recent University of Florida study found that
southeastern forests are already seeing a changing mixture of tree
species in response to prolonged drought. Dangerous forest pests are
reaching farther north into New England as its climate warms. New
stresses are coming to all of America's forests.
The ``Fire Funding Fix'' enacted as part of the fiscal year 2018
Omnibus appropriations bill was a critical step forward. It will allow
the U.S. Forest Service to stop diverting funds away from forest
management. This will provide additional resources to support forest
restoration on America's 193 million acres of national forests, but we
must do much more. The Forest Service needs to rebuild its staff and
forestry resources to adequately manage the crisis that is now
impacting our forests and to help our forests achieve long-term health
and resilience. The question is whether we can shift our thinking and
resources quickly enough.
To address this crisis, American Forests respectfully urges the
Committee to consider significantly increasing investments in the
following key programs:
national forest system
Vegetation Management & Watershed Management
Fiscal year 2018 enacted: $180 million; fiscal year 2019: $180 million;
American Forests fiscal year 2020 request: $371.4 million
Reforestation of our national forests, especially after destructive
wildfires, should be a national priority. Nearly 9 million acres of
national forests have burned since 2010--a significant increase
resulting from the harsh 'new normal' conditions. Funding levels for
this program need to be recalibrated to match this new scale of
reforestation needs. The forest service estimates $371.4 million to
reforest 1 million acres. Therefore, American Forests recommends
resetting program funding to $371.4M which would allow the Forest
Service to reforest 1 million acres of national forest.
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP)
Fiscal year 2018 enacted: $40 million; fiscal year 2019: $40 million;
American Forests fiscal year 2020 request: $80 million.
A well-documented success at improving forest health and safety,
CFLRP promotes job stability, a reliable wood supply, and forest health
while reducing emergency wildfire costs and risks. Increased funding
levels would allow for additional projects to be selected across the
country while capitalizing on the growing energy and successes of
collaborative management and shared stewardship.
Forest and Rangeland Research
Fiscal year 2018 enacted: $297 million; fiscal year 2019: $ 300
million; American Forests fiscal year 2020 request: $315
million with $83 million allocated to the Forest Inventory
Analysis.
The USFS's Forest and Rangeland Research program provides essential
support for urban and wildland forestry research activities. This
program focuses on understanding conditions and trends in our Nation's
urban and community forests and in providing tools and best management
practices--which is critical for addressing the ``new normal'' these
forests face. Agency researchers help policymakers and practitioners
understand the environmental, economic, and social services that trees
and forests provide. We urge the subcommittee to continue including
language in Interior Appropriations reports encouraging the Forest
Service to maintain a strong and vibrant urban forest research program.
state and private forestry
Urban and Community Forestry (U&CF)
Fiscal year 2018 enacted: $28.5 million; fiscal year 2019: $29.5
million; American Forests fiscal year 2020 request: $50 million
By 2050, 90 percent of Americans will live in cities and towns
where currently there are 136 million acres of trees and forests. U&CF
is the core Federal forestry program that helps these forests and trees
adapt to the ``new normal''. Through this program, the Forest Service
provides critical technical and financial support to cities and towns
across the Nation to enhance tree and forest cover, prepare for storms
and other disturbance events, contain threats from native and invasive
pests, and maximize the economic, social, and ecological benefits of
their tree resources. States and partner organizations leverage Federal
support through the program by at least 2:1 (or in many cases
significantly more). Considered a model of Federal-State collaboration,
U&CF consistently increases communities served, brings together diverse
partners and resources, and has lasting impacts on communities of all
sizes but the program needs to be recalibrated to reflect the scale of
its mission.
Cooperative Forestry/Forest Legacy Program
Fiscal year 2018 enacted: $67.025 million; fiscal year 2019: $63.990
million; American Forests fiscal year 2020 request: $100
million
Since authorization in 1990, the Forest Legacy Program has
protected 2.8 million acres of private forests through voluntary
conservation easements held by States. Forests conserved through this
program must be managed to provide economic and social benefits to the
public. The Forest Service recently studied four FLP regions and found
the properties support between 280 and 2,500 jobs, contribute an
average of $140 per acre to gross regional product from timber
harvesting, tree planting, maple syrup, hunting, fishing, birding, and
snowmobiling on the lands. In addition, the study found 34-60 percent
of total project cost was covered by non-Federal partners which is at
least 10 percent greater than required by the program.
Community Forests and Open Space Conservation Program (CFP)
Fiscal year 2018 enacted: $4 million; fiscal year 2019: $4 million;
American Forests fiscal year 2020 request: $10 million
CFP has made substantial progress in preserving forests by
increasing opportunities for Americans to connect with forests in their
own communities and fostering new public-private partnerships. It
provides financial assistance grants to local governments, Tribes, and
qualified nonprofit organizations to acquire and establish working
community forests that provide public benefits. Projects are selected
through a competitive process that evaluates community benefits,
contribution to landscape conservation initiatives, and likelihood of
land conversion.
[This statement was submitted by Alexandra Murdoch, Vice President
of Policy.]
______
Prepared Statement of the American Hiking Society
On behalf of the thousands of diverse trail users our 220
collective organizations represent, we urge appropriators to adequately
invest in our Nation's trails.\1\ Trails provide access to our public
lands for hiking, biking, horseback riding, off-highway vehicles, and
other motorized and non-motorized recreation. They are also the gateway
to nearly every facet of outdoor recreation, including fishing,
hunting, wildlife viewing, camping, and more. A failure to maintain and
manage our Nation's trails stymies economic growth and access to
healthy outdoor recreation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Full list of signatories available here: https://
americanhiking.org/?p=40292&preview=true.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recent data from the Department of Commerce's Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA) calculated that outdoor recreation generated $734
billion in economic activity in 2016, surpassing other sectors such as
agriculture, petroleum and coal. Outdoor recreation makes up 2.2
percent percent of U.S. GDP, supports 4.5 million jobs and is growing
faster than the economy as a whole.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Bureau of Economic Analysis, Outdoor Recreation, https://
www.bea.gov/data/special-topics/outdoor-recreation (last visited March
25, 2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to the Outdoor Industry Association, trail centered
activities directly generate over $594 billion \3\ and nearly 3.5
million jobs.\4\ On federally managed land, outdoor recreation
contributes more than $64.6 billion to the national economy and
supports more than 623,000 jobs annually.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ OUTDOOR INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION, OUTDOOR RECREATION ECONOMY 18
(2017), available at https://outdoorindustry.org/wp-content/uploads/
2017/04/OIA_RecEconomy_FINAL
_Single.pdf. Trail centered activities generated $594,311,835,880 from
including retail spending, salaries, and Federal and State taxes.
\4\ Id. Trail centered activities create 3,476,845 jobs.
\5\ OUTDOOR INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION, OUTDOOR RECREATION ECONOMY 15
(2017), available at https://outdoorindustry.org/wp-content/uploads/
2017/04/OIA_RecEconomy_FINAL
_Single.pdf; ``Forest Service Makes it Easier for Visitors to Enjoy
National Forests and Grasslands.'' U.S. Forest Service, https://
www.fs.fed.us/news/releases/forest-service-makes-it-easier-visitors-
enjoy-national-forests-and-grasslands.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The management of our Nation's trails is largely supported by trail
organizations and citizen volunteers who leverage government resources
to maintain and expand our trails. On the National Trails System alone,
since 1995, hundreds of thousands of citizen volunteers have
contributed more than 19 million hours to build and maintain National
Scenic and Historic Trails, and nonprofit trail organizations have
contributed more than $200 million toward trail stewardship projects, a
total value of $577.4 million.\6\ This historical and ongoing public
``sweat equity'' investment has led to an increased recognition of the
importance of adequate Federal funding for our public lands and trails
to maintain quality visitor experiences. It is our collective belief
that Congress must restore the proper appropriated funding levels that
have been cut over the decades that our Federal land management
agencies so desperately need. We maintain that current levels are
inadequate but recognize the political realities of this challenge.
Consequently, we strive to temper the recommendations to ensure at the
very least current funding is maintained and not further reduced.
However, we believe that restored and adequate funding is not only
desperately needed but fully warranted.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Partnership for the National Trails System, Contributions
Sustaining the National Scenic and Historic Trails (2018), http://
pnts.org/new/partnership-for-the-national-trails-system-gold-sheet-of-
volunteer-contributions-in-2018/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We encourage the committee to adopt the following funding requests
and report language, so the Federal Government can continue to benefit
from private contributions and volunteer labor as well as provide
inexpensive, healthy outdoor recreation options for your constituents:
forest service (usfs)
National Forest trails benefit everyone and receive increasing
public use each year. Collectively, the National Forests provide
157,000 miles of trails for activities ranging from hiking, biking,
horseback riding, off-highway vehicle usage, groomed winter trails for
cross-country skiing and snowmobiling, and access points for ``river
trails.'' Yet this trail system is increasingly stressed and
maintenance cannot keep pace with the growing demand due to inadequate
funding. The lack of maintenance threatens public access to National
Forests and could endanger the public safety if funding does not keep
pace with public visitation.
Action:
--Maintain Capital Improvement and Maintenance, Trails as individual
funding line item.
--Justification: A dedicated line item in the Forest Service budget
helps to ensure that Congress' desire to help clear the
maintenance backlog is met, and funds are not used for
other purposes.
--Fund Capital Improvement and Maintenance, Trails budget at $100
million to address trail maintenance backlog and implementation
of the National Forest System Trail Stewardship Act.
--Justification: In 2016, Congress passed what was termed ``the
most bipartisan bill in Congress''--the National Forest
System Trails Stewardship Act--to address its trail
maintenance backlog, including doubling the output by
volunteers and partners. But the USFS has yet to fully
implement the Act due, in part, to a lack of resources and
declining levels of staffing which hampers its ability to
negotiate and oversee volunteer and cost-share agreements.
The agency recently launched a 10-Year Sustainable Trails
Stewardship Challenge and modest funding is needed to
comprehensively address the well-documented trail
maintenance backlog (GAO-13-618).
--Allocate Capital Improvement & Maintenance (CMTL) Trails funds for
the National Trails Systems
--Report Language: ``Congress expects the Forest Service to
allocate $8.826 million from this account to support
development and maintenance of the 5 national scenic and
one national historic trail it administers and $1.3 million
to manage parts of 16 national scenic and historic trails
administered by the Park Service and the Bureau of Land
Management that cross National Forests. The Forest Service
will report to the Interior Appropriations Subcommittee on
how the fiscal year 2020 funds have been allocated and what
has been accomplished with them and will include specific
allocations for these trails in its fiscal year 2021 budget
request.''
--Justification: In fiscal year 2019, as has been past practice for
two decades, the USFS did not allocate specific Capital
Improvement & Maintenance (CMTL) Trail funds for each of
the six national scenic and historic trails that it
administers, as well as portions of the 17 other trails
that it manages within the national forests for fiscal year
2019.
--Maintain Recreation, Heritage & Wilderness at fiscal year 2019
enacted level of $261 million
--Report Language: ``Within the fund provided, $500,000 is made
available to support infrastructure and trails development,
and to build the capacity of local user groups and
partnership organizations for all National Recreation Areas
administered by the Forest Service established after
1997.''
--Justification: The National Forests and Grasslands provide a
great diversity of outdoor recreational opportunities,
connecting the American public with nature in an unmatched
variety of settings and activities.
--Restore Legacy Roads & Trails as a separate line item and fund
program at $50 million
--Report Language: ``For fiscal year 2020, Legacy Roads & Trails
should be reinstated as a separate line item in the USFS
budget with $50,000,00 distinctly designated for urgently
needed road and trail repair, maintenance and storm-
proofing, fish passage barrier removal, and road
decommissioning, especially in areas where Forest Service
roads may be contributing to water quality problems in
streams and water bodies which support threatened,
endangered or sensitive species or community water
sources.''
--Justification: Legacy Roads & Trails funding is significantly
impactful, improving more than 11,000 miles of trails and
5,000 miles of roads. Dedicated funding is necessary for
continuing the success of this program. Legacy Roads and
Trails contributes funding to support projects that include
the maintenance and treatments of roads that also go a long
way towards improving our watershed health.
national park service (nps)
National Parks and the world-class experiences their 18,844 miles
of trails provide are one of the most unifying forces in America. Well-
maintained trails improve the quality of visitor experiences and
enhance visitor safety. Yet the agency's deferred maintenance has grown
significantly under several administrations and the associated
reductions in adequate appropriations.
Action:
--Park Service Operations for the National Trails System must be
maintained at a minimum of $16.5 million
--Justification: The National Park Service has administrative
responsibility for 23 National Scenic and Historic Trails
established by Congress. Adequate funding is essential for
keeping these popular trails accessible to the public.
--Maintain funding for the Rivers, Trails, & Conservation Assistance
(RTCA) program at $10.033 million
--Justification: The RTCA program brings the expertise of over a
century of land management to the greater recreation
community. When a community asks for assistance with a
project, National Park Service staff provide free critical
tools for success, on-location facilitation, and planning
expertise, which draw from project experiences across the
country and adapt best practices to a community's specific
needs.
--Restore the Challenge Cost Share program, funding at $1.5 million
--Justification: Challenge Cost share leverages private donations
with public funding to maximize trail maintenance
resources. This Program is intended to support specific
National Park Service mission-related projects that align
with goals of local project partners. These partnerships
promote improved access and opportunities for outdoor
recreation, environmental stewardship, and education in our
National Parks, National Trails and/or Wild and Scenic
Rivers.
--Restore funding for Volunteers in Parks programs funding at $8
million
--Justification: Volunteers in Parks leverages private donation
with public funding to maximize trail maintenance
resources.
--Fund Visitor Services subactivity, Youth Partnership Programs, at
$10.95 million
--Justification: The Youth Partnership Program in part funds the
Public Land Corps program, which provides education and
work opportunities for men and women aged 16-30. The NPS
utilizes non-profit youth serving organizations to perform
critical natural and cultural resource conservation
projects at NPS sites. Without funding, projects completed
by youth crews through these programs would not be
accomplished. These projects range from masonry
apprenticeships on historic structures to Tribal land
improvements; to engaging other youth through coordination
of culturally-based workshops and outdoor recreation clubs.
bureau of land management (blm)
The BLM manages 13,468 miles of trails over 245 million surface
acres in the United States-more than any other Federal land management
agency. Most of the country's BLM-managed public land is located in 12
Western States, including Alaska, and contains a diversity of
landscapes that often provide the public less structured but
nonetheless diverse and superlative recreational opportunities. BLM
recreation resources and visitor services support strong local
economies. More than 120 urban centers and thousands of rural towns are
located within 25 miles of BLM lands.
Action:
--Fund National Conservation Lands at $84 million
--Justification: National Conservation Lands funds enhance
recreational access, conserve the Nation's heritage and
manage these nationally recognized resources.
--Fund National Conservation Lands--National Scenic Historic Trails,
subactivity Recreation Resources Management at $9.9 million
--Justification: Recreation Resources Management funding preserves
and provides public access to and allows for the enjoyment
of the 16 National Scenic and Historic trails across BLM
managed land.
--Increase Challenge Cost Share program funding at $3 million
--Justification: Challenge Cost Share funds leverage private
donation for public benefit, to maximize funding for trail
maintenance and construction. Recreation projects build
trails, obliterate road and trails, and enhance visitor
recreation experiences on public lands. Projects improve
and stabilize Riparian areas and washed out bridges or
walkways. Overall, projects also include support for
environmental education, University research, and
interactive youth initiatives based on the programs within
the BLM.
u.s. fish & wildlife service (fws)
Located in every U.S. State and territory, and within an hour's
drive of nearly every major U.S. city, National Wildlife Refuges
provide incredible opportunities for outdoor recreation, including
hiking, hunting, fishing, birding, boating and nature photography
across 2,100 miles of trails. More than 37,000 jobs are reliant on
refuges.
Action:
--Maintain Refuge Visitor Services at $73.319 million
--Justification: Refuge Visitor Services provides funding for trail
maintenance across FWS managed land.
land & water conservation fund (lwcf)--across all agencies
Congress recently showed overwhelming bipartisan support for the
Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF) when it permanently
reauthorized the program in S. 47, the John D. Dingell, Jr.
Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act. Building upon this
support, the committee must ensure that full funding of the program is
provided at the $900 million level.
Action:
--Fund LWCF at the $900 million
--Justification: The LWCF has funded nearly 1,000 trail projects
across the country and countless other recreation and
conservation projects in thousands of communities in every
State. It's time for Congress to fulfill its promise to
provide full funding to the LWCF.
--Include within this appropriation $33.4M for National Scenic and
Historic Trails projects
--Justification: Many of the projects offer a unique opportunity to
acquire lands that will help protect trails or close
existing gaps between sections of these Congressionally-
designated trails. Once land is acquired, volunteers and
private funding stand ready to build/maintain the trails.
This funding will protect 41 tracts along six national
scenic and six national historic trails.
21st century conservation service corps (21csc)--doi, usda (usfs), and
commerce (noaa)
With the establishment of the 21st Century Conservation Service
Corps (21CSC) as part of the Natural Resources Management Act of 2019,
Congress recognized the need to address modern conservation,
recreation, forestry, and infrastructure projects through cost-
effective partnerships with Corps. We encourage you to continue this
focus and make the additional investments necessary to carry its intent
forward and put more young adults and recent veterans to work on the
thousands of unmet needs on our public lands.
Action:
--Conservation Corps Report Language
--Report Language: ``The Secretary of the Interior and the
Secretary of Agriculture are encouraged to utilize, where
practicable, Conservation Corps programs like the Public
Lands Corps, 21st Century Conservation Service Corps, other
related partnerships with Federal, State, local, Tribal or
non-profit groups that serve young adults and veterans.''
______
Prepared Statement of the American Indian Alaska Native Tourism
Association, Inc.
Thank you Chairman Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall, and Members
of the subcommittee, for the opportunity to provide written testimony
on behalf of the American Indian Alaska Native Tourism Association,
Inc. (AIANTA) on the importance of the Native American Tourism and
Improving Visitor Experience Act of 2016 (NATIVE Act).
AIANTA is the only organization specifically dedicated to advancing
Indian Country tourism across the United States. AIANTA helps Tribes
develop, sustain and grow tourism destinations through technical
assistance, training and educational resources. Our mission is to
define, introduce, grow and sustain American Indian, Alaska Native and
Native Hawaiian Tourism that honors traditions and values.
fiscal year 2020 request
The American Indian Alaska Native Tourism Association (AIANTA)
requests a program amount of $5,400,000 for fiscal year 2020 to be
included in the Bureau of Indian Affairs Community Development Central
Oversight account to implement the Native American Tourism and
Improving Visitor Experience Act of 2016 (NATIVE Act), including via
cooperative agreements with Tribes and Tribal organizations.
In fiscal year 2018 and again in fiscal year 2019, $3,400,000 was
appropriated through Committee report language to be used by the Bureau
of Indian Affairs Community Development Central Oversight account for
NATIVE Act implementation.
native act progress
The NATIVE Act is designed to ``enhance and integrate Native
American Tourism, empower Native American communities, increase
coordination and collaboration between Federal Tourism assets, and
expand heritage and cultural tourism opportunities in the United
States.''
Since its passage and enactment, AIANTA was designated the lead
Tribal organizational role in implementation of the NATIVE Act through
a Memorandum of Understanding with the U.S. Department of the Interior
and the U.S. Department of Commerce signed in September, 2018. The lead
role is natural to AIANTA because of its mission, which perfectly
aligns with language of the NATIVE Act, as does the Tribal nonprofit
organization's goals and ongoing projects and initiatives.
fiscal year 2020 funding
Tribes in tourism, with AIANTA as their facilitator and convener,
are requesting $5,400,000 in fiscal year 2020 to ensure implementation
of the NATIVE Act accelerate. The funds will create opportunities for
Native American, Native Hawaiian and Alaska Native Tribes, Tribal
tourism programs and Tribal members as outlined in the NATIVE Act
implementation plan developed by AIANTA and a 5-year cooperative
agreement between BIA and AIANTA. Implementation efforts using the
funds will include technical assistance, training, curriculum
development, professional tourism certification, a state-of-the-art
Tribal tourism destination website, Tribal product assessment and
development, training and marketing in domestic and international
outreach, improved research, data collection and analysis, inclusion in
Federal agency management planning across the Federal Government and
Federal tourism and recreation websites.
In support of the NATIVE Act, AIANTA intends to expand and
formalize partnerships to include working more closely with the U.S.
Department of Commerce and its divisions: National Travel and Tourism
Office, International Trade Administration and Economic Development
Administration and enter into a cooperative agreement to integrate
Tribes into the research and development programs offered by Commerce.
AIANTA will continue to work with the National Endowment for the
Arts, National Endowment for the Humanities, Institute for Museum and
Library Science, Administration for Native Americans, and in
Smithsonian projects to ensure tourism Tribes are well represented in
all Federal grant programs.
AIANTA will continue to work with the National Park Service, Bureau
of Land Management, and U.S. Forest Service to ensure tourism Tribes
are included in their management plans; collaborate with the U.S.
Department of Labor on tourism workforce development and the U.S
Department of Agriculture on Tribal tourism rural development
opportunities.
In addition, $2,000,000 of the $5,400,000 is requested for support
of on-the-ground Tribal tourism planning, studies and projects for
Tribes and Tribal organizations funded through the BIA Division of
Energy and Economic Development in partnership with AIANTA and
educational institutions that specialize and support economic
development.
indian country tourism contributes billions to the u.s. economy
Currently, tourism is a leading opportunity for jobs and economic
development in Indian Country. In some rural and remote communities, it
is one of the only viable opportunities for household income. Indian
Country tourism has a bright future that lies in the more than one
billion leisure travelers in the world, and the interest of
international visitors in the American Indian culture and what their
communities offer--memorable and unique experiences, warm hospitality
and unusual landscapes.
According to U.S. Department of Commerce statistics, approximately
1.9 million overseas visitors traveled to an Indian Country nation or
destination in 2016 (most recent report). In total, those visitors
represented approximately $8.5 billion in visitor spending across the
country for that same year. Furthermore, these visitors are pre-
disposed to spend more time in the U.S. and spend more money. Since
AIANTA began working on international marketing and outreach,
visitation to Native American communities from overseas has grown from
700,000 in 2007 to 1.9 million in 2016, an increase of 180 percent.
According to the U.S. Department of Commerce, when overseas
travelers visit Tribal lands, they stay longer in the U.S.--an average
of 12 additional days. Which means they spend about twice as much money
as the average overseas traveler while they are here. They visit more
States and cities, use more rental cars, and take more domestic
flights. They visit more National Parks, small towns, art galleries and
museums, fine restaurants, and cultural heritage sites compared to all
overseas visitors. (Source: U.S. Department of Commerce National Travel
and Tourism Office Inbound International Visitor Survey)
With the targeted assistance and support of the NATIVE Act, AIANTA
believes Tribes can significantly expand domestic and international
visitors to Indian Country within 5 years. Currently, the only data
available estimating overseas visitors to Indian Country is collected
by the U.S. Department of Commerce. Based on this data, there were 1.9
million overseas visitors to Indian Country in 2017, spending an
estimated $8.5 billion per year throughout the United States. In the
next 5 years, overseas visitors to Indian Country are projected to grow
to 2.2 million and $9.4 billion annually. The increase represents
approximately 4300 jobs. With additional NATIVE Act funding, more
domestic visitors and their spending and job creation in Indian Country
can be tracked.
success of the native act secured through the aianta/bia partnership
For a decade, through its cooperative agreement/grant with BIA
Division of Transportation, AIANTA has nurtured a network of Federal
agency, university and tourism industry partners and engaged national
Indian and non-Indian nonprofits to leverage those Federal resources
into an effective Tribal tourism network. With our partners, AIANTA and
BIA have accomplished many milestones, including:
--Delivered Tribal tourism technical assistance, created Tribal
tourism curricula and developed a professional certificate-
training program in cultural tourism and conducted webinar
trainings.
--Established a national Tribal destinations web site,
NativeAmerica.Travel, for Tribes to market their destinations
directly to the world's travelers.
--Expanded partnerships to improve data collection and analysis.
--Developed the first national resource database of Indian Country
tourism assets to begin to demonstrate the growth and impact of
cultural tourism for Indian Country and the greater U.S.A.
economy and is expanding the database to identify proposed
development and needs (technical assistance and training,
infrastructure, connectivity, marketing, funding and more).
--Gained national and regional recognition through grants and awards
from private and public entities to further create
opportunities for Tribes in tourism.
--Established a presence for Tribes and Tribal businesses in
international travel markets-participating in world travel
marketplaces in Europe as well as IPW, U.S. Travel
Association's leading international inbound travel trade show
in the U.S. and venturing into the United Kingdom and Italian
markets.
--Encouraged project partnerships between Tribes and national parks
and national public lands, conducted educational sessions in
agritourism, organized a Federal land management working group,
and discussed next steps in collaboration with the Federal
agencies.
accelerating tribal tourism development through native act
implementation
Fiscal year 2020 funding will:
--Improve visitor data collection and analysis. Decision-making,
business planning, applying for loans and attracting capital
all require data collection and analysis. AIANTA cannot cite
the number of.
--tourism assets or domestic visitation to Indian Country because
there is inadequate data. The data collection and analysis
provision of the NATIVE Act will improve this deficiency.
--Support the consultation process that provides for collaboration
and cooperation between Federal agencies and Tribes on Tribal
tourism priorities.
--Promote greater awareness to Tribes on Federal programs that can
support tourism capacity building and tourism infrastructure.
--Increase international and domestic awareness of Tribal tourism
destinations.
--Integrate Native American, Alaska and Hawaiian Native culture into
the visitor experience on public lands.
--Increase tourism product and amenity development in Indian Country,
promoting a better visitor experience.
--Create innovative visitor portals between Tribes and parks,
landmarks, heritage and cultural sites that showcase the
diversity of indigenous people related to Federal lands.
--Improve access to transportation programs that assist Tribal
community capacity building for tourism and trade, including
planning for visitor enhancement and safety.
We are supported in the implementation of the NATIVE Act by the
U.S. Travel Association, Affiliated Tribes of Northwest Indians, Alaska
Federation of Natives, All Pueblo Council of Governors, Nevada Inter-
Tribal Council, Intertribal Transportation Association, Sitka Tribes of
Alaska and many other organizations and Tribes.
conclusion
On behalf of Indian Country, AIANTA thanks Congress for its support
of Tribal tourism. We look forward to working with this subcommittee,
the Department of Interior and all Federal agencies included in the
NATIVE Act mandate to assist tourism Tribes and share the results with
you and all our Congressional supporters. Increased funding will help
Tribes initiate programs and create business in Tribal tourism, while
supporting cultural perpetuation in the arts, language, historic
preservation, conservation and agriculture.
[This statement was submitted by Camille L. Ferguson, Executive
Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of the American Institute of Biological Sciences
The American Institute of Biological Sciences (AIBS) appreciates
the opportunity to provide testimony in support of appropriations for
the United States Geological Survey (USGS), Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), and
Smithsonian Institution for fiscal year 2020. We encourage Congress to
provide the USGS with $1.2 billion in fiscal year 2020 and at least
$234 million for the Ecosystems mission area within USGS. We further
request that Congress provide EPA Science and Technology with at least
$760 million, which was equal to the fiscal year 2014 enacted level. We
also request the restoration of funding for Science Support in USFWS to
the fiscal year 2019 enacted level of $17.3 million. Lastly, we urge
Congress to provide new funding to the Smithsonian Institution and at
least $53 million to support scientific and curatorial work within the
National Museum of Natural History in fiscal year 2020.
AIBS is a scientific association dedicated to promoting informed
decisionmaking that advances biological research and education for the
benefit of science and society. AIBS works to ensure that the public,
legislators, funders, and the community of biologists have access to
information to guide informed decisionmaking.
u.s. geological survey
The USGS provides unbiased, independent research, data, and
assessments that are needed by public and private sector decision-
makers. Data generated by the USGS save taxpayers money by enabling
more effective management of water and biological resources and
providing essential geospatial information that is needed for
commercial activity and natural resource management. The data collected
by the USGS are not available from other sources.
The Ecosystems activity within USGS is integral to the agency's
other science mission areas. It conducts research required to
understand the impacts of such things as water use and natural hazards
on environmental systems. The USGS conducts research on and monitors
fish, wildlife, and vegetation-data that informs management decisions
by other Interior bureaus.
Biological science programs, housed within the Ecosystems program
area, collect and analyze long-term data not available from other
sources. Other agencies, universities, and the private sector do not
gather or maintain these data. The knowledge generated by USGS is used
by Federal and State natural resource managers to maintain healthy and
diverse ecosystems while balancing the needs of public use.
Examples of successful USGS Ecosystem initiatives include:
--Development of comprehensive geospatial data products that
characterize the risk of wildfires on all lands in the United
States. These products are used to allocate firefighting
resources and to plan wildfire fuel reduction projects. These
tools require current and accurate information about plant
species distribution, biomass (e.g. amount of energy available
for fire), and how different animals within the landscape
influence the distribution of this vegetation.
--Development and evaluation of control measures and other management
interventions for Asian carp, sea lamprey, Burmese pythons, and
other invasive species that cause billions of dollars in
economic losses to fisheries, hydropower, recreation, and many
other industries.
--Development of the scientific understanding needed to combat the
spread of avian flu, white-nose syndrome, chronic wasting
disease, and other diseases spread by wildlife in North
America, including diseases with the capacity to jump from wild
populations to livestock, agricultural systems, and humans.
The President's fiscal year 2020 budget request restructures the
Ecosystems mission area to include programs formerly under Land
Resources and Environmental Health mission areas, specifically the
National and Regional Climate Adaptation Science Centers, significant
portions of Land Change Science, and Contaminant Biology. The budget
does not merely reposition these programs, it proposes deep cuts
(nearly 35 percent) to this important work. These cuts will harm USGS
scientific research.
Among the proposed cuts are:
--Elimination of curation and research on fish, amphibians, reptiles,
and mammals that is conducted by the Biological Survey Unit at
the Smithsonian Institution. USGS has more than a million
specimens of birds, mammals, amphibians, and reptiles that are
housed at the Smithsonian for the benefit of the USGS and
Department of the Interior. These curatorial and research
positions are required to maintain and use these specimens and
the data associated with them. This management arrangement has
been in place since 1889. Elimination of this program
jeopardizes the ability of the USGS to access timely and
accurate data required for biodiversity research that informs
species management decisions by other State and Federal
agencies.
--Elimination of the Cooperative Research Units (CRUs). CRUs are
located on 40 university campuses in 38 States. These research
centers are a cost-effective way for USGS to leverage research
and technical expertise affiliated with these universities to
conduct actionable research, provide technical assistance, and
develop scientific workforces through graduate education and
mentoring programs.
--Reduced wildlife and fisheries research. The proposal includes
reductions for species-specific research. USGS conducts this
research for the benefit of Federal and State stakeholders.
Without these research programs, USFWS, the National Park
Service, and other Interior bureaus will lack the data required
to fulfill agency missions to manage wildlife, as these
agencies do not have scientific research capacities. Moreover,
the USGS is a non-regulatory agency, which means that its
research is independent of the entities responsible for
developing and implementing rules and regulations.
--Reduced research on diseases. USGS is the leading Federal agency
conducting research on wildlife and fish diseases. The deep
cuts proposed to Toxicological and Pathogenic Diseases would
crush the agency's ability to provide other agencies with
critical research, information, and technical assistance needed
to economically and effectively control and limit disease
spread and risk.
--Reduced research on ecosystems of concern. This research is a
critical component of efforts to restore important national
resources, such as the Everglades and the Chesapeake Bay. The
Arctic ecosystem research and monitoring program addresses the
needs of Native communities, and also promotes public health
throughout the U.S. by monitoring avian influenza, which can
spread to humans.
The President has also proposed drastic cuts to climate research.
The National and Regional Climate Adaptation Science Centers (formerly
regional Climate Science Centers) are responsible for developing the
science and tools to address the effects of climate change on land,
water, wildlife, fish, ecosystems, and communities. These centers play
a vital role in addressing the impacts of unique weather patterns on
ecosystem health in different areas across the country and are slated
for a 46 percent budget cut under the new structure. This is
irresponsible.
We are pleased that the Invasive Species Program was spared from
large cuts in the administration's request and we urge Congress to
reject the deep cuts to other parts of the Ecosystems mission area. We
understand USGS's efforts to realign programs to improve operational
efficiency, but the devastating budget cuts proposed will hamper long-
term data collection initiatives, lead to critical data loss, and
undermine the Nation's ability to address national challenges.
We request Congress fund USGS at $1.2 billion in fiscal year 2020,
with at least $234 million for the Ecosystems mission area and restore
funding for the Biological Survey Unit, CRUs, and ecosystems and
climate research.
environmental protection agency
Funding for EPA Science and Technology supports valuable research
used to identify and mitigate environmental problems. EPA research
informs decisions made by public health and safety managers, natural
resource managers, businesses, and other stakeholders concerned about
air and water pollution, human health, and land management and
restoration. This program provides the scientific basis upon which EPA
monitoring and enforcement programs are built.
Despite the important role of EPA Science and Technology research,
the proposed funding level for fiscal year 2020 is roughly half of what
the program received in fiscal year 2002 and 35 percent below the
fiscal year 2019 enacted level. We are concerned to see the proposed
eliminations of the Science to Achieve Results (STAR) Research Grants
and the Global Change Research program, which develops scientific
information that allows policy makers, stakeholders, and society to
respond to climate change. These programs are important parts of the
Federal Government's ability to ensure that people have clean air and
water. The proposal also eliminates the Marine Pollution and National
Estuary programs which are critical for protecting marine and coastal
ecosystems.
Please provide at least $760 million in fiscal year 2020 to support
scientific research at the EPA.
u.s. fish and wildlife service
The President's budget request once again eliminates the Science
Support program within USFWS. In fiscal year 2019, Congress allocated
$17.3 million for the program. This program provides scientific
information needed by USFWS, such as research on conservation of
priority species prior to Endangered Species Act listing, the impacts
of energy production on wildlife, and best management practices for
combating invasive species, and needs to be restored.
smithsonian institution
The Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History
(NMNH) is a valuable Federal partner in the curation and research on
scientific specimens. The scientific experts at the NMNH care for 140
million specimens and ensure the strategic growth of this
internationally recognized scientific research institution. To increase
the availability of these scientific resources to researchers,
educators, other Federal agencies, and the public, NMNH is working on a
multi-year effort to digitize its collections. That effort will
substantially increase the scientific uses of these collections.
NMNH has also been working to strengthen curatorial and research
staffing and to backfill positions left open by retirements and budget
constraints. The current staffing level is insufficient to provide
optimal care for the collections. Future curatorial and collections
management staffing levels may be further jeopardized given the
proposed funding cuts at science agencies, such as the USGS, that
support staff positions at NMNH.
The budget for NMNH has remained flat over the past 2 years. We
urge Congress to provide NMNH with at least $53 million in fiscal year
2020 to allow the museum to undertake critical collections care, make
needed technology upgrades, and conduct cutting edge research.
conclusion
We urge Congress to reject the administration's budget request for
fiscal year 2020 and continue the bipartisan tradition of investing in
our Nation's scientific capacity. Thank you for your thoughtful
consideration of this request.
[This statement was submitted by Jyotsna Pandey, Ph.D., Public
Policy Manager, and Robert Gropp, Ph.D., Executive Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of the American Samoa Government deg.
Letter From the Office of the Governor, American Samoa Government
April 1, 2019
Senator Richard Shelby, Chairman
Senator Patrick Leahy, Vice
Committee on Appropriations
Chairman
United States Capitol, S-128
Committee on Appropriations
Washington, DC 20510
United States Capitol, S-146A
Washington, DC 20510
Senator Lisa Murkowski, Chairwoman
Senator Tom Udall, Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Interior Appropria-
Subcommittee on Interior Appropria-
tions
tions
131 Dirksen Senate Office Building
125 Hart Senate Office Building
Washington, DC 20510
Washington, DC 20510
Dear Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Leahy, Chairwoman Murkowski and
Ranking Member Udall:
I am writing with regard to the fiscal year 2020 Interior,
Environment and Related Agencies appropriations bill. As you craft your
bill, I would respectfully request that you provide at least the level
of funding you provided in fiscal year 2019 for American Samoa
Operations Grants within the Territorial Assistance program.
In the best of times American Samoa faces serious financial
challenges. Unlike other American territories, American Samoa does not
enjoy the economic benefits of a robust tourism industry or the
presence of a military installation. We have one significant private
sector employer and our remote location makes it more expensive to do
business from American Samoa than from other islands in the region or
from Asia, placing us at a competitive disadvantage as we seek to
attract more businesses.
Our fragile economic position has been further challenged since we
were victimized by Cyclone Gita in February 2018. Gita devastated our
agricultural sector and caused widespread damage across the territory,
something the Committee recognized in its Fiscal Year 2019 Interior
Appropriations Report:
``American Samoa.--The Committee is concerned about the
longterm impact of Cyclone Gita on American Samoa, particularly
as it relates to impending increase in the minimum wage and how
that will impact American Samoa's economy and its ability to
recover.''
I would be remiss if I did not take this opportunity to thank the
Committee for including $5 million in supplemental nutrition assistance
for American Samoa in the pending Fiscal Year 2019 Disaster
Supplemental bill. Our hope is that this number will be increased to a
total of $18 million so that the final amount will provide adequate
assistance to our 2,600 farmers who lost an entire growing season,
depriving them of not only their livelihood for the year but also the
food with which these subsistence/backyard farmers feed themselves and
their 13,000 dependents.
It is in this overall context that I ask for your assistance with
regard to the American Samoa Operations Grants program. As you well
know the President's budget for fiscal year 2020 proposes funding of
$21,529,000, a reduction of more than 9 percent from the $23,720,000
included in the fiscal year 2019 Consolidated Appropriations Act. While
the difference in those amounts, $2,191,000, is no more than a rounding
error in a $4 trillion Federal budget, it makes a very significant
difference to our government's ability to provide essential services to
our 60,000 citizens given our economic circumstances.
Your thoughtful consideration of this request would be greatly
appreciated.
Sincerely,
Lolo M. Moliga,
Governor of American Samoa
cc:
Honorable David Bernhardt, Acting Secretary of the Department of
the Interior
Honorable Douglas Domenech, Assistant Secretary, Office of Insular &
International Affairs
Honorable Lemanu Peleti Mauga, Lieutenant Governor
______
Prepared Statement of the American Shore & Beach Preservation
Association
April 11, 2019
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski
Chairwoman
Interior & Environment, Senate
Appropriations Committee
U.S. Senate
Washington, DC 20510
The Honorable Betty McCollum
The Honorable Tom Udall
Chairwoman
Ranking Member
Interior & Environment,
Interior & Environment, Senate
House Appropriations
Appropriations Committee
Committee
U.S. Senate
U.S. House of
Washington, DC 20510
Representatives
Washington, DC 20515
Dear Chairwomen Murkowski and McCollum and Ranking Members Udall and
Joyce:
Since 1926, the American Shore & Beach Preservation Association
(ASBPA), a 501(c)3 non-profit, has been dedicated to preserving,
protecting and enhancing our coasts by merging science and public
policy. Our members are industry, local government officials, academics
and residents of coastal districts; we are advocates for healthy
coastlines.
Testimony for Senate Interior, Environment and related agencies
Appropriations subcommittee for fiscal year 2020, for the U.S.
Geological Survey and Bureau of Ocean Energy Management.
1.
Provide $46 million for the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) Coastal-
Marine Hazards and Resources Program (CMHRP)
Coastal shoreline counties contribute $6.9 trillion to our GDP \1\.
Coastal habitats including beaches, wetlands, mangroves and estuarine
systems are some of the most ecologically productive and economically
important on earth.\2\ But perhaps most importantly to communities that
live along a coast, a healthy coastline provides protection of life and
property from the hazards of living by the water--storm surge, waves,
and sea level rise. With this in mind, we ask you to increase funding
for USGS CMHRP beyond the administration's request.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ NOAA, State of the Coast, 2012. http://
stateofthecoast.noaa.gov/.
\2\ Barbier, Et al, ``The value of estuarine and coastal ecosystem
services'', Ecological Monographs, 2011. http://www.esajournals.org/
doi/pdf/10.1890/10-1510.1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The research done by USGS CMHRP is critical for helping make
coastal communities more resilient to extreme weather and less reliant
on Federal recovery funds. Working with its partners, the CMHRP
delivers actionable assessments of coastal hazards and helps to develop
effective strategies for achieving more-resilient communities. For
example, CMHRP plans to develop improved methodologies to measuring
shoreline change data that covers not only sandy, but also coral and
wetland shorelines. Leveraging this data and through enhancement of
existing models, the CMHRP will be able to extend forecasts and
projections of shoreline position to span time scales from single
storms to the end of the current century. Federal, State, Tribal,
local, and private-sector end-users incorporate these analyses to
better understand, anticipate, and reduce their risks through science-
based decisionmaking. Increased funding for the CMHRP will allow for
improved real-time and long-term storm forecasts, as well as data
characterizing protective dunes and beaches.
ASBPA also strongly supports USGS's agency-wide efforts to provide
critical tools and data to support coastal research and therefore
improved coastal decisionmaking. Whether by tracking hydrologic
contaminants, deploying tools to improve flood mapping or providing
coastal LIDAR and imagery data-sets, USGS provides critical information
to the entire coastal scientific community. These programs should be
supported and funded to help improve the United States' ability to plan
and prepare for coastal hazards.
2.
Increase funding to the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM)
Marine Minerals Program (MMP) for environmental studies and to
support:
a. Conveyance of Sand Resources
b. National Offshore Sand Inventory
c.
Marine Mineral Information System
As a means of improving their resilience to coastal hazards,
communities are increasingly looking towards marine sediment for
nature-based protection. The BOEM Marine Minerals Program (MMP)
facilitates access to non-energy marine minerals, particularly sand and
gravel, for shore protection and coastal restoration projects. The
National Offshore Sand Inventory and the Marine Mineral Information
System are excellent resources for managers to understand available
resources while facilitating the sustainable and efficient management
of our offshore marine minerals. As communities continue to increase
their resilience and assess their adaptation options, BOEM MMP will be
a critical piece to their success.
Additionally, funding for environmental studies in the MMP will
support the scientific research and long-term monitoring of these
resources that will help reduce the impacts of these activities. For
example, in fiscal year 2018, BOEM worked cooperatively with the Civil
Works and Regulatory Programs of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to
prepare several environmental documents and conduct independent reviews
evaluating the potential impacts from beach nourishment and coastal
restoration projects, including the dredging of Outer Continental Shelf
(OCS) sand and its placement on recipient beaches. These efforts are
vital to ensuring that the potential impacts of OCS activities on the
environment are understood and that appropriate protective measures are
applied.
ASBPA also supports BOEM's proposed creation of a specific Marine
Minerals budget activity line in fiscal year 2020.
3.
Increase funding to U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service (USFWS) to address
permitting needs and reduce the consultation backlog
Consultation with resource agencies helps identify effective
mitigation practices to avoid or minimize harm to protected or managed
species and habitat. Considering the backlog in consultation provided
by the USFWS and the increase in coastal restoration and shore
protection projects, ASBPA encourages an increase in funding to USFWS
permitting resources to address these needs while still maintaining
thorough and necessary permitting review.
Sincerely,
Derek Brockbank
Executive Director
cc:
Sens. Richard Shelby, Pat Leahy; Reps. Nita Lowey, Kay Granger;
Chairs & Ranking Members, Appropriations Committee
______
Prepared Statement of the American Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals
On behalf of our over 2 million supporters, the American Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) appreciates this
opportunity to submit testimony to the House Appropriations
Subcommittee on Interior, Environment and Related Agencies. Founded in
1866, the ASPCA is the first humane organization established in the
Americas and serves as the Nation's leading voice for animal welfare.
We request that the subcommittee consider the following concerns when
making fiscal year 2020 appropriations.
wild horses and the blm
In the over 45 years since Congress charged the Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) with protecting our country's wild horses and burros,
Americans have witnessed the agency's Wild Horse and Burro Program
deteriorate into a continuous cycle of costly roundups and removals
with little regard for the preservation-focused mandate specified in
the Wild Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act or on-range management of
the herds. Our wild horses and burros should be revered as historical
icons, treated humanely, and managed fairly and respectfully on our
public lands. Recognizing that the BLM's Wild Horse and Burro Program
is in dire need of an overhaul, the ASPCA has partnered with a diverse
group of stakeholders to propose a non-lethal, humane, and long-term
approach to on-range management that would implement a sweeping
fertility control program on the range and eventually release the BLM
from a continuous cycle of round-ups, removals, and holdings. We
appreciate BLM's acknowledgement of the need for reform in the Wild
Horse and Burro Program and are encouraged by their recognition of the
need for long-term strategies for on-range management that will require
substantial investment of resources. This approach will, within a few
years, provide significant relief for the range and enable all the
stakeholders to come together around a single solution. It is critical
for the agency to commit to non-lethal management rather than pressing
to relax legal restrictions on sale to slaughter or mass killing of
healthy horses. It is also critical for the agency to augment its
capacity for gathers and focus its attention on the high priority HMAs
where horses, wildlife and the range are most at risk. It is imperative
that robust fertility control work begin immediately.
Prohibit BLM Funding for Euthanasia or Sale of Wild Horses as
Management Methods
In December 2004, Congress passed the Consolidated Appropriations
Act for fiscal year 2005, which amended the Wild Free-Roaming Horses
and Burros Act to allow for the sale of certain wild horses and burros.
This instant transfer of title from the U.S. Government to the
individual purchaser strips key protections for wild mustangs and
burros, making them vulnerable to the still-thriving horse slaughter
industry. Additionally, we take issue with the characterization of
large-scale killing of healthy wild horses as ``euthanasia.'' The
agency currently has the authority to euthanize old, sick or injured
horses, but not healthy horses, as a means of population control. If
allowed, destruction of healthy horses would most likely be
accomplished using gunshot from some distance. That is not humane
euthanasia.
In past appropriations bills, Congress has repeatedly confirmed its
opposition to the slaughter of our Nation's wild horses and burros; it
did so most recently in the fiscal year 2019 Consolidated
Appropriations Act, the current funding vehicle for the Department of
Interior. The ASPCA requests that the subcommittee continue to include
the following language: ``Appropriations herein made shall not be
available for the destruction of healthy, unadopted, wild horses and
burros in the care of the Bureau or its contractors or for the sale of
wild horses and burros that results in their destruction for processing
into commercial products.''
Prohibit Forest Service Funding for Euthanasia or Sale of Wild Horses
as Management Methods
Past appropriations bills have not explicitly prohibited the Forest
Service, which also manages wild horses and burros under the 1971 Act,
from managing horses through lethal methods. This loophole was recently
exploited when managers of the Modoc National Forest proposed selling
wild horses from the Devil's Garden herd without limits on slaughter.
The House Interior subcommittee has included new language to address
this deficiency in their draft fiscal year 2020 bill. The ASPCA
requests that the subcommittee include the following language in the
Senate bill: ``Funds appropriated to the Forest Service shall not be
available for the destruction of healthy, unadopted, wild horses and
burros in the care of the Forest Service or its contractors or for the
sale of wild horses and burros that results in their destruction for
processing into commercial products.''
implement Existing, and Explore New, Methods for On-Range and Off-Range
Management
The Wild Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act makes clear that on-
range management should be preferred over roundup and removal as the
primary method of wild horse management. BLM has multiple options at
its disposal to follow that guidance. Effective, humane management will
require a multifaceted approach. We suggest that the following
strategies be implemented simultaneously:
--Conduct targeted gathers and removals at densely populated Herd
Management Areas (HMAs) to reduce herd size in the short term.
--Treat gathered horses with fertility control prior to returning
them to the range. This program should continue until 80-90
percent of mares on the range have been treated, followed by
continued consistent fertility control.
--Relocate horses in holding facilities, and those taken off the
range, to large cost-effective pasture facilities funded
through public-private partnerships.
--Promote adoptions in order to reduce captive populations and costs.
The four tiers of this approach--gathers and removals, fertility
treatment, public-private partnerships, and adoptions--are crucial to
the ultimate success of the program. Failure to effectively implement
any part of this program jeopardizes the success of a holistic and
sustainable wild horse and burro program. If employed correctly, this
plan will result in a natural population decline over the next decade.
We support this humane, effective, and financially sustainable
approach.
The ASPCA appreciates BLM's public acknowledgement that fertility
control methods must be a significant part of wild horse population
management. Porcine Zona Pellucida (PZP), the contraceptive vaccine
that has been used for decades to manage horse and deer populations, is
registered by EPA and commercially available. In fiscal year 2018, the
BLM administered 702 fertility control treatments.\1\ If PZP is to be a
serious part of the solution, its use must be increased to levels that
will significantly impact population growth. A 2013 National Academy of
Sciences report noted the promising capabilities of this and other
forms of chemical fertility control.\2\ The ASPCA recommends that the
subcommittee direct BLM to prioritize the use of fertility control to
stem the population growth of wild horse and burro herds.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Program Data.'' U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of
Land Management. April 27, 2018. https://www.blm.gov/programs/wild-
horse-and-burro/about-the-program/program-data.
\2\ ``Using Science to Improve the BLM Wild Horse and Burro
Program: A Way Forward.'' National Research Council. The National
Academies Press, 2013.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ASPCA strongly encourages the subcommittee to prioritize and
robustly fund humane on-range management methods, and innovative and
humane off-range programs, as it crafts the fiscal year 2020 Interior
appropriations bill.
[This statement was submitted by Nancy Perry, Senior Vice
President, Government Relations.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Americans for the Arts
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to submit written testimony
in support of Federal funding for the National Endowment for the Arts
(NEA) at no less than $167.5 million for fiscal year 2020, a $12.5
million increase over fiscal year 2019 funding. This would also match
the funding level that the U.S. House Appropriations Interior
Subcommittee approved on May 15, 2019.
Americans for the Arts is the leading nonprofit organization for
advancing the arts and arts education in America. We have more than 55
years of service and are dedicated to representing and serving the more
than 5,000 local arts agencies in every State. Together we work to
ensure that every American has access to the transformative power of
the arts. I appreciate the opportunity to provide public comment on the
budget request for the NEA.
I was deeply troubled by the administration's short-sightedness for
the proposed fiscal year 2018, 2019, and 2020 budgets calling for the
elimination of the NEA. I commend the bipartisan work from this
committee, and Congress, in rejecting those requests, and I know that I
speak for the arts community in our appreciation to Congress in
appropriating an additional $2 million in funds for the NEA in fiscal
year 2019 over fiscal year 2018.
Receiving consecutive years of incremental funding increases, the
NEA's investment in every congressional district in the country now
contributes to a $804.2 billion arts and culture industry in America
according to our U.S. Department of Commerce, representing 4.3 percent
of the annual GDP. The Nation's arts and culture industry supports 5
million jobs and yields a $25 billion trade surplus for our country.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, https://www.bea.gov/system/
files/2019-03/acpsa0319.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This recent study by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis also
found that 13 States had an average annual growth rate above the
national average of 5.9 percent, as measured over the three-year period
of 2014-2016. These States were the fastest-growing for the percentage
of their gross State product coming from arts and cultural industries
and include: California (7.8 percent), Tennessee (7.8 percent), Florida
(7.1 percent), Montana (6.6 percent), and Oregon (6.5 percent).
Further, every NEA grant dollar leverages at least $9 in private
and other public funds, generating more than $500 million in matching
support. This leveraging power far surpasses the required non-Federal
match of at least 1:1 and illustrates why Federal support for the arts
is uniquely valuable. The Federal investment in the arts helps power
the creative economy across the country.
Proportionally, the NEA's budget is just 0.004 percent of the
Federal budget. That amounts to 47 cents per capita. In fact, the NEA
budget has been losing its share of Federal discretionary spending and
failing to keep pace with inflation since 1992 when the appropriation
was for $176 million. When adjusted for inflation, the NEA's 1992
budget would today be more than twice the current budget.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Americans for the Arts, https://www.americansforthearts.org/
sites/default/files/1.%20National%20Endowment%20for%20the%20Arts_0.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regarding our request for fiscal year 2020, we hope that the NEA
will receive funding at the same level as the recent high point of
$167.5 million, which Congress appropriated on a bipartisan basis in
fiscal year 2010.
We estimate that a $12.5 million increase, based on current NEA
programming would provide:
--An increase in the total amount for direct endowment grants by
about $6 million.
--An increase in the total number of direct grants by about 210.
--An increase of $4 million to the NEA's State partnership agreement,
which would result in about 2,000 additional State grants.
--With the NEA estimation of a 9:1 return for each direct grant
dollar, an 8 percent funding level increase would be expected
to leverage an additional $40 million in non-Federal matching
support.
NEA grants are remarkably far-reaching, and they touch many
communities which have fewer opportunities to experience the arts.
According to the NEA, the majority of direct grants go to small- and
medium-sized organizations, which often support projects for audiences
that otherwise might not have access to arts programming. In fiscal
year 2017:
--Small-sized organizations (less than $500,000 in prior year
expenditures) received 31 percent of the NEA's direct grants;
--Medium-sized organizations ($500,000 to $2 million in prior year
expenditures) received about 34 percent; and
--Large organizations (over $2 million) received 35 percent of direct
grant awards.
In examining the communities that NEA grants touch, it is important
to note that:
--40 percent of NEA-supported activities take place in high-poverty
neighborhoods;
--36 percent of NEA grants go to organizations that reach underserved
populations such as people with disabilities, people in
institutions, and veterans; and
--33 percent of NEA grants serve low-income audiences.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ National Endowment for the Arts, https://www.arts.gov/sites/
default/files/NEA_Quick_Facts_2018_V.1.pdf.
I'd like to highlight one very important NEA initiative--that of
the Creative Forces program. An increase in funding for the NEA is
vital in order to sustain and expand important work that serves the
needs of military service members and veterans who have been diagnosed
with traumatic brain injury (TBI) and psychological health conditions.
Much of this work is being supported through targeted programs such as
the NEA's Creative Forces Military Healing Arts Network (administered
through a cooperative agreement with Americans for the Arts), as well
as community arts engagement programs receiving Federal grants and
State and local arts agencies. The modest investment in government
funding for arts and health in the military is instrumental in allowing
military service members and veterans to heal and successfully
reintegrate into society and their communities, as well as supporting
military families and caregivers in their pathway to health and well-
being.
The Creative Forces program--currently at 11 clinical sites--
utilizes 14 NEA-funded and four DoD/VA-funded creative arts therapists
(CATs), who are integrated into interdisciplinary treatment teams
providing art therapy, music therapy, dance/movement therapy, and
creative writing instruction for service members with TBI and
associated psychological health issues. In 2018, more than 16,000
patient encounters took place, and over 3,000 new patients were served.
Additionally, the program significantly invests in related research,
with 11 new studies underway and nine already published.
Throughout the country, we see an increase of arts and military
programs funded by State and local public and private sources catalyzed
by the Federal investment. Many of the creative arts therapies and
community arts engagement programs that are making a difference in the
lives of our military service members, veterans, their families, and
caregivers are being documented and networked through Americans for the
Arts' National Initiative for Arts & Health in the Military. Several
examples here are administered and take place in your districts:
--The Montana Museum of Arts & Culture at the University of Montana
in Missoula, Montana, features an exhibit of the POW collection
of art by veteran and artist Ben Steele. Mr. Steele, 98, who
lives in Billings, is a World War II veteran and Bataan Death
March survivor. As a prisoner he created drawings documenting
the Japanese invasion of the Philippines and the capture of
POWs. These artworks are among the very few firsthand accounts
of the Bataan Death March.
--Thalia Mara Hall in Jackson, Mississippi, with the Sonny Montgomery
VA Center hosted the 2016 National Creative Arts Festival Stage
Show. Each year approximately 120 Veterans from VA medical
facilities across the Nation exhibit their artwork or perform
musical, dance, drama, or original writing selections that are
chose from year-long competitions held at their local
facilities.
--Military Experience & the Arts in Morgantown, West Virginia, works
with veterans and their families to publish creative prose,
poetry, and artwork. Volunteers include college professors,
professional authors, veterans' advocates, and clinicians.
Veterans and their families pay nothing for the services.
--The Spiva Center for the Arts in Joplin, Missouri, is designated
nationally as a Blue Star Museum, a collaboration between the
NEA, Blue Star Families, the Department of Defense, and Museums
Across America. Spiva Center for the Arts' Vet Art program was
established in early 2017 to serve military veterans in the
Joplin region. Vet Art offers free art workshops to veterans
and their families providing camaraderie, reintegration into
their communities, and an outlet for self-expression.
Continuing and expanding creative arts therapies and community arts
engagement programs is essential to reaching military veterans with TBI
and post-traumatic stress. For example, 85 percent of military patients
say art therapy is helpful to their healing and military patients
consistently rate art therapy among the top four treatments out of more
than 40 health interventions offered.
This work is vital for active duty military, staff, veterans, their
families, and caregivers across the military, public, private, and
nonprofit sectors. It will advance the policy, practice, and quality
use of arts and creativity as tools for health in the military, better
ensuring the readiness, resilience, and retention, while assisting the
eventual reintegration from military to civilian life.
In sum, Federal funding fosters investment, spurs job-related
growth, expands educational opportunities, helps our country, and
provides for the preservation of our heritage.
Thank you for your consideration and support of at least $167.5
million for the NEA in the fiscal year 2020 budget, and, as always, we
stand ready to assist and remain focused on increasing funding for the
Endowments in the coming months.
______
Prepared Statement of the Animal Welfare Institute
The Animal Welfare Institute, a national animal welfare advocacy
nonprofit organization, asks the subcommittee to maintain adequate
funding levels for crucial wildlife programs and to include measures to
protect wild horses, bats, and other at-risk species.
bureau of land management (blm)--wild free-roaming horses and burros
The BLM continues to mismanage America's wild horses and burros,
relying on an endless cycle of costly removals from public lands
instead of implementing viable solutions, such as immunocontraception
to control fertility rates and manage these animals in their natural
habitats. We ask the Committee to urge the agency to implement the use
of the porcine zona pellucida (PZP) vaccine, as per the National
Academy of Sciences recommendation. Moreover, we strongly support the
continued inclusion of the Committee's language to ensure that the BLM
does not destroy wild horses and burros: ``Appropriations herein made
shall not be available for the destruction of healthy, unadopted, wild
horses and burros in the case of the Bureau or its contractors or for
the sale of wild horses and burros that results in their destruction
for processing into commercial products.''
The BLM is attempting for the third time to move forward with a
controversial experiment using federally protected horses that would
subject wild mares to an invasive surgical procedure known as
``ovariectomy via colpotomy,'' which involves blindly locating the
ovaries and severing them using a rod-like tool while the animal
remains conscious. In its report on wild horse management, the NAS
explicitly warned BLM against using this procedure due to the risks of
serious complications. We ask the Committee to include language
ensuring that funds shall not be made available to implement the
``ovariectomy via colpotomy'' experiments, as well as report language
directing the BLM to forgo using wild horse and burro management
methods that the NAS has recommended against using.
forest service--wild free-roaming horses and burros
In the fall of 2018, the Forest Service announced that it would
sell rounded-up wild horses from the Devil's Garden wild horse
territory without restrictions or limitations on slaughter. The FS has
traditionally abided by Congress's clear intent on this matter--namely,
the explicit restrictions enacted through the Interior appropriations
bill to prevent the BLM from selling wild horses for slaughter.
However, the FS now contends that the agency is not covered by this
language, and seeks to move forward with plans to sell federally
protected wild horses ``without limitation.'' Appropriations language
is needed to clarify that the FS is similarly bound by restrictions
regarding the commercial destruction of wild horses. We urge the
Committee to incorporate language that mirrors the provisions that bar
the BLM from facilitating the destruction of healthy, unadopted wild
horses and burros. The recently released fiscal year 2020 House
Interior bill includes such language, so we urge the Senate to do the
same.
trophy hunting
We urge you to include language prohibiting the use of funds for:
--Issuing any permit authorizing import into or export from the
United States of a sport-hunted species that is listed or
proposed to be listed under section 4(c) as a threatened
species or endangered species.
--Issuing any permit authorizing import from any country of a sport-
hunted threatened or endangered species until the Secretary
determines that the country where the animal was killed
adequately provides for the conservation, monitoring, and
reporting for that species, including but not limited to:
(A)
the country where the animal was killed has a management
plan for that species based on the best available science
that addresses existing threats to the species; provides a
significant conservation benefit to the species; formally
coordinates with adjacent countries to protect
transboundary populations; and ensures that any take is
sustainable and does not contribute to the species' decline
in either the short-term or long-term according to current
population estimates derived through use of the best
available science;
(B)
the management plan required in subsection (3)(A) is fully
funded and is being actively implemented; and
(C)
the country where the animal was killed demonstrates
transparency, accountability, and verifiability in
governance to ensure that any benefits, including revenue
from such taking, materially, directly, and substantially
benefits the conservation of that species.
--Issuing any permit authorizing import from any country of a sport-
hunted threatened or endangered species until the Secretary has
made a finding, after public notice and comment pursuant to
section 553 of title 5 USC, that hunting of the species in such
country enhances the propagation or survival of the species.
--Issuing any permit authorizing import of a sport-hunted trophy of
an elephant or lion taken in Tanzania, Zimbabwe, or Zambia.
In 2014 the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) issued a rule
banning the importation of African elephant trophies from Tanzania and
Zimbabwe into the United States. A 2016 decision by the U.S. District
Court of the District of Columbia upheld FWS's 2014 ban, finding that
sport hunting of elephants in Zimbabwe would not enhance the survival
of the species. In addition, the FWS suspended imports of sport-hunted
African lions after they were listed under the Endangered Species Act
in 2015. However, since October 2017, FWS has tried to reverse the bans
on importing both African elephant and lion trophies. In March 2018, in
apparent disregard for President Trump's negative comments regarding
trophy hunting, the agency issued a memo announcing that decisions
about whether to approve importation of sport-hunted elephant and lion
trophies would be made on a ``case-by-case basis,'' rather than having
rules that apply to specific species and countries of origin.
international wildlife conservation council
We urge you to include language prohibiting the use of funds for
the International Wildlife Conservation Council of the United States
Fish and Wildlife Service.
The stated goal of the International Wildlife Conservation Council
is to boost public awareness of the ``benefits that result from U.S.
citizens traveling to foreign nations to engage in hunting.'' However,
trophy hunting is unethical, unpopular, and of unproven conservation
value. Furthermore, the IWCC is duplicative of other councils and a
wasteful use of government funding. The Federal Advisory Committee Act
requires that ``new advisory committees should be established only when
they are determined to be essential and their number should be kept to
the minimum necessary.'' This council is not essential, and its
function is already covered by the very broad mandate of the Wildlife
and Hunting Heritage Conservation Council. Despite its nonessential
function, this 18-person council meets twice per year with ``travel
expenses, including per diem,'' covered by US taxpayer dollars. The
makeup of this new council is also of significant concern, with
designated seats for representatives of the firearms and ammunition
industries, who have no scientific or conservation expertise. There is
no seat at the table for experts with a scientific or conservation
focus. Furthermore, the Trump administration has already abandoned
other, more legitimate and effective efforts to address these issues.
For instance, the administration has not held a meeting of the Wildlife
Trafficking Advisory Council or the Federal Interagency Task Force on
Wildlife Trafficking created by President Obama.
trapping-funding request: $300,000 over 3 years
We urge you to direct the Secretary to institute a 3-year pilot
program that replaces the use of body-gripping traps by agency
personnel with humane alternative methods and equipment with only 2
exceptions: When the body-gripping trap is used either to (1) control
documented, invasive species to achieve resource management objectives
where humane alternative methods are documented to have been
ineffective; or (2) protect a species that is listed as an endangered
or threatened under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531
et seq.) or is treated by the Forest Service as a sensitive species and
where humane alternative methods are documented to have been
ineffective. The exceptions apply only under the following conditions:
(1) such use of a body-gripping trap is in accordance with applicable
State and Federal law; (2) prior to using a body-gripping trap, all
available humane alternative methods for such control or protection,
respectively, are attempted; and (3) such attempts are documented in
writing, and such documentation is maintained at the headquarters of
the department that employs the individual engaging in such attempt,
and is published on the department's website.
Body-gripping traps, such as strangling snares, Conibear traps,
steel-jaw leghold traps, and enclosed foothold traps, are inhumane and
inherently nonselective. The nontarget animals caught in these traps
include threatened and endangered species, as well as family pets.
These traps do not belong on public lands where families enjoy spending
time outdoors, and where anyone who trips a trap can become a victim.
u.s. fish and wildlife service: ecological services funding
We are deeply concerned by a lack of adequate funding for
Ecological Services, and urge the Committee to commit the maximum
possible funding to this crucial program area responsible for
implementing the Endangered Species Act. The fiscal year 2019 funding
level of $247.8 million is barely sufficient for the agency to carry
out basic administrative functions required under the ESA, and does not
enable the staffing necessary to address the backlog of hundreds of
species awaiting listing decisions or other time-sensitive actions
mandated by the law. ES requires a budget of at least $486 million
across its five programs to begin to make up for lost ground and put
species on the path to recovery. Critically, this includes ensuring
every listed species receives a minimum of $50,000 per year for
recovery.
national wildlife refuge system funding
We support the administration's proposed fiscal year 2020 increase
of $23 million for the National Wildlife Refuge System, given the
crucial role that refuges across the country play in species
conservation and nonconsumptive outdoor recreation.
usfws: office of law enforcement funding
We support the administration's proposed fiscal year 2020 increase
of $327,000 for the Office of Law Enforcement at FWS. In particular, we
support the increase of $986,000 for the wildlife trafficking account.
The OLE is one of the most important lines of defense for wildlife both
at home and abroad.
usfws: international affairs funding
We support the administration's proposed fiscal year 2020 increase
of $807,000 for International Affairs. In particular, we support the
additional $1 million for the wildlife trafficking account. The
activities undertaken by IA build capacity and develop partnerships
with other nations for species conservation, which enables maximum
cooperation in fighting the terrorist organizations and international
crime syndicates that profit from wildlife trafficking. It is important
to ensure adequate funding to continue implementing Public Law 114-231,
the Eliminate, Neutralize, and Disrupt (END) Wildlife Trafficking Act
of 2016. Additionally, adequate funding for implementation of
agreements made under the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) facilitates
international cooperation and solidifies the US's leadership role on
conservation issues.
white-nose syndrome in bats
We urge the Committee to maintain funding amounts and directives
from S. Rpt. 115-276, as endorsed by the fiscal year 2019 Consolidated
Appropriations Act, H. Rpt. 116-9: Fish and Wildlife Service Science
Support, $3.5 million (including $2 million for species recovery); FWS
Wildlife Program, $2.5 million for WNS studies; and to continue to lead
on and implement the North American Bat Monitoring Program.
Thanks to consistent funding from Congress, the USFWS and its
partners have made great strides in understanding and responding to
WNS. The success of the national plan is heartening not only for the
long term survival of bats but also for being a template for responding
to future disease outbreaks. According to USFWS scientist Jeremy
Coleman, who oversees the plan, ``the multidisciplinary efforts
spearheaded by USFWS represent the kinds of strategy needed for future
responses to such epidemics. WNS and other fungal pathogens-diseases-
that harm wildlife are on the rise, due to increased human visits to
previously remote places . . . and also climate change . . . ''
[This statement was submitted by Nancy Blaney, Director, Government
Affairs.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Asian and Pacific Islander Americans in
Historic Preservation, Hispanic Access Foundation, and Latinos in
Heritage Conservation
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski
The Honorable Tom Udall
Chairman
Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Interior,
Subcommittee on Interior,
Environment and Related Agencies
Environment and Related Agencies
Senate Committee on Appropriations
Senate Committee on Appropriations
131 Dirksen Senate Office Building
131 Dirksen Senate Office Building
Washington, DC 20510
Washington, DC 20510
Chairman Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall:
Asian and Pacific Islander Americans in Historic Preservation,
Hispanic Access Foundation, Latinos in Heritage Conservation, and the
undersigned 43 groups and 66 individuals encourage the Committee on
Appropriations to support the Underrepresented Communities Civil Rights
Grant with a $30 million appropriation for fiscal year 2020.
Funded through the National Park System's Historic Preservation
Fund (HPF), the Underrepresented Communities Civil Rights Grant program
would use non-tax payer dollars to partner with States and Tribes to
help save important places in our communities. The HPF provides
matching grants to State and Tribal historic preservation offices to
support surveys of historic resources, training, nominations to the
National Register of Historic Places, and grants to local
jurisdictions. HPF was established in 1977, is currently authorized at
$150 million per year, and is funded by Outer Continental Shelf oil
lease revenues, not tax dollars. These funds are spent locally on
preservation projects, with selection decisions made at the State
level. In short, it makes preservation possible.
Historic preservation projects assisted by grants like the existing
African American Civil Rights Grant Program generate billions of
dollars in heritage tourism annually, while helping public and private
partners tell unique and powerful stories of the African American
struggle for equality in the 20th Century.
The expansion of the program to the Underrepresented Communities
Civil Rights Grants will increase the program's impact by not only
documenting, interpreting, and preserving the sites and stories related
to a more inclusive story of American history, but also increasing the
audience appeal for such projects. This proposed program expansion is
an opportunity to multiply the economic impact of the existing program
across the United States.
A review by the National Historic Landmarks Committee found that
less than 8 percent (8 percent) of designated landmarks specifically
represented the stories of Native Americans, African Americans,
American Latinos, Asian Americans, Pacific Islanders, women, LGBTQ, and
other underrepresented groups. There are few sites associated with
these groups despite their long histories in the United States from the
earliest settlement of the country to the economic development of the
West to the desegregation of public schools in the 20th century and
political influence in the 21st.
Including women, these groups make up more than 50 percent of the
U.S. population. Representation matters; this Federal grant will allow
us to narrate our stories, which may be misrepresented or otherwise
ignored within a larger society, with accuracy and dignity. This
promotes understanding and compassion and has the power to lessen
social inequalities.
All Americans should be able to see themselves, their history, and
their potential in both our collective story and our national
landscape. As you consider fiscal year 2020 funding levels, we hope
that you will continue the broad bi-partisan support for this National
Park Service grant program that is vitally important to preserving so
many more of our great American stories.
Sincerely,
Asian and Pacific Islander Americans in Historic Preservation
Hispanic Access Foundation
Latinos in Heritage Conservation
Co-Signed by:
2021
African American Community, Cultural, and Educational Society
Alamo City Democracy Project
American Anthropological Association
American Association for State and Local History
American Cultural Resources Association
Asian American Studies Department and Center, UCLA
Coalition for American Heritage
Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation
Curba
Chispa, League of Conservation Voters
Documents of Resistance
Esperanza Peace and Justice Center
Filipino American National Historical Society--Metro New York City
Chapter
Filipino American National Historical Society
GLBT Historical Society
Hispanic Federation
Indiana Landmarks
Landmarks Illinois
Latino Outdoors
National LGBTQ Center for the Arts
National Parks Conservation Association
National Trust for Historic Preservation
Native American Land Conservancy
Native Womens Wilderness
Nature For All
OCA Greater Chicago
Pratt Institute
Preservation Chicago
Preservation Texas
Society for American Archaeology
Society for Historical Archaeology
Spanish Heritage Foundation of Riverside
St. Mary's University
Tataviam Land Conservancy
The National Council of Asian Pacific Americans (NCAPA)
Turning Wheel--University of San Diego
UC Davis Library/Bulosan Center for Filipino Studies
University of California, Riverside Public History Program
University of Houston
University of Maryland, College Park
UT Austin
Westside Preservation Alliance
Stuart Berman
Cathie Bond
Tanya Bowers
Caroline Calderon
Antonia Castaneda, PhD
Marsh Davis
Rachel Delgado
Lisa DiChiera
John Dichtl
xenia diente
Doreen Duran
Maria Espinosa
Henry Flores
Moises Garcia
John Gonzalez
Jaylyn Gough
Sarah Zenaida Gould, PhD
Catherine Gudis, PhD
Estella Habal, PhD
Lawana Holland-Moore
Celeste Hong
Judy Jauregui
Rita Jirasek
Nicole Johnson
Lewis Kasner
Alvina Lai
Kristi Lin
Kelly Lizarraga
Mary Losh
Jose Madrid
Michelle Magalong, PhD
Magda Mankel
Nancy Melendez
Mabel Menard
Ward Miller
Jane Montanaro
Helen Mora
Beatrice Moreno
Sehila Mota Casper
Ron Muriera
Adam Natenshon
Kim Orbe
Gregg Orton
Alberto Pulido
Ray Rast, PhD
paul ruiz
RoxanneRyce-Paul
Graciela Isabel Sanchez
Allan Jason Sarmiento
Erica Schultz
Mary Lu Seidel
Antonio Serna
Carol Shull
Monica Sosa
Alan Spears
Roberto Tejada
Evan Thompson
Edward Torrez
Joseph Trujillo
Sharon Trujillo-Kasner
Karen Umemoto, PhD
Luis Villa
Bill Watanabe
Shayne Watson
Lily Anne Welty Tamai
______
Prepared Statement of the Assiniboine and Sioux Rural Water System
fort peck reservation rural water system ($3,210,000)
The Assiniboine and Sioux Rural Water Supply System (ASRWSS)
submits this testimony in strong support of continued Operations,
Maintenance, and Replacement Costs associated with the Fort Peck
Reservation Rural Water System in the Bureau of Indian Affairs'
Construction Account. The water system is authorized by an act of
Congress (Public Law 106-382).
The Assiniboine and Sioux Rural Water Supply System Board is a
newly tribally chartered agency charged with the construction and
operation of the Assiniboine and Sioux Rural Water Supply System, which
is the part of the Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water System that is on
the Fort Peck Indian Reservation. We are strong partners with Dry
Prairie Rural Water Supply System, which operates the part of the
Project that is off the Reservation.
The most basic of governmental function is the delivery of clean,
safe drinking water and we are honored that the Fort Peck Tribal
Executive Board has entrusted to us this most basic duty of government.
The ASRWSS wants to thank the subcommittee for the full funding of
Operations, Maintenance, and Replacement (OM&R) costs of the Water
Project at $2,634,000 in fiscal year 2019.
As the Project works toward completion our OM&R needs continue to
increase. Thus, for fiscal year 2020 we will need an additional
$576,000 for total level of funding at $3.210 million OM&R funding for
the Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water System for fiscal year 2020,
within appropriations to the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA)
Construction account.
This funding increase of $576,000 is necessary for this System to
safely operate with the correct level of staff and operating supplies,
including chemicals. The System will provide drinking water to more
than 20,000 residents in Northeast Montana in 2020 and several social
and governmental agencies, including the BIA Agency Office, Poplar
Schools, and Poplar hospital, Medicine Lake National Wildlife Refuge,
Fort Union Trading Post National Historic site, as well as several
towns including Wolf Point, Frazier, Culbertson, and Medicine Lake. The
population served at the end of 2016 was less than 10,000. By the end
of 2020, a projected 98 percent of the current Reservation Service
population will be served.
The Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water System was authorized by the
Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water System Act of 2000, Public Law 106-
382. The measure ensures a safe and adequate municipal, rural and
industrial water supply for the residents of the Fort Peck Indian
Reservation and assists the citizens of Roosevelt, Sheridan, Daniels,
and Valley Counties in Montana develop safe and adequate municipal,
rural and industrial water supplies.
As noted in the President's previous budget requests:
Groundwater from shallow alluvial aquifers . . . for the
municipal systems . . . is generally poor with concentrations
of iron, manganese, sodium, sulfates, bicarbonates and total
dissolved solids above recommended standards.
We must timely remedy this health risk.
The Project called for the construction of a single treatment plant
on the Missouri River near Poplar, Montana that distributes water
through 3,200 miles of pipeline to both the Reservation Tribal system
and, through three interconnections, to the Dry Prairie system. A
single water source on the Missouri River replaced nearly two dozen
individual community water sources ensuring a clean, plentiful and safe
water supply.
As a result of the success of the Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water
System, both on the Assiniboine and Sioux Reservation and off-
Reservation communities, alternative water sources have been capped.
There is no safe, reliable alternative if the on-Reservation 30,000
square foot water treatment plant, Missouri River intake, pumping
stations and related infrastructure were to cease operations.
The Federal legislation authorizing the Fort Peck Reservation Rural
Water System requires that the OM&R of the Assiniboine and Sioux Rural
Water Supply System--the portion on the Reservation that is held in
trust by the Federal Government--be paid in full by the BIA as a
Federal obligation. This is consistent with the Federal trust
responsibility to the Tribes who were promised a permanent home when we
agreed to move to the Reservation. A permanent home requires safe
drinking water. If this funding is not made available to the Tribes,
this system will have to shut down and all of the people, towns, and
Federal, Tribal, State, public and private agencies, and businesses
will have no source of drinking water.
Thus, the $3.210 million requested in fiscal year 2020 for the OM&R
of this vital infrastructure project is critical. At about 1 percent of
the total $300-plus million Federal investment in the project, the OM&R
costs to protect public health and the Federal investment made over the
last 17 years is a wise and prudent use of Federal funds--and
represents good stewardship of the Federal investment of taxpayer funds
in the infrastructure project.
The increased funding of $576,000, over the fiscal year 2019 level
for the OM&R of the Project, is needed as the Project buildout
continues and has increased the population served by the rural water
system. The expansion of the system requires additional personnel and
other costs (power, chemicals, repairs, replacements and improvements)
to operate and maintain the water treatment plant and associated
facilities, including the intake, pipelines, pumping stations and
reservoirs, to continue to meet the expanded service. Already, short-
life components of the rural water system must be replaced to maintain
the peak efficiency and reliability of the system.
If Congress does not appropriate the required funds for OM&R, as
the law states, then this System will not operate, and the people of
Northeast Montana will have no drinking water.
Again, we thank the subcommittee for the continued support of the
Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water System.
[This statement was submitted by Bill Whitehead, Chairman.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck
Reservation
I am Floyd Azure, Chairman of the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of
the Fort Peck Reservation. I would like to thank the Senate
Appropriations Subcommittee for the opportunity to submit testimony
concerning fiscal year 2020 appropriations for the Bureau of Indian
Affairs (BIA) and Indian Health Service (IHS).
The Fort Peck Reservation is in northeast Montana, 40 miles west of
the North Dakota border, and 50 miles south of the Canadian border,
with the Missouri River defining its southern border. The Reservation
encompasses over two million acres of land. We have approximately
12,000 enrolled Tribal members, with approximately 7,000 Tribal members
living on the Reservation. We have a total Reservation population of
approximately 11,000 people.
Congress has long recognized that the foundation for economic
development and prosperity in Indian Country lay in community
stability, which begins with infrastructure such as safe drinking
water, roads, public safety, and healthcare. We thank the subcommittee
for its longs standing support of Tribal programs within the Bureau of
Indian Affairs, Bureau of Indian Education and Indian Health Service
which are core Federal programs serving the Fort Peck Reservation and
our members. We cannot support the President's budget proposal which
proposes cuts to programs vital to Tribes. In our view, reducing funds
for these Federal program--critical to addressing the many challenges
facing Tribal governments and Indian people--is poor policy.
human services: substance abuse, suicide, indian child welfare
We appreciate the subcommittee's continued commitment to addressing
substance abuse and the consequential challenges that arise from this
plague. When someone is suffering from addiction it is not just the
person who is impacted, but the entire family. For Tribal communities,
it is the entire Tribe that bears the impacts of families torn apart by
substance abuse. We face higher poverty, higher foster care rates,
higher suicide rates, and in the end our people die at far younger ages
than the rest of the United States.
This last summer we had a rash of heroin overdoses, including two
fatal overdoses in 1 month. Every month a child is born testing
positive for meth or some other drug. We have entire families that are
using, from grandmothers to grandchildren. There is no doubt that
addiction is the leading cause of the 100 children that we have in
foster care now. We, as a people, cannot survive if we do not
acknowledge that what we are doing now is not working.
This level of social dysfunction in communities is no doubt the
cause of the high suicide rate in our communities. The suicide rate on
Montana Reservations is 22 percent higher than the rest of Montana. And
for Fort Peck, a 2016 study indicated that 13 percent of our youth
attempted suicide, that means that more than 1 in 10 of our children
have tried to take their own lives.
While these statistics are startling, the tragedy is overwhelming
for our families and communities because each of these statistics is a
child, mother, father, sister, or brother. This last summer on our
Reservation Michael Lee, a 13-year old boy took his life. This boy,
this baby really, had a family that loved him. He played sports. He was
determined to go to college. In many people's minds he had so much
promise and was fortunate to have a family to support him. But
something happened to him and we lost this child. Who knows what we as
a Tribe lost because this young man lost hope and took his own life. He
could have been a Tribal leader, a teacher, a scientist, a doctor, or
maybe what we need most, a strong role model as a father. I can only
tell you that it is time that we stop burying our children and start
working together to combat this tragedy.
We would urge the Members of the subcommittee to continue to
emphasize the need for additional mental health and substance abuse
treatment services in Indian Country. In particular, we support the
effort to develop a Special Behavioral Pilot Program similar to the
Special Diabetes for Indians Program to combat behavioral/mental health
issues among American Indian and Alaska Natives in a holistic and
culturally appropriate way. We know that having a consistently funded
program directly targeted to combating diabetes has reduced amputations
and lowered diabetes rates throughout Indian Country. It is time that
we have the same kind of program to target behavioral and mental health
issues that our Tribal members face.
We also continue support the increased funding for BIA Social
Service Programs, including our Indian Child Welfare programs, and the
Tiwahe Initiative. We have to address these issues in a holistic
fashion. We must work with individuals as they work to rebuild their
lives and their families. We cannot look at a person as one
dimensional. The same person who is dealing with addiction is often
dealing with child custody issues, health issues, housing issues, and
criminal issues. Thus, we need a team of people and programs to work
collaboratively with a person to attack each of these challenges. These
challenges can and often do overwhelm Tribal members. But if they know
that there is a network of Tribal services and programs and dedicated
people to help them stand on their own and work through their life's
challenges, they can gain the confidence to improve themselves and
return to their families and community as productive individuals.
bia road maintenance
We are again appreciative of subcommittee's recognition of the
importance of transportation safety and economic development on Indian
reservations by increasing fiscal year 2020 funding for the BIA Road
Maintenance Program to $35.8 million. Motor Vehicle deaths on
Reservations is one of the leading causes of deaths in Indian Country
and the poor condition of our roads is no doubt a leading factor in
this.
fort peck reservation rural supply system
I want to express my appreciation to the subcommittee for its
continued support of the Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water System. The
full funding that the subcommittee provided in fiscal year 2019 is
critical to the continued operation of this vital project. I also fully
endorse the funding request of the Assiniboine and Sioux Rural Water
Board, a newly chartered Tribal Agency now charged with the
construction and operation and maintenance of this critical rural water
system.
conclusion
We thank the subcommittee for the opportunity to present testimony
concerning the Bureau of Indian Affairs and Indian Health Service
fiscal year 2020 budget.
______
Prepared Statement of the Association of Air Pollution Control Agencies
On behalf of the Association of Air Pollution Control Agencies
(AAPCA),\1\ thank you for the opportunity to submit written testimony
regarding the fiscal year 2020 budget for the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA). AAPCA's State and local members are directly
responsible for planning and implementing air quality regulations
designed to protect public health, and believe that stable and adequate
resources are core to fulfilling Clean Air Act obligations. As your
subcommittee begins the fiscal year 2020 appropriations process, AAPCA
members specifically request that State and local air quality
management grants under the State and Tribal Assistance Grant (STAG)
program be funded at a level at least equal to fiscal year 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ AAPCA is a national, non-profit, consensus-driven organization
focused on assisting State and local air quality agencies and personnel
with implementation and technical issues associated with the Federal
Clean Air Act. AAPCA represents more than 45 State and local air
agencies, and senior officials from 22 State environmental agencies sit
on the AAPCA Board of Directors. AAPCA is housed in Lexington, Kentucky
as an affiliate of The Council of State Governments. More information
regarding AAPCA can be found at: www.cleanairact.org.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2019 (H.J. Res. 31), signed
into law on February 15 of this year, provided approximately $3.605
billion in funding for the STAG program. Of this funding, $1.077
billion was directed to categorical grants, including $228.219 million
for State and Local Air Quality Management Grants and $87 million for
the Diesel Emission Reductions Grant program, an increase of $12
million from fiscal year 2018 enacted levels.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ H.J.Res.31--Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2019 (Public Law
116-6). Funding levels prior to rescissions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The investment in these programs, which can make up to an average
of 27 percent of environmental agency budgets,\3\ provide critical
assistance to State and local air agencies, which maximize these funds
through strict budgeting, creative programming, and best practices.
Activities that are funded include a broad range of responsibilities
essential to fulfilling Clean Air Act mandates, include planning,
training, developing emissions inventories and rules, modeling,
monitoring, permitting, inspections, and enforcing key elements of the
National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), air toxics, and
regional haze programs. By amplifying Federal grant resources,
especially under Section 103 and 105 of the Clean Air Act, agencies
have achieved significant success in air quality.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.ecos.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/fiscal year 18-
EPA-Budget-Letter.pdf.
\4\ AAPCA, State Air Trends & Successes: The StATS Report, April
22, 2019
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The President's budget proposal for fiscal year 2020 was released
by the White House on March 11, 2019, and requests $6.068 billion for
U.S. EPA, or $2.76 billion (31 percent) less than appropriated by
Congress in fiscal year 2019.\5\ U.S. EPA's Fiscal Year 2020
Justification of Appropriation Estimates for the Committee on
Appropriations details a proposed 35 percent reduction in funding for
the STAG program, including a nearly 45 percent reduction in
categorical grants.\6\ The budget request for U.S. EPA also seeks a 30
percent decrease in funds for State and local air quality management
grants, along with the proposed elimination of several air quality
programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/budget-
fy2020.pdf.
\6\ https://www.epa.gov/planandbudget/cj.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
AAPCA recognizes that your subcommittee is in the early stages of
the fiscal year 2020 appropriations process and appreciates that
Congress did not adopt figures similar to those proposed by the
administration for the past two fiscal years. In fact, since fiscal
year 2009 the annual change in funding for State and local air quality
management grants has been less than 3 percent, with an average of $230
million provided each of those years.\7\ AAPCA members believe that
these long-term, stable resources have had consequential impacts on air
pollution control efforts that have been able to accommodate
substantial national economic and population growth.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Figures assume dollars not adjusted for inflation.
\8\ U.S. EPA, Our Nation's Air: Status and Trends Through 2017,
July 31, 2018. Section: Air Quality Improves as America Grows.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to funding State and local air quality management
grants at a level at least equal to fiscal year 2019, AAPCA members
would also like to highlight the importance of retaining funding for
fine particulate matter (PM2.5) monitoring under Section 103
of the Clean Air Act, rather than through Section 105. Section 103 does
not require State and local agencies to match funds, as is stipulated
in Section 105. Should this funding authority be transitioned as
proposed,\9\ agency budgets could be adversely impacted.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ U.S. EPA, ``fiscal year 2020 National Program Manager Guidance
Monitoring Appendix,'' March 2019. DRAFT.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As your subcommittee develops the budget for U.S. EPA through the
appropriations process, AAPCA members ask for continued stability and
support of funding to carry out core Clean Air Act activities.
Appropriately funded State and local air quality management grants
underscore foundational components of cooperative Federalism, allowing
air agencies to continue the important and essential work that has
driven success in air quality and provide stability for entities that
rely on their expertise.
Thank you for your attention to this testimony. AAPCA's State and
local members look forward to working with your Subcommittee as
Congress develops its priorities for fiscal year 2020 appropriations.
If you have any questions, please contact Mr. Jason Sloan, Executive
Director, at [email protected]
Sincerely,
Nancy Vehr
Administrator, Air Quality Division,
Wyoming Department of Environmental
Quality
President, AAPCA
______
Prepared Statement of the Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies
Thank you for the opportunity to submit recommendations for fiscal
year 2020 appropriations. The Association of Fish and Wildlife
Agencies' (AFWA) mission, which has not changed significantly from our
founding in 1902, is to protect State agency authority to conserve and
manage the fish and wildlife within their borders, and all 50 States
(States) are members. We strive to facilitate cooperation between State
and Federal agencies, conservation NGOs, and private landowners to
conserve our Nation's fish, wildlife, and their habitats.
Thank you for the final fiscal year 2019 funding levels for fish,
wildlife, and conservation programs, and we look forward to working
with you as we enter another challenging budget cycle and fiscal
environment to enact consistent funding levels with fiscal year 2019,
and in some cases higher. Fish and wildlife conservation programs need
funding today to preclude more costly Federal endeavors tomorrow. We
will not succeed by trying to balance the budget on the backs of
conservation programs. A continuation of this policy will prove only to
be costlier in the long-term.
united states fish and wildlife service (fws)
Fish and Aquatic Conservation (FAC).--Of priority is the National
Fish Hatchery Operations line item that supports the Aquatic Animal
Drug Approval Partnership (AADAP), Fish Health Centers, Fish Technology
Centers, Fish Hatcheries, Fish Passage, the National Fish Habitat
Partnership, Wild Fish Health Survey, and Mass Marking program all of
which meet needs of States, Tribes, and the Federal Government. The
need for FDA-approved drugs for use in aquaculture and fisheries
management is a national challenge, and AADAP provides the
``cornerstone'' of partnership efforts. AFWA recommends maintaining
fiscal year 2019 funding levels for National Fish Hatchery Operations
and programs, and we request $11 million more for the mass marking
initiative in the Pacific Northwest and the Great Lakes region, of
which $4.5 million is for the Great Lakes region. Funding for the
deferred maintenance of the National Fish Hatchery System must be
increased to avoid hatchery system failures.
AFWA is concerned that the FWS is not utilizing its fiscal year
2018 and fiscal year 2019 increased AADAP line item appropriations
fully and in a timely manner, and current spending is not sufficient to
meet the intent of the program or the needs of State and private
partners. Also, failure of equipment or structure at one of the
National Fish Hatchery System (NFHS) facilities could result in the
loss of species that provide for recreational opportunities, unique
genetic strains of imperiled species, and multiple year classes of
species used for restoration efforts. There are about $180 million in
deferred maintenance needs for the NFHS, and of the previous
appropriations directed to the FWS for deferred maintenance. We
appreciate Congress addressing deferred maintenance needs for the NFHS
and National Wildlife Refuge System (NWRS) in fiscal year 2018 and
fiscal year 2019, but not enough funds are being allocated to the NFHS.
Aquatic Habitat and Species Conservation.--We support funding the
National Fish Habitat Action Plan at $7.2 million to provide funding
for coordination and restoration projects to the 20 approved fish
habitat partnerships across the country with projects benefitting fish
and fish habitat, anglers, and local communities. Fish Passage needs
far outweigh the resources for species management and replacement of
unsafe transportation infrastructure. We support funding Fish Passage
at fiscal year 2018 levels and strongly support incorporating
additional fish passage funding into Federal infrastructure plans. We
request Congress restore funding for implementation of State Aquatic
Nuisance Species (ANS) management plans to $4.4 million, without
compromising other ANS programs. Further, $25 million is needed to
implement the national Asian carp management and control plan in
``Mississippi River and Tributaries''.
National Wildlife Refuge System.--We support funding NWRS
Operations and Maintenance at no less than $510 million in fiscal year
2020.
Habitat Conservation.--AFWA recommends maintain funding at fiscal
year 2019 levels but requests no less than $2,500,000 in additional
funds to support the Partners in Fish and Wildlife Program for
voluntary conservation of wildlife migration corridors and habitats to
support implementation of Secretarial Order (SO) 3362.
State and Tribal Wildlife Grants.--The State and Tribal Wildlife
Grants program is the only Federal program available to States to
leverage non-Federal funds to conserve over 12,000 State Species of
Greatest Conservation Need identified in State Wildlife Action Plans to
prevent them from becoming threatened or endangered. This investment in
voluntary, proactive, and State-led conservation is needed now to
address the list of declining species and to preclude an increase in
Federal expenditures in the future under the Endangered Species Act
(ESA). Further, this program is not well suited to implement SO3362,
and the Association supports funding those activities out of a
different account. The Association recommends $90 million for the State
and Tribal Wildlife Grants Program in fiscal year 2020, same as the
fiscal year 2010 enacted level. To truly address these growing
challenges, we ask Congress to enact the Recovering America's Wildlife
Act, which would provide States and their conservation partners with
the dependable resources to do proactive, non-regulatory fish and
wildlife conservation--a modern enhancement in how we finance the full
array of diverse fish and wildlife conservation for current and future
generations.
AFWA recommends no less than $42 million for the North American
Wetlands Conservation Fund in fiscal year 2020.
Ecological Services (ES) & Cooperative Endangered Species
Conservation Fund (CESCF).--The FWS needs additional resources in ES to
address a growing workload and to increase FWS recovery efforts for
federally listed species. Insufficient funds to meet growing demands
has resulted in ongoing policy riders stemming from ESA tensions, some
of which can be alleviated with increased funding. We support increased
funding for ES and recommend $85 million for the CESCF in fiscal year
2020. Further, we support sufficient funding for success of the
Recovery Challenge Grant Program.
We recommend $5 million for the Neotropical Migratory Bird
Conservation Fund and recommends maintaining fiscal year 2019 funding
for the Multinational Species Conservation Fund.
Science Applications (SA).--SA provides a critical science
coordination functions such as Species Status Assessments, regional
science initiatives to address threats to wildlife and habitats across
broad landscapes, integrated scientific efforts for elusive species
like wolverine, and support on White-nose Syndrome. We recommend
increasing fiscal year 2019 levels for SA activities by at least $5
million to facilitate implementation of SO3362 and the wildlife
migration corridor initiative and to fund important regional State-
Federal partnerships and research efforts which are supported by the
States.
Migratory Bird Conservation Program (MBCP).--The FWS and States
share management jurisdiction for migratory birds, and migratory bird
conservation represents one of the most successful State-Federal
cooperative partnerships for over 80 years, but the program suffers
from chronic under-funding of traditional functions and activities,
making it particularly vulnerable to unanticipated problems and single
points of failure. The FWS has gone to great lengths to protect the
core functions, but more funding is needed to retain sufficient staff,
fill key vacancies, and support science to inform decisionmaking. AFWA
supports robust funding for the MBCP near fiscal year 2010 levels with
a total budget of $55 million, including full funding of the Migratory
Bird Joint Ventures at $19.9 million, allowing us to accomplish shared
State and Federal responsibilities.
The Association recommends $450 million for the Land and Water
Conservation Fund in fiscal year 2020. We support robust funding for
the State-side programs of the LWCF. Many rural communities rely on the
State-side programs for playgrounds, sports courts, and other
amenities.
The Association recommends $76.5 million for the Forest Legacy
Program in fiscal year 2020.
united states geologial survey (usgs)
Ecosystems.--AFWA strongly supports an increase of $6.6 million in
appropriations for the Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit
Program (CRU) to $25 million. The CRU program provides critically
important scientific and technical support for State and Federal fish
and wildlife managers through collaborative scientific projects that
address the Nation's most critical fish and wildlife management needs
and inform policy decisions. This increase will enable USGS to fill the
39 current staff vacancies nationwide and establish new research units
in Indiana, Kentucky, Michigan, and Nevada. AFWA supports the National
Cooperators Coalition's testimony on CRUs. Further, we support the
Ecosystems Science Centers and the National Wildlife Health Center,
which provides critical scientific support and coordination on Chronic
Wasting Disease (CWD) and financial support to the Southeastern
Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study at the University of Georgia, which
provides essential diagnostic and veterinary support services to 42
States. We request Congress increase funds to the Fisheries Program by
no less than $3.5 million to avoid fish center closures across the
country, loss of critical research on the health of wild fisheries
which is imperative to State and Federal managers, and the loss of
jobs. It is also imperative that Congress provide an additional $1
million to support implementation of a National Academies of Sciences
study on the transmission of Chronic Wasting Disease in deer species,
which will be managed in part by USGS Ecosystems. We support
maintaining fiscal year 2019 funding at a minimum for the remaining
BLIs in USGS Ecosystems.
Core Science Systems.--AFWA supports maintaining funding for USGS
Core Science Systems including for the Integrated Taxonomic Information
System, Biodiversity Information Serving Our Nation, and the USGS
database of Species of Greatest Conservation Need.
bureau of land managment (blm)
Additional needs for wildlife habitat, migration corridors, and
conservation--AFWA supports additional resources to BLM to manage wild
horses and burros at appropriate management levels to reduce herd
impacts on native fish and wildlife and competition for food, water,
and resources. AFWA also supports increased funding for ongoing sage-
grouse, sagebrush, wildfire, and invasive species activities. Many
partnerships have been generated through BLM's sage-grouse efforts and
actions through the DOI SO 3362. This will require additional funds for
an array of activities to address identified barriers to wildlife
migrations, facilitate habitat connectivity, and implement actions to
reduce wildlife-highway conflicts. AFWA supports an additional $10
million for Wildlife Habitat Management, Wild Horse and Burros,
Rangeland Management, Oil and Gas Management, and Land and Water
Conservation Funds to meet these needs. We support a $5 million
increase for Rangeland Improvement and Bighorn sheep disease
prevention, and $10 million in additional funds for Wildlife Habitat
Management (1170) are needed to address invasive species affecting
habitat quantity and quality on big game winter range, summer range,
and in migration corridors. This would supplement existing funding
through the range management program that addresses management of
invasive species. Finally, AFWA recommends the subcommittee reinitiate
BLM's Cost-Share Challenge Grant Program under Wildlife Habitat
Management at $10 million to leverage current momentum and partnerships
to accomplish more wildlife habitat goals and mission objectives.
Further, we do not support funds being redirected away from accounts
intended to benefit fish, wildlife, and habitat to pay for the
management of wild horses and burros.
united states forest service (usfs)
The President's fiscal year 2020 budget request recommends a merger
of multiple BLIs to simplify time coding, increase efficiencies, and
simplify accounting processes. However, AFWA is concerned that
combining into one BLI Hazardous Fuels with Wildlife and Fisheries
Management and others could result in funds being diverted away from
fish and wildlife programs. We look forward to working with you on a
solution that provides accountability and simplification.
Reinvesting in Habitat and Access.--Thank you for your work in the
115th Congress to end the problem of fire-borrowing. Now Congress must
ensure that the funds made available by stabilizing the agency budget
against rising firefighting costs are reinvested back into the programs
and natural resources that have fiscally suffered from previous fire-
borrowing activities. AFWA recommends increasing funding for forest
health and management, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, and
access in the fiscal year 2020 appropriations.
Research and Development.--AFWA strongly supports maintaining
funding for Research and Development for fisheries and wildlife program
areas in fiscal year 2020.
environmental protection agency (epa)
Finally, we recommend maintaining fiscal year 2019 funding for all
Geographic Programs, the National Estuaries Program, and the Beach/Fish
Safety Program.
______
Prepared Statement of the Association of State Drinking Water
Administrators
Summary of Request: The Association of State Drinking Water
Administrators (ASDWA) submits the following recommendations for fiscal
year 2020 appropriations on behalf of the drinking water programs in
the 50 States, 5 territories, District of Columbia, and Navajo Nation.
ASDWA requests funding for two programs that ensure public health
protection and that will result in enhancing economic stability and
prosperity in American cities and towns. ASDWA requests $125 million
for the Public Water System Supervision (PWSS) program and $1.30
billion for the Drinking Water State Revolving Loan Fund (DWSRF)
program. ASDWA also requests $45 million for three drinking water grant
programs to address lead in schools and communities.
overview: the importance of safe drinking water for our communities and
the economy & the role of state drinking water programs
States need sustained Federal support to maintain public health
protection and to support the needs of the water systems they oversee.
State drinking water programs strive to meet the Nation's public health
protection goals through two principal funding programs: the Public
Water System Supervision (PWSS) Program and the Drinking Water State
Revolving Loan Fund (DWSRF) Program. These two programs provide most of
the funding for States to work with drinking water utilities to ensure
that American citizens will have safe and adequate water supplies.
Vibrant and sustainable communities, their citizens, workforce, and
businesses all depend on a safe and reliable supply of drinking water.
Economies only grow and sustain themselves when they have safe and
reliable water supplies. Over 90 percent of the population receives
water used for bathing, cooking, and drinking from a water system that
is overseen by State drinking water program personnel. Water systems--
as well as the cities, villages, schools, and businesses they support--
rely on State drinking water programs to ensure they comply with all
applicable Federal requirements.
In addition to the water we drink in our homes, water produced by
water systems is also used to fight fires, transport wastewater, cook,
wash clothes and dishes, as well as by businesses for manufacturing,
food processing, and cooling. State drinking water programs must have
adequate funding to protect public health and maintain the economic
health of communities. Incidents such as the chemical spill in
Charleston, West Virginia, algal toxins in the water for Toledo, Ohio
and Salem, Oregon, and the lead leaching from service lines into the
water supply in Flint, Michigan all serve as stark reminders of the
critical nature of the work that State drinking water programs do--
every day--and the reason why the funding for State drinking water
programs must be not only be sustained but enhanced. More recently, the
discovery of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) contamination
adds to the urgency of the need for funding.
state drinking water programs: how they operate, why support is needed,
and justifications for requested amounts
The Public Water System Supervision (PWSS) Program
How the PWSS Program Operates: To meet the requirements of the
SDWA, States have accepted primary enforcement responsibility for
oversight of regulatory compliance and technical assistance efforts for
more than 150,000 public water systems to ensure that potential health-
based violations do not occur or are remedied in a timely manner. This
involves 91 federally regulated contaminants and the complexity of
regulations has increased in the past decade. Beyond the contaminants
covered by Federal drinking water regulations, States are also
implementing an array of proactive initiatives to protect public health
from ``source to tap.'' These include source water assessments and
protections, technical assistance for water treatment and distribution,
and enhancement of overall water system performance. Recently, many
States have begun to set drinking water standards for non-federally
regulated contaminants, such as PFAS. State activities go well beyond
simply ensuring compliance at the tap and these activities have to be
efficient given continued resource and funding constraints.
Why Adequate Support is Needed: States will be unable to protect
public health without increased Federal funding. Inadequate Federal
support for State drinking water programs has several negative
consequences. For example, consider the proposed Long-Term Revisions to
the Lead and Copper Rule (LT-LCR). As part of ASDWA's comments on EPA's
Federalism Consultation, ASDWA conducted a Costs of States' Transaction
Study. The resulting data estimated that the costs of States' staff
time for the LT-LCR would be in the range of 72%-95 percent of current
PWSS funding. Without additional funding, this important rule will be
an unfunded mandate for States. Many States are facing difficult
choices on what implementation activities to not do, such as providing
less technical assistance to systems that need it. Others are looking
to EPA for assistance, which is challenged by similar resource
constraints and lack of ``on the ground'' expertise. States want to
offer the flexibilities allowed under existing rules to local water
systems, however, fewer State resources mean less opportunity to work
individually with water systems to improve their systems and protect
public health.
State drinking water programs are already hard pressed financially
and the funding gap continues to grow. State-provided funding and fees
to the water systems have historically compensated for insufficient
Federal funding, but State budgets have been less able to bridge this
funding gap in recent years. Insufficient Federal support for this
critical program increases the likelihood of scenarios that put the
public's health at risk. The administration's fiscal year 2020 request
of $67.9 million represents a 33 percent decrease for PWSS funding from
the $101.9 million that was appropriated for the PWSS program in fiscal
year 2019. This level of funding has not been seen since 1995, nearly
25 years ago. This is an untenable situation, as the long-standing
regulatory oversight remains constant and several non-regulatory
actions such as addressing PFAS, algal toxins, and providing oversight
for the development of water systems' inventories of lead service lines
have increased States' workloads. States always step in to help solve
problems and return systems to providing safe water as quickly as
possible. Any reduction in Federal funding for State water programs, no
matter how small, exacerbate the existing financial difficulties.
For the PWSS Program in Fiscal Year 2020, ASDWA Respectfully
Requests $125 Million: The number of regulations requiring State
implementation and oversight as well as performance expectations
continue to grow while the Federal funding support has been essentially
``flat-lined.'' Inflation has further eroded these static funding
levels. The requested funding amount is based on ASDWA's December 2013
Resource Needs Report and begins to fill the above-described resource
gap. The funding gap identified in the 2013 report is compounded by
inflation and non-regulatory activities yields a total funding gap of
73.3 percent for State drinking water programs, as outlined in ASDWA's
2018 Beyond Tight Budgets report. Increased PWSS funds are urgently
needed for implementing existing drinking water rules, taking on new
initiatives, and to account for the eroding effects of inflation. It is
a small price to pay for protecting the health of the Nation.
The Drinking Water State Revolving Loan Fund Program
How the DWSRF Program Operates: Drinking water in the U.S. is among
the safest and most reliable in the world, but it is threatened by
aging infrastructure. Through low interest loans provided by the DWSRF,
States help water utilities overcome this threat. Since its inception,
the DWSRF has touched millions of Americans through projects that
enhance drinking water capabilities at water utilities. In the core
DWSRF program, $19.8 billion in cumulative Federal capitalization
grants since 1997 have been leveraged by States into over $38.2 billion
in infrastructure loans to 14,500 communities, large and small, across
the country. 26 percent of the cumulative DWSRF assistance, including
negative interest loans and principal forgiveness, has been provided to
disadvantaged communities. Such investments pay tremendous dividends--
both in supporting our economy and in protecting our citizens' health.
For every $1 invested in the DWSRF from the Federal Government, $1.95
has gone to help communities. States have effectively and efficiently
leveraged Federal dollars with State contributions.
An important feature of the DWSRF program is the State ``set-
aside'' fund component, a key reason to fully fund this critical
program. Set-asides function provide a process for States to work with
water systems to maintain compliance and avoid violations. States may
reserve up to 31 percent of these funds for a variety of critical
tasks, such as increasing the technical, managerial, and financial
capacity of water systems, providing training and certification for
water system operators, and continuing wellhead and source water
protection efforts. Set-asides are an essential source of funding for
States' core public health protection programs and these efforts work
in tandem with infrastructure loans. However, as PWSS funds have
remained stagnant, State programs have increasingly relied on the DWSRF
set-asides to perform critical tasks and fill the gap between PWSS
funds and the true funding it takes to run an effective State program.
As States have been forced to utilize additional funding through set-
asides, the DWSRF is losing out not only on those funds for that year,
but the revolving aspect is lost as well. Increased funding for the
PWSS program would help alleviate States using the full 31 percent of
the set-asides, allowing for more infrastructure investment through the
loan fund.
Drinking Water Infrastructure Investment is Well Below the
Documented Need: EPA's 6th Drinking Water Needs Survey concluded that
$427.6 billion of capital investment was needed for the next 20 years.
The total translates to $21.4 billion annually. Continued investment is
needed for aging treatment plants, storage tanks, pumps, and
distribution lines that carry water to our Nation's homes, businesses,
and schools. The DWSRF must continue to be a key part of the
infrastructure solution. Unlike other water infrastructure funding
programs, the DWSRF offers project subsidization for disadvantaged
communities, funds for training and technical assistance, and is a
fundamental funding mechanism for many medium and small utilities who
would pay much higher interest rates if forced to use the bond market.
The DWSRF plays a key role in keeping water rates affordable for many
communities. Having access to low-interest loans allows water systems
to pass on the savings to their rate payers while working towards full-
cost pricing of their water service.
For the DWSRF Program in Fiscal Year 20, ASDWA Respectfully
Requests $1.30 Billion: Multiple years of flat DWSRF funding has only
exacerbated the Nation's infrastructure challenges. The DWSRF program
was funded at $1.30 billion for fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019,
a $300 million increase from previous years of steady funding, however,
more is required. In America's Water Infrastructure Act (Public Law
115-270), Congress authorized a plan to increase the funding of the
DWSRF over time so that States can increase their staff and expand
their expertise in conjunction with the increased funding. ASDWA fully
supports the authorized increased funding. Physical water
infrastructure improvements coupled with critical assistance
initiatives funded by the DWSRF are essential to support public health
protection as well as a sustainable economy. Funding the DWSRF at the
recently authorized $1.30 billion level will better enable the DWSRF to
meet the SDWA compliance and public health protection goals.
Three EPA Drinking Water Grant Programs to Address Lead in Schools and
Communities
ASDWA Respectfully Requests $45 Million for Three Drinking Water
Grant Programs: In fiscal year 2019 appropriations, Congress funded the
Voluntary School and Childcare Lead Testing Grant program at $25
million and the Lead Reduction Grant program at $15 million. ASDWA
requests Congress continue the same appropriation for fiscal year 2020.
In 2018, Public Law 115-270 authorized $5 million for a new EPA grant
program to provide assistance to local educational agencies for the
replacement of drinking water fountains manufactured prior to 1988.
ASDWA also requests that Congress appropriate the $5 million
authorization for this new grant in fiscal year 2020. Addressing lead
contamination in schools' water is a priority for State drinking water
programs and funding these two additional grant programs will provide
significant public health impacts, particularly for children.
Conclusion: ASDWA recommends Congress adequately fund State
drinking water programs in the Federal fiscal year 2020 budget in order
to protect public health and drinking water across the Nation. States
are willing and committed partners, however, additional Federal
financial assistance is needed to meet the ongoing and ever growing
regulatory, infrastructure, and security needs. A strong State drinking
water program supported by the Federal-State partnership will ensure
that the quality of drinking water in this country will continue to
improve so the public knows that a glass of water is safe to drink no
matter where they live.
______
Prepared Statement of the Association of Zoos and Aquariums
The Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) is pleased to submit
the following testimony in support of funding for Endangered Species
Recovery and the Recovery Challenge Grant program for fiscal year 2020.
First, we thank the members of the subcommittee for increasing funding
for endangered species through the Recovery account and working with
our partners at the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) to create
the Recovery Challenge Grant program in fiscal year 2018. We recognize
the positive impact this funding has had on our recovery goals and
encourage you to continue prioritizing these important functions.
Founded in 1924, the Association of Zoos and Aquariums is a 501(c)3
non-profit organization dedicated to the advancement of zoos and
aquariums in the areas of conservation, education, science, and
recreation. AZA's 233 accredited aquariums, nature centers, science
centers and zoos (identified in the addendum to this letter) annually
see more than 195 million visitors, collectively generate more than $22
billion in annual economic activity, and support more than 208,000 jobs
across the country. In 2017, AZA-accredited facilities spent $220
million on field conservation in 128 countries benefiting 863 species
and subspecies. Within those 863 species and subspecies, 281 are listed
under the Endangered Species Act (ESA).
We manage numerous large scale conservation initiatives that
involve many AZA committees, scientific advisory groups, the USFWS, and
other conservation partnership organizations. Successful ongoing
recovery and reintroduction initiatives with AZA members include the
black-footed ferret, the American Burying Beatle, the Golden Lion
Tamarin, the American red wolf, the Karner blue butterfly, multiple
fresh water mussels species, and many others. The unique expertise and
on the ground experience brought to the table by our members is
unparalleled and has proved extremely valuable to species recovery.
One of our member organizations doing exemplary work is San Diego
Zoo Global (SDZG), which holds an extensive record as a longtime leader
in endangered species recovery. Their Institute for Conservation
Research houses the largest, multidisciplinary, zoo-based research team
with more than 150 researchers and staff who are leading experts in
their field. SDZG carries out carefully tailored species recovery plans
in partnership with the USFWS, a dedicated coalition of domestic and
international nonprofit organizations, academic research centers, and
other zoos. To date, San Diego Zoo Global has bred more than 165
endangered species and reintroduced more than 40 endangered species
into native habitats.
Moreover, San Diego Zoo Global (SDZG) plays a vital role in the
highly successful public-private partnership to save the California
condor which has seen the species go from a low of 22 birds to now
reaching around 500. Together, the USFWS, State agencies, San Diego Zoo
Global, The Peregrine Fund, Oregon Zoo, Los Angeles Zoo, Ventana
Wildlife Society, and several other nonprofit partners have provided
critical genetic management, breeding, rearing, and release to recover
the California condor. And in 2015, the California condors reached a
crucial milestone: for the first time in their recovery, more birds
hatched and fledged than died in the wild.
Although the AZA and SDZG, along with partners, are investing
significant resources in the conservation and recovery of the
California condor and other species, the fight to save these species
from extinction is far from over. Continued environmental threats make
condors reliant on costly management efforts including propagation,
rearing, monitoring, regular trapping, testing, and treatment carried
out by nonprofit partners. With limited funding for recovery efforts,
it is more important than ever to invest Federal funding in programs
that leverage the significant resources and expertise of outside
partners that can help the USFWS accomplish its recovery objectives in
the most effective and efficient way. The Recovery Challenge Grants
program created in fiscal year 2018 recognizes this and has been an
incredibly important step towards encouraging this valuable ``Multi-
Partner Recovery'' model.
With these goals in mind, as the Committee develops the fiscal year
2020 Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Appropriations bill,
we urge you to continue to provide robust funding for endangered
species recovery and prioritize longstanding recovery efforts in which
existing resources and partner expertise can be most effectively
leveraged. Specifically, we request an increase for Endangered Species
Act Recovery actions generally to $100 million and request an increase
in funding for the Recovery Challenge Grant program to $8 million. This
funding will enable critical recovery partnerships to sustain their
work so that we can realize the goal of full recovery for condors and
other critically endangered species.
Thank you for your attention to this important request.
Sincerely,
Douglas G. Myers
Daniel M. Ashe
President/CEO
President and CEO
San Diego Zoo Globals
Association of Zoos & Aquarium
ADDENDUM
San Diego Zoo Global, California
The Peregrine Fund, Idaho
Association of Zoos and Aquariums, USA
AZA Member Institutions:
Abilene Zoological Gardens, Texas
Adventure Aquarium, New Jersey
African Safari Wildlife Park, Ohio
Akron Zoological Park, Ohio
Alaska SeaLife Center, Alaska
Albuquerque Biological Park, New Mexico
Alexandria Zoological Park, Louisiana
Aquarium of Niagara, New York
Aquarium of the Bay, California
Aquarium of the Pacific, California
Arizona Sonora Desert Museum, Arizona
Audubon Aquarium of the Americas, Louisiana
Audubon Zoo, Louisiana
Bergen County Zoological Park, New Jersey
Binder Park Zoo, Michigan
Birch Aquarium at Scripps, California
Birmingham Zoo, Alabama
Blank Park Zoo, Iowa
Boonshoft Museum of Discovery, Ohio
Bramble Park Zoo, South Dakota
Brandywine Zoo, Delaware
Brevard Zoo, Florida
Bronx Zoo/WCS, New York
Brookgreen Gardens, South Carolina
Buffalo Zoo, New York
Busch Gardens (Tampa), Florida
The Butterfly House, Missouri
Butterfly Pavilion, Colorado
Buttonwood Park Zoo, Massachusetts
Cabrillo Marine Aquarium, California
Caldwell Zoo, Texas
California Science Center, California
Cameron Park Zoo, Texas
Cape May County Park Zoo, New Jersey
Capron Park Zoo, Massachusetts
Central Florida Zoological Park, Florida
Central Park Zoo, New York
Chahinkapa Zoo, North Dakota
Charles Paddock Zoo, California
Chattanooga Zoo at Warner Park, Tennessee
Cheyenne Mountain Zoological Park, Colorado
Chicago Zoological Society--Brookfield Zoo, Illinois
Cincinnati Zoo and Botanical Garden, Ohio
Cleveland Metroparks Zoo, Ohio
Clyde Peeling's Reptiland, Pennsylvania
Columbus Zoo and Aquarium, Ohio
Como Park Zoo and Conservatory, Minnesota
Connecticut's Beardsley Zoo, Connecticut
Cosley Zoo, Illinois
CuriOdyssey, California
Dakota Zoo, North Dakota
Dallas World Aquarium, Texas
Dallas Zoo, Texas
David Traylor Zoo of Emporia, Kansas
Denver Zoological Gardens, Colorado
Detroit Zoological Park, Michigan
Dickerson Park Zoo, Missouri
Discovery Cove, Florida
Disney's Animal Kingdom, Florida
El Paso Zoo, Texas
Ellen Trout Zoo, Texas
Elmwood Park Zoo, Pennsylvania
Erie Zoo, Pennsylvania
Florida Aquarium, The, Florida
Fort Wayne Children's Zoo, Indiana
Fort Worth Zoo, Texas
Fossil Rim Wildlife Center, Texas
Franklin Park Zoo, Massachusetts
Fresno Chaffee Zoo, California
Georgia Aquarium, Georgia
Gladys Porter Zoo, Texas
Great Plains Zoo and Delbridge Museum of Natural History, South Dakota
Greensboro Science Center, North Carolina
Greenville Zoo, South Carolina
Grizzly & Wolf Discovery Center, Montana
Happy Hollow Zoo, California
Henry Vilas Zoo, Wisconsin
Houston Zoo, Inc. Texas
Hutchinson Zoo, Kansas
Idaho Falls Zoo at Tautphaus Park, Idaho
Indianapolis Zoological Society, Inc., Indiana
International Crane Foundation, Wisconsin
Jacksonville Zoo and Gardens, Florida
Jenkinson's Aquarium, New Jersey
John Ball Zoological Gardens, Michigan
John G. Shedd Aquarium, Illinois
Kansas City Zoo, Missouri
Lake Superior Zoo, Minnesota
Landry's Downtown Aquarium--Denver, Colorado
Landry's Houston Aquarium, Inc., Texas
Lee G. Simmons Conservation Park & Wildlife Safari, Nebraska
Lee Richardson Zoo, Kansas
Lehigh Valley Zoo, Pennsylvania
Lincoln Children's Zoo, Nebraska
Lincoln Park Zoological Gardens, Illinois
Lion Country Safari, Florida
Little Rock Zoological Gardens, Arkansas
Living Desert Zoo & Gardens State Park, New Mexico
The Living Desert Zoo and Gardens, California
Los Angeles Zoo, California
Louisville Zoological Garden, Kentucky
Maritime Aquarium at Norwalk, Inc., Connecticut
Maryland Zoo in Baltimore, Maryland
Memphis Zoological Garden and Aquarium, Tennessee
Mesker Park Zoo & Botanic Garden, Inc., Indiana
Miller Park Zoo, Illinois
Milwaukee County Zoological Gardens, Wisconsin
Minnesota Zoological Garden, Minnesota
Monterey Bay Aquarium, California
Moody Gardens Rainforest and Aquarium, Texas
Mote Marine Laboratory and Aquarium, Florida
Museum of Life and Science, North Carolina
Museum of Science, Massachusetts
Mystic Aquarium, Connecticut
Naples Zoo, Florida
Nashville Zoo, Tennessee
National Aquarium, Maryland
National Aviary, Pennsylvania
National Mississippi River Museum & Aquarium, Iowa
New England Aquarium, Massachusetts
New York Aquarium, New York
Newport Aquarium, Kentucky
North Carolina Aquarium at Fort Fisher, North Carolina
North Carolina Aquarium at Pine Knoll Shores, North Carolina
North Carolina Aquarium on Roanoke Island, North Carolina
North Carolina Zoological Park, North Carolina
Northeastern Wisconsin (NEW) Zoo, Wisconsin
Northwest Trek Wildlife Park, Washington
Oakland Zoo, California
OdySea Aquarium, Arizona
Oglebay's Good Zoo, West Virginia
Oklahoma City Zoo and Botanical Garden, Oklahoma
Omaha's Henry Doorly Zoo & Aquarium, Nebraska
Oregon Coast Aquarium, Oregon
Oregon Zoo, Oregon
Palm Beach Zoo at Dreher Park, Florida
Peoria Zoo, Illinois
Philadelphia Zoo, Pennsylvania
Phoenix Zoo, The, Arizona
Point Defiance Zoo and Aquarium, Washington
Potawatomi Zoo, Indiana
Potter Park Zoological Gardens, Michigan
Prospect Park Zoo, New York
Pueblo Zoo, Colorado
Queens Zoo, New York
Racine Zoological Gardens, Wisconsin
Red River Zoo, North Dakota
Reid Park Zoo, Arizona
Ripley's Aquarium at Myrtle Beach, South Carolina
Ripley's Aquarium of the Smokies, Tennessee
Riverbanks Zoo and Garden, South Carolina
Riverside Discovery Center, Nebraska
Roger Williams Park Zoo, Rhode Island
Rolling Hills Zoo, Kansas
Roosevelt Park Zoo, North Dakota
Rosamond Gifford Zoo at Burnet Park, New York
Sacramento Zoo, California
Safari West, California
Saginaw Children's Zoo, Michigan
Saint Louis Zoo, Missouri
Salisbury Zoological Park, Maryland
San Antonio Zoological Society, Texas
San Diego Zoo, California
San Diego Zoo Safari Park, California
San Francisco Zoological Gardens, California
Santa Barbara Zoological Gardens, California
Santa Fe College Teaching Zoo, Florida
Scovill Zoo, Illinois
SEA LIFE Arizona Aquarium, Arizona
SEA LIFE Carlsbad Aquarium, California
SEA LIFE Charlotte-Concord Aquarium, North Carolina
SEA LIFE Grapevine Aquarium, Texas
SEA LIFE Kansas City Aquarium, Missouri
SEA LIFE Michigan Aquarium, Michigan
SEA LIFE Orlando Aquarium, Florida
Seas, The, Florida
Seattle Aquarium, Washington
SeaWorld Orlando, Florida
SeaWorld San Antonio, Texas
SeaWorld San Diego, California
Sedgwick County Zoo, Kansas
Seneca Park Zoo, New York
Sequoia Park Zoo, California
Shark Reef Aquarium at Mandalay Bay, Nevada
Smithsonian National Zoological Park, District of Columbia
South Carolina Aquarium, South Carolina
Squam Lakes Natural Science Center, New Hampshire
St. Augustine Alligator Farm, Florida
Staten Island Zoo, New York
Steinhart Aquarium, California
Stone Zoo, Massachusetts
Sunset Zoological Park, Kansas
Tennessee Aquarium, Tennessee
Texas State Aquarium, Texas
Toledo Zoological Gardens, Ohio
Topeka Zoo and Conservation Center, Kansas
Tracy Aviary, Utah
Trevor Zoo, New York
Tulsa Zoo, Oklahoma
Turtle Back Zoo, New Jersey
Utah's Hogle Zoo, Utah
Utica Zoo, New York
Virginia Aquarium and Marine Science Center, Virginia
Virginia Living Museum, Virginia
Virginia Zoological Park, Virginia
Western North Carolina Nature Center, North Carolina
Wildlife Safari, Oregon
Wilds, The, Ohio
Woodland Park Zoo, Washington
Zoo Atlanta, Georgia
Zoo Boise, Idaho
Zoo Knoxville, Tennessee
Zoo Miami, Florida
ZOOAMERICA NA Wildlife Park, Pennsylvania
ZooTampa at Lowry Park, Florida
______
Prepared Statement of the Bay Mills Indian Community
introduction
Aanii (Hello)! My name is Bryan Newland, and I am the President of
the Bay Mills Indian Community, which is an Ojibwe Tribe located on
Lake Superior in Michigan's Upper Peninsula. I am appearing before the
subcommittee in my capacity as a Member of the Board for the Chippewa
Ottawa Resource Authority (``CORA'').
CORA is a consortium of five federally recognized Tribes in
Michigan that are parties to the 1836 Treaty of Washington with the
United States: Bay Mills Indian Community, the Grand Traverse Band of
Ottawa and Chippewa Indians, the Little River Band of Ottawa Indians,
the Little Traverse Bay Bands of Odawa Indians, and the Sault Ste.
Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians.
purpose
I appreciate the opportunity to present testimony to the
subcommittee to testify on Natural Resources on the importance of
Federal funding to support the exercise of reserved treaty rights, as
well as the management of natural resources protected through treaties
between the United States and Indian Tribes and to urge your continued
support for funding the Rights Protection Implementation (RPI) program
at the Department of the Interior. RPI funds are necessary to ensure
that Tribes are able to exercise their judicially-recognized reserved
treaty rights in a meaningful way. Tribes use these funds to monitor
and protect natural resources, enforce Tribal, State, and Federal laws,
and to protect their reserved treaty rights.
In fiscal year 2019, Congress appropriated $6,319,467 for RPI
funding, which is allocated for the CORA Tribes. We are urging Congress
to maintain this funding in fiscal year 2020, and to increase that
amount by $40,000.
background
In 1836, the Ojibwe (Chippewa) and Odawa (Ottawa) Tribes (the
``CORA Tribes'') in Michigan negotiated a treaty with the United States
to cede much of the lands that were used to establish the State of
Michigan in 1837. Those ceded lands comprise more than 40 percent (40
percent) of what is now the State of Michigan. In exchange for this
valuable cession of land, the CORA Tribes reserved the right to hunt
and fish throughout the ceded territory, including the adjoining waters
in Lakes Michigan, Huron and Superior.
The citizens of the CORA Tribes continued to exercise their treaty
rights following the ratification of the 1836 Treaty of Washington. In
the 1950's and 1960's, the State of Michigan began efforts to regulate
hunting and fishing activities by our Tribal members, and to curtail
the rights our Tribes reserved in the Treaty of 1836. Many Tribal
members, including Bay Mills Indian Community member Albert ``Big Abe''
LeBlanc, resisted the State's efforts to erode our reserved treaty
rights by continuing to catch fish with gill nets and without State
licenses.
In 1971, the State of Michigan issued a citation to Big Abe LeBlanc
for fishing with gill nets, and prosecuted him under Michigan's
criminal laws. Bay Mills Indian Community defended LeBlanc against the
charges by arguing that the rights reserved by the 1836 Treaty Tribes
continued to exist, and that they superseded State hunting and fishing
regulations under the supremacy clause of the United States
Constitution. The case of People of Michigan v. LeBlanc was ultimately
resolved by the Michigan Supreme Court in 1976, which held that the
fishing rights expressly reserved in the 1836 Treaty remained in
effect.
As a result of the State of Michigan's prosecution of Big Abe
LeBlanc, in 1973 the United States filed a lawsuit against the State of
Michigan on behalf of the 1836 Treaty Tribes to uphold and enforce the
fishing rights reserved in the 1836 Treaty. That case was titled United
States v. Michigan. In 1979, Judge Fox of the U.S. District Court for
the Western District of Michigan entered an opinion and order upholding
the Tribes' fishing rights in what is now known as ``the Fox
Decision.''
Following Judge Fox's famous decision, the parties to United States
v. Michigan--the Federal Government, the Bay Mills Indian Community,
the Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians, the Sault Ste.
Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians, and the State of Michigan--began
court-supervised negotiations regarding how the Tribes would exercise
and regulate our treaty rights. In 1985, the parties reached a
tentative agreement to establish joint fishery management of the
fishery with the State of Michigan, and to allocate harvest
opportunities among Tribal and State-licensed fishers. The U.S.
District Court entered an order putting that agreement into effect.
The 1985 Consent Judgment remained in effect until August 2000. At
that time, the Federal Government, the 1836 Treaty Tribes, and the
State of Michigan negotiated a successor agreement to regulate Tribal
fishing activities on the Great Lakes. That agreement expires in August
2020, and the parties are preparing to negotiate another agreement to
take its place.
In 2007, the United States, the CORA Tribes, and the State of
Michigan finalized a separate agreement to implement the Tribes'
reserved treaty rights on the ``inland'' portion of the territory ceded
by the 1836 Treaty. That agreement was also entered as a consent decree
by the U.S. District Court in the United States v. Michigan case as a
means to regulate Tribal hunting, fishing, and gathering activities
under the 1836 Treaty, to establish joint management protocols with the
State of Michigan, and to allocate harvest opportunity for certain
species.
From 1985 until today, the Federal Government, the CORA Tribes, and
the State of Michigan have worked together to manage the commercial
fishery in the upper Great Lakes. Since 2007, we have also worked
together to manage game and other natural resources across the ceded
territory. While we have had disagreements over the years, this
framework has allowed us to cooperate to ensure the protection of
natural resources and the continued vitality of Tribal treaty rights.
This cooperative framework is now an accepted part of the fabric of
natural resource protection and conservation law enforcement across
much of the State of Michigan.
Funds appropriated to the Rights Protection Implementation program
are used to implement this cooperative framework.
It is important to note that this framework is mandated by order of
the U.S. District Court in the United States v. Michigan litigation;
and, that the Federal Government negotiated the terms of the
cooperative resource management framework on behalf of, and with, the
1836 Treaty Tribes.
fiscal year 2020 budget request: rights protection implementation
The CORA Tribes receive funding through the ``Treaty Fisheries''
line item in the Rights Protection Implementation program. Those funds
are used to support the following activities:
--Establishment of conservation-based fishing regulations;
--Biological support services to monitor the fishery;
--Resource protection and enhancement programs;
--Conservation law enforcement activities and Tribal courts for
violation of fishing regulations; and,
--Intertribal coordination of activities and policies with Federal
and State agencies.
The CORA Tribes also receive RPI funding to implement the 2007
Consent decree relating to the exercise of ``inland'' treaty rights.
Those funds support the following activities:
--Establishment of conservation-based hunting, fishing, and gathering
regulations;
--Biological support services to monitor wildlife, plant-life, and
habitat;
--Resource protection and enhancement programs;
--Invasive species monitoring and controls;
--Conservation law enforcement activities and Tribal courts for
violation of hunting, fishing, and gathering regulations; and,
--Intertribal coordination of activities and policies with Federal
and State agencies.
CORA does not support any budget request for Rights Protection
Implementation in the fiscal year 2020 which is less than the sum
appropriated for fiscal year 2019. Any cut in funding levels would
leave inadequate funding to ensure that we are able to successfully
implement the terms of the 2000 and 2007 Consent Decrees in United
States v. Michigan. Less funding will require the CORA Tribes to scale
back our conservation, monitoring, and enforcement activities. This
will result in staff layoffs, increased risk of conflict between Tribes
and other communities over resources, and a reduction in protection of
the fishery, wildlife, and habitat throughout the ceded territory.
CORA is urging Congress to maintain for Rights Protection
Implementation in the fiscal year 2020 budget the same amount as
provided for in fiscal year 2019 and to increase the CORA Tribes share
to $6,359,467. We believe that this funding is adequate to allow us to
successfully work with Federal and State agencies to implement the
terms of the 2000 and 2007 Consent Decrees.
CORA is also requesting that Congress appropriate $2.5 million to
the Bureau of Indian Affairs for ``Litigation Support'' for Tribal
treaty rights litigation. While ``Litigation Support'' funds are not
used to directly implement Tribal treaty rights, they are used by
Tribes--like the CORA Tribes--to negotiate consent decrees that ensure
cooperative resource management and avoid litigation between the United
States and State governments over Tribal treaty rights. The current
Great Lakes Consent Decree expires in August 2020, and the Tribes
require additional funds to prepare for both negotiation and possible
litigation to create a new allocation/management regime.
The Department of the Interior does not presently have adequate
``Litigation Support'' funds to ensure that the CORA Tribes are able to
gather data, hire experts, and retain legal counsel to negotiate a new
consent decree in the United States v. Michigan litigation.
The Department of the Interior has provided Litigation Support
funding to the CORA Tribes throughout the 45 year history of the United
States v. Michigan case to litigate important issues and negotiate
consent decrees. But, in the past year, the Department provided
insufficient funds to enable the Tribes to prepare to negotiate a new
Consent Decree in United States v. Michigan. This is a dramatic
departure from the Department's prior support to the CORA Tribes
throughout this litigation; and, we are deeply concerned that the
Department will not provide the resources necessary to negotiate a new
consent decree. This will increase the odds of litigation over our
treaty rights, and jeopardize our cooperative management framework.
CORA estimates a need for $500,000 in fiscal year 2019 to negotiate
a new consent decree (or, to prepare to litigate the scope of our
treaty rights beyond 2020). This funding will ensure that the CORA
Tribes can participate in negotiations for a successor agreement to the
2000 Consent Decree.
conclusion
The Rights Protection Implementation Program is necessary to ensure
that the United States continues to meet its obligations under treaties
with Tribes across the country. These funds are also necessary to
ensure that Tribes can meet our obligations under Federal Court orders
applicable to our reserved treaty rights. As Supreme Court Justice Hugo
Black famously proclaimed: ``Great nations, like great men, keep their
word.''
For these reasons, the CORA Tribes respectfully request your
support for fiscal year 2020 RPI funding at its current level, with
$6,359,467 allocated for the CORA Tribes. Miigwetch (thank you) for the
opportunity to present our views. I am happy to answer any questions
that you may have.
______
Prepared Statement of the Bristol Bay Area Health Corporation
The Requests of the Bristol Bay Area Health Corporation (BBAHC) for
the fiscal year 2020 Indian Health Service appropriations and our
comments are as follows:
--Clinic Leases.--Direct the Indian Health Service (IHS) to fully
fund Village Built Clinic (VBC) and tribally leased clinics
under section 105(l) of the Indian Self-Determination and
Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA).
--CSC Funding.--Continue to fund Contract Support Costs (CSC) at 100
percent and provide funding on a permanent and mandatory basis.
--Advance Appropriations/Sequestration.--Provide advance
appropriations for the IHS and shield its budget from
sequestration or rescissions.
--Increase IHS behavioral healthcare funding (Mental Health/Substance
Abuse)
--Special Diabetes Program for Indians (SDPI).--Multi-year
authorization and increased mandatory funding.
--Land Transfer Legislation.--Enactment of S. 224/H.R. 933, to
facilitate transfer of a parcel of land from IHS to BBAHC on
which our dental clinic is located.
The Bristol Bay Area Health Corporation was created in 1973 to
provide healthcare services to Alaska Natives of Southwest Alaska. We
began operating and managing the Kanakanak Hospital and the Bristol Bay
Service Unit for the IHS in 1980, and were the first tribal
organization to do so under the ISDEAA. BBAHC is a co-signer to the
Alaska Tribal Health Compact with the IHS under the ISDEAA and is now
responsible for providing and promoting healthcare to the people of 28
Alaska Native Villages.
We have made significant progress but now deal with modern-day
health problems. Today, rather than TB and influenza epidemics, we
struggle with diseases of a modern society that include chronic
illnesses such as cancer, diabetes, heart disease and behavioral and
mental health needs. The life expectancy of our people has increased
from 47 years of age in 1952 to 69.4 in 1998, still below that of U.S.
residents and other Alaskans.
Village Built Clinics and Section 105(l) Leasing.--We thank
Congress for appropriating a $36 million increase over base funding for
Tribal health clinic leases in the Fiscal Year 2019 Consolidated
Appropriations Acts. And we thank the Alaska delegation, and in
particular Senator Murkowski, for her leadership on this issue,
including her line of questioning of the IHS this issue in your May 1,
2019 hearing. The $25 million increase over fiscal year 2018 was in
recognition of IHS's responsibility as confirmed by the 2016 Federal
court decision in Maniilaq v. Burwell, which held that section 105(l)
of the ISDEAA provides an entitlement to full compensnation for leases
of Tribal facilities used to carry out ISDEAA agreements. BBAHC
utilizes both Village-Built and Section 105(l) leasing. Small
chronically underfunded remote clinics serve as an essential health
lifeline in rural Alaskan villages where there is no road system to
connect villages to urban centers. As noted above, BBAHC serves 28
remote villages in southwest Alaska.
Congress has asked IHS to submit a report on the budget impact of
meeting its responsibility under Maniilaq v. Burwell. We oppose any
appropriataions rider, such as those included in the administration's
budget proposals for fiscal years 2018 and 2019, which would allow IHS
to avoid its responsibility to compensate Tribes fully for these costs.
We ask that Congress again decline to include such a provision in the
fiscal year 2020 IHS appropriation. In addition, we urge that any
infrastructure proposal that may move forward include assistance for
village built and tribally leased clinics, many of which are in poor
condition and/or need to be replaced.
Contract Support Costs (CSC).--BBAHC thanks the House and Senate
Interior Appropriations Subcommittees for their leadership in
committing to fully fund IHS and BIA contract support costs and for
finding a way to do it through providng ``such sums as may be
necessary'' and making it a separate account in the IHS and BIA
budgets. For many years, both the IHS and BIA vastly underpaid the
contract support costs owed to Tribal organizations, and this
transformation makes an enormous difference in helping to ensure that
Tribes and Tribal organizations can successfully exercise their rights
and responsibilities under the ISDEAA. The shift is also likely to
significantly improve the Federal-Tribal government-to-government
relationship. We ask that you again not include any proposed proviso
that would effectively deny CSC carryover authority granted by ISDEAA
as you did in fiscal years 2017, 2018, and 2019.
The House Committee Report language fom fiscal year 2018
encouraging IHS to pay CSC on their grant programs was welcome, and we
will continue to advocate to IHS that they take this action.
BBAHC will continue to advocate for our long-term goal of ensuring
that full CSC appropriations are made permanent and mandatory. Under
the ISDEAA, the full payment of CSC is not discretionary; it is a legal
obligation affirmed by the Supreme Court of the United States. Funding
of CSC on a discretionary basis has in the recent past placed the House
and Senate Appropriations Committees, in their own words, in the
``untenable position of appropriating discretionary funds for the
payment of any legally obligated contract support costs.'' BBAHC is
committed to working with the appropriate Congressional committees to
determine how best to achieve that goal.
Advance Appropriations for IHS.--We are heartened by the
introduction of legislation to provide advance appropriations for the
IHS. Representative Young's bill, H.R. 1135, would provide advance
appropriations for the IHS Services and Facilities accounts. Other
legislation on this topic is S. 229, introduced by Senator Udall and
companion legislation, H.R. 1128, introduced by Representative
McCollum. Those bills would provide advance appropriations to the IHS
Services and Contract Support Costs accounts and the BIA/BIE Operation
of Indian Programs, Contract Support Costs and the Indian Guaranteed
Loan Program.
Sequestration.--BBAHC respectfully requests the subcommittee's
support in amending the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control
Act to exempt Indian programs, such as the IHS and BIA budgets, from
across-the board sequestration of funds. We supported Congress fully
exempting Veterans Health Administration programs from sequestration.
However, Indian healthcare, as a Federal trust responsibility, should
be afforded equal treatment. A number of Members of this subcommittee
and other members of Congress have publicly stated that it was an
oversight that the Indian budgets were not included in the exempt
category when the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act was
enacted.
Behavioral Health.--We have testified before Congress previously
regarding the hardships in providing for our communities' behavioral
and mental health needs, particularly with regard to our youth. As you
know, there is an epidemic of suicide among Alaska Natives, especially
teens. BBAHC has well-qualified professional staff who service
approximately 6,500 people in our region. But our social workers,
counsellors and behavioral health aides have a theoretical caseload of
300 persons each. The ratio of mental health clinicians to clients is 1
to 1,300. Our 14-bed residential youth facility for substance abuse
(Jake's Place) has an Alcohol and Drug Safety program funded by the
State of Alaska but it is primarily an education program, not a
treatment program, and much of the education is done remotely, via the
Internet.
We appreciate the fiscal year 2019 increases for IHS Alcohol and
Substance Abuse ($17.7 million) and Mental Health ($5.4 million)
programs while urging additional increases under the IHS Mental health
program for behavioral health integration and the Zero Suicide
Initiative and under the Alchohol and Substance Abuse account for
Generation Indigenous, the pilot youth project, and detoxification. Of
the fiscal year 2019 increase in the Substance Abuse account, $10
million is for a Special Behavioral Health Pilot Program modeled after
the Special Diabetes Program for Indians and we thank the Inteiror
Appropriations Subcommittees for your work on this forward-looking
proposal.
We acknowledge the HHS Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA) fiscal year 2019 Tribal behavioral health
grants ($20 million substance abuse; $20 million mental health) but the
need in Indian Country is so great.
Opioid Epidemic.--Indian Country, which has been severely affected
by the opioid abuse epidemic, was initially left out of the funding
under the State Opioid Response grants. Now, however, Tribes/Tribal
organziations received $50 million in fiscal year 2018 and will receive
the same amount of funding in fiscal year 2019 from that program. Per
Tribal recommendations ,the funding is being distributed via formula.
The recently enacted opoiod legislation, the SUPPORT Act signed into
law on October 24, 2018, includes a Tribal funding allocation and we
applaud that. Still, recommendations from around the Nation urge that
significantly more resources are needed to address this crisis.
Special Diabetes Program for Indians.--The SDPI authorization is
set to expire on September 30, 2019, and while we expect Congress will
extend it in some manner, we hope it will not be another short-term
extension. For the stability of the program we and other Tribes and
Tribal organizations advocate for a mult-year authorization and an
increase in its mandatory funding. SDPI, currently funded at $150
million annually, has not had an increase since fiscal year 2004.
Pending legislation would extend the program for 5 years at $150
million per year, but we urge that it be provided an overdue increase
to at least $200 million per year to help accout for medical inflation
and expansion.
Land Transfer Legislation.--BBAHC also asks for your support in
enacting legislation that would direct the Secretary of the Department
of Health and Human Services to convey a 1.474-acre parcel of land, via
warranty deed, to BBAHC for the land on which our new state-of the art
dental clinic is located. The legislation is HR 933, introduced on
January 30, 2019 by Congressman Young, and S. 224, introduced on
February 1, 2017 by Senators Murkowski and Sullivan. On January 29, the
Senate Committee on Indian Affairs approved S. 224.
The House and Senate bills are identical, and there is no reason
they should not pass under unanimous consent or under suspension of the
rules. The property transfer authorized by these bills would enable the
land transfer from IHS to BBAHC via warranty deed, and would supersede
any existing quitclaim deed. It would allow the BBAHC to have greater
control over the land and more opportunities for financing as well as
to remove any IHS reversionary interests.
Our dental facility opened in September 2016, on the grounds of the
Kanakanak Hospital Compound. The new clinic replaced a dilapidated
clinic and is providing expanded dental care to our region, where there
are very few public dental clinics. Our service population is 6,500.
Part of the funding for the dental facility came from BBAHC reinvesting
its share of a CSC settlement with IHS that was paid to compensate for
years of contract underpayments to the Tribal health organization. The
clinic is the first permanent building owned by BBAHC on the hospital
campus and there is a lot of pride and self-determination that flows
from this tribally-owned dental building.
We appreciate your leadership and commitment to the advancement of
Native American people and thank you for your consideration of the
concerns and requests of the Bristol Bay Area Health Corporation.
[This statement was submitted by Robert J. Clark, President/CEO.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Business Council for Sustainable Energy
On behalf of the Business Council for Sustainable Energy (BCSE), I
am writing to express support for fiscal year 2020 Federal investment
in initiatives that help businesses manage environmental issues, foster
transparency and best practices in emissions and water management, and
recognize leadership in environmental stewardship and sustainability.
As Congress moves forward with appropriations legislation for
fiscal year 2020, the Council urges Congress to continue robust funding
for the EPA offices of Air and Radiation, Enforcement Division, and
Transportation and Air Quality related to international climate change
programs, climate change research and partnership programs, the
Renewable Fuel Standard, water management, and the ENERGY STAR program.
BCSE is a coalition of companies and trade associations from the
energy efficiency, natural gas and renewable energy sectors. It
includes independent electric power producers, investor-owned
utilities, public power, manufacturers, commercial end users and
service providers in energy and environmental markets. Founded in 1992,
the coalition's diverse business membership is united around the
continued revitalization of the economy and the creation of a secure
and reliable energy future in America.
As a business group working to advance clean energy policies over
the last 27 years, BCSE has seen first-hand the importance of the
Federal role EPA fills in sharing information about new technologies
and practices to help speed adoption and allow consumers to make more
informed decisions.
The Federal Government's role in these efforts is critical to
provide transparent, standardized and independent data and expertise
that cannot be replicated by private sector or non-governmental
organizations with the same credibility.
maintaining america's status as an energy leader
Through regulatory and voluntary initiatives, EPA helps foster the
U.S. leadership role in clean energy and transportation technologies
globally. Many EPA programs, including the CHP Partnership, Green Power
Partnership, Natural Gas Star, Methane Challenge, AgStar, Center for
Corporate Climate Leadership, SmartWay Transport Partnership, and
others, embody longstanding public-private endeavors that benefit
American businesses and help them continue to compete on a global
scale.
For example, the Natural Gas Star program brings companies together
to voluntarily conduct projects to reduce methane emissions and share
lessons learned on innovative, cost-effective best practices. The new
Methane Challenge program (within Natural Gas STAR) provides a credible
platform for partner companies to transparently report the voluntary
methane reduction measures they are implementing company-wide and to be
publicly recognized as leaders in methane reduction. Both programs help
companies share technology innovations that modernize and improve the
efficiency of the country's energy delivery system.
EPA initiatives provide market transparency, encourage voluntary
action, and identify companies that are leaders in businesses and in
environmental protection. Additionally, EPA's laboratories lead the
world in capabilities that make the United States preeminent in
research and analysis which supports private sector capabilities to
enhance economic growth and emissions reductions simultaneously.
epa programs provide value to u.s. taxpayers
Federal investments in programs implemented by the EPA have
multiple benefits including reducing air pollution, saving consumers
money, and achieving energy independence and security. Additionally,
clean energy supported over 3 million jobs in the United States in
2016, due in part to EPA and other government programs that encourage
the use of clean energy and energy efficiency.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 2018 U.S. Energy and Employment Report, available at: https://
static1.squarespace.com/
static/5a98cf80ec4eb7c5cd928c61/t/5c7f3708fa0d6036d7120d8f/
1551849054549/USEER+2019+US+Energy+Employment+Report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Programs like ENERGYSTAR have proven track records of success and
are extremely cost-effective. Through brand recognition, information
and positive publicity, the ENERGY STAR program has provided the
catalyst for many consumers, homeowners, businesses, and State and
local governments to invest in energy efficiency. The Council opposes
moving to a fee-based funding model for ENERGYSTAR, which would erode
the integrity and effectiveness of the program.
Under the Office of Transportation and Air Quality, EPA has run the
Renewable Fuel Standard, which has enabled the development of the
biomass and biogas industry to help meet lower carbon energy needs. The
Council encourages EPA to fund the registration of projects producing
RINs from biogas derived fuels, including renewable electricity. This
pathway would open up the potential for electricity derived from
biogas, renewable biomass and solid forms of biomass used as
transportation fuel and could significantly contribute to the program.
epa programs provide critical support to states, tribes, and localities
Many State, local, and Tribal efforts to improve the environment
are dependent on the information and resources provided by Federal
programs. The EPA provides valuable technical assistance, analytical
tools, and outreach support to State, local, and Tribal governments
that enable the States to administer robust clean energy and energy
efficiency programs. Investing in energy efficiency, renewable energy,
and environmental policies and programs is an important way for State
and local governments to improve air quality and to improve people's
health, and to save money. For example, EPA's State and Local Climate
and Energy Program offers expertise about energy efficiency, renewable
energy, and climate change policies and programs to interested State,
local, and Tribal governments. By providing these resources, EPA
removes barriers that would otherwise prohibit action at the local
level due to resource constraints or lack of information on best
practices.
the federal role for air quality and climate change programs
EPA can address barriers to the adoption of emissions-reducing
technologies--such as a lack of reliable information, inconsistent
regulatory environments, and workforce training gaps--through
activities that include providing objective information, creating
networks between the public and private sector and providing technical
assistance. These efforts can help energy consumers in all sectors.
Through its programs on renewable energy, natural gas, combined heat
and power and energy efficiency, EPA encourages the use of clean,
efficient, and market-ready technologies that can lower costs and
improve resilience in addition to lowering emissions.
EPA also has an important role to play as an international leader
in climate science and emission reduction frameworks. EPA is engaged in
a variety of international activities to advance climate change
science, monitor our environment, and promote activities that reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. EPA establishes partnerships, provides
leadership, and shares technical expertise to support these activities.
The Council wishes to work with Members of the Appropriations
Committee to maximize the value of limited Federal dollars and we
request the opportunity to meet with your staff to further discuss the
Council's position and support for EPA programs. For questions please
contact Carolyn Sloan on the BCSE's staff at [email protected]
______
Prepared Statement of the Center for Invasive Species Prevention
We are contacting you in support of funding for programs at the
USDA Forest Service that are essential for protecting the resilience of
the Nation's forests in the face of invasive pests. Specifically, we
ask that the subcommittee support funding of the State and Private
Forestry Forest Health Management program at a level of $104 million;
and Research and Development at $310 million.
About one-third of America's land area supports forests or
woodlands. These forests provide many benefits, including wood and non-
wood forest products, jobs for rural economies, wildlife habitat,
carbon sequestration, clean water and air, and aesthetic enjoyment.
While these benefits are well understood for rural and wildland
forests, the contributions of urban forests are sometimes not
recognized. Urban forests moderate temperatures and winds, thus
reducing energy expenditures and related emissions of carbon dioxide
and other pollutants. They moderate stormwater runoff and related
management costs. Urban trees while they filter air and water
pollutants. And they improve the health and wellbeing of city
residents.
forest health and management programs
The Cooperative Forest Health Management program supports partners'
efforts to prevent, monitor, suppress, and eradicate insects, diseases,
and invasive plants through technical and financial assistance to State
forestry agencies who deal directly with private forest owners. Our
request for $104 million for Forest Health Management program would
increase funds for work on non-Federal cooperative lands from $41 to
$48 million. We ask for this increase for two reasons. First, over 60
percent of America's forests are owned by States or private entities.
Forest-based rural economies and the thousands of jobs these non-
Federal forests support depend on the assistance received from USDA
Forest Service experts.
Second, non-native pests such as the emerald ash borer, spotted
lanternfly, polyphagous and Kuroshio shot hole borer, and laurel wilt
disease are usually first introduced in cities or suburbs. This occurs
because the imports which transport these pests are usually destined
for population centers. As a result, the newly arrived pests cause
enormous damage to urban forests.
However, the pests don't stay in the cities. Instead, they
proliferate and spread to forests in rural and wildland areas. This
movement is often facilitated by people moving firewood or plants (such
as through the nursery trade) or even household goods. In this way, the
pests introduced to our cities threaten forests across the continent--
including in National forests. For example, the emerald ash borer is
killing trees in many National forests across the Northeast and
Midwest; the polyphagous and Kuroshio shot hole borers are now killing
trees in the Cleveland National Forest. All were first discovered in
urban forests.
To be most effective, the USDA Forest Health Management program
must address pests where they are first found--in urban or semi-rural
forests--before they spread to National forests.
Our request for $48 million for Cooperative Lands seeks to restore
some of the capacity lost in past budget reductions. Between fiscal
year 2010 and fiscal year 2018, spending to combat 11 specified non-
native insects and pathogens fell by about 50 percent. Furthermore, the
Forest Service' responsibilities to combat these pests is likely to
increase because the USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
has proposed to terminate the program under which it regulates movement
of firewood, nursery stock, and other items which spread the emerald
ash borer. Such a termination will greatly increase the risk that the
emerald ash borer will spread to un-infested Western States. The step
will also exacerbate the risk of spreading many other wood-boring pests
that are also transported in firewood.
Another example of the value of the Cooperative Lands program is
the pathogen that causes sudden oak death (SOD). Since 2001, this
program has provided an average of $1.9 million per year to the Oregon
Department of Forestry as well as to National forests and Bureau of
Land Management to treat SOD in Curry County, Oregon. An economic
analysis concluded that continuing this cooperative containment program
is essential to protecting economic, cultural, aesthetic, and
ecological values of southwest Oregon. Continuing the slow-the-spread
program at approximately the same level over the next 20 years--at a
cost of $30 million--could prevent the loss of 1,200 jobs by 2028 and
$57.9 million in wages from 2028.
Of course, a variety of non-native and native pests are threatening
National forests. Consequently, CISP also supports funding the Forest
Health Management program on National Forests at $56 million for fiscal
year 2020.
usda forest service forest and rangeland research program
Effective programs to prevent, suppress, and eradicate non-native
insects, diseases, and plants depend on understanding of the pest-host
relationship gained through research. We seek $310 million for the USDA
Forest Service Research and Development program in fiscal year 2020.
Past reductions have already severely reduced the Service's ability
to carry out vitally important research on non-native insects,
diseases, and plants. Thus, funding for research conducted by the
Research stations on 10 non-native pests decreased from $10 million in
fiscal year 2010 to just $3 million in fiscal year 2018. Cuts of this
magnitude cripple the Service's ability to develop effective tools to
manage the growing number of pests threatening the health of the
Nation's forests, regardless of ownership.
The budget does not specify funding levels within the Research and
Development budget that should be allocated to non-native insects,
pathogens, or other invasive species. We ask the subcommittee to
include in its report language an instruction that the Service increase
the funding for this vital research area to 5 percent of the total
research budget.
For further information, please contact Faith T. Campbell at
[email protected]
[This statement was submitted by Faith T. Campbell, President.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Central Arizona Water Conservation District
On behalf of the Central Arizona Water Conservation District
(CAWCD), I encourage you to include $2 million for salinity specific
projects in the Bureau of Land Management's (BLM) Aquatic Habitat
Management sub-activity (formerly known as the Soil, Water and Air
Program) in fiscal year 2020. The funding will help protect the water
quality of the Colorado River that is used by approximately 40 million
people for municipal and industrial purposes and used to irrigate
approximately 5.5 million acres in the United States.
CAWCD manages the Central Arizona Project (CAP), a multi-purpose
water resource development and management project that delivers
Colorado River water into central and southern Arizona. The largest
supplier of renewable water in Arizona, CAP diverts an average of over
1.5 million acre-feet of Arizona's 2.8 million acre-foot Colorado River
entitlement each year to municipal and industrial users, agricultural
irrigation districts, and Indian communities.
Our goal at CAP is to provide an affordable, reliable and
sustainable supply of Colorado River water to a service area that
includes more than 80 percent of Arizona's population.
These renewable water supplies are critical to Arizona's economy
and to the economies of Native American communities throughout the
State. Nearly 90 percent of economic activity in the State of Arizona
occurs within CAP's service area. The canal provides an economic
benefit of $100 billion annually, accounting for one-third of the
entire Arizona gross State product. CAP also helps the State of Arizona
meet its water management and regulatory objectives of reducing
groundwater use and ensuring availability of groundwater as a
supplemental water supply during future droughts. Achieving and
maintaining these water management objectives is critical to the long-
term sustainability of a State as arid as Arizona.
negative impacts of concentrated salts
Natural and man-induced salt loading to the Colorado River creates
environmental and economic damages. EPA has identified that more than
60 percent of the salt load of the Colorado River comes from natural
sources. The majority of land within the Colorado River Basin is
federally owned, much of which is administered by BLM. Human activity,
principally irrigation, adds to salt load of the Colorado River.
Further, natural and human activities concentrate the dissolved salts
in the River.
The U.S. Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) has estimated the
current quantifiable damages at about $454 million per year to U.S.
users with projections that damages would increase to approximately
$574 million per year by 2035 if the program were not to continue.
These damages include:
--A reduction in the yield of salt sensitive crops and increased
water use to meet the leaching requirements in the agricultural
sector;
--Increased use of imported water and cost of desalination and brine
disposal for recycling water in the municipal sector;
--A reduction in the useful life of galvanized water pipe systems,
water heaters, faucets, garbage disposals, clothes washers, and
dishwashers, and increased use of bottled water and water
softeners in the household sector;
--An increase in the cost of cooling operations and the cost of water
softening, and a decrease in equipment service life in the
commercial sector;
--An increase in the use of water and the cost of water treatment,
and an increase in sewer fees in the industrial sector;
--A decrease in the life of treatment facilities and pipelines in the
utility sector; and
--Difficulty in meeting wastewater discharge requirements to comply
with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
terms and conditions, and an increase in desalination and brine
disposal costs due to accumulation of salts in groundwater
basins.
Adequate funding for salinity control will prevent the water
quality of the Colorado River from further degradation and avoid
significant increases in economic damages to municipal, industrial and
irrigation users.
history of the blm colorado river basin salinity control program
In implementing the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Act of
1974, Congress recognized that most of the salts in the Colorado River
originate from federally owned lands. Title I of the Salinity Control
Act deals with the U.S. commitment to the quality of waters being
delivered to Mexico. Title II of the Act deals with improving the
quality of the water delivered to users in the United States. This
testimony deals specific with Title II efforts. In 1984, Congress
amended the Salinity Control Act and directed that the Secretary of the
Interior develop a comprehensive program for minimizing salt
contributions to the Colorado River from lands administered by BLM.
In 2000, Congress reiterated its directive to the Secretary and
requested a report on the implementation of BLM's program (Public Law
106-459). In 2003, BLM employed a Salinity Coordinator to increase BLM
efforts in the Colorado River Basin and to pursue salinity control
studies and to implement specific salinity control practices.
Meaningful resources have been expended by BLM in the past few years to
better understand salt mobilization on rangelands. With a significant
portion of the salt load of the Colorado River coming from BLM
administered lands, the BLM portion of the overall program is essential
to the success of the effort. Inadequate BLM salinity control efforts
will result in significant additional economic damages to water users
downstream.
The threat of salinity continues to be a concern in both the United
States and Mexico. On November 20, 2012, a five-year agreement, known
as Minute 319, was signed between the U.S. and Mexico to guide future
management of the Colorado River. Among the key issues addressed in
Minute 319 included an agreement to maintain current salinity
management and existing salinity standards. The United States, Mexico,
and key water users, including CAWCD, worked since 2015 to develop a
successor agreement, Minute 323, which was finalized on September 27,
2017. Minute 323 continues collaboration and cooperation among the
United States and Mexico with respect to salinity control in the
Colorado River system. The CAWCD and other key water providers are
committed to meeting these goals.
conclusion
Implementation of salinity control practices through the BLM
Program has proven to be a very cost effective method of controlling
the salinity of the Colorado River and is an essential component of the
overall Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Program.
CAWCD urges the subcommittee to include $2 million for salinity
specific projects in the BLM's Soil, Water and Air Program. The
continuation of funding will prevent further degradation of the water
quality of the Colorado River and further degradation and economic
damages experienced by municipal, industrial and irrigation users. A
modest investment in source control pays huge dividends in improved
drinking water quality for nearly 40 million Americans.
[This statement was submitted by Theodore C. Cooke, General
Manager.]
______
Prepared Statement of Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma
On behalf of the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma, I am submitting this
written statement for the hearing record on the fiscal year 2020
budgets for the Indian Health Service (IHS) and the Bureau of Indian
Affairs (BIA). This testimony identifies healthcare funding priorities
and budget issues important to the Choctaw Nation and its citizens.
First, and foremost, the Choctaw Nation requests that Congress
exempt Tribal Government Services and Program Funding from
Sequestrations, Unilateral Rescissions and Budget Cuts in all future
appropriations. We also request that Congress continues to fully fund
Contract Support Cost (CSC) without impacting direct program funding.
The Choctaw Nation requests that the subcommittee works to approve
timely appropriations for fiscal year 2020, and we trust all efforts
will be made to have a Federal appropriation prior to the beginning of
the fiscal year. However, in fiscal year 2019, the Interior
appropriations, including funding to provide direct healthcare services
for our people, was severely delayed due to the longest partial
government shutdown in our history. The Indian Health Service (IHS)
system (including Tribal) was the only Federal direct healthcare system
that was affected by the partial government shutdown, leaving IHS and
Tribes alike scrambling to ensure that patients continued to receive
access to critical healthcare services during this time. Tribes, with
the inability to be paid any of its compact funds during the partial
shutdown period, found themselves in the awkward position of finding a
way to continue to administer services that are Trust obligations of
the Federal Government for which the government was not providing
funding. This situation is untenable.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) finalized a report in
September, 2018 analyzing the possibility of advanced appropriations
for Indian Health Service. IHS Advanced Appropriations would eliminate
the negative effect of any government shutdown and allow these critical
health services to operate uninterrupted. It is time for advanced
appropriations to be enacted for IHS, and we look to the subcommittee
for leadership and support to make it a reality this year.
Thank you for continuing to appropriate funds in 2017 for the Joint
Venture Project (JVP), a proven, successful model for leveraging
Federal resources to improve access to care in Indian Country. We most
recently opened the Choctaw Nation Durant Regional Medcial Clinic, in
February 2017. We were the first Tribal or IHS program to have an
ambulatory surgery suite in an outpatient facility. Other services also
include primary care, dental, pediatrics, lab, diabetes care, community
health nurses, optometry, radiology services (including MRI, CT, bone
density, mammography, ultrasound, fluoroscopy and x-ray), pharmacy,
behavioral health, physical therapy, and numerous specialty care
services. This JVP with IHS has been an invaluable exercise in
partnership and investment in improved quality healthcare for Native
American people.
Although there are many facility needs in the Choctaw Nation and
Oklahoma City Area, none are included on the IHS Health Facilities
Construction program listing. The current backlog would take decades to
construct at the current pace of appropriations and yet it will still
not address any needs in Oklahoma. The only viable option for Tribal
health facilities in Oklahoma is the JVP, which is a very small and
highly competitive program. IHS has not held a competition for the
program since 2014 and has created a similar 'queue' as the large
Health Facilities Construction program, which is both bureaucratic and
ineffective. The IHS should be strongly encouraged to abandon this
failed approach and compete the JVP on at least a bi-annual basis to
address the highest facility priorities.
We strongly urge the Committee to protect the Federal trust and
treaty obligations that are funded in the Federal domestic budget.
Federal funding that meets Federal Indian treaty and trust obligations
also provides significant contributions to the economy. The Department
of the Interior (DOI), the BIA and Bureau of Indian Education (BIE)
contribute substantially to economic growth in Tribal areas through
advances in infrastructure, strategic planning, improved practices of
governance, and the development of human capital.
the choctaw nation of oklahoma
The Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma is the third largest Native American
Tribal government in the United States with over 230,000 members. The
Choctaw Nation territory consists of all or part of 10\1/2\ counties in
Southeast Oklahoma, and we are proudly one of the State's largest
employers. The Nation operates a hospital at Talihina, Oklahoma, and a
system of eight (8) outpatient health facilities, along with a broad
range of ancillary services.
The Nation also administers referred specialty care and sanitation
facilities construction; higher education; Johnson O'Malley program;
housing improvement; child welfare and social services; law
enforcement; and, many other programs and services. The Choctaw Nation
has operated under the Self-Governance authority in the DOI since 1994
and in the Department of Health and Human Services' IHS since 1995. As
a Self-Governance Tribe, the Nation is able to re-design programs to
meet tribally-specific needs without diminishing the United States'
trust responsibility.
NATIONAL BUDGET REQUESTS--INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE
1.
Special Diabetes Program for Indians.--Support reauthorization
of $200 million/year for 5 years (IHS): The administration's budget
proposes to move SDPI from ``mandatory funding'' which Congress must
authorize from time to time to ``discretionary spending'' which would
allow Congress to control the funding going to SDPI as part of the
annual appropriations process. That means SDPI will compete with other
Indian programs annually, as opposed to being funded automatically
outside of that environment today. Indian Country has not been
consulted on this proposal and the rationale for the request has not
been made available to us. We request no changes until such
consultation occurs.
2.
Contract Support Costs--Indian Health Service and Bureau of
Indian Affairs (IHS and BIA).--The Nation appreciates the continued
support of the Committees to fully fund CSC requirements without
impacting direct Indian health programs. Beginning in fiscal year 2014,
fully funding CSC has made a tremendous improvement and properly
retained important health program funding to direct services. We
request that IHS and BIA be instructed to consult with Tribes on every
provision of the CSC Policy until both sides reach consensus; and if at
any time the agencies seek to unilaterally make changes, they should be
directed to consult with Tribes prior to any changes in the CSC Policy.
3.
Purchased and Referred Care (PRC).--The Purchased/Referred Care
(PRC) program pays for urgent and emergency, specialty care and other
critical services that are not directly available through IHS and
Tribally-operated health programs when no IHS direct care facility
exists, or the direct care facility cannot provide the required
emergency or specialty care, or the facility has more demand for
services than it can currently meet. Although the Nation operates a
hospital facility, the hospital is located in a very rural area, we are
the only provider in the community and services are limited. In fact,
our hospital does not have an intensive care unit, which requires
patients to be flown to another facility using PRC. Therefore, PRC is a
significant need to provide intensive care and tertiary care, as well
as emergency transportation.
4.
IHS Mandatory Funding (Maintaining Current Services).--Existing
funding levels must keep pace with population growth, inflation and the
like, or the result is similar to a reduced budget with less purchasing
power. One very good example are the extraordinary rise in
pharmaceutical costs. Over the last 3 years, the IHS has seen an
increase of 8.8 percent in pharmaceutical expenditures alone.
5.
Workforce Development--permanent funding for Graduate Medical
Education.--The Choctaw Nation has operated an accreditated and
successful Graduate Medical Education program, or GME since receiving a
grant from the Health Care Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
in 2010. The Nation has found the GME program to be integral to our
physician recruiting and retention efforts in a rural, remote area. As
a Teaching Health Center, our residents are very likely to practice
following their residency in our health system, or close by in rural
Oklahoma, which is also underserved. Physicians considering employment
are often interested in GME and it becomes a recruitment tool outside
the residents themselves. Other benefits are: (1) becoming a THC is a
marker of quality; (2) improved in-house physician coverage; (3)
``growing your own'' medical staff from nearby rural communitites; (4)
high retention and satisfaction rates of residency graduates; (5)
promotes an environment of life long learning; (6) provides enhanced
continuing medical education opportunities; (7) encourages Medical
Staff to be up on current literature and topics; and (8) Engages the
existing staff and is seen as a ``breath of fresh air''. While the HRSA
funding has been helpful, it is competitive and sporatic--sometimes
with unknown future appropriations. GME programs should be funded
permanently in the Indian health system so that IHS and Tribal sites
with hospitals can address some of the dire challenges in recruiting
and retaining health professionals in rural areas.
6.
Opioid Funding.--We appreciate the set asides for Indian health
that have been made in various initiatives for funding addressing the
opioid epidemic. Increase funding and include Tribal set asides rather
than to make it funding through States. Addressing the opioid epidemic
is a nationwide priority. American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/AN)
face opioid related fatalities three times the rate of non-Natives.
7.
Information Technology.--The IHS health information technology
(HIT) program continues to face increased demand for systems
improvements and enhancements, rising costs, and increased information
technology (IT) security requirements driven in part by medical
advances, and ever-growing and more complex requirements for HIT
capabilities. Virtually any new program initiative has IT requirements
for functionality, modality, data collection, and reporting which then
must be added to a clinician's work flow and managed within the HIT
portfolio. In addition to the overall increased demand, the HIT program
must also plan for a change in Electronic Health Record platforms
resulting from the decision by the Veteran's Administration (VA) to
replace their current legacy HIT platform, VistA. To prepare for this
transition that is expected to occur over the next 5 years, the IHS HIT
program will be required to devote additional budgetary resources for
infrastructure modernization, training, and support.
Thank you for accepting my written statement on behalf of the
Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma.
[This statement was submitted by Melanie Fourkiller, Senior Policy
Analyst.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Choose Clean Water Coalition
Dear Chair Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall:
To follow a common sense path to maintain healthy local water and
restore Chesapeake Bay, which is critical for our regional economy, the
undersigned members of the Choose Clean Water Coalition request funding
for the following programs in fiscal year 2020:
u.s. environmental protection agency
Chesapeake Bay Program--$90 million.--We request an increase in
funding to $90 million for the base budget of the Chesapeake Bay
Program, which coordinates Chesapeake Bay watershed restoration and
protection efforts. More than two-thirds of the program's funds are
passed through to the States and local communities for on-the-ground
restoration work through the Small Watershed Grants, Innovative
Nutrient and Sediment Reduction Grants, State Implementation Grants,
Chesapeake Bay Regulatory and Accountability Program grants and local
government grants. This would be the first increase in funding for the
Chesapeake in 6 years--since a very modest 4 percent increase in fiscal
year 2015. We are advocating for an additional $17 million to go to the
States, local governments and local entities to do on-the-ground
restoration that will help the region move toward its clean up goals in
2025.
We strongly support the Chesapeake Small Watershed Grants and the
Innovative Nutrient and Sediment Reduction Grants--and request $9
million for each of these critical grant programs. These grants go
directly to on-the-ground restoration efforts by local governments and
communities, including to family farms, and are critical to addressing
the new increased pollution loadings from Conowingo Dam. We recognize
the high priority that Congress has placed on these two grant programs
for years and support the effort to get more Federal funds on the
ground at the local level.
We urge you to fund the Chesapeake Bay Program at $90 million in
fiscal year 2020, and specify that $9 million of that amount be
provided for Small Watershed Grants ($3 million more than in fiscal
year 2019) and $9 million be provided for Innovative Nutrient and
Sediment Reduction Grants ($3 million more than in fiscal year 2019).
We also support additional funding of $5 million for Local Government
Implementation Funding and $6 million for priority watersheds to
address the additional pollution reductions that must be met over the
next 6 years, due to the Conowingo Dam.
Clean Water State Revolving Fund (SRF)--$5 billion.--This program
is critical to any national initiative to provide a Federal
Infrastructure Spending Plan and it provides the lifeblood for the
1,779 local governments throughout the Chesapeake region to secure
their water infrastructure. The funding level for the Clean Water SRF
has eroded over the years as the clean water needs of local communities
have increased dramatically. The Clean Water SRF is one of the funding
components of the Clean Water Act to ensure that local governments have
Federal funding support for the Act's mandates. We request tripling the
current funding for the Clean Water SRF.
These low interest loans are critical for clean water and for
ratepayers in the Chesapeake region and nationwide. We urge you to
support the $5 billion funding level that would provide $1.07 billion
in low interest loans to local governments in Delaware, Maryland, New
York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia and the District of
Columbia--three times the current level of funding. We also strongly
support targeting 20 percent of the Clean Water SRF funds for green
infrastructure and innovative projects including those to manage
stormwater, which helps communities improve water quality while
creating green space, mitigating flooding. As the list of clean water
infrastructure needs in the Chesapeake region continues to expand, we
request that Congress triple the funding of the Clean Water SRF from
fiscal year 2019.
department of the interior
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)--Chesapeake Ecosystem Science and
Monitoring--$12.85 million.--We support full funding for USGS to
continue to provide the critical science necessary for restoration and
protection efforts for fish, wildlife and the 18 million people in the
Chesapeake Bay watershed. USGS monitoring and assessment informs
decisions made by the Department of the Interior as well as other
Federal and State partners in the Chesapeake Bay Program on issues
related to fisheries and associated water quality, waterfowl and their
habitats, and land protection.
In fiscal year 2020, USGS, working with the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), will put a new focus on habitat
conditions for commercial and recreational fisheries. This will help
State and Federal agencies develop a more comprehensive approach to
restore and protect fisheries. The comprehensive approach will better
tie together Chesapeake Bay Program efforts to: (1) reduce nutrient and
sediment pollution under the Bay total maximum daily load (TMDL); (2)
mitigate the effects of toxic contaminants; and (3) improve stream and
estuary habitats important for fisheries.
National Park Service--Chesapeake Regional Programs--$3.891
million.--The National Park Service Chesapeake Bay Office has led
efforts on a number of small, but very important programs that focus on
increasing public access and the use of ecological, cultural and
historic resources of the Chesapeake region.
We are requesting increased funding for the key program currently
administered by the National Park Service Chesapeake Bay Office in the
Chesapeake Bay watershed: Chesapeake Bay Gateways and Trails ($3.0
million). Gateways helps to preserve critical landscapes and natural
resources in the region and has contributed over $16 million in
technical and financial assistance for more than 300 projects in the
Bay watershed. We urge you to increase funding for the Gateways program
from $2.02 million in fiscal year 2019 to $3 million in fiscal year
2020. In addition, we urge continued support for coordinating programs
through the National Park Service Chesapeake Bay Office ($495,000). In
addition, as in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2018, we urge you
to extend the authorization for the Chesapeake Bay Gateways and Trails
program, specifically for 2 more years.
We also support continued funding for the Captain John Smith
Chesapeake National Historic Trail at $396,000. We are, however, very
concerned with the recent administrative transfer of this Historic
Trail program from the National Park Service Chesapeake Bay Office to
the Colonial National Historic Park in Virginia. We urge Congress to
reassert your intent that the Captain John Smith Chesapeake National
Historic Trail be administered by the National Park Service Chesapeake
Bay Office in Annapolis, Maryland, as it has been since 2007.
department of the interior/u.s. department of agriculture
National Park Service/U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/U.S. Forest
Service--Land and Water Conservation Fund Priority Projects in the
Chesapeake Bay Watershed--$16.7705 million.--We strongly support full
funding for the Land and Water Conservation Fund. In particular, we
support continuation of the strategic use of funds from the Land and
Water Conservation Fund for priority projects in the Chesapeake Bay
watershed. These efforts target conservation funds for critical
priority landscapes throughout the Chesapeake Bay region. The following
projects would protect more than 6,000 acres of nationally significant
resources.
--U.S Fish and Wildlife Service--James River National Wildlife
Refuge--$750,000 (255 acres)
--U.S Fish and Wildlife Service--Rappahannock River Valley National
Wildlife Refuge--$3 million (968 acres)
--U.S. Forest Service--George Washington and Jefferson National
Forests--$435,500 (144 acres)
--U.S. Forest Service--George Washington and Jefferson National
Forests--$4,285,000 (2,897 acres)
--National Park Service--Captain John Smith Chesapeake National
Historic Trail--$5,000,000 (1,400 acres)
--National Park Service--Richmond National Battlefield Park--
$3,300,000 (380 acres)
Thank you for your consideration of these very important requests.
Please contact Peter J. Marx at [email protected] with any
questions or concerns.
Action Together Northeastern Pennsylvania
Alliance for the Chesapeake Bay
Alliance for the Shenandoah Valley
American Chestnut Land Trust
American Rivers
Anacostia Riverkeeper
Anacostia Watershed Society
Annapolis Green
Arundel Rivers Federation
Audubon Maryland/DC
Audubon Naturalist Society
Audubon Society of Northern Virginia
Back Creek Conservancy
Baltimore Tree Trust
Blue Heron Environmental Network
Blue Ridge Watershed Coalition
Blue Water Baltimore
Butternut Valley Alliance
Cacapon Institute
Capital Region Land Conservancy
Catskill Mountainkeeper
Center for Progressive Reform
Chapman Forest Foundation
Chemung River Friends
Chesapeake Bay Foundation
Chesapeake Climate Action Network
Chesapeake Conservancy
Chesapeake Legal Alliance
Chesapeake Wildlife Heritage
Clean Fairfax
Clean Water Action
Clean Water Linganore
Coalition for Smarter Growth
Conservation Voters of Pennsylvania
DC Environmental Network
Delaware Nature Society
Ducks Unlimited
Earth Conservation Corps
Earthworks
Earth Forum of Howard County
Eastern Pennsylvania Coalition for Abandoned Mine Reclamation
Eastern Shore Land Conservancy
Elizabeth River Project
Environmental Integrity Project
Environmental Justice Center of Chestnut Hill United Church
Environmental Working Group
Experience Learning
Float Fishermen of Virginia
Friends of Accotink Creek
Friends of Frederick County
Friends of Herring Run Park
Friends of Little Hunting Creek
Friends of Lower Beaverdam Creek
Friends of Quincy Run
Friends of Sligo Creek
Friends of the Bohemia
Friends of the Cacapon River
Friends of Dyke Marsh
Friends of the Middle River
Friends of the Nanticoke River
Friends of the North Fork of the Shenandoah River
Friends of the Rappahannock
Friends of St. Clements Bay
Goose Creek Association
Interfaith Partners for the Chesapeake
James River Association
Lackawanna River Conservation Association
Lancaster Farmland Trust
Little Falls Watershed Alliance
Lower Shore Land Trust
Lower Susquehanna Riverkeeper
Lynnhaven River NOW
Maryland Conservation Council
Maryland Environmental Health Network
Maryland League of Conservation Voters
Maryland Native Plant Society
Maryland Nonprofits
Maryland Science Center
Mattawoman Watershed Society
Mid-Atlantic Council Trout Unlimited
Middle Susquehanna Riverkeeper
Muddy Branch Alliance
National Aquarium
National Parks Conservation Association
National Wildlife Federation
Natural Resources Defense Council
Nature Abounds
NeighborSpace of Baltimore County
New York League of Conservation Voters
New York State Council of Trout Unlimited
Neighbors of the Northwest Branch
Otsego County Conservation Association
Otsego Land Trust
Partnership for Smarter Growth
Patapsco Heritage Greenway
Patuxent Tidewater Land Trust
PennEnvironment
PennFuture
Pennsylvania Council of Churches
Pennsylvania Council of Trout Unlimited
Piedmont Environmental Council
Potomac Conservancy
Potomac Riverkeeper
Potomac Riverkeeper Network
Potomac Valley Audubon Society
Queen Anne's Conservation Association
Preservation Maryland
Rachel Carson Council
Restore America's Estuaries
Rappahannock League for Environmental Protection
Richmond Audubon Society
Rivanna Conservation Alliance
St. Mary's River Watershed Association
Savage River Watershed Association
Severn River Association
Shenandoah Riverkeeper Shenandoah Valley Network
ShoreRivers
Sidney Center Improvement Group
Sierra Club--Maryland Chapter
Sleepy Creek Watershed Association
Southeast Rural Community Assistance Project
Southern Environmental Law Center
Southern Maryland Audubon Society
SouthWings
Susquehanna Heritage
Talbot Preservation Alliance
The Downstream Project
Transition Howard County
Trash Free Maryland
Trout Unlimited
Upper Potomac Riverkeeper
Upper Susquehanna Coalition
Virginia Association of Biological Farming
Virginia Conservation Network
Virginia League of Conservation Voters
Warm Springs Watershed Association
Waterfront Partnership of Baltimore, Inc.
Waterkeepers Chesapeake
West Virginia Citizen Action Group
West Virginia Environmental Council
West Virginia Highlands Conservancy
West Virginia Rivers Coalition
Wetlands Watch
Wicomico Environmental Trust
______
Prepared Statement of the Chugach Regional Resources Commission
The Chugach Regional Resources Commission (CRRC) is pleased to
submit written testimony reflecting the needs, concerns and requests of
CRRC for fiscal year 2020 appropriations for the Bureau of Indian
Affairs (BIA). Our recurring funding is included in the
administration's annual budget within the BIA's Tribal Management
Development Program (TM/DP) account. The Bureau of Indian Affairs not
only has a legal and contractual obligation to provide funding for the
CRRC, but the CRRC is able to translate this funding into real economic
opportunity for those living in the small Alaska Native villages
located in Prince William Sound and Lower Cook Inlet. We leveraged a
meager budget of well under a half million dollars in BIA funds and to
operate with a budget of nearly $2 million to support community-based
programs (almost a five-to-one ratio). In previous years, the
administration has proposed to cut TMDP funding by 25 percent and slash
our funding. Reducing the already-modest funding we and other
organizations like ours receive would be a mistake, and we urge this
Committee to consider expanding on the resources we have available to
do our critical work.
For example, a modest increase of $100,000 in fiscal year 2020
funding for CRRC may translate into as much as $500,000 in additional
revenues that we can use to serve our Alaska Native communities. As
noted in the administration's budget request for fiscal year 2019
concerning the BIA's TM/DP:
[T]he Tribal Management/Development Program (TMDP) supports
Tribal self- determination by allowing Tribal management of
fish and game programs . . . Contract agreements are executed
with individual fish and wildlife resource Tribes [and
consortia] to accomplish management objectives. Tribes
administer programs that contribute significantly towards
economic development [].
CRRC is an intertribal organization organized in 1984 by the seven
Native Villages located in Prince William Sound and Lower Cook Inlet in
South-central Alaska; namely, Tatitlek Village IRA Council, Chenega IRA
Council, Port Graham Village Council, Nanwalek IRA Council, Native
Village of Eyak, Qutekcak Native Tribe, and Valdez Native Tribe. The
success of our programs, from both an economic and social standpoint,
make them an integral part of our constituent Tribes' ongoing
development. Reductions in our BIA funding will limit our outreach and
ability to leverage additional Federal, State, local and other Tribal
resources which are critical to our program's and our constituent
Tribes' success.
CRRC was created to address environmental and natural resources
issues and to develop culturally-sensitive economic projects at the
community level to support the sustainable development of the region's
natural resources. The Native Villages' action to create a separate
Tribal entity demonstrates the concern and importance the Tribal
governments hold for environmental and natural resource management and
protection--which is the wellspring for jobs and the perpetuation of
our Alaska Native communities and culture.
Through its many important programs, CRRC provides employment for
up to 20 Native people in the Chugach Region annually--an area of high
unemployment--through programs that conserve and restore our natural
resources and ensure a future for our Tribal communities.
Federal investment in CRRC has translated into real economic
opportunities, savings and community investments that have a great
impact on the Chugach region. Our employees are able to earn a living
and support their families, thereby removing them from the rolls of
people needing Alaska State and Federal support. This contributes to
family and community stability and is a bulwark against depression,
substance abuse, suicide and other ills that plague remote Tribal
communities. With the job opportunities made possible by CRRC programs,
Alaska Native members are able to reinvest their wages into the
community, supporting the employment of and opportunities for other
Alaska Native and non-Native families. Our programs also support future
economic and commercial opportunities for the Prince William Sound and
Lower Cook Inlet regions--protecting and developing our shellfish
industry and other natural resources.
Programs.--CRRC has leveraged its recurring BIA funding into almost
$2 million to support our community-based programs. Specifically, the
$410,000 in base funding provided through BIA appropriations has
allowed CRRC to maintain core administrative operations and seek
specific project funding from other sources such as the Administration
for Native Americans (ANA), the State of Alaska, Bureau of Indian
Affairs (BIA), U.S. Forest Service, U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, the
U.S. Department of Education, the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee
Council, the North Pacific Research Board and other foundations. This
diverse funding pool has enabled CRRC to develop and operate several
important programs that provide vital services, valuable products, and
necessary employment and commercial opportunities. These programs
include:
Alutiiq Pride Shellfish Hatchery.--The Alutiiq Pride Shellfish
Hatchery is the only shellfish hatchery in the State of Alaska. The
20,000 square foot shellfish hatchery is located in Seward, Alaska, and
houses shellfish seed (cockles, littlenecks and butter clams), brood
stock and algae production facilities. Alutiiq Pride is undertaking a
hatchery nursery operation, as well as grow-out operation research to
adapt mariculture techniques for the Alaskan Shellfish industry. The
Hatchery is also conducting scientific research on blue and red king
crab as part of a larger federally-sponsored program.
Alutiiq Pride has already been successful in culturing geoduck,
oyster, littleneck clam, and razor clam species and is currently
working on sea cucumbers. This research has the potential to
dramatically increase commercial opportunities for the region in the
future. The activities of Alutiiq Pride are especially important for
the region; as the only shellfish hatchery in the State, it is uniquely
qualified to carry out this research and production.
Alutiiq Pride staff are working on developing a shellfish sanctuary
concept in Port Graham and Resurrection Bay, acquiring land use permits
from the Department of Natural Resources for Port Graham and from the
Alaska Railroad for Resurrection Bay. Port Graham has been stocked with
220 little neck, 200 cockles and 220 butter clam adults and CRRC is
working to reduce predation and ensure greater survival rates.
Alutiiq Pride also devotes considerable time to its Ocean
Acidification (OA) monitoring lab, processing 300 discrete samples
collected from villages and scientific partners. A Burk-O- Later, an
instrument that tests for aragonite saturation, required for shellfish
to form their shells, requires frequent maintenance and calibration.
Alutiiq Pride recently implemented a preventive maintenance program
to prolong the useful life of essential capital equipment. Alutiiq
Pride installed chillers at its facility that were donated by the
University of Alaska. The chillers will house king crab brood stock in
the event water temperatures are too high. In 2016, warm waters caused
the crabs to release their larvae early which reduced survivability.
Alaska Migratory Bird Co-Management Council.--As a member of the
AMBCC, CRRC works with 10 Native non-profit organizations, the U.S.
Fish & Wildlife Service (USFWS), and the State of Alaska to develop
regulations governing the subsistence harvest of migratory birds during
the spring and summer. As a result of many years representing the
Chugach Region on the AMBCC, CRRC was unanimously selected to serve as
the managing entity for the statewide program, housing staff in the
CRRC office and providing overall management of the subsistence
migratory bird program on behalf of the USFWS. Funding for this program
comes from the USFWS to the Alaska Native non-profit organization
through cooperative agreements. There is no specific line item for the
AMBCC in the USFWS budget, so the Tribes do not know what level of
funding will be available for the program, from year to year. In
addition, funding decisions for the AMBCC are done internally at the
USFWS, so there is no opportunity for input by the Tribes in this
decisionmaking process. The Native Caucus of the AMBCC has directed the
staff to pursue a Public Law 93-638 contract or compact with the USFWS
and we are asking Congress to support this effort with $1 million in
funding.
Climate Change.--CRRC has been identifying and addressing climate
needs relative to understudied resources of high cultural value to our
member Tribes through its Climate Change Program. Changing climate
affects ecosystems in the Gulf of Alaska, Prince William Sound, Cook
Inlet, and the Kenai Peninsula in a variety of ways. CRRC's member
Tribes are extremely susceptible to climate change from adverse effects
relating to declining water resources, reduced aquaculture
productivity, changing resource harvest patterns, and resource
availability. This program addresses ecosystem information needs as it
will demonstrate the need to integrate across information types (i.e.,
weather, climate, socioeconomic, policy, and ecology) to better inform
those involved in climate change-related decisionmaking for ecosystem
management. Through your support for this project, we have been able to
secure additional funding to focus on vulnerability assessments for key
subsistence species, the development of an adaptation plan, and harmful
algal blooms, and food security.
Traditional Foods Security.--There is heightened concern about the
availability of and the potential contaminants in the subsistence foods
that Tribal members eat. The primary food sources have changed
dramatically over the past 100 years. Traditional food systems such as
hunting, fishing, and gathering have declined and there has been an
increased reliance on store-bought foods. The intrinsic value of
harvesting a local food sources in traditional ways cannot be
overstated. Issues our member Tribes face include changing marine and
terrestrial environments where traditional foods gathered in the forest
and on the beaches near the villages are no longer available. The ways
in which foods are produced, distributed and consumed have direct
implications for the local economy and community.
Bureau of Indian Affairs Invasive Species Program.--Each year, the
Bureau of Indian Affairs announces grant opportunities through the BIA
Natural Resources program. In the announcement under ``Project
Eligibility'' it reads: ``Successful applications will focus on the
management/control of invasive species on Tribal trust lands,
individual Indian allotment lands, or in areas managed by Tribes
through treaties or agreements.'' The Invasive Species Program is for
invasive species on land managed by Tribes and is not intended for
marine waters, since these are not areas managed by Tribes. Some of our
Tribes, Nanwalek and Port Graham, have trust lands, the others, Chenega
Bay, Eyak, Seward, Valdez and Tatitlek do not. Therefore, Nanwalek and
Port Graham would be eligible for the Invasive Species Program funding
for any work on those allotment lands, but CRRC could not implement a
region-wide invasive species management approach. This funding is
important to our Tribes. Coastal Tribes, especially those who rely on
healthy marine ecosystems, are especially vulnerable to the potential
harm of invasive species. CRRC's member Tribes are willing to initiate
a proactive response to the dangers of invasive species, but the trust
land requirement prevents them from participating.
conclusion
We urge the subcommittee and Congress to protect and increase
CRRC's fiscal year 2019 appropriation level of $410,000 in the BIA's
fiscal year 2020 budget for TMDP. We also, urge the subcommittee to
support the AMBCC with additional funding and direct the BIA to move
past its overly-restrictive eligibility requirements for the Invasive
Species program. With a five-to-one return on every Federal dollar
invested in CRRC, we clearly demonstrate our ability to effectively
administer these dollars.
Thank you for the opportunity to present our testimony.
[This statement was submitted by Patricia K. Schwalenberg,
Executive Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Coalition Against Forest Pests
SIGNATORIES:
American Forests, Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, California
Forest Pest Council, Center for Invasive Species Prevention, Maine
Forest Service, National Association of Forest Owners, National
Woodland Owners Association, Pennsylvania Department of Conservation
and Natural Resources Bureau of Forestry, Vermont Woodlands Association
Dear Honorable Chairwoman Murkowski, Honorable Ranking Member Udall,
and Honorable Committee Members:
The Coalition Against Forest Pests (CAFP) consists of non-profit
organizations, for-profit entities, landowners, State agency
associations and academic scholars who have joined together to improve
our Nation's efforts to address forest health threats.
We thank you for your continued support of USDA Forest Service
State and Private Forestry programs in the fiscal year 2019 Omnibus
bill. We write to ask your support for adequate funding of programs
managed by the USDA Forest Service that help keep the Nation's forests
healthy by preventing introduction and spread of invasive pests.
Specifically, we ask the Subcommittee on Interior, Environment and
Related Agencies to maintain fiscal year 2019 funding levels in fiscal
year 2020 and increase funding for specific programs with a long and
effective history of detecting and eradicating non-native forest pests.
Forested landscapes cover approximately one-third of the land area
of the United States. All forests benefit Americans. Whether rural or
urban; Federal, State or privately forests they provide wood products,
jobs for rural economies, wildlife habitat, carbon sequestration, clean
water and air, and aesthetic enjoyment.
forest health and management programs on cooperative lands
Maintaining or increasing funding for forest health management on
cooperative lands is essential to ensuring the health and productivity
of the Nation's forests, over 60 percent of which are State or
privately owned. Forest-based rural economies and the thousands of jobs
they support are also tied to healthy forests, not only in the forest
products sector but for recreation industries as well. The economic
well-being of tens of thousands of American families depends on healthy
forests.
Since fiscal year 2010, spending to combat 2011 specified non-
native insects and pathogens decreased about 50 percent--to $12.8
million in fiscal year 2018. Pest species suffering the largest cuts
are the Asian longhorned beetle, hemlock woolly adelgid, oak wilt,
sudden oak death, and the combination of gold spotted oak borer,
thousand cankers disease, and laurel wilt. These pests do not limit
themselves to destruction on federally owned lands.
Since 2001, Oregon Department of Forestry, USFS, & BLM have spent
an average of $1.9 million per year to treat Sudden Oak Death in Curry
County, Oregon. Continuing this cooperative containment program is
essential to protecting economic, cultural, aesthetic, and ecological
values of southwest Oregon. Based on models of disease spread, recent
economic analysis concluded that continuing to spend at approximately
the same level--$30 million spent on slow the spread treatments over
the next 20 years--could offset the loss of 1,200 jobs by 2028 and $580
million in wages from 2028 to 2038.
The Cooperative Forest Health Management program supports
activities related to prevention, monitoring, suppression, and
eradication of insects, diseases, and plants through technical and
financial assistance to State forestry agencies who deal directly with
private forest owners. Because forest pests and disease know no bounds,
controlling pests on private lands can stop millions of dollars in
damage to public lands and vice versa.
CAFP supports funding the Forest Health Management on Cooperative Lands
Program at $51 million and on National Forests at $59 million for
fiscal year 2020.
usda forest service forest and rangeland research program
Effective programs to prevent, suppress, and eradicate non-native
insects, diseases, and plants depend on understanding of the pest-host
relationship gained through research.
The Service's ability to carry out vitally important research on
non-native insects, diseases, and plants has already been severely
reduced by cuts in previous years. Funding for research conducted by
the Research stations on 10 non-native pests has decreased from $10
million in fiscal year 2010 to just $3 million in fiscal year 2018.
Cuts of this magnitude cripple the Service's ability to develop
effective tools to manage the growing number of pests threatening the
health of the Nation's forests across all ownerships.
CAFP supports funding the Forest and Rangeland Research Program in
fiscal year 2020 at $303 million, of which $32 million should be
allocated to invasive species research.
usda forest service urban and community forests program
Urban and community forests play a critical role in the health of
our cities and the health our cities' residents. These forests and tree
canopies provide noise abatement, temperature reductions, runoff
filtration and flood control as well as improving the quality of life
for those living in and around these green areas.
When non-native insects and diseases attack trees and forests,
enormous losses may arise. Most of the quantified costs are in cities
and suburbs; across the country each year, municipal governments spend
more than $2 billion per year to remove trees on city property that are
killed by non-native pests. Homeowners spend $1 billion every year to
remove and replace trees on their properties and absorb an additional
$1.5 billion in reduced property values. As new pests are introduced,
and established pests spread, these costs will only continue to rise.
A considerable number of non-native invasive pests and diseases are
introduced through cities. As noted above, these pests cost people
living in these cities and suburbs--directly or through their local
taxes--billions of dollars per year to remove and replace trees killed
by the non-native pests. As new pests are introduced, and established
pests spread, these costs will only continue to rise. For example, the
polyphagous and Kuroshio shot hole borers are projected to cost
municipalities and homeowners in California $36.2 billion if spread is
not prevented.
CAFP supports funding the Urban and Community Forests Program at $35
million for fiscal year 2020.
For further information, please contact Faith T. Campbell,
Coalition Contact Person, Coalition Against Forest Pests, at
[email protected]
______
Prepared Statement of the Coalition for American Heritage
Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee:
Thank you for the opportunity to offer the Coalition for American
Heritage's recommendations for fiscal year 2020 Interior, Environment
and Related Agencies appropriations.
The Coalition for American Heritage (``the Coalition'') is an
organization comprised of heritage professionals, scholars, small
businesses, non-profits and history-lovers across the country. Our
350,000 members work together to promote our Nation's commitment to
historic preservation. Preserving historic resources helps stabilize
neighborhoods, attract investment, create jobs, generate tax revenues,
support small businesses, and power America's heritage tourism
industry.
To continue our country's proud tradition of preservation, the
Coalition urges robust funding for all of the U.S. Department of the
Interior's historic preservation and cultural management programs, and
for the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for
the Humanities. Respectfully, the Coalition urges the Committee to
approve the following funding levels for fiscal year 2020:
--National Park Service (NPS): $2.5 billion
--NPS Historic Preservation Fund: $148.5 million
--NPS Deferred Maintenance: $476 million
--NPS Office of International Affairs: $1.5 million
--NPS National Heritage Areas and Heritage Partnership Program: $32
million
--Bureau of Land Management (BLM) Cultural Resources Management: $20
million
--BLM National Landscape Conservation System: $45 million
--Department of Interior Land and Conservation Fund (LWCF): continued
increase toward the full $900 million in dedicated funding from
offshore mineral leasing revenues
--National Endowment for the Arts (NEA): $167.5 million
--National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH): $167.5 million
national park service
We urge the Committee to fund the NPS at the fiscal year 2019
enacted level of $2.5 billion. The popularity of our national parks is
at an all-time high. Our country cannot afford unwarranted reductions
to visitor services and cuts to the responsible stewardship of our
historic and cultural resources. The NPS is responsible for 418
National Park System units. Over the past 20 years, more than 40 new
parks have been added to the park system. Many recent additions
preserve historic places and themes that have traditionally been
underrepresented within the system.
Within the $2.5 billion requested, we recommend robust funding for
Resource Stewardship, including $1 million for the National Underground
Railroad Network to Freedom, $2 million for the African American Civil
Rights Network, and $2 million for the Reconstruction Era National
Historic Network. Funding for these popular initiatives provides the
public with valuable educational resources that honor and preserve our
country's rich African American heritage and history for future
generations.
nps historic preservation fund
We urge the Committee to appropriate $148.5 million in fiscal year
2020 for the Historic Preservation Fund (HPF), a vital program that, in
partnership with States, local governments and Tribes, is the
cornerstone of our country's historic preservation initiatives.
Within the $148.5 million request, we recommend the following
funding breakdown:
--$60 million for State Historic Preservation Officers (SHPOs)for
heritage preservation and protection programs.
--$20 million for Tribal Historic Preservation Officers (THPOs).
--$5 million for a new competitive grant program to digitize, map and
survey historic and cultural resources. Using this program,
SHPOs and THPOs could create and enhance GIS-based maps of
historic resources and develop predictive models. This
investment would advance the faster, less expensive, and more
efficient delivery of infrastructure projects while ensuring
the protection of America's most cherished historic resources.
--$30 million for competitive grants to document, interpret, and
preserve historic sites associated with the Civil Rights
Movement.
--$15 million for Save America's Treasures grants for the
preservation of nationally significant sites, structures and
artifacts.
--$10 million for grants to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to preserve and repair historic buildings.
--$7.5 million for preservation grants to revitalize historic
properties of national, State, and local significance.
--$1 million for competitive grants for the survey and nomination of
properties associated with communities currently
underrepresented on the National Register of Historic Places
and National Historic Landmarks.
nps deferred maintenance
We urge the Committee to appropriate $476 million in fiscal year
2020 to address the deferred maintenance backlog at America's national
parks. Almost half of the current backlog concern historic assets.
Robust investments in this area will contribute to the successful
preservation of historic sites and structures and other NPS cultural
resources. Without critically needed funding for repair and
rehabilitation, these critical sites, buildings and artifacts that draw
visitors to our national parks assets risk further deterioration and
potential loss.
Within the $476 million request, we recommend the following funding
breakdown:
--$160 million for Line Item Construction projects
--$150 million for Repair and Rehabilitation
--$166 million for Cyclic Maintenance
Line Item Construction projects: We support at least $160 million
toward addressing the needs of the highest priority non-transportation
assets.
Repair and Rehabilitation: We recommend $150 million, a $14 million
increase above the fiscal year 2019 enacted level. The Committee's
support for these programs has been very helpful in addressing the
long-term maintenance needs at America's national parks over the past
several years.
Cyclic Maintenance: We recommend $160 for cyclic maintenance, a $15
million increase above the fiscal year 2019 enacted level. These
efforts are critical to preventing assets from degrading to the point
of needing repair. Performing regular maintenance will help prevent an
increase in the number of deferred maintenance projects.
national park service: office of international affairs
We urge a $1.5 million fiscal year 2020 appropriation for the NPS
Office of International Affairs. This funding would ensure that the
United States can robustly engage in and support the World Heritage
Program. Communities throughout the country are pursuing nominations of
sites in their area to the World Heritage List, including Hopewell
Ceremonial Earthworks in Ohio and Mount Vernon in Virginia. The Office
of International Affairs is critical to shepherding advocates through
the nominations process.
The administration proposed to consolidate the Southwest Border
Protection Program into the Office of International Affairs program. We
are very concerned that this change would mean that the Office of
International Affairs will not have the resources necessary to fulfill
its mission effectively.
nps national heritage areas
We recommend $32 million in funding for the Heritage Partnership
Program and our National Heritage Areas (NHAs). Through the use of
public-private partnerships, NHAs support historic preservation,
heritage tourism, and recreation. These programs collaborate with
communities to make heritage relevant to local interests and needs.
blm cultural resources management
We urge the Committee to appropriate $20 million, a modest increase
of $3 million above the fiscal year 2019 enacted level. The increase is
necessary to fulfill the BLM's substantial workload requirements under
the National Historic Preservation Act, for land use assessments (up to
13,000 per year) and inventory and protection of cultural resources.
The increase would support surveys of sensitive areas, site protection
and stabilization projects for sites vulnerable to unauthorized
activities and damage due to fire, erosion and changing water levels.
Increased funding would also support updated predictive modeling and
data analysis to enhance the BLM's ability to address large-scale,
cross-jurisdictional land-use projects. To support the effective
implementation of the increased appropriation level, we further
recommend that the Committee encourage the BLM to promote inventory
information-sharing with State and Tribal historic preservation
officers.
blm national landscape conservation system
We urge a $45 million fiscal year 2020 appropriation for the
National Landscape Conservation System. An increase in base funding
will prevent critical damage to 36 million acres of congressionally and
presidentially designated National Monuments, National Conservation
Areas, Wilderness, Wilderness Study Areas, National Scenic and Historic
Trails, and Wild Scenic Rivers. Increased funding will ensure proper
management and provide for a quality visitor experience.
We urge the Committee to reject the administration's proposed cuts
to the Oregon and California Grants Lands programs, which would result
in reduced visitor services, decreased maintenance and care of trails,
and fewer educational and interpretive resources.
blm land water conservation fund
We urge the Committee to reject the administration's drastic cuts
to the LWCF. Instead, we urge the Committee to continue increasing LWCF
funding toward the full $900 million from offshore mineral leasing
revenues that is dedicated to the LWCF annually. Many of our country's
most significant historic and cultural landscapes have been permanently
protected through LWCF investments, including Martin Luther King Jr.
National Historic Park, Canyons of the Ancients National Monument, and
Hopewell Culture National Historic Park. In total, more than $550
million has been invested to acquire historic sites and 137,000 acres
in 162 NPS units.
Within LWCF funding, we urge the Committee to fund the American
Battlefield Protection Program (ABPP) at $10 million in fiscal year
2020. Through public-private partnerships, the ABPP has helped
communities to preserve more than 100 historic battlefields in 42
States and territories. In protecting the hallowed ground upon which so
many Americans fought and died, the ABPP preserves a valuable part of
our shared history.
independent agencies: advisory council on historic preservation
We request $7 million for the Advisory Council on Historic
Preservation (ACHP), to fund its work to administer the rulemaking
process for historic preservation law, assist in resolving conflicts
from historic resource reviews, and provide advice on historic
preservation.
national endowments for the arts and the humanities
The Coalition urges the Committee to fund the NEA and the NEH at
$167.5 million in fiscal year 2020. Robust funding for the NEA and NEH
is critical to communities across America. For example, support from
the NEA has created programs like Arts and Shadows at the Shadows-on-
the-Teche in Louisiana that put regionally-based artists in residence
at the site, resulting in programming that attracted new audiences and
served as a prototype for broader arts-focused programming that draws
people to the town's commercial district. The NEA is also a
collaborator in the Blue Star Museums program, which offers America's
active duty military families free admission to more than 2,000 museums
every summer. NEH support has brought teachers from around the country
to learn about history in the places that it was made, and to carry
those experiences back to their classrooms.
The Coalition is grateful to the Committee for the opportunity to
offer its perspective on fiscal year 2020 appropriations for the
Interior, Environment and Related Agencies appropriations bill. The
Coalition stands ready to work with the Committee on finding common
ground to achieve the fiscal year 2020 funding levels that will support
and enhance historic preservation.
[This statement was submitted by Marion Werkheiser, Policy
Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Coalition for the Delaware River Watershed
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski,
The Honorable Tom Udall,
Chair
Ranking Minority Member
Subcommittee on Interior,
Subcommittee on Interior,
Environment and Related Agencies
Environment and Related Agencies
S-128 Capitol
S-146A Capitol
U.S. Senate
U.S. Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510
Washington, D.C. 20510
Dear Chair Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall:
The undersigned members of the Coalition for the Delaware River
Watershed request continued support for programs that are essential to
protecting and restoring natural resources throughout the Delaware
River Watershed, a 5-State region (New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania,
Delaware, and Maryland) that drains into the Delaware River and
Delaware Bay. The watershed serves as the drinking water source for
more than 15 million people, or roughly 5 percent of the U.S.
population in the densely populated Mid-Atlantic region. The Delaware
River Watershed also generates $25 billion in annual economic activity,
including agriculture, recreation and eco-tourism, hunting and fishing,
port benefits, commercial fishing, and it supports at least 600,000
jobs with over $10 billion in annual wages.
Congress affirmed the importance of protecting the natural
resources of the Delaware River Watershed when it passed, with
bipartisan support and leadership, the Delaware River Basin
Conservation Act in December 2016. The Act directed the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service to establish the Delaware River Basin Restoration
Program, a non-regulatory effort that leverages private investment,
regional partnerships, and local knowledge to protect and restore the
resources of the watershed. The Program was appropriated $5 million in
fiscal year 2018 and increased to $6 million in fiscal year 2019,
representing a critical investment in the future of our region.
To continue on the path toward a restored, and preserved watershed,
critical for our regional economy and wildlife species, we respectfully
request funding for the following programs in fiscal year 2020:
department of the interior
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service--Delaware River Basin Restoration
Program--$10 million
The non-regulatory Delaware River Basin Restoration Program has at
its centerpiece a grants program, the Delaware Watershed Conservation
Fund, launched in August 2018. The first round of funding was awarded
to 25 worthy on-the-ground conservation and restoration projects
throughout the watershed. Funded projects will conserve and restore
fish and wildlife habitat, improve and maintain water quality, sustain
and enhance water management and reduce flood damage, and improve
recreational opportunities and public access in the Delaware River
Watershed. To continue the success of this tremendously successful
program, funding must be increased from the current fiscal year 2019
level of $6 million to meet new project demands and adequately address
the issues threatening the future of the watershed, such as polluted
stormwater, overdevelopment, and habitat loss.
National Park Service--Partnership Wild and Scenic Rivers Program--
$3.051 million
The Partnership Wild and Scenic Rivers Program protects nationally
significant rivers that flow through privately-owned or State-owned
lands within the United States by preserving them in a natural, free-
flowing condition. It engages private interests and all levels of
government in studying, planning, and managing the rivers for the
benefit of future generations. There are 400 miles of designated Wild
and Scenic River in the Delaware River Watershed, including 60 percent
of the Delaware River (New Jersey & Pennsylvania), the Maurice River
(New Jersey), the Musconetcong River (New Jersey), and White Clay Creek
Watershed (Delaware & Pennsylvania). This is the largest concentration
of designated miles in a single watershed east of the Mississippi
River. Partnership Rivers are managed locally, with the National Park
Service providing support and funding via cooperative agreements.
Providing full funding for the Partnership Wild and Scenic Rivers
Program ensures effective and efficient implementation of approved
conservation plans, while providing equitable funding for newly
designated rivers.
department of the interior/u.s. department of agriculture
National Park Service/U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/U.S. Forest
Service--Land and Water Conservation Fund--$900 million
The Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF) remains the premier
Federal program to conserve our Nation's land, water, historic, and
recreational heritage. LWCF funds support for an entire suite of
conservation tools to address national, State, local, and regionally-
driven priorities across the country. Over the last 50 years, the 5
States in the watershed have received over $1 billion from this fund to
support public lands including the Delaware River Watershed's 6
National Wildlife Refuges, the Delaware Water Gap National Recreation
Area, the Appalachian National Scenic Trail, other Federal sites, and
hundreds of State and local parks. In addition, several open space
projects in the region are currently pending LWCF funding, such as
Cherry Valley National Wildlife Refuge, the Northeast Connection Forest
Legacy Programs, and Highlands Conservation Act projects. Support for
public lands among the American public remains consistently and
overwhelmingly strong and bipartisan. We respectfully request that LWCF
is reliably and robustly funded to ensure that it plays the strongest
possible role in revitalizing communities.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency--Clean Water State Revolving Fund-
$5 billion and Drinking Water State Revolving Fund--$5 billion
The Delaware River Watershed requires protective and well-resourced
water infrastructure systems to overcome the challenges of aged and
over-burdened systems. We respectfully request robust funding for
programs and agencies, including the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), to ensure clean water is available to support businesses
and communities affordably. The EPA estimates a need of $384.2 billion
for nationwide water infrastructure investments. The Clean Water State
Revolving Fund (SRF) and the Drinking Water SRF help communities across
the Nation address their local water infrastructure needs by providing
low interest loans to local governments. Thus, the Coalition requests
$5 billion for the Clean Water SRF, tripling current fiscal year 2019
funding, and $5 billion for the Drinking Water SRF to dramatically
improve water quality and protect human health in our region and across
the Nation. We urge dedicating 20 percent of the Clean Water SRF funds
for green infrastructure and innovation projects to improve stormwater
management, which in turn mitigates flooding, improves water quality,
and creates green space. These funds should be accompanied by Federal
technical assistance to help States raise awareness of green
infrastructure's benefits and build demand for green projects.
Thank you for considering our requests. Please contact Sandra
Meola, Director of the Coalition for the Delaware River Watershed, if
you have any questions about our position on this or any other issues
at [email protected]
Sincerely,
American Littoral Society
American Rivers
American Sustainable Business Council
Appalachian Trail Conservancy
Appalachian Mountain Club
Aquaschiocola/Pohopoco Watershed Conservancy
Association of New Jersey Environmental Commissions (ANJEC)
Audubon Pennsylvania
Basha Kill Area Association
Berks Nature
Brodhead Chapter Trout Unlimited
Bucks County Audubon Society
Catskill Mountainkeeper
Christina Conservancy, Inc.
Citizens'Climate Lobby--Lower DE
Citizens United to Protect the Maurice River and Its Tributaries, Inc.
Conservation Voters of Pennsylvania
Conserve Wildlife Foundation
Darby Creek Valley Association
Delaware Canal 21
Delaware Electric Vehicle Association
Delaware Highlands Conservancy
Delaware Nature Society
Delaware Ornithological Society
Delaware Rural Water Association
Ducks Unlimited
Eastern PA Coalition for Abandoned Mine Reclamation
Eastern Waters Council of Fly Fishers International
Environmental Justice Center of Chestnut Hill United Church
Environment New Jersey
Equinunk Watershed Alliance
Forks of the Delaware Chapter of Trout Unlimited
Friends of Cherry Valley
Friends of the Abbott Marshlands
Friends of Heinz Refuge
Friends of the Upper Delaware River
Great Egg Harbor Watershed Association
Greenbelt Overhaul Alliance of Levittown
Greentreks Network, Inc.
Green Valleys Watershed Association
Isles, Inc.
Kirkwood Lake Environmental Committee
Lake Hopatcong Foundation
Land Conservancy of NJ
Lehigh River Stocking Association
Lighthawk
Musconetcong Watershed Association
National Audubon Society
National Parks Conservation Association
National Wildlife Federation
Natural Lands Trust
New Jersey Audubon
New Jersey Conservation Foundation
New Jersey Council of Trout Unlimited
New Jersey Environmental Lobby
New Jersey Highlands Coalition
New Jersey League of Conservation Voters
New Jersey Trout Unlimited
New York League of Conservation Voters
New York State Council of Trout Unlimited
Newtown Creek Coalition
North Jersey RC&D
Northeast Pennsylvania Audubon Society Chapter
PennFuture
Pennsylvania Council of Trout Unlimited
Pennsylvania Land Trust Association
Pennsylvania Resources Council
Pinelands Preservation Alliance
Pocono Heritage Land Trust
Rancocas Pathways, Inc.
Riverfront North
Schuylkill Headwaters Association, Inc.
Shehawken Trout Unlimited
South Jersey Land & Water Trust
Southeast Montco Trout Unlimited
The Red Clay Valley Scenic Byway Alliance
The Watershed Institute
Tobyhanna Creek/Tunkhannock Creek Watershed Association
Tookany-Tacony/Frankford Watershed Partnership Inc.
Trout Unlimited
University of Delaware Delaware Water Resources Center
Upper Delaware Preservation Coalition
Urban Promise/UrbanTrekkers
Valley Forge Trout Unlimited
Water Defense
Watershed Coalition of the Lehigh Valley
Western Pocono Trout Unlimited
White Clay Watershed Association
Wissahickon Valley Watershed Association
______
Prepared Statement of the Coalition for Healthier Schools
Dear Chairman Shelby and Vice Chairman Leahy, Chairwoman Murkowski and
Ranking Member Udall:
The undersigned members of the national Coalition for Healthier
Schools representing millions of K-12 school and childcare
stakeholders, urge you to include in the fiscal year 2020 budget a $65
million Healthy Schools Program at EPA. This represents $1 per child
enrolled in schools and childcare and is an increase to the President's
proposed EPA budget request of $50 million for a similar annual
program. Funds should be to advance EPA capacity and outreach
activities to address healthier schools and childcare facilities for
all children, as described in EPA's March 2019 press release on the
proposed new Program (see below):
EPA: ``Protecting children's health is a top priority for
EPA, and this new funding would help school's address poor and
deteriorating conditions that can harm children's health and
stymie academic progress,'' said EPA Administrator Andrew
Wheeler. ``This grant program would help schools, especially
those in underserved communities, reduce exposures to
environmental hazards, create healthier learning environments,
and ensure children can reach their fullest potential.'' . . .
``The Healthy Schools Grant Program is a comprehensive
environmental health grant program with the goal of identifying
and addressing environmental health risks in and around schools
that contribute to increased absenteeism and reduced academic
performance. The program would provide a total of $50 million
for schools to identify, prevent, reduce and resolve
environmental hazards including:
--reducing childhood lead exposure;
--reducing asthma triggers;
--promoting integrated pest management; and
--reducing or eliminating childhood exposure to one or more
toxic chemicals in schools.
Eligible recipients would include State and local
governments, federally recognized Tribal governments, and non-
profit organizations.
As described by EPA, the Program should offer an array of cross-
media planning and education and training grants at multiple levels and
constituencies--national, regional, NGOs--and not be restricted to only
States and Tribes. Relevant EPA offices that must be resourced and
engaged are the Office of Air and Radiation/Indoor Environments
Division, Office of Chemical Safety, Office of Research, Office of
Water Quality, and Office of Children's Health Protection. Importantly,
either EPA or the appropriations bill text should identify the EPA
office to lead the effort. In our combined decades of experiences, it
should be an office with robust K-12 staff expertise and other
resources. The Indoor Environments Division has the most relevant
experience: a 25-year record of structured grant making and successful
work with the States, Tribes, NGOs, and K-12 and childcare leaders and
personnel.
We agree with Administrator Wheeler that every child--and
especially the highest risk little learners--needs a healthful learning
environment. Due to sustained cuts to EPA's core offices and cuts by
States to education over the last few years, fewer schools today than
10 years ago are actively addressing indoor air, mold remediation, and
hazardous chemicals management. Furthermore, EPA's critical guidance
documents on energy saving and test score-boosting facility retrofits
(better lighting, ventilation) and on siting of new facilities (away
from flood zones, industrial facilities) have never moved into active
use in the field, due chiefly to the absence of EPA grants.
The proposed program would not provide funds for school or
childcare construction or maintenance. However, EPA can spur the
education and training for those responsible for school and childcare
facilities, as well as parents and others concerned for children's
well-being. A relatively small $65 million annual investment by EPA
should stress preventing small problems (roof leaks) from becoming
expensive health threats (mold infestations) to children and personnel
alike, and could yield big benefits in attendance and seat time that
outweigh local costs. Prevention is better than remediation.
In 2017 America's School Infrastructure earned a D+ from the
American Society of Civil Engineers. In the same year, the Harvard Chan
School of Public Health released a landmark report detailing how
unhealthy school facilities damage children's ``health, thinking, and
learning.'' The Harvard findings are echoed in research previously
produced by the University of Tulsa, University of California at
Berkeley, and in countless other studies in the U.S. and across Europe
and Scandinavia.
Every school day there are some 65 million children in schools and
childcare facilities. The research has shown that
--indoor environmental exposures to pollutants can be more intense
than outdoor exposures;
--educators are often unaware of how facility problems impact
children;
--school and childcare facilities are filled with asthma triggers
such as dusts, molds, chemical fumes, pests and pesticides,
other contaminants;
--poor indoor school environments decrease attention, seat time,
attendance, and test scores; and,
--poor indoor environmental quality increases asthma and other health
complaints, thus increasing healthcare costs for children and
school faculty and staff.
This Coalition's letter to the appropriators in 2018 urged that
EPA's final budget include the allocations to various EPA offices based
on $1/child in schools and in childcare, We urge you again, in light of
the President and EPA's recognition of these issues in the President's
fiscal year 2020 Budget Request, to do the same over fiscal year 2019:
--$35 Million for cross-agency Leadership and program implementation
by EPA's Indoor Environments Division-Reducing the Risks of
Indoor Air to advance healthy indoor environments in schools
and childcare centers with guidelines, grants to the field,
annual symposia, webinars, and to provide inter agency Federal
leadership on school infrastructure concerns;
--$5 million for EPA's Office of Children's Health to strengthen
pediatric environmental health capacity to address children
with suspected exposures in schools and child care settings;
--$5 million for EPA's Drinking Water office to disseminate user-
friendly guidance to key school and childcare stakeholders
regarding lead in drinking and cooking water;
--$10 million for EPA's Office of Chemical Safety to strengthen its
guidelines and enforcements that address legacy toxics in
schools such as asbestos, lead, PCBs, and pesticides, and to
encourage the safe management and disposal of hazardous
chemicals in schools;
--$10 million for EPA's Office of Research to strengthen and expand
its research into children's exposures in the school and
childcare settings.
We urge the U.S. Senate to include $65 Million over fiscal year
2019 in EPA appropriations for restoring and expanding EPA's proven
healthy schools and healthy kids programs and annual symposia that
educate schools and child care entities on how to site, design,
maintain and operate buildings to prevent or address common problems,
such as: indoor air pollution, dampness and molds, lead in drinking
water and paint, pests and pesticides, hazardous chemical management,
legacy toxics like PCBs, and more. The EPA programs also support public
health services for children with suspected environmental exposures in
these settings.
Sincerely,
ORGANIZATIONS
Alaska Community Action on Toxics
American Public Health Association
Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America
Association of Asthma Educators (PA)
Association of School Business Officials International (ASBO
International)
Breast Cancer Prevention Partners
Californians for Pesticide Reform
Cancer Prevention Coalition for Los Angeles (CA)
Center for Environmental Health
Child Care Aware of America
Children's Environmental Health Center of the Hudson Valley at New York
Medical Center and Maria Fareri Children's Hospital (NY)
Children's Environmental Health Network
Children's Environmental Protection Alliance (AL)
Coalition for Environmentally Safe Schools (MA)
Collaborative for High Performance Schools
The Deirdre Imus Environmental Health Center at Hackensack UMC (NJ)
Earth Day Network
Education Law Center
Empire State Consumer Project (NY)
First Focus
Great Lakes Center for Children's Environmental Health (IL)
Green Schools National Network
Healthy Legacy (MN)
Health Promotion Consultants (VA)
Health Resources in Action
Healthy Schools PA/Women for a Healthy Environment
Healthy Schools Network, Inc.
Improving Kids' Environment (IN)
IPM Institute of North America
Learning Disabilities Associations of America
Learning Disabilities Association of Arkansas
Learning Disabilities Association of Georgia
Learning Disabilities Association of Illinois
Learning Disabilities Association of Iowa
Learning Disabilities Association of Maine
Learning Disabilities Association of Maryland
Learning Disabilities Association of Minnesota
Learning Disabilities Association of Pennsylvania
Learning Disabilities Association of New Jersey
Learning Disabilities Association of Oklahoma
Learning Disabilities Association of South Carolina
Learning Disabilities Association of Tennessee
Learning Disabilities Association of Texas
Learning Disabilities Association of Utah
Maine PTA
Maryland Children's Environmental Health Coalition
Massachusetts Coalition for Occupational Safety and Health
Midwest Pesticide Action Center
The National Alliance to Advance Adolescent Health
National Center for Environmental Health Strategies
National Association of County and City Health Officials
Nontoxic Certified (NY)
Pesticide Action Network of North America
Occupational Health & Safety Section of the American Public Health
Association
Ohio Public Health Association
Parents for Students Safety (TN)
Partners for a Healthier Community (MA)
Pennsylvania Integrated Pest Management Program
Pioneer Valley Asthma Coalition (MA)
Project Green Schools (MA)
Regional Asthma Management and Prevention (RAMP--CA)
Responsible Purchasing Network
School-Based Health Alliance
School Based Health Alliance of Arkansas
Sierra Club
South Texas Asthma Coalition
Toxics Information Project (TIP--RI)
Valley Community Healthcare (CA)
Western New York Council on Occupational Safety & Health
INDIVIDUALS (affiliations for informational purposes only)
Rosemary Ahtuangaruak, Nuiqsut (AK)
Abbey Alkon, RN, PhD, UCSF (CA)
Louis Allen, MD
David Ammend, MD, NW Passage, (WI)
Gary Arthur, Issaquah Educ. Assoc. (WA)
Elgin Avila, MPH, Eq. Health Solutions
Noam H. Arzt, PhD (CA)
Kesha Baptiste-Roberts, PhD, MPH, Morgan State University (MD)
Carl R. Baum, MD, Yale School of Medicine
Gloria E. Barrera, MSN, RN (IL)
Chelsey E. Brown, MPH (LA)
Carla C Campbell, MD, MS, FAAP, University of Texas at El Paso
Beverly Chester, MPH (OH)
David Chester, Capt. USMC (OH)
Laurie Costello, MD (CO)
Richard Crume, Env. Engineer (KY)
Marcia Deegler, MS (MA)
Amanda Farr, MPH (CA)
Mary Gant, Green Science Policy Institute
Augusta Gross, PhD (NY)
Chip Halverson, ND, Northwest Center for Biological Medicine (OR)
Katharine Hawkes, MPH (VA)
Brent Ibata, PhD, JD, MPH, FACHE (FL)
Tenaya Jackman, MPH (HI)
Jyotsna Jagai, MS, MPH, PhD, Chair, APHA Environment Section (IL)
Jazmine Kenny, MSPH (CA)
Jerry Lamping, Take Care of Your Classroom Air (TX)
Paul Landsbergis, PhD, MPH, SUNY Downstate Medical Center
Patricia A. Lasley, MPH, Great Lakes Center for Children's
Environmental Health (IL)
Larry K. Lowry, Southwest Center for Pediatric Environmental Health
(TX)
Daniel Lefkowitz (NY)
Jennifer Lam, MS, RDN (WI)
Megan Latshaw, PHD, MPH (MD)
Elinor Mattern, MPH (CA)
Annika Montag, PhD, (CA)
Virginia Mott (ME)
Christina Olbrantz, MPH, Columbia University
Larry K. Olsen, DrPH, MCHES (NM)
Jerome A. Paulson, MD, FAAP, Emeritus, George Washington University
Milken Institute School of Public Health
Suzette Phillips, MA (Washington, DC)
Joseph Ponessa PhD, Rutgers University (NJ)
Rachel Powell, PhD, MPH (GA)
Marjorie Sable, DrPH (MO)
Natalie R Sampson, PhD, MPH, UMI/Dearborn (MI)
Chelsea Alexandra Schafer, California State University, Northridge (CA)
Hani Serag, MD, MPH (TX)
Craig Slatin, ScD, UMass/Lowell (MA)
Lindsay Tallon, PhD, Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health
Sciences
Evelyn Tejeda, MPH (GA)
Joan K. Teach, PhD (GA)
Mariana Torchia (CA)
Theodora Tsongas, PhD, MS (OR)
vity Jasmine Uysal, MPH (CA)
Jeff Vincent, PhD, UC Berkeley (CA)
Kim Whitmore, PhD, RN, UW/Madison (WI)
Chelsea Schafer, MPH, CHES, Los Angeles Valley College (CA)
Yolanda Whyte, MD, Whyte Pediatrics
CONTACT: Claire Barnett, Coordinator, Coalition for Healthier
Schools, [email protected]
______
Prepared Statement of the Coalition Supporting USGS
Streamgage Networks & Modernization
water data & science program funding
Dear Senator Murkowski and Senator Udall:
As leaders in the undersigned organizations, we urge your support
to enable the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), a Bureau in the Department
of Interior (DOI) to fully support its streamgaging networks. These
vital networks, managed within the USGS Groundwater and Streamflow
Information Program, serve the national interest with continuous
streamflow information at over 8,200 locations. But additions to these
networks are needed to adequately manage the Nation's critical water
supplies and infrastructure. The members of our organizations rely on
the streamgage data and science that USGS produces and many of us
represent active, cost-share partners in funding the data collection
that Congress and the Federal agencies require.
Information from these valuable streamgages are utilized by water
supply managers, water quality administrators, emergency responders,
consulting engineers, recreationists and many others in forecasting and
response during floods, droughts, and other extreme events, design of
bridges and other infrastructure, energy generation, management of
Federal lands, design and operation of Federal reservoirs and
navigation infrastructure. These networks provide critical information
to other bureaus of the DOI and to the Corps of Engineers, NOAA, EPA,
USDA, and other Federal agencies, as well as providing information
essential to congressional oversight and revision of many Federal laws,
including the Clean Water Act, Endangered Species Act, Safe Drinking
Water Act, and many interstate compacts and international treaties.
Federal Priority Streamgage Network: (formerly referred to as the
National Streamflow Information Program, ``NSIP''), was authorized by
Congress in 2009, to operate and maintain a stable ``Federal backbone''
network of streamgages to meet five specific national needs for
streamflow information at (1) interstate and international boundaries,
(2) National Weather Service flood forecast sites, (3) outflows of
major river basins, (4) ``sentinel watersheds,'' needed to evaluate and
anticipate the potential consequences of ongoing changes in American
land use, water use, climate etc., and (5) national priority water-
quality monitoring sites. Our national ability to collect sufficient
water data at the needed locations to answer the necessary Federal,
State, Tribal, local, business and NGO questions is seriously
compromised by the insufficient funding for the Federal Priority
Streamgage Network.
Today, less than 25 percent of the Federal Priority Streamgages are
fully funded by the Federal Government. The USGS is unable to complete
development of the Network, as Congress directed in 2009, without
additional funding. Full implementation of the Federal Priority
Streamgage Network is estimated at $125 million. Requested Funding
Level by this Coalition for Federal Priorities Streamgages is $27.5
million for fiscal year 2020.
Cooperative Matching Funds: The USGS works with over a thousand
partners Nation-wide (Federal, State, Tribal, local, and NGO) using
Cooperative Matching Funds to jointly support USGS streamgages, many of
which meet the criteria of the Federal Priority network. This matching
program, which began as a 50-50 program, has seen the non-Federal cost-
share contribution increase from 50 percent to over 70 percent.
Restoring this program to a 50-50 percent cost share is estimated to
require $70 million. Requested Funding Level by this Coalition for
Cooperative Matching Funds for Streamgage Network is $33 million for
fiscal year 2020.
Modernization of the Networks and Data Delivery: Much of the basic
operations of the streamgaging networks is based on technology that is
seven or eight decades old. Innovations are necessary to enable scarce
dollars to effectively measure, monitor, and understand the Nation's
water resources. The Next Generation (NextGen) Water Observation System
exemplifies innovative data collection equipment and data delivery and
the potential to support water prediction and decision-support systems
for emergencies and daily water operations.
Next Generation Water Observation System: Our coalition very much
appreciates Congress' support of this innovative program. Build-out of
NextGen envisions focused monitoring in 10 basins nationwide to better
calibrate modeling, thus improving the ability to estimate water supply
in the Nation's many ungaged areas. The Delaware River basin was
selected as the pilot basin, first of the 10 envisioned. The USGS's 10-
year plan for implementation of Next Gen calls for $7.8M/year in order
to equip one additional basin per year. Requested Funding Level by this
Coalition for NextGen Equipment for Implementation is $7.8 M and for
Operation and Maintenance is $4.5 million for fiscal year 2020.
To fully capitalize on the robust data collected in the NextGen
basins, modernization of data delivery is also required. Aging legacy
software systems with a growing maintenance burden need to be updated
to a robust and scalable IT water infrastructure that positions us for
the future. This transformation is needed to enable management of new
data and sensor networks, support integration of the best water data
available from across multiple agencies and sectors, feed data and
analytical products forward into the National Water Model, and
ultimately provide feedback to optimize and evolve the system. The new
system must deliver data and advanced model results through innovative
online tools to meet the Nation's water challenges over the coming
decades. Requested Funding Level by this Coalition for Modernization of
USGS Data Management, Integration and Delivery Infrastructure is $9.0 M
for fiscal year 2020.
With your help, we hope that Congress will enable the USGS to
fulfill its Water Resources Mission Area, including working toward full
implementation of the Federal Priority Network, adequately funding the
Cooperative Matching Funds for streamgaging and moving water science
into the 21st century through much needed modernization upgrades.
We are happy to answer your questions or provide additional
information; please contact any of us or Sue Lowry at the Interstate
Council on Water Policy ([email protected]).
Sincerely,
______
Prepared Statement of the Coalition to Protect America's National Parks
Sen. Murkowski, Sen. Udall, and Members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to submit testimony on behalf of the Coalition
to Protect America's National Parks (Coalition) regarding the fiscal
year 2020 Budget for the National Park Service.
I am a long-time member of the Coalition, including having served
as the chair of the Executive Council for the past year. I retired from
the National Park Service in 2013 after 8 years as superintendent of
Blue Ridge Parkway, and a total of 41 years of government service with
the NPS. My work with the Park Service included service as
administrative officer at Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military
Park, Shenandoah National Park, and Yosemite National Park. I also
served as associate regional director, administration, for the
Southwest region, and as deputy superintendent of Great Smoky
Mountains, including 3 years as acting superintendent.
The Coalition is comprised of more than 1,700 members who
collectively have more than 40,000 years of experience managing and
protecting national parks. We believe that our parks and public lands
represent the very best of America, and advocate for their protection.
National parks host millions of visitors annually who come to enjoy
the spectacular natural, historic, and cultural resources that the
parks preserve. The National Park Service also touches the lives of
even more of our citizens through a number of grant and technical
assistance programs, which facilitate the preservation of our Nation's
natural, cultural, and historic resources in a partnership between the
National Park Service and hundreds of individuals and organizations
throughout the country.
This work would not be possible without regular, annual
appropriations from Congress to support over 23,000 employees and
400,000 volunteers who are dedicated to preservation and guiding the
enjoyment of these special places. The Coalition is relieved that the
fiscal year 2019 appropriations bill for the National Park Service was
finally enacted after the long, partial Federal Government shutdown. We
are particularly pleased to see that Congress rejected the large budget
cuts presented by the administration and, instead, produced a
bipartisan Department of the Interior Appropriations Act as part of the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, which provided $3.22 billion for NPS,
which is $20 million above the amount from fiscal year 2018, and $521
million above the president's request.
We are pleased that there is an additional $6.2 million for more
park rangers, for we fully appreciate that more rangers are needed to
ensure that the needs of park visitors are met and that park resources
are protected. Also, we are glad to see fixed costs being provided to
NPS so that park and program office staffing levels do not suffer
further erosion because they have to absorb these costs within their
existing budgets. And we welcome inclusion of modest amounts of funding
for newly established parks to ensure that protection and visitor
services are established as soon as possible at these sites.
Further, we welcome the continued support of the construction
program and the Centennial Challenge funds as a means of addressing the
deferred maintenance backlog. Additionally, the support provided for
historic preservation programs and our heritage areas will help
maintain both park resources and significant structures found
throughout the country.
The Trump administration's fiscal year 2020 budget proposes a 14.9
percent cut to the National Park Service budget, when compared to the
appropriations enacted by Congress for fiscal year 2019. It represents
an enormous threat to the protection and preservation of our national
parks, which are suffering from significant reductions in staffing due
to decreased annual appropriations in the past decade. Effectively
managing the high visitation at our parks is proving more and more
challenging with funding that has not kept up with the National Park
Service's costs. And, the backlog of deferred maintenance projects
continues to grow.
We continue to hear so much discussion about the maintenance
backlog of the National Park Service that we worry that the deferred
maintenance backlog is the only issue facing the NPS that gets
attention from members of Congress and the public. Accordingly, our
goal is to encourage comprehensive understanding about what is needed
to protect the important natural, historic, and cultural resources
under the care of the Park Service, as well as what is needed to
provide for a quality visitor experience. Clearly, adequate levels of
annual appropriations are required to ensure the best possible visitor
experience, to ensure that irreplaceable resources are protected, and
to address the maintenance backlog,
Even with the increased appropriations provided during the last two
fiscal years by this subcommittee, parks are not yet able to achieve
these basic purposes. Parks still suffer from significant reductions in
staffing over the past decade due to decreased annual appropriations
over that time period. To put this in perspective, appropriations for
the National Park Service were $3.275 billion in fiscal year 2009, a
full 10 years ago. This is $53 million more than was just appropriated
for NPS in fiscal year 2019. With inflation increasing by 17.3 percent
since 2009, the NPS would need $3.84 billion in appropriations this
year just to stay even with inflation. Thus, the Coalition requests NPS
appropriations be increased by $565 million in fiscal year 2020 to
bring the NPS back to the level of services the agency provided back in
fiscal year 2009.
NPS annual appropriations must be spread thinner as Congress
continues to increase the responsibilities given to the Park Service
through the addition of new parks and programs. Over the last 10 years,
NPS has been directed to manage 27 new parks, 5 more national trails, 5
new wild and scenic rivers, and to coordinate assistance for 3 new
affiliated areas and 9 national heritage areas, along with 8 grant
programs. Park visitation remains high with 331 million people visits
in 2016, with an estimated $18.2 billion economic impact in local
gateway regions. While this record-breaking attendance was no doubt
fueled by the Centennial celebration, and was slightly lower in 2017,
it is clearly a reflection of the importance that these special places
have in the mind of the American public. Effectively managing these
demands is proving more and more challenging with funding that has not
kept up with the Park Service's costs.
While operational needs are absolutely essential, NPS continues to
have a large land acquisition backlog. At the end of 2016, an estimated
$2.1 billion was identified as necessary to purchase privately owned
lands within current park boundaries that have been identified in land
protection plans. These properties represent the minimum interest
necessary to protect resource values within the park. Unfortunately,
this administration has adopted a freeze-the-footprint goal, which
blocks acquisition of key parcels and leaves them vulnerable to
incompatible development. And this policy remains in place even though
$900 million a year is being placed in the Land and Water Conservation
Fund (LWCF) solely for land acquisition purposes and at a time Congress
has just permanently reauthorized LWCF.
In a similar manner, a number of historic structures across the
country are in danger of being lost because of inadequate
appropriations from the Historic Preservation Fund (HPF). As required
by law, $150 million a year goes into this fund; but appropriations
have not kept pace with the need.
Likewise, the NPS relies on partnerships with a number of groups
and organizations, including educational institutions, to carry out
cooperative agreements, technical assistance, and grant programs.
Unfortunately, grant programs are constantly targeted for reductions or
elimination during the annual budget request process, which contributes
to uncertainty among many long-standing partners.
While the modest increase in appropriations for construction in the
fiscal year 2019 Consolidated Appropriations Act will put a dent in the
deferred maintenance backlog, funding remains inadequate to reduce the
backlog in a meaningful way. With a backlog of $11.6 billion, more
needs to be done. Half of this backlog is the result of thousands of
miles of roads, bridges, and other supporting structures that are in
dire need of repair. The highly publicized needs at the Arlington
Memorial Bridge are just one example of this backlog.
And it is this large group of assets, with many being decades old,
which has contributed to the rising maintenance backlog. With more
visitors coming to the parks, this only puts additional stress on the
structures found in the parks.
Unfortunately, the backlog of facility restoration and maintenance
needs continues to grow in the absence of adequate funding. And we know
that repairing park buildings and other assets will mean nothing if
annual funding is not adequate to maintain them. We also know that over
the last several years, funds dedicated to recurring maintenance needs
have not kept up, resulting in further backsliding in addressing the
backlog. There are projects ready to go all across the country.
Completing these projects with an infusion of funding could make an
immediate and tangible difference in the parks.
The National Park Service had previously estimated in its fiscal
year 2017 budget that $400 million a year was needed to restore and
maintain in good condition all of its highest-priority non-
transportation assets within 10 years. Because it is unlikely that
annual appropriations will increase by this much, the National Park
Service needs a dedicated source of funding to address the backlog.
Similar to the structure of the Land and Water Conservation Fund and
the Historic Preservation Fund, the Coalition believes a dedicated
source of revenue for a maintenance backlog fund is required, such as
that being proposed in the Restore Our Parks Act. There will be no
reduction in the backlog if such a revenue stream is unreliable from
year to year. And this revenue must be in addition to current annual
appropriations and not supplant annual funding.
Finally, the Coalition remains very concerned about the proposed
reorganization of the Department of the Interior initiated by former
Secretary Zinke. We are told that the new Secretary Bernhardt will
continue to pursue this very costly scheme despite presenting no
reasonable rationale why such a reorganization is needed. In our view,
it is unfortunate that the recently enacted appropriations bill
provided some initial funding requested for the reorganization.
We are reassured, however, that you have prohibited the department
and its bureaus from implementing any part of a reorganization that
modifies regional boundaries currently in effect until you have
received a reprogramming request that details the anticipated
efficiencies and cost-savings, a description of anticipated personnel
impacts, and funding changes anticipated to implement the proposal. The
Coalition is convinced the administration has not presented any good
rationale for pursuing such a reorganization for the National Park
Service and we urge you to continue to oppose any reprogramming request
for this purpose as a waste of money that can be better used to support
the numerous needs of the Park Service outlined above.
We recognize the challenges the subcommittee confronts in providing
appropriations for all of the programs under its jurisdiction. We are
committed to working with you in helping to ensure sufficient resources
are available for our national parks to fulfill the mandate enacted by
Congress to protect the resources of the parks unimpaired for future
generations, while also making them available for the public to enjoy.
That concludes my statement. I would be glad to respond to any
questions you might have.
[This statement was submitted by Philip A. Francis, Jr.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Colorado Forest and Water Alliance
Members: Colorado Water Congress, Colorado Timber Industry, The Nature
Conservancy, Club 20, and Watershed Health Investment Partners
Senator Lisa Murkowski, Chair
Senator Tom Udall, Ranking Member
U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Interior,
Environment and Related Agencies
131 Dirksen Senate Office Building
Washington, D.C. 20515
Dear Senator Murkowski and Senator Udall:
As you consider the fiscal year 2020 Interior, Environment, and
Related Agencies Appropriations bill, we write to urge you to provide
full funding in line with the 2018 Farm Bill for the Collaborative
Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP). As communities across the
country struggle with the impact of severe fire seasons, now is the
time to expand this vital forest program.
Since its enactment in 2009, CFLRP has had a proven track record of
success in bringing collaboration to our forests to increase forest
health, mitigate wildfires, and support rural economies and local
voices. CFLRP requires various local stakeholders to collaborate,
resulting in stronger relationships on the ground, better projects, and
a decreased risk of conflict and litigation.
To date, 23 CFLRP projects in 14 States have sold more than 2.5
billion board feet of timber; created $1.4 billion in local labor
income; and improved 760 miles of trails for sports enthusiasts and
recreation. On average, CFLRP creates or maintains 5,400 jobs each year
at current funding levels--a number that would likely increase if
funding is expanded. In addition, CFLRP has reduced the risk of
megafires on more than 2.9 million acres.
Because of this bipartisan program's successful track record, the
2018 Farm Bill (Public Law 115-334) doubled the size of its funding
authorization. There is interest across the country in establishing new
collaborative projects as well as sustaining current projects. As the
national conservation on forest management continues, it is imperative
that we invest in programs that reduce conflict in our forests and
increase the number of logs sent to mills.
As you draft the Fiscal Year 2020 Interior, Environment, and
Related Agencies Appropriations bill, we respectfully request that you
fully fund CLFRP. Thank you for considering this request.
Respectfully,
Travis Smith for
Molly Pitts for
Colorado Water Congress
Colorado Timber Industry
Association
Aaron Citron for
Cindy Dozier for
The Nature Conservancy
Club 20
Mark Shea for
Watershed Health Investment
Partners
cc:
Senator Cory Gardner
Senator Michael Bennet
______
Prepared Statement of the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Forum
TO:
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski, Chairwoman
The Honorable Tom Udall, Ranking Member
Senate Committee on Appropriations
Subcommittee on Interior, Environment,
and Related Agencies
SUBJECT:
Continued Funding for the Colorado River
Basin Salinity Control Program under
BLM's Aquatic Habitat Management Sub-
Activity (formerly known as the Soil,
Water and Air Program)
FROM:
Don A. Barnett, Executive Directory
Colorado River Basin Salinity Control
Forum
DATE:
May 10, 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Waters from the Colorado River are used by nearly 40 million people
for municipal and industrial purposes and used to irrigate
approximately 5.5 million acres in the United States. Natural and man-
induced salt loading to the Colorado River creates environmental and
economic damages. The U.S. Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) has
estimated the current quantifiable damages at about $454 million per
year. Congress authorized the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control
Program (Program) in 1974 to offset increased damages caused by
continued development and use of the waters of the Colorado River.
Modeling by Reclamation indicates that the quantifiable damages would
rise to approximately $574 million by the year 2035 without
continuation of the Program. Congress has directed the Secretary of the
Interior to implement a comprehensive program for minimizing salt
contributions to the Colorado River from lands administered by the
Bureau of Land Management (BLM). In the past BLM has funded these
efforts through its Soil, Water and Air Program and now they will be
funded under the new Aquatic Habitat Management sub-activity. BLM's
efforts are an essential part of the overall effort. A funding level of
$2.0 million for salinity specific projects in 2020 is requested to
prevent further degradation of the quality of the Colorado River with a
commensurate increase in downstream economic damages.
EPA has identified that more than 60 percent of the salt load of
the Colorado River comes from natural sources. The majority of land
within the Colorado River Basin is federally owned, much of which is
administered by BLM. In implementing the Colorado River Basin Salinity
Control Act in 1974, Congress recognized that most of the salts in the
Colorado River originate from federally owned lands. Title I of the
Salinity Control Act deals with the U.S. commitment to the quality of
waters being delivered to Mexico. Title II of the Act deals with
improving the quality of the water delivered to users in the United
States. This testimony deals specifically with Title II efforts. In
1984, Congress amended the Salinity Control Act and directed that the
Secretary of the Interior develop a comprehensive program for
minimizing salt contributions to the Colorado River from lands
administered by BLM. In 2000, Congress reiterated its directive to the
Secretary and requested a report on the implementation of BLM's program
(Public Law 106-459). In 2003, BLM employed a Salinity Coordinator to
increase BLM efforts in the Colorado River Basin and to pursue salinity
control studies and to implement specific salinity control practices.
BLM is now working on creating a comprehensive Colorado River Basin
salinity control program as directed by Congress. In January 2018 BLM
issued A Framework for Improving the Effectiveness of the Colorado
River Basin Salinity Control Program, 2018-2023. This document lays out
how BLM intends to implement Colorado River Basin salinity control
activities over the next 5 years. Meaningful resources have been
expended by BLM in the past few years to better understand salt
mobilization on rangelands. With a significant portion of the salt load
of the Colorado River coming from BLM administered lands, the BLM
portion of the overall program is essential to the success of the
effort. Inadequate BLM salinity control efforts will result in
significant additional economic damages to water users downstream.
Concentration of salt in the Colorado River causes approximately
$454 million in quantified damages and significantly more in
unquantified damages in the United States and results in poor water
quality for United States users. Damages occur from:
--a reduction in the ability to reclaim and reuse water due to high
salinities in the water delivered to water treatment and
reclamation facilities,
--a reduction in the yield of salt sensitive crops and increased
water use to meet the leaching requirements in the agricultural
sector,
--increased use of imported water and cost of desalination and brine
disposal for recycling water in the municipal sector,
--a reduction in the useful life of galvanized water pipe systems,
water heaters, faucets, garbage disposals, clothes washers and
dishwashers, and increased use of bottled water and water
softeners in the household sector,
--an increase in the cost of cooling operations and the cost of water
softening, and a decrease in equipment service life in the
commercial sector,
--an increase in the use of water and the cost of water treatment,
and an increase in sewer fees in the industrial sector,
--a decrease in the life of treatment facilities and pipelines in the
utility sector, and
--difficulty in meeting wastewater discharge requirements to comply
with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
terms and conditions, and an increase in desalination and brine
disposal costs due to accumulation of salts in groundwater
basins.
The Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Forum (Forum) is composed
of gubernatorial appointees from Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada,
New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming. The Forum is charged with reviewing the
Colorado River's water quality standards for salinity every 3 years. In
so doing, it adopts a Plan of Implementation consistent with these
standards. The level of appropriation requested in this testimony is in
keeping with the adopted Plan of Implementation. If adequate funds are
not appropriated, significant damages from the higher salinity
concentrations in the water will be more widespread in the United
States and Mexico.
In summary, implementation of salinity control practices through
BLM is a cost effective method of controlling the salinity of the
Colorado River and is an essential component to the overall Colorado
River Basin Salinity Control Program. Continuation of adequate funding
levels for salinity within the Aquatic Habitat Management sub-activity
(formerly the Soil, Water and Air Program) will assist in preventing
the water quality of the Colorado River from further degradation with a
commensurate significant increase in economic damages to municipal,
industrial and irrigation users. A modest investment in source control
pays huge dividends in improved drinking water quality to nearly 40
million Americans.
______
Prepared Statement of the Colorado River Board of California
TO:
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski, Chairwoman
The Honorable Tom Udall, Ranking Member
Senate Committee on Appropriations
Subcommittee on Interior, Environment,
and Related Agencies
SUBJECT:
Continued Funding for the Colorado River
Basin Salinity Control Program under
BLM's Aquatic Habitat Management Sub-
Activity (formerly known as the Soil,
Water and Air Program)
FROM:
Christopher S. Harris, Executive
Directory
Colorado River Board of California
DATE:
May 9, 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
This testimony is in support of fiscal year 2020 funding for the
Department of the Interior's Bureau of Land Management (BLM) associated
with those activities that assist in the implementation of Title II of
the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-
320), as amended. This long-standing successful and cost-effective
salinity control program in the Colorado River Basin is being carried
out pursuant to the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Act and the
Clean Water Act (Public Law 92-500). Congress has directed the
Secretary of the Interior to implement a comprehensive program for
minimizing salt contributions to the Colorado River from lands
administered by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). BLM funds these
efforts through its Soil, Water and Air Program and now they will be
funded under the new Aquatic Habitat Management Sub-Activity. BLM's
efforts are an essential part of the overall effort. A funding level of
at least $2.0 million for salinity specific projects in 2020 is
requested to prevent further degradation of the quality of Colorado
River water supplies and increased economic damages.
The Colorado River Board of California (Colorado River Board) is
the State agency charged with protecting California's interests and
rights in the water and power resources of the Colorado River system.
In this capacity, California participates along with the other six
Colorado River Basin States through the Colorado River Basin Salinity
Control Forum (Forum), the interstate organization responsible for
coordinating the Basin States' salinity control efforts. In close
cooperation with the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and
pursuant to requirements of the Clean Water Act, the Forum is charged
with reviewing the Colorado River water quality standards every 3
years. Every 3 years the Forum adopts a Plan of Implementation
consistent with these water quality standards. The level of
appropriation being supported in this testimony is consistent with the
Forum's 2017 Plan of Implementation. The Forum's 2017 Plan of
Implementation can be found on this website: http://
coloradoriversalinity.org/docs/2017%20Review%20-%20FINAL.pdf. If
adequate funds are not appropriated, significant damages associated
with increasing salinity concentrations of Colorado River water will
become more widespread in the United States and Mexican portions of the
Colorado River Basin.
The EPA has determined that more than 60 percent of the salt load
of the Colorado River comes from natural sources. The majority of land
within the Colorado River Basin is federally owned, much of which is
administered by BLM. Through passage of the Colorado River Basin
Salinity Control Act in 1974, Congress recognized that much of the
salts in the Colorado River originate on federally-owned lands. Title I
of the Salinity Control Act deals with the U.S. commitment to efforts
related to maintaining the quality of waters being delivered to Mexico
pursuant to the 1944 Water Treaty. Title II of the Act deals with
improving the quality of the water delivered to U.S. users. In 1984,
Congress amended the Salinity Control Act and directed that the
Secretary of the Interior develop a comprehensive program for
minimizing salt contributions to the Colorado River from lands
administered by BLM. In 2000, Congress reiterated its directive to the
Secretary and requested a report on the implementation of BLM's program
(Public Law 106-459). In 2003, BLM employed a Salinity Coordinator to
coordinate BLM efforts in the Colorado River Basin States to pursue
salinity control studies and to implement specific salinity control
practices. BLM is now working on creating a comprehensive Colorado
River Basin salinity control program as directed by Congress. In
January 2018 BLM issued A Framework for Improving the Effectiveness of
the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Program, 2018-2023. This
document lays out how BLM intends to implement Colorado River Basin
salinity control activities over the next 5 years. Meaningful resources
have been expended by BLM in the past few years to better understand
salt mobilization on rangelands. With a significant portion of the salt
load of the Colorado River coming from BLM-administered lands, the BLM
portion of the overall program is essential to the success of the
entire effort. Inadequate BLM salinity control efforts will result in
significant additional economic damages to water users downstream.
It has been more than 44 years since the passage of the Colorado
River Basin Salinity Control Act, and much has been learned about the
impact of salts in the Colorado River system. Currently, the salinity
concentration of Colorado River water causes about $450 million in
quantifiable economic damages in the United States annually. Economic
and hydrologic modeling by Reclamation indicates that these economic
damages could rise to nearly $600 million by the year 2035 without
continued implementation of the Program. For example, damages can be
incurred related to the following activities:
--A reduction in the ability to re-claim and reuse water due to high
salinities in the water delivered to water treatment and
reclamation facilities;
--A reduction in the yield of salt-sensitive crops and increased
water use to meet the leaching requirements in the agricultural
sector;
--Increases in the volumes of imported water required;
--Increased costs of desalination and brine disposal for recycled
water in the municipal and industrial sectors;
--A reduction in the useful life of galvanized water pipe systems,
water heaters, faucets, and other household appliances, and
increased use of bottled water and water softeners in the
municipal and industrial sectors;
--Increased costs of cooling operations and the cost of water
softening, and a decrease in equipment service life in the
commercial sectors;
--Increases in the use of water and cost of water treatment, and an
increase in sewer fees in the industrial sector;
--Decreased life of treatment facilities and pipelines in the utility
sectors;
--Increasing difficulty in meeting wastewater discharge requirements
to comply with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
permit terms and conditions; and
--Increased desalination and brine disposal costs due to accumulation
of salts in groundwater basins.
The Colorado River is, and will continue to be, a major and vital
water resource to the nearly 20 million residents of southern
California, including municipal, industrial, and agricultural water
users in Imperial, Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, San
Diego, and Ventura Counties. The protection and improvement of Colorado
River water quality through the continuation and expansion of an
effective salinity control program will avoid, or reduce, additional
economic damages to water users in California and the other States that
rely on Colorado River water resources.
______
Prepared Statement of the Congressional Fire Services Institute,
International Association of Fire Chiefs, National Association of State
Foresters, and National Volunteer Fire Council
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski
The Honorable Tom Udall
Chairwoman
Ranking Member
Appropriations Subcommittee on
Appropriations Subcommittee
Interior, Environment and Related
on
Agencies
Interior, Environment and
U.S. Senate
Related Agencies
Washington, D.C. 20510
U.S. Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510
Dear Chairwoman Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall:
The undersigned organizations are writing to express our strong
support for maintaining effective funding levels in the fiscal year
2020 appropriations process for essential wildfire risk reduction and
protection programs within the USDA Forest Service's (USFS) State and
Private Forestry (S&PF) program area. The important work accomplished
through the State Fire Assistance (SFA) and Volunteer Fire Assistance
(VFA) programs \1\ help decrease total Federal emergency wildland fire
suppression costs and reduce the threat of fire to people, communities,
and both public and private lands.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The President's Budget proposed renaming these programs
National Fire Capacity and Rural Fire Capacity respectively.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
America's forests and forest-dependent communities are at risk from
outbreaks of pests and pathogens, persistent drought, and the buildup
of hazardous fuels. Urbanization and development patterns are placing
more homes and communities near fire-prone landscapes, leading to more
destructive and costly wildland fires, like those that burned more than
8 million acres in 2018 alone.
We thank you for your leadership in developing and securing a long-
term wildland fire funding solution which will ensure that the USFS has
the funding needed for both routine activities to local and State
wildland fire preparedness and mitigation efforts as well as engage in
emergency wildland fire suppression activities. This long-held goal of
our organizations would not have been realized without your leadership
and the work of this Committee. Additionally, our organizations thank
you for providing additional funding to support the USFS wildland fire
suppression and prevention accounts as well as increased funding for
hazardous fuels mitigation on Federal lands and cross boundary areas
for fiscal year 2019 appropriations.
The fiscal year 2020 appropriations bill can provide for both
necessary wildland fire suppression and fire risk reduction activities
that reduce firefighting costs in the long run. We appreciate this
Committee's continued support for the SFA and VFA programs and
encourage you to continue providing strong funding for these important
programs.
SFA is the fundamental Federal mechanism for assisting States and
local fire departments in responding to wildland fires and in
conducting management activities that mitigate fire risk on non-Federal
lands. The program helps train State and local first responders who are
often first to arrive at a wildland fire incident, as well as equip
them with the tools they need to put wildland fires out efficiently and
safely.
For example, in fiscal year 2018 SFA provided over $28 million in
funding for hazardous fuels treatments, benefiting 1,065 communities in
the wildland-urban interface (WUI). This funding led directly to the
treatment of 49,400 acres of hazardous fuels, with another 184,808
acres treated with leveraged funding from partners. Additionally,
roughly $3.7 million in assistance was provided to conduct 3,882 risk
assessments and complete fire management planning projects, supporting
2,873 communities. In fiscal year 2018, SFA funding assisted 12,829
communities through a variety of different activities, including
funding for the training of 97,210 firefighters.
The localized support provided by SFA is crucial because most
wildland fires (80 percent during 2017) burn within State and local
fire department jurisdictions. Even when it comes to wildland fires on
Federal lands, SFA-supported crews and apparatus are often the first to
respond.
Our organizations are grateful for the Committee's decision to
increase SFA funding to $81 million in fiscal year 2019. However,
additional modest increases in SFA funding will help expand wildland
fire preparedness and mitigation capacity for State forestry agencies.
Attacking fires when they are small is the key to reducing fatalities,
injuries, loss of homes and cutting Federal firefighting costs. The
need for increased funding for fire suppression on Federal lands has
broad support. The need to increase fire suppression funding for State
and private lands, where roughly 80 percent of wildland fires occur,
and where many fires that impact Federal lands begin, is just as
urgent. In fiscal year 2020, we urge you to provide $87 million for the
State Fire Assistance program.
The VFA program provides support to rural communities and is
critical to ensuring adequate capacity to respond to wildland fires,
reducing the risk to communities, people, homes and property, and
firefighters. This capacity is critical because these State and local
resources are the first responders to more than 80 percent of wildland
fires--whether on State, Federal or private lands. According to the
USFS, during fiscal year 2018, the VFA program helped provide
assistance to 13,959 communities, train 21,868 firefighters, expanded
or organize 48 fire departments, and purchase, rehabilitate, or
maintain nearly $11 million in equipment. Our organizations greatly
appreciate the Committee's work to increase VFA funding to $17 million
in fiscal year 2019. In fiscal year 2020, we urge you to provide no
less than $18 million for the Volunteer Fire Assistance Program.
We appreciate the difficult task the Committee faces in the current
budget climate. It is important to remember, however, that these vital
programs safeguard human life, habitat, and property, and reduce the
overall cost of wildland fire management. Accordingly, we urge you to
support funding for these critical programs.
Thank you for your consideration of this important request.
______
Prepared Statement of The Conservation Fund
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
Appropriations Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and Related
Agencies, thank you for this opportunity to submit outside witness
testimony on behalf of The Conservation Fund (TCF). TCF supports a
funding request of $600 million in fiscal year 2020 for the Land and
Water Conservation Fund (LWCF), which includes the Federal land
acquisition programs of the Bureau of Land Management ($45 million),
National Park Service ($75 million), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
($85 million), U.S. Forest Service ($100 million), as well as three
State grant programs: the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Cooperative
Endangered Species Conservation Fund ($35 million); National Park
Service's State Assistance Grants program ($130 million); and the U.S.
Forest Service's Forest Legacy Program ($100 million). TCF also
supports a funding request for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's
North American Wetlands Conservation Fund ($45 million); U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service's State and Tribal Wildlife Grant Programs ($90
million); National Park Service's Chesapeake Bay Gateways and
Watertrails Program ($3 million); the U.S. Forest Service's Community
Forest and Open Space Conservation Program ($10 million); and the
Department of Interior's (DOI) Natural Resource Damage Assessment and
Restoration Program ($10 million). TCF requests funding for the
Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) Great Lakes Restoration
Initiative ($300 million) and Chesapeake Bay Program ($80 million).
At The Conservation Fund, we make conservation work for America. We
are a nonprofit environmental organization, working to create
conservation solutions that make economic sense. Top-ranked for
efficiency and effectiveness, we have worked in all 50 States since
1985 to protect over 8 million acres of land. We applaud the leadership
of this subcommittee over many years to appropriate funds to acquire
lands for future generations, working forests, recreational
opportunities, wildlife habitat, and many other benefits.
As the subcommittee crafts its Interior, Environment and Related
Agencies Appropriations bill, there are several key programmatic
funding recommendations we respectfully request you to consider, listed
below.
1.
Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF) at $600 million.--LWCF
represents a promise to the Nation that proceeds from offshore oil and
gas development will help protect the public trust. The requested $600
million for LWCF in fiscal year 2020 will foster that mission, with the
goal of soon securing the authorized funding level of $900 million per
year.
Funding at $600 million in fiscal year 2020 is critical for
the Nation's premier conservation program, a bipartisan
agreement nearly 55 years ago. The Conservation Fund applauds
Congress for passing bipartisan, bicameral legislation that
permanently reauthorizes LWCF, which was signed into law by the
president on March 12, 2019. TCF also urges Congress to work in
a similar fashion to provide full, mandatory funding (at $900
million) for the land conservation program.
Since 1964, the Land and Water Conservation Fund has
protected some of America's most important natural and
historical treasures. From national parks, fish and wildlife
refuges, to working farms and ranches, and State and local
parks, LWCF continues to yield tremendous land protection
outcomes in communities nationwide. LWCF's land acquisition
programs provide critical resources needed to safeguard vital
lands from potential development, expand public access, and
protect wildlife habitat. LWCF projects are driven by private
landowners seeking to work with Federal land units and state
partners to sell their property for conservation purposes.
A.
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) Land Acquisition at $45
million.--The BLM and its National Conservation Lands provide some of
our Nation's best recreation and historic areas. TCF partners with BLM
on projects ranging from expanding sportsmen's access to Blue Ribbon
fishing on the North Platte River in Wyoming to recreational access to
the Upper Snake/South Fork ACEC SRMA in Idaho. In fiscal year 2020, we
request $45 million to fund BLM's land acquisition program and
projects.
B.
National Park Service (NPS) Federal Land Acquisition at $75
million.--Hosting more than 330 million visitors every year, the 419
National Park units provide an economic boost to their local
communities and those employed directly and indirectly. Funding for NPS
LWCF will help protect key access points for recreation, historic
areas, trails and more, including at Little River Canyon National
Preserve in Alabama and the Chesapeake Bay's Captain John Smith
Chesapeake National Historic Trail. We respectfully request $75 million
to fund NPS's land acquisition program and projects.
C.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) Land Acquisition at $85
million.--National Wildlife Refuges (NWR) are our Nation's protectors
of clean water, clean air, abundant wildlife and world-class
recreation. Funding for fiscal year 2020 FWS LWCF will help protect
critical wildlife habitat, provide public access and recreation, and
improve water quality at Refuges, including Texas' Laguna Atascosa
National Wildlife Refuge; as well as preserving our Nation's working
lands, such as at Montana's Rocky Mountain Front Conservation Area. We
respectfully request $85 million to fund FWS's land acquisition program
and projects.
D.
U.S. Forest Service (USFS) Land Acquisition at $100 million.--
USFS LWCF funds help with forest management by protecting key
inholdings and reducing fire threats. From Minnesota's Superior
National Forest-Boundary Water Canoe Area Wilderness to the Appalachian
Mountain's Cherokee (TN), Pisgah (NC), George Washington-Jefferson
(VA), and Chattahoochee (GA) National Forests, we are working with
willing landowners at priority project areas and respectfully request
$100 million to fund USFS's land acquisition program and projects.
E.
LWCF State Grant Programs: FWS-Cooperative Endangered Species
Fund, NPS-State Conservation Grants, and USFS-Forest Legacy.--We
encourage the subcommittee to fund:
-- FWS.--Cooperative Endangered Species Conservation Fund: $35
million (for the LWCF-funded portion)
-- NPS.--State Assistance Grants program: $130 million
-- USFS.--Forest Legacy Program: $100 million
2.
DOI and USFS Conservation and Land Acquisition Programs.--TCF
encourages the Committee to fund:
-- FWS.--North American Wetlands Conservation Fund at $45 million
-- FWS.--State and Tribal Wildlife Grant Programs at $90 million
-- NPS.--Chesapeake Bay Gateways and Watertrails Program at $3
million
-- USFS.--Community Forest and Open Space Conservation Program at
$10 million
3.
Department of Interior--Natural Resource Damage Assessment and
Restoration Program at $10 million.--The Restoration Program leads the
national response for recovery of natural resources that have been
injured or destroyed because of oil spills or releases of other
hazardous substances. Recoveries from responsible parties can only be
spent to implement restoration plans developed by the Trustee Council
for each incident. These funds are one hundred percent private and
represent the amount needed to restore environmental resources or
compensate for lost public use since the damage in question. The fiscal
year 2020 funds would allow the Program to add carefully targeted staff
allocated to Interior bureaus and offices through its Restoration
Support Unit to accelerate restoration activities.
4.
Environmental Protection Agency Programs.--TCF encourages the
Committee to fund:
-- Great Lakes Restoration Initiative (GRLI) at $300 million.--TCF
urges funding of GLRI at $300 million. The Initiative provides
critical support for on-the-ground restoration and conservation
programs and projects targeted at the most significant
environmental problems in the Great Lakes ecosystem.
-- Chesapeake Bay Program at $80 million.--TCF urges funding of
the Chesapeake Bay program at $80 million. This program brings
together a diverse partnership to support the Bay's
restoration.
The Conservation Fund stands ready to work with you to secure full
and consistent funding for the Land and Water Conservation Fund, North
American Wetlands Conservation Act, Great Lakes Restoration Initiative,
and the other critically important programs that help protect the
environment, economies, forests, and community values across our
Nation. Thank you for the opportunity to provide this testimony and
your consideration of our request.
[This statement was submitted by Kelly Reed, Vice President of
Government Relations.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Cooperative Alliance for Refuge Enhancement
Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee:
The National Wildlife Refuge System stands alone as the only
Federal land and water conservation system with a mission that
prioritizes wildlife and habitat conservation alongside wildlife-
dependent recreation. Since 1995, the Cooperative Alliance for Refuge
Enhancement (CARE) has worked to showcase the value of the Refuge
System and to secure a strong congressional commitment for conserving
these special landscapes.
Found in every U.S. State and Territory, national wildlife refuges
conserve a diversity of America's environmentally sensitive and
recreationally vital ecosystems, including wetlands, coasts, forests,
prairie, tundra, deserts, and oceans, and provide Americans with an
opportunity to encounter and engage with these areas.
We ask that the Committee provide a funding level of $586 million
for the Operations and Maintenance accounts of the National Wildlife
Refuge System for fiscal year 2020.
This testimony is submitted on behalf of CARE's 23 member
organizations, which represent over 16 million American hunters,
anglers, bird and wildlife watchers, scientists, managers, and
concerned citizens passionate about wildlife conservation and related
recreational opportunities.
American Birding Association
American Fisheries Society
American Sportfishing Association
Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies Congressional Sportsmen's
Foundation
Defenders of Wildlife
Ducks Unlimited, Inc.
Izaak Walton League of America
Marine Conservation Institute
National Audubon Society
National Rifle Association
National Wildlife Federation
National Wildlife Refuge Association
Safari Club International
The Corps Network
The Nature Conservancy
The Wilderness Society
The Wildlife Society
Theodore Roosevelt Conservation Partnership
Trout Unlimited
U.S. Sportsmen's Alliance
Wildlife Forever
Wildlife Management Institute
inadequate funding-challenges to the refuge system
The Refuge System budget, at $487.7 million, is now $96.6 million
below the level needed to keep pace with inflation and fixed costs
($584.3 million), relative to the fiscal year 2010 budget of $503.2
million. At least $8-10 million appropriations increase is required
each year just to keep pace with inflation and fixed costs, and these
budgets are going in the wrong direction.
Workforce has declined since the high staffing point in 2011 by 645
positions through attrition. Those employees provided services such as
administration, maintenance, fire management, wildlife management, and
research support. That is a loss of nearly 1 out of 7 refuge positions.
As a result, refuge staff struggle to maintain habitat, while also
providing adequate visitor services, environmental education, and
access for hunting, fishing, and other recreation. No refuges today are
fully staffed, and in fact, nearly half of refuge units (282) are
completely unstaffed.
An additional problem with lack of funding is the System's
inability to provide for ongoing maintenance costs, which only compound
and become more expensive with time. At Arthur R. Marshall Loxahatchee
NWR in Florida, the invasive species issues are overwhelming the
refuge. In the last 12-15 years, Loxahatchee has struggled with
invasive Lygodium, with initial costs of $2 million a year to restrict
uncontrolled spread. Now, the refuge needs roughly $5 million a year
for 5 years in order to control this weed, with costs having doubled or
tripled.
Unfortunately, inadequate funding threatens the System's ability to
carry out its mission, which is mandated by the National Wildlife
Refuge System Improvement Act of 1997. For example, in Region 3, which
includes the Great Lakes States, there are 296 current positions, down
from their height of 346 staff in fiscal year 2010. Based on optimal
staffing models, the region is 100 staff short. This shortage of staff
has caused problems across the region: visitor centers prioritize hours
for peak visitation and are closed many days. There is no ability to do
restoration work on lands they have or have acquired. There are fewer
Federal wildlife officers. Maintenance of public use facilities such as
parking lots and bathrooms has dwindled, particularly on Wildlife
Management Areas, and approximately 20 percent fewer are mowed. At the
Prairie Wetlands Learning Center in Fergus Falls, MN, the director
position has been vacant for 2 years, and the city is questioning the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's commitment to the center. The loss of
managed hunts, such as youth hunting programs and hunts for the
disabled, has been dire. Many such hunts have not been held for years.
This dire funding situation can be seen across the other seven
regions.
Between fiscal year 2010 and fiscal year 2013, Refuge System
funding was reduced by $50 million--a 10 percent cut. Even with
increased budgets in fiscal year 2019 to $487.7 million, the Refuge
System continues to function at unsustainable levels. CARE estimates
that the Refuge System needs at least $900 million in annual operations
and maintenance funding to meet conservation targets, including
wildlife management, habitat restoration, and opportunities for public
recreation.
Inadequate numbers of Federal wildlife officers (by some measures,
the number of FWOs should be three to four times higher than current
numbers) imperil healthy habitat and the safe and enjoyable visitor
experience. The 'lucky' refuges still have one or two employees per
refuge or refuge complex doing work such as environmental education,
biology, or maintenance work. Yet many other refuges sit for years with
unfilled, critical positions.
In Region 6, which stretches from Colorado to the Prairie Pothole
Region, retention of staff is a major problem. Biologists are in short
supply, and regional headquarters staff struggle to get biologists out
to each refuge at even a fraction of the needed time. In 2014, they had
63 full time farm maintenance staff, now only 49--a 25 percent
reduction. They currently have ten refuge law enforcement positions
open, and cannot fill them because of the combination of low pay and
benefits with the very rural locations. At the same time, they're
looking to increase usage on refuges, such as hunting and fishing. Elk
National Wildlife Refuge in Wyoming is 24,700 acres, and one FWO is
stationed there--and he shares time at BLM lands as well.
Without significant increases in funding, there is simply no room
left to trim positions and still maintain at least a portion of those
services--they will simply disappear, and school programs or ongoing
maintenance will end. And refuges will continue to close.
national wildlife refuge system: statistics and visitors
The National Wildlife Refuge System, established by President
Theodore Roosevelt in 1903, protects approximately 840 million land and
marine acres on 567 national wildlife refuges and 38 wetland management
districts in every State and territory in the U.S., and 5 marine
monuments in the Pacific and Atlantic oceans. These acres are part of
the Refuge System and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service managed (with some
marine acres co-managed with NOAA). From the Virgin Islands to Guam to
Alaska to Maine, the Refuge System spans 12 time zones and protects
America's natural heritage in habitats ranging from arctic tundra to
arid desert, boreal forest to sagebrush grassland, and prairie wetlands
to coral reefs.
A refuge is within an hour's drive from most metropolitan areas,
enabling the Refuge System to attract a growing number of visitors each
year (55.8 million in fiscal year 2018, up from 46.5 million in fiscal
year 2013) and provide opportunities for hunting, fishing, wildlife
observation, photography, kayaking, hiking, and outdoor education.
Americans are visiting refuges in increasing number for the wild beauty
and recreational opportunities they provide.
CARE welcomes recreational use of our Nation's refuges. The ``Big
6'' uses of the Refuge System--hunting, fishing, wildlife watching,
photography, environmental education, and interpretation--were
enshrined into law in the 1997 National Wildlife Refuge System
Improvement Act. Refuge visitors generate $2.4 billion annually to
local and regional economies--on average returning $4.87 in economic
activity for every $1 appropriated--and support 35,000 U.S. jobs.\1\ In
addition, refuges provide major environmental and health benefits, such
as filtering storm water before it is carried downstream and fills
municipal aquifers; reducing flooding by capturing excess rainwater;
and minimizing the damage to coastal communities from storm surges.
Refuges generate more than $32.3 billion in these ecosystem services
each year, a return of over $65 for every $1 appropriated by
Congress.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Banking on Nature, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, October
2013, http://www.fws.gov/refuges/about/refugereports/pdfs/
BankingOnNature2013.pdf
\2\ The Economics Associated with Outdoor Recreation, Natural
Resources Conservation, and Historic Preservation in the United States,
Southwick Associates, October 2011, https://www.fws.gov/refuges/news/
pdfs/TheEconomicValueofOutdoorRecreation[1].pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
care requests $586 million in fiscal year 2020
We acknowledge that this request would mean a dramatic $98 million
increase. However, with the effective $96 million decrease in funding
since fiscal year 2010, the Refuge System has lost a great deal of
conservation work and public use opportunities, all at a time when
visitor numbers are increasing. If annual operations and maintenance
funding does not rise substantially, CARE anticipates further impacts
both within and outside of refuge boundaries, including:
--Loss of refuge law enforcement to the point where visitors and
wildlife are not protected--the System is currently functioning
with 22 percent of the FWOs needed. Six States currently have
zero FWOs, and another 10 only have one.
--Further closures of visitor centers, elimination of environmental
education programs that currently work closely with local
schools, and a loss of visitor services staff, which would
leave many States with no visitor services staff at all, such
as Maine.
--Reduced quality of habitat for hunting. Over the past 2 years, the
Department of the Interior has worked to add and expand hunt
programs at refuges, providing additional opportunities for
outdoor recreationists as part of the ``Big 6''. These hunt
expansions will require corresponding funding to keep up with
the demand on Federal wildlife officers and on biologists and
other staff responsible for keeping wildlife habitat and
populations healthy.
--Reduced treatment of invasive plants, reducing habitat quality for
wildlife (both game and non-game) and placing nearby private
lands at higher risk of infestations.
--Decreased use of prescribed fire, which is used on refuges both to
improve habitat for wildlife and to reduce hazardous fuels that
pose a wildfire risk to nearby communities. This risk has been
mitigated by the fire fix passed by the Congress this spring,
but resources for prescribed fire still need to be in place on
individual refuges.
The common denominator to all these challenges is a lack of
funding. Adequate staffing and funding are critical to the maintenance
of healthy wildlife populations and access for recreational users to a
healthy ecosystem. Increasing funding for the System will empower and
enable individual refuge units to deliver on-the-ground conservation
that benefits not only wildlife and recreation, but also local
communities across the Nation.
We ask that this Committee use a portion of its additional funding
allocation in the budget deal finalized in January, and put it towards
a substantial increase in Refuge Operations and Maintenance funding.
CARE has a goal of seeing Refuge Operations and Maintenance funding
reach $900 million by fiscal year 2021, and a large increase in fiscal
year 2020 would help us meet that goal.
We urge Congress to fund the Refuge System at $586 million in
fiscal year 2020--to bridge the growing gap between what the System
needs and what it receives--enabling refuges to continue moving America
forward as the world's leader in wildlife conservation and restoration.
Our hope is that this level of funding will put the Refuge System
on a path to full funding of $900 million and help the System advance
its mission to maintain refuge lands as intended in their purpose for
the benefit of the American people, finalize outstanding Comprehensive
Conservation Plans, and implement programs that will benefit both
wildlife and people. The President's Budget Request for fiscal year
2020 is $509.5 million, which would be the highest amount ever
appropriated to the Refuge System O&M. While we applaud the requested
increase, more funding is needed.
On behalf of our more than 16 million members and supporters, CARE
thanks the subcommittee for the opportunity to submit comments on the
fiscal year 2020 Senate Interior Appropriations bill, and we look
forward to more discussions with you regarding our request.
______
Prepared Statement of the Council of Athabascan Tribal Governments
The Council of Athabascan Tribal Governments (CATG) is a consortium
of 10 Tribal governments located along the Yukon River and its
tributaries in northeastern Alaska. The Gwich'in and Koyukon Athabascan
peoples of the Yukon Flats live in remote villages, who united to form
the Council: Arctic Village, Beaver, Birch Creek, Canyon, Chalkyitsik,
Circle, Fort Yukon, Rampart, Stevens, and Venetie. Tribal leadership
has clear vision: stable self-sufficient economies built upon strong
local self-governance. Our organization provides a variety of services
to the Tribal citizens of our region, including full healthcare
services at the Yukon Flats Health Center and village-based clinics in
four of our Villages. We have Self-Governance agreements with the Fish
and Wildlife Service and with the Bureau of Land Management.
CATG requests the following considerations be implemented in the
fiscal year 2020 Appropriations cycle:
--Natural Resource Priorities: Ensure Adequate funding for co-
management.
--Expand Self-Governance: Expand Self-Governance and fully fund
Annual Funding Agreements with Bureau of Indian Affairs, Bureau
of Land Management, and U.S. Fish and Wildlife.
--Section 105(l) Leases: Support funding for healthcare facility
leases under Section 105(l) of the Indian Self-Determination
and Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA).
--Budget Increases: Support behavioral health increases to the IHS
and BIA budgets.
--Advance Appropriations for IHS: Support advance funding for the IHS
and other Tribal programs.
--Contract Support Cost (CSC) Funding: Support continued full and
mandatory CSC funding for the IHS and BIA.
Natural Resources
The traditions of our grandparents live on through our ability to
hunt and fish, which include the ceremonies that accompany these
cultural practices. As Native peoples, access to our traditional food
resources is critical for our culture, health, wellbeing, economic
security and food sovereignty. The Council advocates for Alaskan
hunting and fishing management policy and regulations to provide for
Alaska Native food security, community wellbeing, and traditional ways
of life. We ask for funding to protect Alaska Native hunting and
fishing rights.
The Porcupine Caribou Herd are our relatives, they are the backbone
of our culture, and they provide for our health, wellbeing, economic
security, and food security. The Gwich'in Nation and the Council stand
unified in our call for full protection of the ``Sacred Place Where
Life Begins,'' birthing grounds of the Porcupine Caribou Herd along the
coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge since 1988. Last
year, Congress opened up the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR)
through the budget process. The Council asks Congress to ensure
meaningful government to government consultation, and participation by
all impacted Tribes in all Federal actions related to the Porcupine
Caribou Herd and their habitats.
Salmon are our relatives, they are the backbone of our culture, and
they provide for our health, wellbeing, economic security, and food
security. The U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service (USFWS) has confirmed the
importance of this critical resource, ``the state's rural residents
harvest approximately 22,000 tons of wild foods each year--an average
of 375 pounds per person. Fish make up about 60 percent of this harvest
Statewide. Nowhere else in the United States is there such a heavy
reliance upon wild foods.'' CATG asks Congress to support Tribal co-
management, through full funding of the Yukon River Inter-Tribal Fish
Commission.
Expand Self-Governance
CATG is proud to be one of the first Tribal consortium in the
country to develop non-Department of the Interior (DOI) Self-Governance
Annual Funding Agreements (AFA) for agencies other than the Bureau of
Indian Affairs (BIA). We remain concerned that DOI scopes of work are
being limited and the original intent and practice of Self-Governance,
which is to build Tribal capacity to take on increasing levels of
responsibility, is not being properly carried out. We request your
support to expand Self-Governance practice and agreements beyond BIA.
Since 2004, the CATG has had an Annual Funding Agreement (AFA)
under Title IV of the Indian Self-Determination and Education
Assistance Act (ISDEAA) with the USFWS. Through the AFA, the CATG has
implemented selected PFSAs of the Yukon Flats National Wildlife Refuge
(YFNWR), namely: (1) Cooperative Moose Management Planning; (2)
education and outreach programming; (3) harvest data collection and
reporting; (4) logistical maintenance of the only logistical outpost in
the Refuge; and (5) Refuge Information Technician staffing.
The AFA's success and growth has been limited by funding levels
that have remained fairly static since the 1st agreement was signed
(estimated at $60,000 annually), lacking funding for staff time to
complete PFSAs and for contract support costs. We appreciate recent
positive developments with YFNWR leadership in working to expand and
fully fund the AFA, as it is a beneficial relationship for the YFNWR
staff, the wildlife and habitat, and Tribal governments. At this time,
it has been demonstrated CATG needs to implement harvest data
collection and reporting activities for adequate moose management. CATG
has demonstrated its commitment to a successful working relationship
with the YFNWR, and seeks to expand and fully fund the AFA. CATG asks
Congress to ensure continued, fully funded, and expanded self-
governance agreement with USFWS YFNWR.
In 2011, the CATG implemented the first self-governance AFA under
Title IV of the ISDEAA with the Bureau of Land Management/Alaska Fire
Service (BLM/AFS). The Council has demonstrated their commitment to
running a successful Emergency Fire Fighter training and certification
program ever since. But the 2018 Federal Government shutdown resulted
in our BLM AFA getting hung up in the process, leaving CATG with
substantial uncertainty. Announcements are now also coming late for
contract work with BLM, and these are all jobs that our communities
count on. The Council has developed a productive partnership with the
BLM/AFS to more efficiently and effectively use government resources.
The Council asks for Congress to ensure continued self-governance
agreement with the BLM AFS through full funding, and we encourage
Congress to facilitate BLM's cooperation in finalizing and implementing
the AFA, and other contract work, within this fiscal year 2019, not
simply kicking the can down the road to fiscal year 2020 as it relates
to CATG.
Section 105(l) Clinic Leases
Tribes and Tribal organizations increasingly rely on section 105(l)
leases to address chronically underfunded facilities operation,
maintenance, and replacement costs. We are gratified that IHS has been
funding Section 105(l) leases for Tribal health clinics. This
responsibility was confirmed by the 2016 Federal court decision in
Maniilaq v. Burwell, which held that section 105(l) of the ISDEAA
provides an entitlement to full compensation for leases of Tribal
facilities used to carry out ISDEAA agreements. We appreciate your
supplemental appropriations in fiscal year 2019 for these costs, and we
ask that funding continue to be made available for these important
leases. This Committee has invited IHS to submit a report on the budget
impact of meeting its responsibility. We oppose any appropriations
rider, such as those included in the administration's budget proposals
for fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019, which would allow IHS to
avoid its responsibility to compensate Tribes fully for these costs. We
ask that Congress again decline to include such a provision in the
fiscal year 2020 IHS appropriation.
Budget Increases
CATG's communities in rural Alaska have extreme rates of suicide,
alcohol and substance abuse; issues that contribute to a multitude of
other adverse problems such as crime, domestic violence, child abuse
and neglect. We have been encouraged by new funding to address the
opioid crisis that impacts many of our communities. Thank you for the
new $10 million opioid grant program in the fiscal year 2019 IHS
budget. However, frequently, Tribes in Alaska have difficulty working
through the State of Alaska to provide behavioral and social services,
which adds burdensome layers and undue regulation. We appreciate that
HHS this year distributed the $50 million in Tribal opioid funds via
formula.
CATG believes that Tribes and Tribal organizations should receive
behavioral funds directly, because programs that implement traditional
cultural values have proven to be far more successful than those that
do not. We ask for your support in this effort. CATG also asks for
support in expanding the Generations Indigenous (Gen-I) initiative,
which provides increased resources for Tribes to address youth
behavioral, mental health and substance abuse issues, as well as
expansion of the Tiwahe Initiative, designed to address the inter-
related problems of poverty, violence and substance abuse faced by
Native communities. We appreciate that last year Congress rejected the
administration's proposal to reduce funding for this important
initiative.
Advance Appropriations for IHS
We thank Ranking Member Udall, Representative Don Young, and
Interior Appropriations Chairwoman McCollum and Ranking Member Joyce
for introducing legislation to provide advance appropriations for IHS
and in some of the bills, for the BIA and BIE. IHS healthcare is
similar to Veterans healthcare in that both the VA and the IHS provide
direct medical care and both are the result of Federal policies.
Predictability, continuity, and certainty are essential for providing
stable quality healthcare. This issue continues to be important to
Alaska Native and American Indian patients, particularly in a budget
climate of seemingly endless Continuing Resolutions (CR). When IHS
funding is subject to a CR, as it has been repeatedly over many years,
Tribal healthcare providers receive only a portion of funding at a
time, making it particularly difficult to implement long-range planning
and to effectively use and leverage limited resources. Partial funding
also requires the same processing and manpower for each incomplete
payment as one full apportionment. Having advance notice of funding
levels would greatly aid CATG and other Tribal health providers in
program planning, recruitment and retention of essential healthcare
professionals. Under advance appropriations, we would know a year in
advance what the budget would be and it would resolve much of the
uncertainty we have experienced because full appropriations were not
enacted at the first of the Federal fiscal year. The IHS budget should
be afforded the same status consideration as VA health programs.
Contract Support Cost (CSC) Funding
CATG would like to thank the House and Senate subcommittees for
their leadership and commitment to fully funding CSC for IHS and BIA
ISDEAA agreements. We appreciate the full funding of CSC over the past
few fiscal years, that the funding is indefinite (``such sums as may be
necessary'',) and that the funding is in separate accounts in the IHS
and BIA budgets. We request that the subcommittees continue to fully
fund CSC. Such action is crucial to strengthening the ability of Tribal
governments to successfully exercise their rights and responsibilities
as sovereign nations.
Telecommunications Subsidies
As you know, Internet connectivity is critical to providing
healthcare services to our remote villages. Last year you heard from us
and other Tribes regarding the cap on Universal Service rural
healthcare funds. We appreciate the work that was done to eliminate the
cap.
Conclusion
CATG greatly appreciates your consideration of our requests
outlined in this testimony. On behalf of our organization and all of
the people we serve, I would be happy to provide any other additional
information as requested by the subcommittees.
[This statement was submitted by Rhonda Pitka, Chief of the Village
of Beaver, and Vice Chair of the Council of Athabascan Tribal
Governments.]
______
Prepared Statement of Dance/USA
Madam Chair and distinguished members of the subcommittee, I am
grateful for the opportunity to submit testimony on behalf of Dance/
USA, its Board of Directors and its 500 members. We strongly urge the
subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies in the
Committee on Appropriations to designate a total of at least $167.5
million to the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) for fiscal year
2020. This testimony and the funding examples described below are
intended to highlight the importance of Federal investment in the arts,
which are critical to sustaining a vibrant cultural community
throughout the country.
The NEA is a great investment in the economic growth of every
community. The NEA was established in 1965 with the mission to
``strengthen the creative capacity of our communities by providing all
Americans with diverse opportunities for arts participation.'' It has
continued to meet this mission for over 50 years, recommending more
than 2,300 grants in every Congressional District in the country in
fiscal year 2018. Sixty-five percent of direct grants went to small
(budgets under $500,000) and medium sized (budgets between $500,000 and
$2 million) organizations. Additionally, 40 percent of NEA-supported
activities took place in high-poverty neighborhoods and 36 percent of
NEA grants reached underserved populations, such as people with
disabilities and veterans. Between 2012 and 2015, NEA-supported
programs reached 24.2 million adults and 3.4 children on average each
year through 80,603 live events.
Funding from the NEA continues to support arts organizations and
their communities by providing a high return on investment. The ratio
of private and other public funds matching every NEA grant dollar is
approaching 9:1, generating more than $500 million in matching
supporting.
Before the establishment of the NEA, funding for the arts was
mostly limited to larger cities. The NEA is the only arts funder in
America, public or private, that supports the arts in all 50 States,
the District of Columbia, and U.S. territories. Additionally, 40
percent of the NEA's program funds are distributed through State arts
agencies, reaching tens of thousands throughout the U.S. NEA funding
provides access to the arts in regions with histories of
inaccessibility due to economic or geographic limitations.
At the national level, the arts and cultural sector contributed
$763.6 billion to the U.S. economy in 2015, 4.2 percent of the GDP, and
counted 4.9 million workers who earned $372 billion in total
compensation. The tax-exempt performing arts organizations contributed
$9 billion to the U.S. economy and employed 90,000 workers, who earned
$5.6 billion in total compensation. Consumers spent $31.6 billion on
admissions to performing arts events.
Dance companies make communities healthier and more vibrant.
Audiences across the U.S. have the opportunity to experience dance in
many aspects of life. Professional not-for-profit dance is highly
diverse in its artistic forms, covering genres and styles that include
aerial, ballet, burlesque, capoeira, flamenco, hip hop, hula, jazz,
kathak, liturgical, modern, physically integrated, and tap dance, in
addition to fusions of these genres and styles and the incorporation
into other artistic disciplines. Dance artists work with performing
arts centers, businesses, park districts, community centers, schools,
religious institutions, and many other groups to ensure this wealth of
creative activity is widely accessible to the public.
Established in 1982 as the national service organizations for the
professional dance field, Dance/USA's membership currently consists of
more than 500 dance companies, dance service and presenting
organizations, individuals, and related organizations.
--Economic Impact: Not-for-profit dance regularly generates more than
$700 million in economic activity across the country. In fiscal
year 2014, reported annual expense budgets totaled $755.5
million. Ensembles that reported expenses for wages and
benefits on their 990s paid a total of $372.4 million, which
approximates to half (50.9 percent) of total aggregated
expenses for these ensembles.
According to data compiled by the NEA and the Bureau of
Economic Analysis' U.S. Arts and Culture Production Satellite Account,
the gross output from not-for-profit dance companies totaled $972
million, while the value added to the GDP by dance companies is $573
million.
Not-for-profit dance ensembles employed over 15,900
individuals in a mix of full-time and part time positions in fiscal
year 14. These ensembles were further supported by more than 22,800
volunteers.
--Communities Served: According to the Survey of Public Participation
in the Arts (SPPA), social dancing is the most common way
Americans performed art in 2012. African Americans are the
race/ethnic group more likely to dance in a formal setting, and
Hispanics are the group most likely to dance socially. The
rates of dance participation are highest for younger adults
(18-34). Dance (other than ballet) is the only performing arts
activity for which U.S. attendance rates at performances did
not fall between 2002 and 2012. (Data from the 2017 SPPA
research has not yet been fully released.)
--Dance Works: According to research conducted by Dance/USA, the
dominant motivation for attending dance performances,
representing 50 percent of those surveyed, is to be inspired or
uplifted. Not-for-profit dance performances have the
opportunity to bring communities together, supporting social
and emotional needs of audience members.
nea grants at work
NEA grants are awarded to dance organizations through its core
programs: Art Works; Challenge America Fast Track Grants; and Federal/
State Partnerships. In fiscal year 2018, the NEA awarded 163 grants to
the dance field through the Art Works category, totaling $3,920,000.
Below are just a few examples of the excellent initiatives that
dance groups are engaged in, supporting artists, audiences, and
communities.
Karen Peterson and Dancers
Miami, Florida
$35,000
Karen Peterson and Dancers received support to re-stage and present
choreographer Paul Taylor's ``3 Epitaphs'' by Valencia College
students. Francie Huber, an award-winning principal dancer with the
Paul Taylor Dance Company for 14 years and a teacher of modern dance
and Taylor workshops, restaged the work. Outreach activities included
master classes for high school students, open rehearsals, and
discounted tickets.
National Institute of Flamenco
Albuquerque, New Mexico
$15,000
National Institute of Flamenco received support for residency
activities for flamenco artists traveling from Spain to New Mexico.
Through the Visiting Artist Line, NIF brings the world's finest
professional flamenco artists, including dancers, choreographers,
musicians, costumers, and design technicians for residencies in New
Mexico that can last from eight days to four weeks. These guest artists
interacted with local and national communities by teaching, providing
professional development opportunities, performing, collaborating,
creating new dance works, and facilitating international artistic
networks.
Nashville Ballet
Nashville, Tennessee
$15,000
Nashville Ballet received funding to support the company premiere
of Stephen Mills' ``Light: The Holocaust and Humanity Project,'' and
accompanying community engagement programming. The work was presented
at the Tennessee Performing Arts Center in Nashville as part of a
larger community collaboration with the Jewish Federation of Nashville,
the Tennessee Holocaust Commission, and the Nashville Symphony
Orchestra.
Axis Dance Company
Oakland, California
$20,000
Axis Dance Company received support for dance education and
outreach programs for youth and adults with and without disabilities.
AXIS offered a variety of educational opportunities in the Bay Area and
on a national tour. Project activities included dance classes,
professional-level dance training, teacher training, a choreographic
lab for choreographers with disabilities, dance apprenticeships,
community workshops, lecture-demonstrations, residencies, and open
rehearsals and movement experiences for veterans.
Eugene Ballet
Eugene, Oregon
$15,000
Eugene Ballet received support for the premiere of ``Peer Gynt,'' a
multimedia ballet by choreographer Toni Pimble based on Henrik Ibsen's
fairy tale play. In collaboration with designer Andy Warfel and video
engineer and multidisciplinary artist Jessey Zepeda, the ballet
included virtual theatrical scenery. Multimedia elements helped
communicate the complicated narrative. Outreach and education
programming included pre-performance discussions and lecture-
demonstrations in rural schools.
Conclusion
Dance/USA is grateful for the $2 million increase to the NEA in
fiscal year 2019. The continued bipartisan support for the agency has
continued to support artists and audiences, allowing dance and the arts
to address critical issues, making communities healthier and more
vibrant.
We urge you to continue toward restoration and increase the NEA
funding allocation $167.5 million for fiscal year 2020.
On behalf of Dance/USA, thank you for considering this request.
[This statement was submitted by Amy Fitterer, Executive Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of David Jonas Bardin
usgs geomagnetism program and & mt survey continuation
Chairman Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall:
Thank you for rejecting proposals to zero out the USGS Geomagnetism
program in fiscal year 2018 and 2019.
I ask for $4 million in fiscal year 2020. OMB proposes a program
cut of 25 percent, which would lead USGS to mothball three of its 14
magnetic observatories--in Alaska, California, and Mississippi.
I support OMB's new $1.726 million line for continuation of the
magnetotelluric survey. (See USGS Energy and Mineral Resources
program).
USGS researchers combine observatory detections of magnetic storms
(``space weather'' from the Sun) with MT survey data as they become
available, finding ``that risk varies considerably from region to
region, with some electrically resistive rocks boosting the regional
geoelectric hazard by a factor of a hundred.'' See National Geographic,
Solar storms can be even worse if you live near certain rocks: New USGS
data show how cities have higher or lower risks of blackouts during a
powerful sun storm depending on their regional geology (March 18,
2019).
geomagnetism program
This program is underfunded: Congress has appropriated $1.888
million every year since fiscal year 2013 when sequestration hit. In
fiscal year 2012, it was $2.004 million, in fiscal year 2011 it was
$2.097 million, in fiscal year 2010 it was $2.138 million.
Moreover, the U.S. Air Force has decided to stop contributing to
this program after 14 years--during which other agencies benefiting
from USGS observatory data (such as NOAA) contributed nothing. (USGS
will continue to give USAF and other agencies data--at no charge--to
extent collected.)
USGS's high-quality Geomagnetism program--vital to space weather
predictions, electric power grid protection, civilian and military
navigation (and more)--should expand rather than contract. ``For both
science and practical applications there are already too few permanent
magnetic observatories'' write our international partners (March 20,
2019, letter to USGS from Dr. Alan Thomson of British Geological Survey
on behalf of INTERMAGNET and IAGA).
--Congress should fund entire program through USGS (in the Interior
et al bill).
--Congress should add $1.1 million to last year's appropriation
($650,000 to offset loss of USAF funding and $450,000 to offset
erosion of buying power, catch up on maintenance of all 14
existing observatories, and modestly to expand this program.
--Congress should enable USGS to operate permanent magnetometers to
measure magnetic fields at each of its 14 observatories and to
add permanent electrometers to measure electric fields directly
at some (only Boulder now has an electrometer). See USGS
observatory map, below.
--Congress should enable USGS to overcome insufficiency of magnetic
observatories--especially in the vast Eastern electric power
interconnection, home to most Americans (where USGS has only
two observatories, one to be mothballed) and the Texas
interconnection (where it has none).
Executive Order 13865 (March 26, 2019), Sec. 5(c), directs the
Secretary of the Interior to ``support the research, development,
deployment, and operation of capabilities that enhance understanding of
variations of Earth's magnetic field associated with [natural and
human-made electromagnetic pulses] EMPs'', but OMB proposes to withhold
Geomagnetism program resources essential to do that.
mt survey
OMB's proposed MT survey continuation line (under Energy and
Mineral Resources program) is reasonably scaled for fiscal year 2020.
E.O. 13865, section 6(b)(iv) directs: ``Within 4 years of the date of
this order, the Secretary of the Interior shall complete a
magnetotelluric survey of the contiguous United States to help critical
infrastructure owners and operators conduct EMP vulnerability
assessments.''
Reference: Budget Justifications and Performance Information Fiscal
Year 2020--USGS, pp. 49-50, 70-71.
[This statement was submitted by David Jonas Bardin.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Defenders of Wildlife
Madam Chairman, Ranking Member and Members of the subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony for the record.
Founded in 1947, Defenders has more than 1.8 million members and
supporters and is dedicated to the conservation of wild animals and
plants in their natural communities.
Our Nation's wildlife is caught up in the planet's sixth mass
extinction, yet, in recent years, programs that preserve wildlife and
habitat have been hollowed out by severely inadequate funding. The
President's budget again includes a number of draconian cuts. Defenders
urges the subcommittee to begin to rebuild our wildlife conservation
framework by providing robust increases for these crucial programs,
particularly given the additional funding that we hope will be
available in the 403(b)-allocation given the fire funding fix that will
go into effect in fiscal year 2020.
Defenders remains skeptical about efforts to reorganize the
Department of the Interior by consolidating authority for administering
diverse Interior agencies and we oppose the $28 million requested for
this purpose. Reorganization would reduce or eliminate the relative
independence of agencies to manage and conserve land, waters, and
wildlife in accordance with their individual statutory and policy
mandates and would be detrimental to transparent and balanced
decisionmaking and conservation of our natural resources. Relocating
central offices to various western locales also would make them more
prone to capture by development and resource extraction industries. We
urge you to reject this proposal. We also have concerns which we
specify later in our testimony regarding budget restructuring proposals
for various agencies in the request.
While we appreciate that nearly all riders that threatened to
undermine protections for imperiled species and the Endangered Species
Act (ESA) were stricken from the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2019,
we urge that the subcommittee not continue the sage-grouse listing
prohibition rider which has been included in the bill since 2014. The
Trump administration has reversed course on the unprecedented and
broadly supported initiative to conserve the sage-grouse. The U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service must have all tools available to conserve the
imperiled bird.
fish and wildlife service
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) is our Nation's premier
wildlife conservation agency yet the request proposes a 15.8 percent
cut below the fiscal year 2019 level. The FWS needs significant
increases to support recovery of threatened and endangered species;
protection of migratory birds and fish, species of global conservation
concern and other trust species; and prevention of both domestic and
international wildlife crimes.
Ecological Services.--Recently, a coalition of more than 200
organizations sent a letter to Congress requesting a significant
infusion of funds into the Ecological Services program to begin to
address the extinction crisis, a total of $486 million, nearly double
the current level of $251.8 million:
--Listing: Several years ago, FWS developed a broadly supported
workplan to allow for timely listing decisions on 350 species.
Because of decreases to listing, FWS now has a backlog of 77
species with delayed listing decisions as well as 78 species in
the workplan for 2020 for a total current listing backlog of
155 species. For FWS to meet these and other obligations under
the listing budget, a total of $51 million is needed annually,
an increase of $32.7 million over the fiscal year 2019 level.
Species due for decisions include the Eastern Hellbender, the
American Wolverine, the Humboldt Marten and the Yellow Banded
Bumble bee. The President's request cuts the listing program by
an unacceptable 39.3 percent.
--Recovery: Currently, more than 480 listed species lack final
recovery plans and another 500 plans will need to be updated in
the next 5 years. Moreover, hundreds of listed species receive
less than $1,000 per year for recovery with many receiving no
FWS funding at all. Congress should provide a minimum of
$50,000 per year per species for recovery to ensure no species
slips through the cracks. For FWS to meet these and other
obligations under the recovery budget, a total of $196.7
million is needed annually, an increase of $101.7 million.
--Planning and Consultation: FWS conducts ESA Section 7 consultations
on more than 10,000 Federal actions each year so that projects
can move forward while minimizing harm to listed species. The
program has been flat or declining since the early 2000's. To
meet planning and consultation needs, including highly
technical analyses on issues such as pesticides and to work
with non-Federal stakeholders to develop Habitat Conservation
Plans, $130 million is needed annually, an increase of $23.9
million over the fiscal year 2019 level.
--Conservation and Restoration: At least $8 million per year from
fiscal year 2020 to fiscal year 2025 is needed for the
Candidate Conservation element of Conservation and Restoration
to assist with early conservation action on the current 23
candidate species.
--Wolf Livestock Loss Demonstration Program: Defenders urges
continued funding at no less than $1 million for this program
that assists livestock owners co-existing with wolves.
National Wildlife Refuge System.--Our National Wildlife Refuge
System is the largest network of public lands and water in the Nation
dedicated to wildlife conservation, unique in that it is one of the few
places on the planet where wildlife comes first. The fiscal year 2019
level of $488.3 million for Refuge System Operations and Maintenance
(O&M) is $96 million below the level needed to keep pace with inflation
and salary increases relative to the fiscal year 2010 level of $503.2
million. Defenders recommends $586 million for O&M for fiscal year
2020, an increase of $98 million over fiscal year 2019. The Cooperative
Alliance for Refuge Enhancement, a broad coalition of 23 hunting,
fishing, conservation and scientific organizations estimates at least
$900 million is needed annually for O&M.
Migratory Bird Management.--According to a 2018 report \1\ at least
40 percent of bird species worldwide are experiencing declining
populations. Despite this alarming fact, the Trump administration is
moving to eliminate long-standing protections for migratory birds
against incidental take. Defenders recommends a return to no less than
the fiscal year 2010 level of $54.5 million, an increase of $8.1
million over the fiscal year 2019 level to support crucial survey and
monitoring programs and for building resilience of bird species and
their habitats.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.birdlife.org/sites/default/files/attachments/
BL_ReportENG_V11_spreads.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Office of Law Enforcement (OLE).--We are extremely grateful that
the fiscal year 2019 bill continued appropriated funding to support
inspectors at ports of entry currently without personnel and we urge it
be maintained. Defenders supports $85 for million for fiscal year 2020,
an increase of $5.9 million over the fiscal year 2019 level to help OLE
continue to address the crisis in the illegal global wildlife trade.
International Affairs.--Defenders supports $18 million for fiscal
year 2020, an increase of $2.2 million, crucial in continuing to combat
illegal wildlife trade and to build capacity in range countries.
Cooperative Landscape Conservation and Science Support.--We thank
the subcommittee for again restoring funding for these two programs
which the administration had zeroed out in its fiscal year 2019 request
and has once again zeroed out. We recommend increases over current
levels, returning to the requests made in the last Obama administration
budget for fiscal year 2017 for $17.8 million (an increase of $5.3
million) and $20.6 million (an increase of $3.3 million) respectively.
With these increases, FWS can continue to work to address complex
challenges, such as climate change, across large landscapes and
otherwise address scientific questions key to conservation of trust
species.
Key Grant Programs.--Defenders supports: $100 million for the
Cooperative Endangered Species Fund, an increase of $54 million; $6.5
million for the Neotropical Migratory Bird Fund, an increase of $2.6
million; $15 million for the Multinational Species Conservation Fund,
an increase of $3.4 million; and $70 million for State and Tribal
Wildlife Grants, an increase of $5.4 million.
u.s forest service and bureau of land management
The U.S. Forest Service (FS) and the Bureau of Land Management
(BLM) are essential to the conservation of wildlife and habitat in the
United States. The administration is proposing to consolidate nine
National Forest System budget line items into a single budget line
item. Defenders is concerned that such a consolidation, given this
administration's narrow focus on timber production, could be
devastating to wildlife habitat and watersheds. Under any scenario,
Congress must reaffirm meaningful performance metrics for wildlife
habitat, watersheds, and forest resiliency on FS lands. In addition,
while Defenders was opposed to restructuring the BLM Wildlife and Fish
activity into the new Wildlife and Aquatic Habitat Management activity
approved in the fiscal year 2019 bill, we appreciate that specific
funding for Threatened and Endangered Species (T&E) was maintained and
we urge the subcommittee to continue this specific funding. We also
remain concerned about the level of accountability and transparency in
allocating the T&E funding under the new structure. We ask the
subcommittee to ensure that BLM reporting on the use of these funds is
accurate and to make clear to the agency that T&E funding is to be used
specifically to advance conservation and recovery of the 430 listed
species and at least 31 candidate species found on BLM lands rather
than to pay for Section 7 compliance which ought to be funded by the
benefitting programs. In addition, Defenders requests that BLM be
prohibited from using any funds on all oil and gas activities in the
Coastal Plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in fiscal year
2020.
BLM Wildlife and Aquatic Habitat Management.--Defenders opposes the
35 percent cut in the President's request which includes nearly a 50
percent cut to T&E funding. We urge $200.8 million, an increase of
$18.3 million over the fiscal year 2019 level of $182.5 million which
includes a total of $23.8 million for T&E, an increase of $2.2 million
over the fiscal year 2019 level. We also will be providing the
subcommittee with some specific recommendations for report language and
funding initiatives to help conserve the greater sage-grouse and
sagebrush habitat which will be needed to help mitigate the damage
likely to occur under the current administration's new sage-grouse plan
amendments.
BLM Renewable Energy.--Defenders supports the requested level of
$29.1 million, an increase of $4.8 million over the fiscal year 2019
level to continue facilitating renewable energy development on public
lands, while avoiding areas with natural resource conflicts, including
sensitive wildlife species.
BLM Resource Management Planning, Assessment and Monitoring.--
Defenders opposes the 17.4 percent cut to this program in the request.
We urge $69.4 million, an increase of $6.3 million over the fiscal year
2019 level of $63.1 million to support crucial data collection and
monitoring of ecological conditions and trends on the landscape as well
as continued development of the Enterprise GIS.
FS Wildlife and Fisheries Habitat Management.--Wildlife and
Fisheries Habitat Management has been essentially flat-funded since
fiscal year 2014, yet the request cuts the program by an indeterminate
amount. We support restoring funding to at least the fiscal year 2010
level of $143 million, $6 million over the fiscal year 2019 level to
carry out critical conservation and recovery activities for the nearly
470 threatened and endangered species and 3,100 sensitive species that
depend on FS lands and to help address the loss of biologists that has
occurred in recent years.
FS Land Management Planning, Assessment and Monitoring.--The
request cuts this program by an indeterminate amount. Defenders
supports maintaining funding at no less than the fiscal year 2017 level
of $182.9 million, $2.9 million over the fiscal year 2019 level.
Outdated forest plans lack effective habitat conservation and
restoration strategies.
FS Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program.--The request
zeroes out the program, despite the 2018 Farm Bill's doubling of
authority to $80 million, which Defenders supports.
FS Forest and Rangeland Research (FS R&D).--The request cuts R&D by
20 percent. We urge a return to the fiscal year 2010 level of $245
million, $22 million over fiscal year 2019, which included $30.5
million for Wildlife and Fish R&D. Adequate funding for this program is
crucial in providing relevant tools and information to support
sustainable management of both Federal and non-Federal forest lands.
u.s. geological survey
The U.S. Geological Survey provides the basic science for
conservation of wildlife and habitat. We are extremely concerned about
the proposal in the President's budget to consolidate and substantially
reduce funding for the Ecosystems and Land Resources activities.
National and Regional Climate Science Centers.--The request cuts
the Climate Science Centers by 5.5 percent and proposes to ``realign
centers.'' Given the magnitude of the climate crisis threatening our
planet, the Centers should be maintained and funded at $30.9 million,
an increase of $7 million and equal to the request made in the last
Obama administration budget in fiscal year 2017 to support scientific
needs in planning for climate change adaptation and building resiliency
of ecosystems.
Ecosystems.--The request restructures and cuts this activity by
10.1 percent, including eliminating the Cooperative Research Units
which Defenders opposes. Defenders urges funding at no less than the
fiscal year 2017 request of $173. 9 million, $17 million above fiscal
year 2019 to help support development of crucial scientific information
for sound management of our Nation's biological resources.
land and water conservation fund (lwcf)
The request slashes funding by 105 percent. We support phased in
increases to LWCF to ultimately reach the fully authorized $900 million
level. These increases are needed to help to save some of the 6,000
acres of open space, including wildlife habitat, that are lost each day
in the United States.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://www.fs.fed.us/openspace/coop_across_boudaries.html
[This statement was submitted by Mary Beth Beetham, Director of
Legislative Affairs.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Dine Grant Schools Association
The Dine Grant Schools Association (DGSA) is comprised of the
school boards of seven Bureau of Indian Education (BIE)-funded schools
which are operated pursuant to the Tribally Controlled Schools Act
(Public Law 100-297) and located on the Navajo Nation in Arizona and
New Mexico. These schools are: Black Mesa Community School; Dzilth-Na-
O-Dith-Hle Community Grant School; Hanaadli Community School/Dormitory,
Inc.; Lukachukai Community School; Pinon Community School; Pine Hill
Schools; and Shiprock Associated Schools, Inc.
Success through language, culture, community involvement, and high
standards. As Tribal school boards, we have both the greater freedom
and the tremendous responsibility to ensure that our students receive a
quality and culturally relevant education that will help them reach
their fullest potential. We believe that successful students know who
they are, that they are valued, and that great things are expected of
them. Our schools incorporate Navajo language and culture into our
curricula. We set rigorous standards that our students must strive to
meet and give them a sense of accomplishment at their achievements.
Why Federal funding matters. It is difficult to concentrate on
school lessons if you are too cold or the roof is leaking or the water
pipes do not function properly. It is difficult to take Partnership for
Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers (PARCC) online practice
tests or take distance learning Advanced Placement classes with
unreliable and slow Internet connections. It is difficult to ride the
bus on unimproved roads and to a deteriorating school that has lingered
on a replacement list because of lack of funding. These challenges to
learning are prevalent throughout Indian Country. What has been
different these past several years is an extensive change in
understanding the extent of these challenges and a bipartisan support
to address them. For this, we are deeply grateful to our partners in
Congress.
Our highest funding priorities are: ISEP formula funds; Tribal
Grant Support Costs; Facilities Operations and Maintenance; and the
FACE Program in the BIE budget as well as Education Construction and
Repair and Road Maintenance in the BIA budget. These programs make the
greatest difference in our ability to educate our students.
Indian School Equalization Program (ISEP) Formula Funds. The Indian
School Equalization Program (ISEP) Formula is the core budget account
for Educational and Residential programs of the BIE elementary and
secondary schools and dormitories. These funds are used for
instructional programs at BIE-funded schools as well as salaries and
benefits of teachers, educational technicians, other support staff and
principals. For years, the amount appropriated for ISEP formula funds
increased barely enough to cover fixed costs. We appreciate that
Congress has provided program increases these past several fiscal
years.
Impact. For most BIE-funded schools, the chronic shortfall in the
other key school accounts has a negative impact on ISEP Formula
funding, because ISEP Formula funds are often diverted to make up the
shortfalls in other accounts, such as Facilities Operations and
Maintenance, when a Tribe or Tribal school board has no other source of
funding to satisfy those shortfalls. This means fewer funds are
available for instructional activities. We are tremendously grateful
that Congress has increased funding for these critical accounts so ISEP
Formula funds can be used for their intended purpose.
Request. The $1.28 million program increase for a total of $404.2
million that Congress provided in fiscal year 2019 from fiscal year
2018 is very helpful, however, this total amount still does not
acknowledge the shortfalls that have been building for many years.
Therefore, we respectfully request an additional increase in ISEP
Formula funding for fiscal year 2020.
Tribal Grant Support Costs. Since the 1988 Elementary and Secondary
Education Act reauthorization, tribally-operated elementary and
secondary schools have received funding for the administrative expenses
incurred for the operation of BIE-funded schools through an
Administrative Cost Grant, now called Tribal Grant Support Costs
(TGSC). Tribal Grant Support Costs are the Contract Support Costs for
tribally controlled schools. These funds are used for essential
services such as contract/grant administration; program planning and
development; human resources; insurance; fiscal, procurement, and
property management; required annual audits; recordkeeping; and legal,
security, and other overhead services.
Impact. We appreciate in that in recent fiscal years the Obama and
Trump administrations have requested and Congress has committed to
providing full funding for Tribal Grant Support Costs.
Request. We would like to express our appreciation for this
bipartisan commitment to fully fund Tribal Grant Support Costs and
express support for its continuation for fiscal year 2020.
Early Childhood or ``FACE'' Program. The Early Childhood and Family
Development budget category commonly referred to as the ``FACE''
program is designed to (1) strengthen family-school-community
relations, (2) increase parent participation in education, and (3)
support parents in their role as a child's first and most important
teacher. Many of DGSA's Member schools run successful FACE programs so
we ask the subcommittees to once again reject any administration
proposals to zero out this program.
Impact. The FACE program teaches essential skills to children that
help make them kindergarten-ready, such as direction on how to hold a
pencil, color, and write their name. There is a marked academic
difference in outcomes for those children who have access to a FACE-
funded program and those who do not. Further, these programs strengthen
families and communities and help increase parent engagement. For
example, parents who attend the FACE program are able to attain their
GED and then go on to community college or training programs. Parents
are also taught how to academically engage with their children, leaning
study skills and the importance of education. Families are another
critical factor in whether children succeed academically.
Request. We respectfully ask that the subcommittees continue to
reject any administration proposal to zero out this vital program and
continue to provide adequate funding to support the FACE program for
fiscal year 2020.
Facilities Operations and Maintenance. Facilities Operations
funding is for the ongoing operational necessities such as electricity,
heating fuels, custodial services, communications, refuse collection
and water and sewer service. Facilities Maintenance funds are intended
to provide for the preventative, routine, and unscheduled maintenance
for all school buildings, equipment, utility systems, and ground
structures. We appreciate that these budget categories have seen some
increases in recent years. While the recent increases for these two
budget categories are important improvements; we note that the fiscal
year 2017 budget justification states that the $66.2 million requested
for Facilities Operations and the $59 million requested for Facilities
Maintenance would fund 78 percent of calculated Facilities Operations
and Maintenance need across BIE-funded schools. Neither the fiscal year
2018 budget justification nor the fiscal year 2019 budget justification
bothered to provide an estimate for what full funding would be. We also
note that Facilities Operations and Facilities Maintenance are some of
the last budget categories for primary and secondary schools that are
still funded on a fiscal year schedule, rather than a forward funded
(school year) basis. Continuing Resolutions and government shut-downs
can wreak havoc when trying to carry out these activities.
Backlog. The Department of the Interior's fiscal year 2019 budget
justification projected that by the end of fiscal year 2018, ``68
percent of school facilities will be in good or fair condition.'' This
projection still leaves 32 percent of school facilities for Indian
students in ``poor'' condition. We also note that the fiscal year 2019
budget justification states that as of the first quarter of fiscal year
2018, there were ``$634 million dollars of deferred maintenance across
BIE-school facilities and grounds.'' Accordingly, many BIE-funded
schools are being written up for health and safety violations but have
no money to make the needed changes. Schools are also being threatened
with fines or being shut down. If schools do not have the needed
facilities funds, they are forced to use education funds. Part of the
maintenance problem will be resolved by replacing aging, deteriorated
schools, but Federal resources for maintenance are needed to preserve
that investment and to ensure our schools' facilities remain fully
functional learning environments throughout the length of their design
life.
Proposed Public Lands Infrastructure Fund or Other Related Funding
Legislation. We sincerely appreciated that BIE-funded schools were
included among the national parks and national wildlife refuges as
eligible for repairs and improvements funding in the 2019 legislative
proposal to establish the Public Lands Infrastructure Fund. However, it
is uncertain whether the Public Lands Infrastructure Fund will be
proposed in the current legislative session and whether there would be
sufficient congressional support for the Public Lands Infrastructure
Fund to move forward. Alternatively, we are highly supportive of BIE-
funded schools being included as eligible recipients for repairs and
improvements funding in any Public Works, Public Infrastructure, or
other related legislation proposed during the current congressional
session.
Impact. There are numerous studies which attest to the fact that
there is a close correlation between poor or inadequate facility
conditions and poor student and staff performance. Because we cannot
delay paying our utilities or avoid taking actions that would impact
student safety, we often have to resort to using our other education or
academic program monies-just like what happened when Tribal Grant
Support Costs were not fully funded.
Request. We respectfully ask that the subcommittee provide full,
consistent funding for Facilities Operations and Facilities Maintenance
and transition these two budget categories to a forward funded (school
year) budget cycle, just like the other core education accounts. In
addition, we request that BIE-funded schools be included as eligible
recipients of repairs and improvements funding in any Public Works,
Public Infrastructure, or other related legislation in order to address
the $634 million maintenance backlog to BIE-school facilities and
grounds.
Education Construction and Repair. This funding category within the
BIA Construction budget includes Replacement School Construction;
Facilities Component Replacement; Facilities Improvement and Repair;
and Employee Housing Repair. According to the Department of the
Interior, the current backlog of construction projects is estimated to
be as high as $1.3 billion. The BIE has stated that its ``next-step''
is to ``develop a long-term school construction funding plan that will
address the needs of all BIE funded schools determined to be in poor
condition.'' We were encouraged by the important increases that the
subcommittees provided for Education Construction in fiscal year 2016
and then maintained in fiscal year 2017, and followed by more
significant increases in fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019 for
which we are very grateful. Two DGSA Member schools are on the National
Review Committee's 2016 Replacement List: Dzilth-Na-O-Dith-Hle
Community Grant School is in the design phase and has issued an RFP for
schematic designs while Lukachukai Community School completed the
planning phase and is waiting for design phase funds. Given the state
of school facilities across the BIE system, we ask that the
subcommittees continue to appropriate the kind of funding levels for
Replacement School Construction and Facilities Component Replacement
which will make a meaningful impact on the school replacement lists.
Impact. Facilities within the BIE system are woefully outdated and,
in some cases, dangerous for students and staff. Each year that the
Facilities Improvement and Repair budget is underfunded, our facilities
deteriorate more quickly. The lack of an appropriate learning
environment in many BIE system schools puts Native students at an
unfair disadvantage. In turn, the schools are then blamed for any low
academic performance.
Request. We respectfully request that Congress and the
administration consult with Tribes and Tribal school boards when
developing this long-term school replacement and repair plan. Further,
we ask that once developed, Congress implement this plan by providing
consistent funding for Education Construction and Repair each fiscal
year.
Road Maintenance. The subcommittees have highlighted the poor
conditions and backlog of deferred maintenance of unpaved roads and
bridges in Indian Country that are used by school buses to transport
students. We would like to thank the subcommittees for attempting to
hold the BIA accountable and for providing additional funding directed
to these routes.
Request. We respectfully request that the subcommittees increase
funding directed to these school bus routes for fiscal year 2020 and
continue your efforts to hold the BIA accountable. As of this writing,
we are not sure how or where these funds have been allocated.
[This statement was submitted by Marlene Watashe, President.]
______
Prepared Statement of Dr. Adam Schultz
agency: united states geological survey
1.
Account: Energy, Minerals, and Environmental Health
Program/Activity:
Energy and Minerals/Mineral Resources/
Magnetotelluric
Survey
Fiscal Year 2020 President's Budget Request: $1,726,000
My Suggested Request: $1,726,000
2.
Account: Natural Hazards
Program/Activity: Geomagnetism
Fiscal Year 2020 President's Budget Request: $1,888,000
My Suggested Request: $4,000,000
Chairman Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall:
The effects of space weather--charged particles emitted by the
Sun--are felt at ground level, including disturbances in the
geomagnetic field that cause anomalous geomagnetically induced electric
currents (GICs) to flow through high-voltage electric power
transmission lines, pipelines and other critical infrastructure. Such
naturally occurring electromagnetic pulse (EMP) events, along with
those generated by high altitude detonation of nuclear devices (HEMP)
pose a critical threat to the U.S. economy, national security and the
health and safety of the American people. Cascading failures of the
most vulnerable of approximately 2200 high-voltage transformers
underpinning the U.S. power transmission network can lead to large-
scale, sustained power grid interruptions, profound economic, national
security and societal impacts. Other risk factors include power grid
voltage/frequency instabilities, power interruptions, and premature
ageing of critical infrastructure. This is recognized as a significant
threat to our way of life, and efforts to assess and mitigate this high
risk level have been encapsulated in the National Space Weather Action
Plan and Strategy [NSTC, 2015; update 2019], Executive Order 13744
[Obama, 2016], Executive Order 13865 [Trump, 2019], FERC Orders 779,
851, NERC (North American Electrical Reliability Corporation) electric
Transmission system standards TPL 007-1,2,3]. Among the enforceable
standards, power transmission risk assessments must factor in the
variations of the electrical conductivity of the geologic structures
and materials beneath ground level, and power transmission system
sensor and ground-level magnetic field sensor data must be acquired.
During the period 2006-2018 I served as the Principal Scientist
responsible under National Science Foundation EarthScope Program
support to execute a program of mapping the electrical conductivity
variations in the crust and upper mantle beneath the conterminous U.S.
and parts of the interior of Alaska in a region immediately north of
Fairbanks. We employed a geophysical method (magnetotelluric method, or
MT) that involves monitoring the natural changes in the electric and
magnetic field measured at ground level at a grid of survey locations
that returns information we can use to image the Earth's interior in a
manner analogous to MRI or CT scanning in medical diagnostics. By
mapping the changes in electrical conductivity below ground level, we
can provide information on fundamental Earth processes, but we also
provide information on ground conductivity that is essential to
assessing and mitigating the risk of geomagnetically induced currents
(GICs) in the power grid, in pipelines, and in other structures caused
by space weather and by high-altitude electromagnetic pulse.
Figure 1. Locations at which measurements of the Earth's electric
and magnetic field variations were recorded under the NSF EarthScope
Program. Long-period MT station occupation time is typically
3-6
weeks. MT equipment is then relocated to next available grid point in
rolling array. Blue dots on almost regularly-spaced station location
grid represent 1167 MT sites operated by Oregon State University (OSU)
under NSF funding, under the direct oversight of Incorporated Research
Institutions for Seismology (IRIS). Yellow dots represent 44 MT sites
operated by USGS sites in part of FL; TN, AR, MO (not shown) and
included in the open access EarthScope data base. Cyan dots represent
MT sites acquired under other programs. Red dots represent 54 MT sites
OSU is current acquiring in California under NASA funding. Yellow dots
represent the permanent USGS and Natural Resources Canada magnetic
observatories. Note: The USGS magnetic observatories in Fresno,
California, Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, and Shumagin, Alaska become
unmaintained as of April 22, 2019 as a consequence of USAF support for
co-funding the USGS Geomagnetism Program ending.
Executive Order 13865 (March 26, 2019) directs that: ``Within 4
years of the date of this order, the Secretary of the Interior shall
complete a magnetotelluric survey of the contiguous United States to
help critical infrastructure owners and operators conduct EMP
vulnerability assessments.''
The $1.725 million in the OMB fiscal year 2020 budget request for
DOI/USGS, for the first year of a 4 year magnetotelluric survey called
for in Executive Order 13865, is of critical importance to providing
continuity of operations to the MT survey, which was executed by Oregon
State University during the 15 years of the NSF EarthScope Program (now
ended), completing it over approximately 2/3rd of the territory of the
conterminous U.S. (Figure 1 above). In the course of executing that
program of basic scientific research, it was discovered that the data
returned was of great importance to assessing and mitigating the risk
to the electric power grid and other critical infrastructure from the
effects of Space Weather and Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP). The data
returned from this effort has been adopted widely in efforts to assess
and mitigate risk to the power grid from these threats. The fiscal year
2020 budget line initiates a 4-year program overseen by USGS to
complete MT survey operations in the remaining ``southern tier'' of the
United States.
While Executive Order 13865 specifies the completion of the survey
in the contiguous U.S., this activity also lays the foundation in
subsequent fiscal years for extending the MT survey to all regions of
Alaska where assessing and mitigating space weather and EMP risk to the
Alaska power transmission and pipeline networks is a priority.
Suggested Language Request: The committee recognizes risks to the
Nation's electric power transmission network, pipelines, and other
critical infrastructure from geomagnetic field disturbances. The
Committee provides $1,726,000 to collect magnetotelluric observations
of the Earth's naturally occurring electric and magnetic fields in U.S.
regions for which this data has not already been collected to inform
the conductivity structure of the crust and uppermost mantle of the
conterminous United States.
The second request:
I ask for your support to increase the U.S. Geological Survey
Natural Hazards line request for Geomagnetism from $1.888 million to
$4.0 million.
Executive Order 13865 (March 26, 2019) also directs the Secretary
of the Interior to ``support the research, development, deployment, and
operation of capabilities that enhance understanding of variations of
Earth's magnetic field associated with [natural and human-made
electromagnetic pulses] EMPs'', but OMB proposes to withhold
Geomagnetism program resources essential to do that.
The geomagnetism program operates the Nation's network of permanent
magnetic observatories, which provide a continuous, high-quality stream
of data on the geomagnetic field at ground level from a small set of
stations within the conterminous U.S., as well as in Alaska, Hawaii and
a small number of island stations. These data have proven essential to
assessing and mitigating risk to the electric power grid and other
critical infrastructure from the effects of Space Weather. These data
are used in combination with the magnetotelluric survey data, and with
sensors on the power grid to determine the level of geomagnetic
disturbance due to solar activity. The intensity of geomagnetically
induced currents in the power grid, pipelines and other structures is
determined by the intensity of geomagnetic disturbance as it varies in
time and space, and by its interaction with the electrical properties
of the Earth's crust and mantle beneath the electric power transmission
grid.
The current set of only 7 USGS magnetic observatories in the
conterminous U.S. is insufficient to accurately represent the true
level of geomagnetic disturbance in every section of the conterminous
U.S. electric power transmission grid, its pipeline networks, and in
other critical infrastructure. The 5 USGS magnetic observatories in
Alaska serve a similar role in an area of great magnetic field
variation and intensity related to the auroral zone. The spatial scale
of those variations throughout the U.S. is smaller than the distance
between the magnetic observatories. It is necessary to double the
number of permanent magnetic observatories in the conterminous U.S. in
order to provide the required fidelity of data to assess and mitigate
risk to critical infrastructure. It is necessary at a minimum to
preserve the number of magnetic observatories in Alaska.
While $1.888 million in the requested appropriation matches last
year's, this does not reflect a 25 percent cut in this program because
the U.S. Air Force ended its contributions to this program in 2019. The
impact on this decision to the USGS Geomagnetism Program is profound.
Three permanent magnetic observatories are now slated to lose support
by fiscal year 2020: Magnetic observatories in Fresno, California; Bay
St Louis, Mississippi, and Shumagin, Alaska. Reduction of the network
of observatories will very badly impact our ability to assess and
mitigate risk to critical infrastructure from space weather both in the
conterminous U.S. and in Alaska.
By increasing this line to $4.0 million, the three observatories at
risk will be secured, and the number of observatories in the U.S. can
be roughly doubled over a few years while catching up on deferred
maintenance, providing important data to achieve space weather
resilience goals.
Subcommittee: Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies
Department: Interior
Agency: United States Geological Survey
Account: Natural Hazards
Program/Activity: Geomagnetism
Fiscal Year 2020 President's Budget Request: $1,888,000
My Suggested Request: $4,000,000
Suggested Language Request: The committee recognizes risks to the
Nation's electric power transmission network, pipelines, and other
critical infrastructure from geomagnetic field disturbances. The
Committee provides $4,000,000 to collect continuous, stable magnetic
field observations in the conterminous U.S.; to support the existing
network of such observatories currently operated by the U.S. Geological
Survey, and to increase the number of such observatories in the United
States.
Respectfully submitted,
Dr. Adam Schultz
(Professor of Geophysics, Oregon State University)
[email protected]
______
Prepared Statement of the Duckwater Shoshone Tribe
The Duckwater Shoshone Tribe's requests for the fiscal year 2020
Indian Health Service (IHS) and Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA)
appropriations are as follows:
--Assist the Tribe with our reservation expansion plans and self-
governance project;
--Increase funding for Community and Economic Development in the BIA
budget for development of renewable energy, conventional
energy, and mineral resources;
--Increase BIA funding for road maintenance;
--Increase funding to the IHS Hospitals and Clinics line item, and
direct the IHS to direct additional funding to pharmacy
programs and physician services;
--Fund IHS in advance in parity with the Veterans Administration;
--Permanently reauthorize the Special Diabetes Program for Indians;
--Continue to fully fund Contract Support Costs for the IHS and BIA;
and
--Increase funding for Welfare Assistance in the BIA budget.
Background
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony. The Duckwater
Shoshone Tribe is a federally recognized Indian Tribe located in a
remote, high desert valley in the State of Nevada, in the very northern
tip of Nye County. The Tribe is governed by a democratically elected,
five-member tribal council and is primarily an agricultural community.
We offer a range of services to our tribal members, including
healthcare and natural resources and environmental health programs. The
Tribe operates a tribal health clinic under a self-governance agreement
with the Indian Health Service under Title V of the Indian Self-
Determination and Education Assistance Act.
Reservation Expansion and Self Governance
Our reservation has recently been expanded by thirty thousand
acres. In order to proceed with this project, we have requested the
Bureau of Land Management, whose funding falls under the jurisdiction
of this Committee, to complete a survey of the land. Despite repeated
requests, the Bureau has not completed the survey. Further, for several
years, the Tribe has been seeking a self-governance contract with BLM,
and the agency has simply refused to respond to our requests for
meetings to begin negotiations for our Tribe to assume various BLM
duties. We ask for any support in ensuring that BLM promptly responds
to requests for engagement on this issue. The DST has submitted a self-
governance compact funding proposal to the BLM.
Development of Renewable Energy, Conventional Energy, and Mineral
Resources
We ask that this subcommittee increase funding for the ``Community
and Economic Development'' activity in the BIA budget, particularly the
``Job Placement and Training'' sub activity, which funds technical and
vocational training, and the ``Minerals and Mining'' sub activity,
which promotes and provides technical assistance for the development of
renewable energy, conventional energy, and mineral resources. As a
rural Tribe, our members have less access to both employment and job
creation opportunities than other citizens. We also struggle with high
energy prices. These conditions are two factors hampering our ability
to thrive as a community and we have been exploring a number of options
to alleviate them. We have determined that we have viable wind and
solar energy resources that can be developed to provide our Tribe with
greater energy certainty, lower energy prices, and economic
opportunities for our tribal members. If we in Indian Country are to
build a strong economic future for our communities, we must pursue an
``all of the above'' energy strategy which for us, includes wind and
solar.
Road Maintenance
The Tribe requests that Congress substantially increase the
critically low funding for BIA road maintenance in fiscal year 2020.
The fiscal year 2019 funding of $35.8 million doesn't begin to cover
the costs of deferred road maintenance. The Tribe relies on miles of
unpaved and unsafe roads to reach the distant communities where Tribe
members work, attend school, and visit family. Due to the Tribe's
remote location, this is an urgent issue because the limited access to
and from our reservation caused by the unmaintained and unpaved dirt
road hampers our economic development and the ability of our members to
access essential services, employment, education, and to visit family
living off the reservation. As you know, the roads in Indian Country
are some of the most dangerous and poorly funded roads in the Nation.
We consider road maintenance funding to be a matter of public safety
and we respectfully ask the subcommittee to increase appropriations for
this critical budget sub-activity. Further, the Tribe would like to
pave the 21 miles of unpaved, dirt road between our reservations in
Duckwater, Nevada to the town of Eureka, Nevada in order to make it
safe. While we understand that road improvement falls outside of the
purview of this subcommittee, we would appreciate your support in
increased Department of Transportation funds for such projects.
Increased IHS Funding For Pharmacy and Physician Services
The funding the Tribe receives through its Hospitals and Clinics
funding is simply insufficient to serve the needs of the Tribe's
pharmacy patients. The Tribe's pharmacy is currently not operating due
to budget constraints, and the Tribe is forced to refer patients to
pharmacies in nearby towns. The Tribe previously used its buy back
authority to procure pharmacy services from the IHS through McKesson,
but that proved prohibitively expensive.
Similarly, the Tribe has a similar concern about the funding made
available through the IHS that the Tribe can then allocate to procuring
physician services. The Tribe has been experiencing great difficulty
over the past several fiscal periods in recruiting and retaining
physicians for carrying out its primary healthcare programs.
There is just not enough funding for the Tribe to provide necessary
services and still have adequate funding for pharmaceuticals and to pay
physicians to locate to our remote area. Further, our costs required to
provide adequate care to our members have risen by $800,000 that is not
covered by our IHS funding agreement, and the Tribe also spends
approximately $250,000 per year to provide healthcare services to
members living off the reservation. We ask for the subcommittees'
support for increasing the IHS appropriation for Hospitals and Clinics
funding, and to direct the IHS to allocate additional funding toward
pharmacy and physician services.
Advance Appropriations for IHS
We appreciate the increased interest some members of Congress have
shown for providing advance appropriations for IHS and Indian Affairs
programs. Thank you to Interior Appropriations Ranking Member Udall,
Representative Don Young, and House Interior Appropriations Chair
McCollum for introducing, and Rep. David Joyce for co-sponsoring
legislation to provide advance appropriations for IHS and programs in
the BIA and BIE. With regard to the IHS programs, they should have
parity with the Veterans Administration health accounts, which Congress
had funded in advance since fiscal year 2010. Both IHS and the VA
provide direct medical care, but they are not treated equally in the
funding process. Predictability, continuity, and certainty are
essential for providing stable quality healthcare. When IHS funding is
subject to a Continuing Resolution, as it has been over many years,
tribal healthcare providers receive only a portion of annual funding at
a time, making it particularly difficult to implement long-range
planning and to effectively use and leverage limited resources. Having
advance notice of funding levels would greatly aid the Tribe in program
planning, recruitment and retention of essential healthcare
professionals in the same way that the VA is able to conduct such
advance planning. The IHS budget should be afforded the same status
consideration as VA health programs. Further, IHS appropriations
should, like VA funds, be exempt from sequestration, should that occur
again in the future.
Special Diabetes Program for Indians (SDPI)
The Tribe, like others throughout Indian Country, continue to
support permanent reauthorization and increased funding for the SDPI,
which provides crucial support for diabetes prevention and treatment
programs. While an SDPI reauthorization bill is not under purview of
this subcommittee, the SDPI and the programs carried out with SDPI
funding affect the scope and range of our healthcare efforts and our
IHS programs, which this subcommittee funds. The Tribe would greatly
appreciate any help the Interior Appropriations Subcommittee members
can provide with your colleagues on this matter. A permanent
reauthorization with mandatory annual funding of $200 million would
provide stability for our diabetes programs in terms of planning and
recruiting and retaining personnel.
Continue Full Funding of Contract Support Costs
The Tribe appreciates the subcommittees' leadership and commitment
to fully funding CSC for IHS and BIA ISDEAA agreements. We appreciate
the full funding of CSC over the past few fiscal years, that the
funding is indefinite (``such sums as may be necessary'', and that the
funding is in separate accounts in the IHS and BIA budgets. We request
that the subcommittees continue to fully fund CSC. Such action is
crucial to strengthening the ability of tribal governments' to
successfully exercise their rights and responsibilities as sovereign
nations.
Adult Welfare Assistance
Our tribal members, like other residents of Indian Country and non-
tribal rural populations, experience higher than average rates of
unemployment than urban populations. As a Tribe, we are working hard to
help create opportunities for our Members both in terms of job
placement and job creation. Unfortunately, there are some circumstance
when welfare assistance is temporarily needed for some tribal members.
The ``Welfare Assistance'' sub-activity funded under the ``Human
Services'' activity in the BIA budget provides these critical resources
for our people. We, like the BIA and Congress, believe that welfare
assistance should be a temporary safety net and ultimately, a bridge to
better circumstances and opportunities, but we believe that it must
exist. We ask the subcommittees to increase funding for Welfare
Assistance to strengthen and stabilize families so that they are able
to pursue job opportunities and ultimately become self-sufficient.
Conclusion
The Duckwater Shoshone Tribe appreciates your consideration of our
requests outlined in this testimony. On behalf of the Tribe, I would be
happy to provide any other additional information as requested by the
subcommittee.
[This statement was submitted by Rodney Mike, Tribal Chairman.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Ecological Society of America
The Ecological Society of America (ESA) appreciates the opportunity
to provide testimony in support of fiscal year 2020 appropriations for
the interagency Joint Fire Science Program. ESA is the Nation's largest
society of professional ecologists, representing over 9,000 members
across the country. ESA requests full funding in fiscal year 2020 of
$16 million for the interagency Joint Fire Science Program (JFSP): $8
million in funding for the USDA Forest Service JFSP program and $8
million for the Department of Interior JFSP program to ensure active
participation from both agencies in prioritizing investment in fire
research and decision support. Recent years' funding for the JFSP has
eroded a program with proven great success in supporting practical
science that reduces fire risk and enhances economic, ecological, and
social outcomes nationwide.
As you know, the frequency, severity, and size of fires have
increased substantially in the continental U.S. since the 1980s, and
this trend is projected to continue and intensify in the future. The
risk to communities, the cost of property loss, and the expense to
cover the damage brought by these fires will consequently also grow.
Scientific research is critical to understanding and properly
responding to these wildfires in the most productive and cost effective
manner possible.
The JFSP was created by Congress in 1998 as an interagency
research, development, and applications partnership between the U.S.
Department of the Interior and the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The
program solicits proposals from scientists who compete for funding
through a rigorous peer-review process to ensure the highest quality
projects are funded. Over 90 colleges and universities across the
United States have collaborated or partnered with JFSP-sponsored
research projects. The JFSP also runs a model program in science
communication, with very effective efforts to put science in the hands
of managers and policymakers.
No other Federal program except the JFSP provides the integration
of science and management needed to face the challenges that lie ahead-
we will be living in a world with more fire. Research in fire science
is crucial to anticipating how ecosystems and landscapes may change in
the future, how fire should be managed in both wildlands and developed
areas, and where mitigation or adaptation strategies are most
appropriate. Reductions in support for JFSP are inconsistent with high-
priority national research needs.
We appreciate that the House and Senate Interior and Environment
Appropriations Committees have made funding for policy-relevant
wildfire science among your highest priorities. We hope you will
continue to recognize the critical role the JFSP plays in these efforts
and fund fully fund the program in fiscal year 2020 for $16 million: $8
million in funding for the USDA Forest Service JFSP program and $8
million for the Department of Interior JFSP program.
[This statement was submitted by Catherine O'Riordan, Executive
Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Ecological Society of America
The Ecological Society of America (ESA) appreciates the opportunity
to provide testimony in support of fiscal year 2020 appropriations for
the Environmental Protection Agency. ESA is the Nation's largest
society of professional ecologists, representing over 9,000 members
across the country and would like to make two important
recommendations. First, we strongly encourage and recommend that
Congress reach a bipartisan agreement to raise the budget caps for non-
defense discretionary spending. Additionally, we urge you to support
robust funding for the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for fiscal
year 2020, specifically at least $746 million for Science and
Technology within EPA.
We appreciate your past support for the EPA and your preservation
of the agency's budget for fiscal year 2019. We urge you to once again
reject cuts to EPA programs and research as you proceed with fiscal
year 2020 appropriations.
The EPA is vital to protecting both the environment and human
health, and the agency's Science and Technology programs are critically
important to its ability to successfully address environmental
problems. Without adequate funding, the EPA cannot fulfill its core
mission and responsibilities. Strong investments in the EPA are thus
essential to ensuring the health of our Nation's citizens and
environment.
epa science and technology programs reduce environmental risks facing
americans
Since its formation in 1970, the EPA has reduced environmental risk
to Americans, enforced laws safeguarding human health and the
environment, and helped the Nation serve as a leader in protecting the
environment.
Science and Technology funding supports programs and research that
contribute to clean air, clean water, sustainable communities, homeland
security, and human health. Through the Office of Research and
Development (ORD), the EPA conducts cutting-edge research programs,
including important ecological research and monitoring, that provide
the scientific foundation for the agency's decisionmaking and other
programs. These research and monitoring programs also provide essential
data and information on which State and local governments depend, with
environmental monitoring data collected and maintained by the EPA
helping to ensure healthy communities across the country. EPA research
projects focus on issues of national significance and help to solve
complex environmental problems--often with public health implications--
with new scientific understanding and technologies. From detecting and
addressing harmful algal blooms to helping communities rehabilitate
contaminated sites, EPA research funded by Science and Technology
appropriations delivers solution-oriented results with broad and
lasting impacts.
proposed cuts would have consequences for human and environmental
health
ESA is very concerned with the administration's proposed cuts to
the EPA in fiscal year 2020. The President's budget proposal requests
only $6.1 billion for the agency, an estimated reduction of 31 percent
from enacted fiscal year 2019 funding of $8.1 billion. The proposed
reductions, reflective of those suggested in the President's fiscal
year 2019 budget, would have far-reaching and damaging effects on
public and environmental health and economic growth that depends on
healthy communities.
The administration's budget also proposes to reduce funding for EPA
Science and Technology considerably to only $463 million, a 35 percent
cut from fiscal year 2019 funding. Sound science is the foundation of
everything the agency does. EPA research programs support clean air,
healthy neighborhoods, safer chemicals, and clean water, and it helps
develop solutions to environmental problems. EPA science meets the
highest standards for peer review, transparency, ethics, and integrity,
and it is essential to maintain strong support for science and research
at the EPA. Cuts, particularly cuts of the magnitude proposed in the
President's budget, would dangerously hinder the EPA's ability to
fulfill its mission and responsibility to the American people and would
have serious impacts on the local, State, and national levels.
strong investments in the epa protect our citizens and our ecosystems
The EPA is an essential agency that plays a key role in addressing
ecological problems and other environmental issues that affect public
health. We appreciate your past support for this critical agency, and
we urge you, in the interest of ensuring the health of our Nation's
citizens and ecosystems, to continue this support and provide robust
funding for the EPA in fiscal year 2020, in particular $746 million for
EPA Science and Technology.
Thank you for your consideration of this request.
[This statement was submitted by Catherine O'Riordan, Executive
Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Entomological Society of America
The Entomological Society of America (ESA) respectfully submits
this statement for the official record in support of funding for
entomology-related activities at the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service,
and the U.S. Department of Interior (DOI). For fiscal year 2020, ESA
recommends $8.267 billion for EPA, including support for Pesticides
Licensing Program Area activities within its Science & Technology and
Environmental Program & Management budgets, and continued support for
State & Tribal Assistance Grants for Pesticide Program Implementation.
ESA strongly supports EPA's commitment to work with other Federal
agencies to monitor and improve pollinator health, including
involvement by EPA to examine the potential impact of pesticides on
pollinator health. In addition, ESA requests the Forest Service be
funded at least at the fiscal year 2019 enacted level of $6.087 billion
in discretionary funds. Within the Forest Service, ESA requests the
Forest and Rangeland Research budget be supported at the fiscal year
2019 enacted level of $300 million to preserve valuable invasive
species research and development. The Society also supports continued
investment in Forest Health Management programs across the Forest
Service in fiscal year 2020. ESA also recommends that DOI continue to
support the important work of the National Invasive Species Council
(NISC), which coordinates efforts across agencies to respond to the
threats posed by invasive species, to be funded at no less than the
fiscal year 2018 level of $1.202 million.
Advances in forestry and environmental sciences, including the
field of entomology, help to protect our ecosystems and communities
from threats impacting our Nation's economy, public health, and
agricultural productivity and safety. Through improved understanding of
invasive insect pests and the development of biological approaches to
pest management, entomology plays a critical role in reducing and
preventing the spread of infestation and diseases harmful to national
forests and grasslands. The study of entomology also contributes to the
development of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) techniques, which use
science-based, environmentally conscious, comprehensive methods to take
effective management action against pests, often resulting in lower
costs and a more targeted use of pesticides. In addition, entomology
improves our knowledge of pollinators and the factors affecting
pollinator health and populations, helping to ensure safe, reliable
crop production that meets the needs of a growing world population.
EPA carries out its mission of protecting human health and the
environment by developing and enforcing regulations, awarding grants
for research and other projects, conducting studies on environmental
issues, facilitating partnerships, and providing information through
public outreach. Through these efforts, EPA strives to ensure that our
Nation enjoys clean water, clean air, a safe food supply, and
communities free from pollution and harmful exposures to chemicals.
EPA's Pesticides Licensing Program Area, supported by EPA's Science
& Technology and Environmental Program & Management budgets, serves to
evaluate and regulate new pesticides to ensure safe and proper usage by
consumers. Through the mandate of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide,
and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), EPA uses scientific expertise and data,
including knowledge gained from entomological sciences, to set maximum
tolerated residue levels and to register pesticide products as
effective and safe. By controlling insects that act as vectors of
diseases of humans and domesticated animals, and invasive insect
species that endanger our environment, pesticides registered by EPA
help protect public health and the Nation's food supply.
EPA's activities in this area also include the development of
educational information and outreach to encourage the use of IPM, a
scientific approach to reducing pest populations by incorporating a
variety of techniques, and other reduced-risk methods of managing
pests. The funding that EPA allocates towards IPM in schools is
important to lower the risks of students to pest management tactics and
the pests that are harmful to their health or development. Schools can
be vulnerable to pest problems because of their size, design and
maintenance of green space. The integrated approach to pest problems
focuses on prevention, which is advantageous because it reduces the
probability of infestation, and is economical, sometimes saving school
districts thousands of dollars per year. However, little is known about
the current status of many schools and the degree to which they
implement IPM practices. Results from a 2014 survey published last year
in the Journal of School Health found that about 55 percent of schools
in the US conducted IPM practices.\1\ The largest schools were the most
likely to have robust programs, where they notified staff, students and
families before applications. However, despite the resources and guides
from the EPA about IPM in schools, there is a need for funding to
better ensure a wider adoption and reporting of these practices.
Therefore, ESA supports continuing the activities in the Pesticides
Licensing Program Area as well as the modest funding that EPA has
invested in school IPM.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Everett Jones, S., & Glick, S. (2018). School Factors
Associated with the Implementation of Integrated Pest Management-
Related Policies and Practices. Journal of School Health, 88(9), 669-
675.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Among EPA's State & Tribal Assistance Grants, categorical grants in
the area of Pesticides Program Implementation help to facilitate the
translation of national pesticide regulatory information into real-
world approaches that work for local communities. For example, these
grants fund efforts to reduce health and environmental risks associated
with pesticide use by promoting, facilitating, and evaluating IPM
techniques and other potentially safer alternatives to conventional
pest control methods. ESA requests that the subcommittee support a
modest increase for Pesticides Program Implementation grants in fiscal
year 2020.
ESA is in favor of increased funding for scientifically based
studies of pollinator populations and health. Pollinators play a vital
role in our Nation's agriculture industry; for example, honey bees
alone pollinate more than 90 crops in the U.S. and are essential for
the production of an estimated one-third of all the food we eat or
export, contributing over $17 billion in annual crop and seed
production in the U.S. alone. To ensure a healthy bee population, more
research is needed to fully understand the diverse factors that
endanger bee health. Pesticides represent just one potential risk to
bees, but both the risks and benefits must be balanced, and those risks
and benefits will vary among different crops and different crop-
producing regions of the US. EPA is well-positioned to help identify
methods for protecting bee health; the agency has previously awarded
agricultural grants to three universities to aid in the development of
IPM practices that lower pesticide risks to bees while protecting
valuable crops from pests. For this reason, ESA supports EPA's
participation in multi-agency efforts to investigate pollinator health
and implementing plans to prevent pollinator population decline.
The U.S. Forest Service sustains the health, diversity, and
productivity of 193 million acres of public lands in national forests
and grasslands across 44 States and territories. Serving as the largest
supporter of forestry research in the world, the agency employs
approximately 30,000 scientists, administrators, and land managers. In
addition to activities at the Federal level, the Forest Service
provides technical expertise and financial assistance to State and
private forestry agency partners.
The Forest Service's Forest and Rangeland Research budget supports
the development and delivery of scientific data and innovative
technological tools to improve the health, use, and management of the
Nation's forests and rangelands. Within Forest and Rangeland Research,
the Invasive Species Strategic Program Area provides scientifically
based approaches to reduce and prevent the introduction, spread, and
impact of non-native invasive species, including destructive insects,
plants, and diseases that can have serious economic and environmental
consequences for our Nation. For example, Forest Service scientists are
working to prevent the devastation of ash trees across North America by
the emerald ash borer, an invasive beetle that was accidentally
introduced from Asia. Emerald ash borer was first detected in 2002 and,
since then, has killed millions of ash trees. This biological invasion
threatens to eliminate all ash trees from North America and is the
costliest invasion from a forest insect to date. Emerald ash borer is
just one on the exponentially growing list of invasive insects and
diseases that harm our Nation's forests and our Nation's economy.
Forest health is also affected by invasive weeds, and those weeds are
often best controlled by beneficial insects used as biological control
agents, resulting in permanent and often spectacular control. ESA
respectfully requests that Forest and Rangeland Research be fully
funded at $297 million for fiscal year 2020.
Also under the purview of the Forest Service is the Forest Health
Management program, which conducts mapping and surveys on public and
private lands to monitor and assess risks from potentially harmful
insects, diseases, and invasive plants. The program also provides
assistance to State and local partners to help prevent and control
outbreaks that threaten forest health. According to a 2011 study,
invasive forest insects cost local governments alone an average of over
$2 billion per year; direct costs to homeowners from property loss,
tree removal, and treatment averages $1.5 billion per year.\2\
Initiatives within the Forest Health Management program can help
control these costly pests. The program's ``Slow the Spread''
activities, for example, have led to a 60 percent reduction in the rate
of the spread of the gypsy moth, another invasive species, resulting in
an estimated benefit-to-cost ratio of 3:1. Without the program, it is
estimated that 50 million additional acres would have been infested by
the moth.\3\ To support these important functions, ESA requests that
the subcommittee oppose any proposed cuts to Forest Health Management
program in fiscal year 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Aukema, J.E.; Leung, B.; Kovacs, K.; [et al.]. 2011. Economic
impacts of non-native forest insects in the continental United States.
PLoS ONE 6(9): e24587.
\3\ Forest Service Fiscal Year 2017 Budget Overview: http://
www.fs.fed.us/sites/default/files/FY-2017-FS%20-budget-overview.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spotted lanternfly is an invasive insect pest from Asia that was
first reported in the United States in 2014. It has become established
(meaning it has been identified in all stages of its life cycle) in
Pennsylvania, Virginia, New Jersey, and, most recently, Delaware. Its
ability to disperse over broad geographic areas presents a particularly
challenging problem to growers and homeowners, as does its unusually
broad host range, as it has been recorded feeding on more than 70
plants, including commercial crops such as hops, grapes, apples, and
cherries. In addition to damage caused directly by feeding, the spotted
lanternfly inflicts indirect damage via coating plants and other
surfaces in ``honeydew'' (urine), which encourages the growth of mold
and fungi. Preliminary studies indicate that it is a serious threat to
agriculture and forest ecosystem health in the U.S., poised to destroy
an estimated $18 billion worth of crops in Pennsylvania alone. Studies
like this demonstrate the need for continued and robust support for the
interagency coordination advanced by the National Invasive Species
Council (NISC). As such, ESA requests that NISC be funded at no less
than the fiscal year 2018 level.
ESA, headquartered in Annapolis, Maryland, is the largest
organization in the world serving the professional and scientific needs
of entomologists and individuals in related disciplines. Founded in
1889, ESA has more than 7,000 members affiliated with educational
institutions, health agencies, private industry, and government.
Members are researchers, teachers, extension service personnel,
administrators, marketing representatives, research technicians,
consultants, students, pest management professionals, and hobbyists.
Thank you for the opportunity to offer the Entomological Society of
America's support for Forest Service and EPA programs. For more
information about the Entomological Society of America, please see
http://www.entsoc.org/.
[This statement was submitted by Robert K.D. Peterson, PhD,
President.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Environmental Council of the States
Dear Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall and Members of the
subcommittee:
The Environmental Council of the States (ECOS) is the national
nonprofit, nonpartisan association of State and territorial
environmental agency leaders. We, its undersigned Officers, submit this
testimony on fiscal year 2020 appropriations for the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA).
State environmental agencies are the engines of environmental
progress in our Nation. Under America's system of cooperative
Federalism, agencies like ours normally take the lead in implementing
Federal environmental laws like the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act,
Safe Drinking Water Act, and Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
Today, States exercise over 90 percent of the delegable authorities
under these and other Federal laws. You can learn more about the
tangible progress the States have delivered on our ECOS Results data
visualization portal.
State environmental agencies depend on Federal funding to do their
work; ECOS has documented that the Federal Government provides, on
average, 27 percent of our agencies' budgets. The U.S. Congress
included provisions in the CWA, CAA, RCRA, and SDWA to provide
assistance to States to operate these Federal programs primarily
through State and Tribal assistance grants (STAG). Without adequate
Federal funding support, State agencies find it more challenging to
properly administer Federal environmental laws, improve public health,
and protect the environment. ECOS therefore asks that fiscal year 2020
appropriations provide sustained support to programs that advance the
well-being of our communities.
Please consider these principles as you deliberate about the fiscal
year 2020 appropriations. Please also consider the following specific
requests:
increase state and tribal assistance (stag) categorical grants
STAG categorical grants fund a huge range of work by State
environmental agencies. Much of that work is core implementation
activity such as issuing environmental permits, inspecting facilities
and enforcing the law, setting standards, and managing data. But
categorical grants, including those that support voluntary and
community-based programs, also fund creative solutions to local
problems.
For example, STAG funds issued under Section 319 of the Clean Water
Act recently helped Wyoming's Department of Environmental Quality
(WDEQ) partner with The Nature Conservancy (TNC) and various other
private and public stakeholders in Northwest Wyoming to improve the
Grass Creek/Cottonwood Creek watershed. Historic grazing practices in
this area had contributed to degraded rangeland and stream conditions,
until the partnership led by TNC installed best management practices
with area ranchers and other stakeholders. Data collected by TNC over
the course of the project suggest marked decreases in nitrogen and
phosphorous, as well as decreased streambank erosion and increases in
desirable riparian and rangeland vegetation. In 2018 this project was
added to U.S. EPA's Nonpoint Source Success Stories, and also in 2018,
Wyoming DEQ used its Section 319 funds to initiate nine similar
projects.
STAG categorical grants also help our agencies take on larger
projects that deliver positive economic benefits for communities. For
example, downtown Nashville, TN is home to ``The Gulch,'' a former rail
yard which decades of neglect turned into a blighted neighborhood. Due
to the use of Voluntary Brownfields Agreements the Tennessee Department
of Environment and Conservation (TDEC) was able to leverage and expand
private investment into the neighborhood and ensure a faster and more
thorough redevelopment process. The Gulch is now a vibrant, LEED-
certified mixed-use neighborhood and a popular local destination for
shopping, dining, and entertainment, yielding significant new tax
revenue.
STAG support is critical to the continued creativity and vitality
of State-led environmental regulation. States therefore thank Congress
for preserving STAG categorical grants over the past three fiscal
years, and ask that Congress further support the program in the fiscal
year 2020 budget.
continue funding environmental infrastructure via state revolving funds
STAG funds also support State-level investments in the
infrastructure that provides our citizens safe drinking water and a
clean aquatic environment. Much of that infrastructure is aging or
inadequate and the States therefore depend on the funding that Congress
provides through the STAG State Revolving Fund (SRF) program. Congress
recently reemphasized its support for State water infrastructure with a
second consecutive year of supplemental funding through Title IV of the
fiscal year 2019 Consolidated Appropriations Act, but there is still
more to be done. The American Society of Civil Engineers estimates that
our Nation faces more than $271 billion in wastewater infrastructure
needs. The situation is even more staggering on the drinking water
side, where the U.S. EPA's most recent assessment cites a $472.6
billion need for infrastructure investments.
These figures show that the already extensive infrastructure needs
continue to grow along with our populations and the advancing age of
our existing facilities. ECOS has documented these needs in reports
such as our State Water and Wastewater Project Inventory, which
describes the top 20 ``shovel-ready'' water and wastewater projects in
each State. States have also shown the impact of these projects on
water quality, and have demonstrated creative infrastructure solutions.
In late 2018, West Virginia DEQ became the first State in its region to
obligate its fiscal year 2018 Clean Water SRF money: $50 million that
will go to restore and upgrade wastewater and stormwater infrastructure
and extend sewer service to two previously unserved areas. On the
drinking water side, Alaska and Connecticut recently set up micro-loan
programs with specially streamlined requirements to expand SRF loan
access to the smallest of public water systems. In Alaska these small
systems are commonly found in remote native Alaskan villages, and since
small systems have not typically had SRF access these new micro-loans
will have an even greater proportionate positive effect on public
health. Congress should continue funding projects like these so that
States can continue to serve as important sources of revolving funding
to modernize local communities.
preserve the stag multipurpose grant program
Under cooperative Federalism, States gain the authority to allocate
Federal resources in ways that reflect local needs and priorities.
State agencies cannot deliver on this promise unless Congress ensures
flexibility in Federal funding. Funding flexibility also streamlines
joint decisionmaking by EPA and States, and ultimately allows States to
more quickly convert Federal dollars into positive environmental and
public health results.
States used 2016 Multipurpose Grant money to fund activities
ranging from implementing the National Ambient Air Quality Standards to
improving electronic data management systems, and to control everything
from water pollution to pesticide overuse. ECOS understands that the
fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019 funds will be obligated to States
in tandem, meaning that a large investment in priority State programs
is on the horizon. States are appreciative that Congress established
this program in 2016, and we urge you to appropriate a third
consecutive year of Multipurpose Grant funds in fiscal year 2020.
Making this grant program a dependable funding stream would allow
States to deploy that money in ways that maximize the long-term benefit
to their citizens.
avoid rescission and impoundment of stag funds
States work closely with EPA through ECOS' State Grants Subgroup to
speed the distribution of Federal funds and allow on-the-ground work to
begin sooner. Our experiences lead us to urge Congress not to include
rescissions of unobligated STAG funds in future enacted budgets, as
this often results in uncertainty and delays in obligating pass-through
funding. For the same reason, States ask Congress to discourage
impoundment of enacted appropriations.
fully fund increased state responsibilities
During the past several years, States and U.S. EPA have done
considerable evaluation and alteration to the State-Federal division of
responsibility for environmental regulatory programs. ECOS has
facilitated many of the high-level discussions about this topic through
our work on Cooperative Federalism, and many of these conversations
have been oriented toward shifted responsibility from U.S. EPA toward
the States. States believe that Federal funds are essential to our
ability to maintain the critical resources for many of these additional
responsibilities.
States are also largely carrying out the responsibilities over air
quality monitoring, State research, and other program implementation
activities. These activities, which are now performed by the States,
are important to be carried out consistently to assure adequate public
protection remains. These efforts could be negatively impacted by the
proposed shift of STAG categorical grant funds for particulate air
quality programs from Clean Air Act (CAA) Sec. 103 grants, which do not
require a State funding match, to CAA Sec. 105 grants which require a
40 percent State match or Maintenance of Effort (MOE). This change
would likely amount to reduced levels of effort or inconsistency among
States in monitoring networks if these Federal funds are not
maintained.
States' regulatory workloads increase gradually year-by-year, and
most STAG categorical grant programs have been flat-funded for several
years in a row. This, too, has the effect of an increase in State
program responsibilities without a proportional increase in Federal
support. As mentioned in the introduction, States rely heavily on
Federal funding and even peripheral decreases in this funding can
adversely impact State programs. We ask, therefore, that Congress
account for increasing State implementation costs in Federal funding
levels and push back against the proposed CAA Sec. 103-Sec. 105 funding
shift, and similar policy changes at States' expense.
conclusion
ECOS thanks you for considering the views of State environmental
agencies as you prepare the fiscal year 2020 budget. We would welcome
any further discussion with you about these issues and how Federal
funding can support State-level work to protect human health and the
environment. Please email our executive director at [email protected], or
send mail to 1250 H Street NW, Suite 850, Washington D.C. 20005.
Becky Keogh, Director, Arkansas Department of Environmental Quality
ECOS President
Jim Macy, Director, Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality
ECOS Vice President
Patrick McDonnell, Secretary, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection
ECOS Secretary-Treasurer
Todd Parfitt, Director, Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality
ECOS Past President
______
Prepared Statement of the Federation of State Humanities Councils
Madam Chairwoman and members of the subcommittee, I thank you for
this opportunity to submit testimony on behalf of the State humanities
councils, the State affiliates of the National Endowment for the
Humanities, requesting $167.5 million for the National Endowment for
the Humanities and $53 million for the Federal/State Partnership for
fiscal year 2020.
As partners of the NEH, the State humanities councils receive their
core funding through the Federal/State Partnership line of the NEH
budget, which they use to leverage additional support from foundations,
corporations, private individuals, and State governments. In the past
year, councils leveraged, on average, $4.00 in local contributions for
every dollar of Federal funding awarded through their grants, and they
have further extended their resources in recent years by forming
partnerships with nearly 9,000 organizations throughout their States.
But demand continues to increase. In the past few years, councils
continue to be asked to expand their programs to reach new populations
and meet growing needs in their States.
The State councils are the local face of the humanities, developing
and delivering the programs that address the issues of greatest concern
to their communities, helping them explore their history and culture,
and sharing the stories of our many diverse populations. The councils
are also a major source of grants to local educational, cultural, and
historical organizations for public programming in places where a small
grant of several hundred to a few thousand dollars can make an enormous
difference in the life of a community.
It is to meet the growing need for programs with such impact on our
communities and Nation that we are requesting funding at the levels of
$165.7 million for the NEH and $53 million for the councils. The
councils are stretched thin in their ability to meet local needs and
support and collaborate with local businesses, cultural organizations,
schools, libraries, museums, and many other groups seeking to better
the lives of those in their communities. Councils must make difficult
decisions in how to allocate scarce resources among the many legitimate
demands presented from a wide range of deserving populations.
Fortunately, councils are also expert at using the Federal funds to
attract other funding, and the increase in core Federal funding will
also enhance their ability to seek those additional funds.
It is not just current demands that drive this request. The State
councils see a plethora of new program possibilities, including a
special opportunity to explore our country's history and system of
government. In 2026, the Nation will commemorate the 250th anniversary
of the Declaration of Independence, which offers an opportunity to
reexamine the many diverse voices and forces that shaped our Nation and
to engage in an expanded civics education program for Americans of all
ages. Surveys reveal a shocking ignorance of history and a lack of
awareness among both school age children and adults of the structure
and processes of government and the ideals and philosophies that
underlie them. The next 5 years can be a time when we rededicate
ourselves to improving our collective understanding and reinvigorating
our ability to work through differences.
The State humanities councils are uniquely positioned to pursue
activities that offer education about our founding principles while
speaking to the interests and concerns of individual communities.
Further, the councils have a track record of collaborating with diverse
partners to broaden impact and extend resources well beyond the initial
investment. The councils also have a unique ability to reach all
corners of their States. This has been effectively demonstrated in the
25-year council collaboration with the Smithsonian Institution
Traveling Exhibition Service (SITES) in the Museum on Main Street
program and in the recent national initiative commemorating the 100th
anniversary of the Pulitzer Prizes. We must begin now to build the
community relationships and develop the programs that will make
commemoration of the 2026 anniversary a meaningful national event.
Throughout their history, State humanities councils have shown
themselves to be innovative, collaborative, efficient, and resourceful
organizations, strongly connected to the communities in their States
and highly responsive to their needs. The following examples highlight
a few areas where councils have a particularly strong record of
service.
Serving Veterans. The importance of the council programs involving
returning veterans is reflected in a comment from Pulitzer Prize-
winning author Viet Thanh Nguyen, who noted in an interview at a
council-sponsored event, ``All wars are fought twice, the first time on
the battlefield, the second time in memory.'' A number of councils
conduct programs to educate the public about the consequences of war,
while also helping veterans reintegrate into their communities in the
aftermath of their service.
In 2014 the Maine Humanities Council developed a Veterans Book
Group, as one of several projects created under the NEH Standing
Together initiative. The council piloted the program in 12 States
including California, Maryland, Oregon, and Vermont. The reading
groups, all co-facilitated by a veteran, provide a space to connect
with other veterans by exploring ideas found in selected poetry and
works of fiction and non-fiction, both ancient and modern.
Since 2015, Maryland Humanities has supported the Veterans' Oral
History Project, through which students at a high school in Anne
Arundel County have conducted oral history interviews with Vietnam War
veterans and Vietnamese immigrants who experienced the war. The
students receive training in oral history techniques, and transcripts
and videos of the interviews are accessible online at the Maryland
State Archives website. The Missouri Humanities Council works in
partnership with libraries and veteran support organizations throughout
the State to conduct writing workshops for veterans, which empower
veterans to share their stories, thoughts, and experiences through the
written word. The workshops are free of charge and conducted by
professional writers.
Exploring Native American History and Culture. In May 2017, members
of the House Interior Appropriations Subcommittee heard testimony from
Valorie Walters, executive officer for the Division of the Chickasaw
Cultural Center of the Chickasaw Nation, and board member of Oklahoma
Humanities. Her testimony not only reflected on the Native American
story that is ``so fundamental to understanding the history of the
Nation as a whole,'' but also demonstrated the scope of programs,
including a symposium, an exhibit, a language festival, a documentary
film, and several other educational programs in Oklahoma. The programs
she described were just one council's examples of comparable programs
that continue to receive support throughout the country. The aims of
these programs are to work with American Indian populations to increase
public awareness and appreciation of their enduring role in our
history, to forge stronger bonds between native and non-native
populations, and to support language preservation initiatives. The
Alaska Humanities Forum's program, ``Take Wing Alaska,'' for example,
focuses on Native Alaskan high school students, placing them in three
immersion experiences to guide them to focus not only on academic
skills but also inherent cultural strengths they can refer to and draw
on in the midst of a challenging life shift.
Humanities Montana, through its Tribal Partnership Initiative,
supports humanities projects on the Blackfeet, Flathead, Rocky Boy,
Fort Belknap, Fort Peck, Northern Cheyenne and Crow Reservations, as
well as the Little Shell Nation, with up to $5,000 in funding annually.
The projects are a result of informal relationships rather than
conventional grant-driven processes. The council forms up to three
partnerships each year, anchored in the expressed needs and aspirations
of the Tribal nations.
Engaging Rural America. From the beginning, State humanities
councils have been dedicated to ensuring that rural areas have access
to high-quality public humanities programs. One means of accomplishing
this has been through the highly successful Museum on Main Street
program, a 25-year partnership between the councils and the Smithsonian
Institution Traveling Exhibition Service (SITES), specifically designed
to serve small rural communities. Smithsonian exhibits are refabricated
as lightweight, portable traveling exhibits, suitable for display in
small settings such as local libraries, museums, and community centers.
Participating councils select six communities of less than 20,000 in
their States to host the exhibit. Councils and scholars work with a
local planning group in each community to develop a wide variety of
humanities programs around the theme of the exhibit.
These exhibits cover a wide range of issues important to the
communities, including, in recent years, work in America, hometown
sports, foodways, and migration stories, among others. Maryland
Humanities and the Mississippi Humanities council are currently touring
``Water/Ways,'' which explores the economic, spiritual, cultural, and
historic significance of water in our society. ``Hometown Teams,''
currently being toured by the Florida Humanities Council, looks at the
role that sports play in American society and especially in small towns
across the country. ``Crossroads: Change in Rural America,'' which
offers small towns a chance to examine their own paths and to highlight
the changes that affected their fortunes over the past century, will be
on tour in Florida, Kentucky, and Tennessee in 2019 and 2020.
Councils also engage rural populations through a variety of other
programs. Humanities Montana's ``Hometown Humanities'' program, for
example, brings a year's worth of humanities-based programming to a
rural Montana community. Community members choose upwards of 30
cultural programs from Humanities Montana's catalog of offerings--
public speakers, speakers in the schools, community discussions and
more. The 2019 Hometown Humanities community, Red Lodge, Montana,
population 2,300, will enjoy a series of programs including a writing
workshop, several speakers bureau programs, storytelling, and community
discussions.
Promoting Literacy and Reading. The humanities are all about
reading, exploring ideas, and strengthening our connections to one
another, and this is nowhere more important than within our families.
Family literacy and reading programs have been signature offerings by
councils for decades, arising from the belief that parents and children
not only gain knowledge and improve reading skills but also build
stronger bonds with each other when given opportunities to discuss
ideas together. The Prime Time program, developed more than two decades
ago by the Louisiana Endowment for the Humanities and offered by a
number of humanities councils, engages low-income families in
discussion of high-quality children's literature to improve the reading
skills of parents and increase school readiness for at-risk children.
During a 6-week period, children and parents in this program gather in
schools and libraries to hear stories from a skilled storyteller and
then discuss the book's ethical and cultural themes with the help of a
scholar. The program is also available in a bilingual format.
Kentucky Humanities, which has conducted the program for several
years, just received a grant from the National Endowment for the
Humanities to expand the program directly into public schools around
Kentucky. The Mississippi Humanities Council also offers Prime Time, in
addition to Luciernagas, a bilingual family reading program, which
serves the increasing number of Spanish speakers in the State.
Supporting the Cultural Infrastructure. One of the hallmarks of the
State humanities councils is their connection to and support for the
communities in their States. They work hard to strengthen the resources
that make these communities vibrant places to live. This includes
supporting activities, such as book festivals and local commemorations,
which bring people and resources into a community. Cultural tourism has
benefitted from the creation of State encyclopedias, audio tours, and
other materials designed to draw visitors to a specific area.
It also includes supporting local institutions that are the
lifeblood of a community, such as libraries and museums. California
Humanities demonstrates this with their Library Innovation Lab, which
builds capacity within California libraries to develop creative and
innovative programs, which respond to local needs. In particular, the
program continues the legacy of welcoming newcomers, especially
immigrants and immigrant populations, fostering more inclusive
communities throughout the State. The Rhode Island Council for the
Humanities, in partnership with the Rhode Island Foundation and the
Rhode Island Council on the Arts, supports the Rhode Island Expansion
Arts Program, which provides funding and organizational assistance to
community-based culturally diverse arts and cultural organizations. The
program provides skills and tools that the organizations, especially
newly emerging groups, require to grow as equal partners in the Rhode
Island arts and cultural community.
The programs discussed in this brief space are merely illustrative.
They represent hundreds of programs in communities large and small in
every corner of this Nation where residents gather to learn about the
history of their communities and their Nation; to hear previously
untold stories; to read and discuss books that expand their empathy and
understanding; to examine difficult ethical issues; and to inform
themselves in ways that make them more responsible citizens. The State
councils are well-positioned to effectively put to use the $53 million
we are requesting through the Federal/State Partnership.
______
Prepared Statement of the Fond Du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
On behalf of the Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa, we
submit this testimony to urge Congress to increase, or, at the very
least preserve, the Federal funding levels for Indians programs that
are provided through the Interior Department, Indian Health Service and
Environmental Protection Agency.
It is essential to keep in mind that the problems that face
communities nationwide are far more severe for Indian communities, with
Tribes having far fewer resources to address those problems. An example
is the opioid epidemic. Native Americans in Minnesota are far more
likely to die from an overdose than white Minnesotans. For example,
``[f]rom 2010 to 2016, the American Indian mortality rate more than
doubled from 29.0 per 100,000 to 64.6 per 100,000 (123 percent
increase), and was almost six times as high as the white mortality
rate.'' \1\ The opioid epidemic creates other adverse impacts for
Indian communities. It means that our children are ``7.4 times more
likely to be born with neonatal abstinence syndrome'' which requires
specialized treatment and care.\2\ It increases demands on our social
service programs for addiction treatment and counseling, and assistance
to growing numbers of at-risk families, with more children in foster
care or the subject of CHIPS (Child in Need of Protection or Services)
proceedings, an increase of 65 percent since 2015. It increases demands
on our school to address the unique needs of children living in at-risk
homes. And it increases the demands on our law enforcement who respond
to ever-growing numbers of incidents that are drug related.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.health.state.mn.us/communities/opioids/documents/
raceratedisparity.pdf.
\2\ ``Minnesota State Targeted Response to the Opioid Crisis'' at 6
(2017), found at https://mn.gov.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With seed money from Federal funds, we have implemented innovative
programs and measures to provide health, education, social services,
public safety and other governmental services to our 4,200 members and
the more than 7,300 Indian people who live on and near our Reservation.
Fond du Lac built the first-of-its-kind supportive housing programs in
Indian country, and the first such supportive housing for Veterans. We
have undertaken to implement best practices in healthcare. In so doing,
we have found that an important element to the success of these
programs is building on our traditional cultural practices. We are
active in natural resource management and environmental protection so
our water is safe to drink, fish are safe to eat, wild rice re-
generates, game is plentiful, and natural resources remain available
for cultural and religious practices that are central to our identity.
We are proud of what we have accomplished, but more remains to be
done. The investment of Federal funds is key to that effort. It allows
us to use Band resources and attract private partners so we can provide
jobs, grow the local economy, educate our children, prevent crime, and
care for our elders and infirm. We urge Congress to continue to fund
these programs.
indian health service
We appreciate Congress's decision to increase funding for IHS in
fiscal year 2019, which is essential to address the substantial unmet
need for healthcare among Indian people. Indians at Fond du Lac, like
Indians throughout the Nation, continue to face severe disparities
across a broad range of health issues. In addition to the
extraordinarily high mortality rates due to the opioid epidemic,
Indians in Minnesota are far more likely to die prematurely than all
others in the State, and suffer from the highest mortality rates for
causes of death due to cancer, heart disease, diabetes, suicide, and
unintentional injury.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See Minnesota Department of Health, Center for Health Equity,
Populations of Color: Update Birth and Death Statistics (December
2015). https://seedsofnativehealth.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/
Populations-of-Color-Health-Update-Birth-and-Death-Statistics.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We serve over 7,300 Indian people at our clinics, but the current
funding level meets only 33 percent of our healthcare funding needs. To
make progress in reducing the disparities in Indian health, we urge
Congress to continue to increase funding for IHS. We urge an increase
for fiscal year 2020 in order to fully fund IHS programs, with the top
priorities given to Hospitals & Health Clinics; Purchased/Referred
Care; Mental Health; Alcohol & Substance Abuse; and Dental Health.
Expanded resources for treatment and community education capacity are
especially needed to combat the epidemic of drug abuse.
We also ask that Congress continue to increase funding for IHS
Facilities, including Sanitation Facilities Construction. We rely on
wells for drinking water, but the quality of the source water on our
Reservation is very poor. It generally cannot be used unless treated,
and where the source water is really poor quality, treatment may leave
an unacceptable level of by-products that also fail to meet water
quality standards. We face this problem now in one of our communities,
affecting 54 homes and a community center. As a short-term solution, we
are providing point-of-use filters. But to eliminate the problem, we
need to drill several new wells to access better quality source water,
but which will still need to be treated. We will also need to build a
new water treatment facility, along with a water tower and new
pipelines to establish redundancy in the system to protect users and to
aid in fire protection. The cost is expected to be $2.5 million, but
the very limited funds for capital work provided to IHS is not
sufficient to meet the need. In our region, IHS has $1.7 million to
serve 37 Tribes. Federal appropriations for other potential funding
sources for drinking water infrastructure, like EPA and USDA Rural
Development, should also be increased to aid us and other Tribes to
build the infrastructure needed for safe drinking water.
bureau of indian education
With funding from the BIE and the Department of Education, we
operate the Fond du Lac Ojibwe School serving an average of 230
children from pre-K through 12th grade. More than 90 percent of our
students come from very low-income households, as 96 percent receive
free or reduced-price lunch. We are slowly making progress in improving
the outcomes for our students. For example, high school graduation
rates for American Indians in Minnesota have improved from 37.9 percent
in 2003 to 52.6 percent in 2016, but are still well-below the 2016
State-wide rate of 82.2 percent. We are handicapped by limited
resources. BIE funding has never kept pace with need, which prevents us
from providing the educational services needed for our students. We
appreciate Congress's decision to increase overall BIE funding for
fiscal year 2019 and to continue to fund the Johnson O'Malley (JOM)
grant program. Because education is so critical to success later in
life, we urge Congress to continue to increase Federal funding for
Indian education. We especially ask that increases be made to each of
the following program:
--ISEP, which is the primary source of school funding provided
through Interior. It covers salaries for teachers, teacher
aides, and administrative personnel and is essential to our
ability to recruit and retain qualified teachers.
--Tribal Grant Support Costs, which helps pay for accounting,
insurance, background checks, legal and record-keeping.
--Student Transportation, which allow us to maintain, repair, and
replace buses.
--Early Childhood Development funds (FACE), which is critical to
providing preschoolers with skills to be school-ready.
--JOM, which assists Indian children in public schools.
--School Facility Operations and Maintenance, which keeps the
building safe, pays for preventative maintenance, and covers
insurance and utility costs.
bia: public safety and justice
We appreciate Congress's decision to increase funding for BIA's
Public Safety and Justice, including increased funding for criminal
investigations and police services and to help people affected by
opioid addiction. The largest law enforcement problems we face are due
to opioids and other drugs including methamphetamines and prescription
drugs. The large drug problem has also increased thefts, burglaries,
and assaults. In addition, we find (and the Federal Government has also
recognized),\4\ that a disproportionately large number of Native
American women are the victims of sex trafficking. This is a very
serious problem for our community and we are working now to establish a
Tribal Task Force to help combat it. Our law enforcement also responds
to domestic disputes, disturbances, disorderly conduct, property
damage, trespass, suspicious activity, unwanted persons, medical
emergencies, fire, neglected children, missing persons, suicide
threats, and traffic offenses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ U.S. GAO, Human Trafficking: Investigations in Indian Country
or Involving Native Americans and Actions Needed to Better Report on
Victims Served (Sept 2017). https://www.indian.senate.gov/sites/
default/files/upload/Gretta%20Goodwin%20Testimony.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We address law enforcement by a combination of Tribal and available
Federal funds and cooperative agreements with local law enforcement
agencies. We currently have 20 officers, which, in addition to the
Chief Law Enforcement Officer, includes a Lieutenant, one investigator
and 17 officers assigned to patrol or similar duties. To meet need, we
should have 25 full time officers. Five of those officers would be
assigned to investigations, with two investigators dedicated to
narcotics enforcement. We currently have 3 administrative staff, but
should have one more person to gather Intel and manage an intelligence
page linked to other Tribal agencies.
We need funding for training. With an increase in the drug epidemic
and related crimes, our officers need, but are not receiving, vital
training for undercover work, narcotics detection, investigative
procedures, interview and interrogation, use of force, de-escalation,
firearms, and community policing. Budget restraints also restrict us
from buying patrol vehicles and proper equipment to combat the drug
problems on our Reservation. Uniform costs increase due to
contamination from drugs and blood-borne pathogens from drug users.
That includes duty gear and equipment, and patrol vehicles, which need
to be decontaminated more frequently. There is also need for personal
protective gear and other basic equipment (e.g., binoculars, video
cameras and digital recorders). We urge Congress to increase Federal
funding for Tribal law enforcement.
bia: trust-natural resources management
We appreciate Congress's decision to increase funding for BIA
Trust-Natural Resources by $2.6 million. We urge Congress to further
increase funding for this program in fiscal year 2020, as past funding
levels have never met need. Natural resource management is vital in
Indian Country where the basic subsistence needs of many Indian
People--especially those living in poverty--depend on natural
resources. This is certainly true at Fond du Lac. By Treaties in 1837,
1842 and 1854, the United States acquired our aboriginal territory, but
to ensure that we could sustain ourselves, expressly promised that we
retained rights to hunt, fish and gather natural resources within and
outside our Reservation. Our members depend on and exercise these
treaty-protected rights to put food on the table and for ceremonial
practices that serve as the foundation for our culture. The stewardship
of those natural resources-through scientific study, resource
management, and enforcement of Band laws that regulate Tribal members
who hunt, fish and gather those resources-are an important source of
employment for many of our members. Full funding for Trust-Natural
Resources Management, including increased funding for Rights,
Protection and Implementation, is essential in allowing us to protect,
enhance, and restore natural resources.
Forest resources are an important asset to us, and the Interior
Department has recognized the importance of protecting forests from
wildfire. Fire preparedness funding is insufficient. Fire preparedness
provides jobs in Indian forestry and protects Indian and non-Indian
lands.
national park service: historic preservation funds--tribal grants
We urge Congress to increase funding, as the work of Tribal
Historic Preservation Officers has grown. We have seen this firsthand.
Failures on the part of Federal and State officials to properly review
existing records of known sites of historic and cultural importance to
the Band resulted in substantial inadvertent discoveries of human
remains in a known Indian cemetery. This has, in turn, placed
substantial demands on our THPO to ensure proper delineation of the
site to protect the undisturbed portions, and ensure proper reburial of
the remains.
environmental protection agency (epa)
We appreciate that Congress has continued to provide Federal funds
for EPA, but we ask that funding for EPA in fiscal year 2020 be
increased. We rely on EPA grants to clean up brownfields and administer
clean water and clean air programs. These enable us to protect the
health of our community, so that we have safe water to drink and can
continue to rely on fish, wild rice, and game to put food on the table.
--State and Tribal Assistances Grants (STAG).--We thank Congress
providing STAG funding in fiscal year 2019 and strongly urge
that support for this program continue.
--Water Quality.--We have a federally-approved water quality
standards program that has seen annual funding declines while
the need and Band's responsibilities have increased. Given the
current threats to water resources in our region, we urge that
Tribal section 106 funding be doubled so that we can do the
work needed to protect the water we drink, which is critical to
the fish and game that are central to our and the State's
economy.
--Air.--We also have a long-standing air monitoring program that has
faced a steady decline in Federal funding. We request that air
quality program funding for Tribes be increased.
--Wetlands.--One-half of our reservation is made up of wetlands.
Proper management and restoration of this valuable resource is
impossible without adequate and consistent Federal funding. We
request sustained wetland monitoring and protection program
funding.
--Great Lakes Restoration Initiative.--The Band fully supports this
initiative, and asks that Congress increase funding by $200
million to restore the original funding level suggested for
this initiative to $500 million. This initiative has broad-
reaching benefits to resources of importance for all
stakeholders (State, Tribal and private) in the Great Lakes
region.
Miigwech. Thank you.
[This statement was submitted by Kevin R. Dupuis, Sr., Chairman.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Forest Climate Working Group (FCWG)
Endorsing Organizations:
American Forest Foundation  American Forests
Binational Softwood Lumber Council  Cleaves Consulting LLC
The Conservation Fund  Enviva  The Forestland Group  Forest Stewards
Guild
Hancock Forest Management  Hardwood Federation  L&C Carbon
National Alliance of Forest Owners  The Nature Conservancy
Society of American Foresters  Sustainable Forestry Initiative
Western Pennsylvania Conservancy  Weyerhaeuser
Woodworks--Wood Products Council
Rationale: Forests and forest products currently sequester and
store 14 percent of annual carbon emissions. It is important to
maintain this important resource by addressing rising threats to forest
health and slowing forest conversion to non-forest uses. We can take
steps to protect and increase this carbon benefit, and accelerate the
ability of U.S. forests to provide a sustained level of climate
mitigation service to the Nation. Many of these same investments are
leveraged to strengthen the resiliency of the Nation's forests and thus
protect additional public services beyond carbon such as watersheds,
wildlife habitat, recreational resources and economic prosperity for
rural and urban communities alike.
fiscal year 2020 budget items
The FCWG recommended funding levels below focus on program needs to
produce major positive steps in conserving and enhancing climate
resilience and carbon sequestration and storage on public and private
lands.
Invest in Sound Science and Data
--USFS Forest Inventory and Analysis Program: FIA is the foundational
measure for our forests nationwide and is essential to
monitoring our progress. The fiscal year 2019 enacted budget
included a level funding for this program which we believe
should at least be maintained, but an investment of $83 million
in fiscal year 2020 is warranted. We remain concerned about the
low level of funding for the program relative to established
needs for the information it provides and the negative impact
of constrained budgets on data gathering, geographic scope, and
sampling return interval and national consistency that is vital
for evaluating forest carbon and resilience problems and
potentials. This additional Federal investment should be
accompanied with language calling for improvements in this
program efficiencies to justify additional investment in 2020
and in future fiscal years to enable further program impact and
ensure that FIA fully delivers on the Congressional mandate set
in previous Farm Bills and the needs for forest owners,
managers, and communities. Additional support for the FIA
program is needed to ensure that we have improved data
regarding carbon sequestration rates and storage and the impact
of disturbance in forests to support growing data and analysis
needs for climate mitigation, forest protection, and bioenergy.
--USDA Climate Hubs and Related Investments in Applied Climate
Science: The USDA Climate Hubs have demonstrated the capacity
to provide useful science-based guidance for private landowners
and other land managers. The Hubs assure that investments in
science are returned to the taxpayer in the form of usable
knowledge and tools that millions of forest landowners and
managers can apply to climate adaptation and mitigation
problems. Continued investment in these Hubs, integrated into
various program funding, to assist both public and private land
managers is critical to cross-boundary success. Specifically,
the USFS Forest and Rangeland Research at $315 million is
needed to ensure this and other climate research can be applied
to managing all forests.
Promote the Use of Forest Products--Utilization in Building
Construction
USFS Forest Products Laboratory
--Woodworks: We recommend at least $2 million investment through the
USFS, or other funding source, into the initiative Woodworks,
which promotes wood use in building construction through
technology transfer, especially in non-residential buildings.
--Life Cycle Assessment Research on Wood Products: We recommend a $1
million investment in LCA Research through USFS FPL to ensure
the most updated information about the environmental impact of
wood products, with a particular focus on climate related
information and the role of wood in sustainable forest
management systems.
Enhance Resources for Private Forest Owners--Reforestation,
Afforestation, and Restoration
--USFS Forest Stewardship Program: The Forest Stewardship Program
helps landowners plan sustainable management, including carbon
friendly and climate-smart practices, and to implement
reforestation. We recommend an appropriation of at least $29
million to advance carbon mitigation through this program,
including funds to support tree-planting assistance on private
lands.
--USFS Landscape Scale Restoration: We recommend $20 million this
program, to stimulate cross boundary, landscape scale work that
will measurably improve climate mitigation and resilience in
our forests. We feel that the landscape restoration approach
taken by the U.S. Forest Service effectively leverages public
investments and creates scale and efficiency that allows
climate and carbon public and private benefits to be both cost-
effective and sustainable. Climate-induced stressors like
wildfires and insects and diseases, don't stay within ownership
boundaries and thus, a landscape approach is needed.
Utilize Existing Grant Programs to Retain Forests--Diverse Tools for
Different Partners and Contexts
--USFS Forest Legacy Program: We recommend $100 million for the
Forest Legacy Program the most flexible and widely applicable
Federal program for permanent conservation of forestland from
development. We recommend at least maintaining or strengthening
funding for this program to capture the many opportunities for
State, local, and private forest conservation in carbon-rich
forest systems, including extensive working forest conservation
easements.
--USFS Community Forest and Open Space Program: The Community Forest
Program is a 50/50 matching grant program that is helping local
governments, Tribes, and non-profits to acquire and manage
forestland threatened with conversion. We recommend $5 million
for this program, to fully tap the potential of these local and
Tribal entities to contribute carbon mitigation through forests
______
Prepared Statement of the Friends of Camas National Wildlife Refuge
background
Camas National Wildlife Refuge was established in 1937 to protect
nearly 11,000 acres of the Snake River Plains in eastern Idaho for the
benefit of migratory waterbirds. The refuge contained nearly 5,000
acres of high desert wetlands fed by groundwater discharge from local
springs and the surface waters of Camas Creek, a shallow stream that
frequently topped its banks. However, ensuing agricultural development
of the watershed prompted landscape modifications to control the stream
water for crop irrigation and to deter unwanted flooding. Creek
excavation began around refuge headquarters to prevent flooding of the
structures, and at the same time became common practice throughout the
watershed. In this way, Camas Creek was systematically transformed from
a flood prone three foot deep stream into a highly-incised twelve foot
deep channel.
In spite of this, the high water table continued to sustain
expansive wetlands that annually produced thousands of waterfowl,
supplied valuable stopover resources for tens of thousands of migratory
waterbirds, and provided year-round habitat for obligate wetland
species for the first half century of the refuges' existence. But
beginning in the 1980s, a regional shift in agricultural practices from
flood to sprinkler irrigation caused the groundwater at Camas to recede
from the surface, effectively changing the area hydrologically from a
discharge to a recharge system. Today, the water table exists 10 to 30
feet below the ground. Combined with the artificially low retention of
Camas Creek surface water, the retreat of groundwater has meant the
inundation of fewer wetland acres for a shorter period of time. During
each of the drought years in 2014 and 2015, the refuge peaked at a mere
200 acres of inundated wetland habitat. This has profoundly decreased
Camas NWR's contribution to wildlife conservation. Average waterfowl
production and stopover usage have each fallen by an order of
magnitude. The once established breeding populations of resident
species such as leopard frogs, painted turtles, and muskrat no longer
persist.
In the absence of springs, Camas NWR wetlands now rely upon two
sources for life-sustaining water: (1) Camas Creek surface water, and
(2) groundwater contributions from agricultural wells co-opted to
deliver water from the retreating aquifer. Yet, both sources remain
configured in a way that inefficiently translates cubic feet of water
into wetland acres, remnants of a period when water was plentiful on
the refuge and concerns about water excess outweighed water scarcity.
Therefore, in this emerging period of water shortage, Camas NWR needs
to adapt in a way that most efficiently utilizes the available sources
of water to protect and sustain the wetland resources that prompted
refuge establishment.
objectives
The three following efforts are essential to reshaping Camas NWR to
meet these hydrological challenges:
1.
Return a portion of Camas Creek from its current highly incised
state to a more natural morphology to convey more surface water to
refuge wetlands via overbank flooding.
2.
Shift the refuge point of creek diversion to a location
downstream adjacent to lower seepage wetlands to avoid high seepage
losses in the diversion water delivery ditch.
3.
Relocate groundwater wells to locations adjacent to low seepage
wetlands to significantly increase the wetland acreage return on cubic
feet of water pumped from the aquifer.
camas creek restoration
Problem: Eight stream miles of Camas Creek exist within Camas NWR
boundaries and the refuge has senior water rights to the surface runoff
it conveys. However, extensive modifications to the stream channel
early in the refuges' history artificially confine these surface flows,
minimizing retention of these waters on the refuge and impairing water
clarity. Today, the excavated channel is about four times its natural
depth over much of its length, placing the channel bottom well below
that of the adjacent wetlands. In this way, much of the surface water
that enters the refuge also exits the refuge, unable to flow uphill
into many of the adjacent wetlands. The wetlands that do receive creek
water are not necessarily much more successful at producing waterbird
resources. With the channelization of the stream bed came highly
incised banks whose continuous erosion releases abundant sediment into
the creek water. These suspended sediments impair water clarity, which
in turn inhibits the germination and growth of the submerged aquatic
vegetation upon which wetland animals, including migratory waterbirds,
rely for nutrition. In an average year, nearly two-thirds of Camas'
largest wetland is too light-limited to produce submerged aquatic
vegetation.
Solution: In order to restore some measure of wetland expanse and
integrity to Camas NWR, staff seeks to restore a portion of Camas Creek
from its current highly incised state to a more natural morphology.
This will promote overbank flooding by raising the creek channel to the
level of the adjacent wetlands and increase water transparency by
reducing bank erosion. We anticipate that the increase in overbank
flooding and decrease in erosion from a restored Camas Creek will
contribute to the recovery of historical wetland acreage, and to the
increased production of high quality aquatic resources for migratory
waterbirds.
point of diversion
Problem: The refuge maintains a point of diversion from Camas Creek
on the northeast side of the refuge. From this structure, surface water
is diverted down a 2 mile long delivery ditch to a ring of wetland
impoundments. However, a significant proportion of this water never
arrives at the wetlands, instead sinking through the porous substrate
of the ditch towards the aquifer. A USGS seepage study concluded that
water was lost to the aquifer in this ditch at a rate two orders of
magnitude higher than in any of the sampled wetlands.
Solution: To more efficiently translate diverted creek water into
wetland acres, the refuge needs to move their point of diversion
downstream to a location directly adjacent to the wetland units,
bypassing the inefficient main diversion water delivery ditch.
groundwater well relocation
Problem: To offset the loss of groundwater contributions to
wetlands via spring discharge, refuge staff co-opted volume wells to
deliver water from the retreating aquifer into wetland impoundments.
Today, well operation comes at great expense due to the quantities of
electricity required, but only yields
200 acres of wetland habitat.
This inefficiency is an unsurprising consequence of co-opting wells
established for agricultural irrigation to wetland inundation. Nine of
the ten refuge wells remain in their original locations. As such, only
7 of these wells are connected to infrastructure that can deliver water
to wetlands. And water originating from five of these wells must
utilize inefficient delivery ditches with high seepage rates.
Additionally, the effect of well water input is not uniform across
Camas NWR wetlands. While the southern wetlands hold water better, most
of the wells exist in the north part of the refuge. This mismatch
requires that well water must first fill impoundments with high seepage
rates in order to reach the southern wetlands.
Solution: To efficiently translate limited and expensive water
resources into quality wetland habitat, the refuge needs to
strategically relocate groundwater wells to locations adjacent to
southern wetlands. This will allow for inundation of twice the acreage
during drought years, and increase the ability of staff to manage for a
more natural dynamic hydrology regime which will yield abundant and
diverse resources for migratory waterbirds.
importance
Camas NWR is located in the arid Intermountain West. Similar to
many parts of the Nation, this region has not been exempted from
wetland destruction/loss. However, the natural rarity of aquatic
habitat in this arid region lends added importance to the maintenance
and restoration of the limited habitat that remains. It is estimated
that approximately 90 percent of Intermountain West wildlife species
depend upon wetlands for at least some portion of their life.
consequences of inaction
--Breeding and stopover habitat for migratory waterbirds will
continue to be lost.
--Species diversity and abundance will decrease both locally and
likely regionally.
--Once productive units will remain non-viable for waterfowl hunting
opportunities because the refuge lacks the ability to maintain
water in those wetlands into the fall.
--Diminished quality of wildlife viewing opportunities for family
outings.
--Opportunities for drawing in and educating area students, scouts,
and adults will decrease.
--Food chains, food webs and area ecosystems will be disrupted.
--The decline in native species will create a void likely to be
filled by invasive or less desirable species.
[This statement was submitted by Karl P. Bohan, President.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Friends of Rachel Carson National Wildlife
Refuge
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski, Chair
The Honorable Tom Udall, Ranking Member
May 17, 2019
Ms. Chairman and Honorable Members of the subcommittee: I am Bill
Durkin, President of The Friends of Rachel Carson National Wildlife
Refuge in Biddeford, Maine.
I have been a member of the Friends of Rachel Carson NWR for the
past 30 years. The group was founded in 1987; we are a small group
supporting the refuge in Southern Maine. I have given numerous written
statements over the years and we really appreciate your support in the
past. This year, our refuge is not requesting any appropriations
directly for Rachel Carson National Wildlife Refuge; this is a request
for general funding of the National Wildlife Refuge System of $586
million. This year we ask to appropriate $50 million in the National
Wildlife Refuge Fund. There was great news last week with the news of
reauthorizing and permanently funding the Land , Water and Conservation
Fund. With that in mind, I request $150 million for the National
Wildlife Refuge Systems purchase of easements and in holdings. I thank
you all for your consideration.
The Rachel Carson National Wildlife Refuge is named in honor of one
of the nation's foremost and forward-thinking biologists. After
arriving in Maine in 1946 as an aquatic biologist for the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, Rachel Carson became entranced with Maine's coastal
habitat, leading her to write the international best-seller The Sea
Around Us. This landmark study, in combination with her other writings,
The Edge of the Sea and Silent Spring, led Rachel Carson to become an
advocate on behalf of this nation's vast coastal habitat and the
wildlife that depends on it. Her legacy lives on today at the refuge
that bears her name and is dedicated to the permanent protection of the
salt marshes and estuaries of the southern Maine coast. The refuge was
established in 1966 to preserve migratory bird habitat and waterfowl
migration along southern Maine's coastal estuaries. It consists of 11
refuge divisions in 12 municipalities protecting approximately 5,600
acres within a 14,800 acre acquisition zone.
Consisting of meandering tidal creeks, coastal upland, sandy dunes,
salt ponds, marsh, and productive wetlands, the Rachel Carson NWR
provides critical nesting and feeding habitat for the threatened piping
plover and a variety of migratory waterfowl, and serves as a nursery
for many shellfish and finfish. Located along the Atlantic flyway, the
refuge serves as an important stopover point for migratory birds.
Previous years' appropriations have allowed the USFWS to conserve
several properties within the refuge.
1. We are requesting an overall funding level of $586 Million in
fiscal year 2020 for the Operations and Maintenance Budget of the
National Wildlife Refuge System, managed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service. All of the refuges are in dire need of staffing and upkeep.
The National Wildlife Refuge System is responsible for 568 million
acres of lands and waters, but currently receives less than a $1. per
acre for management costs. The refuges cannot fulfill its obligation to
the American public, our wildlife and 47 million annual visitors
without adequate funding. Refuges provide unparalleled opportunities to
hunt, fish, watch wildlife and educate children about the environment.
An investment in the Nation's Refuge System is an excellent investment
in the American economy, generating $2.4 billion and creating about
35,000 jobs in local economies. Without increased funding for refuges,
wildlife conservation and public recreation opportunities will be
jeopardized. We fully supported the U.S. Fish and Wildlife's request of
$586 Million for Operation and Management for the National Wildlife
Refuge System.
2. Appropriate $50 million in the National Wildlife Refuge Fund in
fiscal year 2020 which offsets losses in local government tax revenue
because lands owned by the Refuge System are exempt from taxation. The
Refuge Fund is an annual appropriation that supplements the Refuge
Revenue Sharing Program. The Revenue Sharing Program offsets lost local
tax revenue by providing payments to local governments from net income
derived from permits and wildlife refuge activities.
3. We request $150 million in LWCF funding for Refuge land
acquisitions/conservation easements and we thank you for the recent
vote on re-establishing ``forever'' for the permanent reauthorization
full funding of LWCF. The Land and Water Conservation Fund is our
Nation's premier Federal program to acquire and protect lands at
national parks, forests, refuges, and public lands and at State parks,
trails, and recreational facilities. These sites across the country
provide the public with substantial social and economic benefits
including promoting healthier lifestyles through active recreation,
protecting drinking water and watersheds, improving wildfire
management, and assisting the adaptation of wildlife and fisheries to
climate change. The quality of place is greatly enhanced. As you know,
LWCF uses no tax payer dollars. Created by Congress in 1964 and re-
authorized last week, the LWCF is our most important land and easement
acquisition tool. I support the administration's commitment to fully
funding the program. This wise investment in the Land and Water
Conservation Fund is one that will permanently pay dividends to the
American people and to our great natural and historical heritage. The
Refuge System needs $150 million in LWCF for fiscal year 2020,
including these high priority requests:
--$10 million for Everglades Headwaters NWR and Conservation Area
(FL)
--$6 million for Silvio O. Conte NFWR (CT, NH, VT, MA)
--$3 million for Cache River NWR (AR)
--$2 million for Bear River Watershed Conservation Area (WY, ID, UT)
--$2 million for Blackwater NWR (MD)
--$2 million for Clarks River NWR (KY)
--$8 million for Hakalau Forest NWR (HI)
--$8 million for the Dakota Grasslands Conservation Area (ND, SD)
I again extend our appreciation to the subcommittee for its ongoing
commitment to our National Wildlife Refuge System and respectfully
request the Interior, Environment and Related Agencies Appropriations
Subcommittee allocate $586 million for the Refuge System's fiscal year
2018 Operations & Maintenance Budget, $50 million in the National
Wildlife Refuge Fund and $150 million in Refuge LWCF monies. I Thank
Congress for reauthorizing and understanding the need and the
commitment that was made in 1964 : Keep LWCF for the People and
Wildlife. I request $900 million in LWCF funds for fiscal year 2020.
Thank you again, Ms. Chairman, for the opportunity to present this
testimony in support of protecting wildlife and it's habitat. Enjoy
your next walk out on a National Wildlife Refuge. Please visit Maine
and the Rachel Carson National Wildlife refuge.
______
Prepared Statement of the Friends of the San Luis Valley National
Wildlife Refuges
Thank you for the opportunity to address funding for the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service and the National Wildlife Refuge System. I am
writing on behalf of the approximately 200 members of the Friends of
the San Luis Valley National Wildlife Refuges.
Refuges in the San Luis Valley, Colorado have been devastated by
budget cuts in the past 20 years since the Friends formed. Refuge
staffing has been reduced to the point to where the remaining staff can
barely keep up with day-to-day maintenance of the refuges. In 2003, the
92,500 acre Baca National Wildlife Refuge was added to the San Luis
Valley Refuge Complex without funding for additional staff. Currently,
that refuge is staffed by one refuge manager, an biology technician,
and one wage grade maintenance position. Each of these positions came
from previous positions on the existing Alamosa and Monte Vista
Refuges.
Due to recent changes in water management in the San Luis Valley in
which junior water users need to augment their injury to senior surface
water users, the Monte Vista Refuge hardly has enough money to pay to
pump water to provide habitat for migratory birds.
The refuge biologist, Scott Miller, now spends much his time
writing grants to try to find money to fund programs on the refuge.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is one of the smallest of the
Federal land management agencies, but their management is intensive and
requires people on the ground. In the last restructuring, many refuges
and wetland management units were simply closed and the gates locked.
We have been told repeatedly by the regional USFWS office that the
San Luis Valley Refuge Complex is a funding priority, but we haven't
seen much funding. In the Comprehensive Conservation Plan, published in
2015, Fish and Wildlife proposed building an new office complex/visitor
contact station, but apparently funding for the project has been cut to
the point that the building would not be large enough for the few
remaining staff.
From our perspective, the Refuge System is dying from 1000 cuts--
that today have reached the bone. As I compile this brief list of what
has happened to ``our'' refuges, it saddens me to reflect on the
decline in our local refuges and the refuge system as a whole, and the
corresponding costs to USFWS employees, local communities, and wildlife
across the United States.
If we are to preserve our natural heritage, we need to fund our
National Wildlife Refuge System.
[This statement was submitted by Tim Armstrong, President.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Geological Society of America
summary
The Geological Society of America (GSA) urges Congress to provide
$1.2 billion for the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) in fiscal year 2020.
We thank Congress for the investments made in fiscal year 2019 and
encourage a path of sustainable growth moving forward. As one of our
Nation's key science agencies, the USGS plays a vital role in
understanding and documenting mineral and energy resources that
underpin economic growth; researching and monitoring potential natural
hazards that threaten U.S. and international security; and determining
and assessing water quality and availability. Approximately two thirds
of the USGS budget is allocated for research and development. In
addition to supporting the science activities and decisions of the
Department of the Interior, this research is used by communities across
the Nation to make informed decisions in land-use planning, emergency
response, natural resource management, engineering, and education.
Despite the critical role played by the USGS, funding for the agency
has stagnated in real dollars for more than a decade. Given the
importance of the many activities of the Survey that protect lives and
property, contribute to national security, and enhance the quality of
life, GSA believes that growth in funding for the Survey is necessary
for the future of our Nation.
The Geological Society of America (GSA) is a global professional
society with approximately 22,000 individuals. GSA provides access to
elements that are essential to the professional growth of earth
scientists at all levels of expertise and from all sectors: academic,
government, business, and industry. The Society unites thousands of
earth scientists from every corner of the globe in a common purpose to
study the mysteries of our planet (and beyond) and share scientific
findings.
The Geological Society of America (GSA) appreciates the increase to
the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) budget in fiscal year 2019 and thanks
the Committee for recognizing the importance of the work of the agency
to protect lives, property, and national security. GSA asks Congress to
again reject the proposed cuts in the administration's request and
instead provide USGS $1.2 billion in fiscal year 2020. GSA urges the
committee ensure that any changes to the organizational structure of
USGS support rather than hinder the ability of the USGS to serve the
Nation with its research.
u.s. geological survey contributions to national security, health, and
welfare
The USGS is one of the Nation's premier science agencies, with a
distinctive capacity to engage truly interdisciplinary teams of experts
to gather data, conduct research, and develop integrated decision
support tools. Approximately two thirds of the USGS budget is allocated
for research and development. In addition to underpinning the science
activities and decisions of the Department of the Interior, this
research is used by communities and businesses across the Nation to
make informed decisions regarding land use planning, emergency
response, natural resource management, engineering, and education.
As noted in the Preamble to its Endorsement of American
Meteorological Society's Freedom of Scientific Expression statement,
GSA ``strongly believes that science and society benefit greatly from
careful and ample technical peer review of scientific findings, and
subsequent communication of scientific results must be permitted freely
and without concern by the scientist for censorship, intimidation, or
political interference.'' GSA encourages Congress to ensure that USGS
follows these principles and others outlined in the Department of the
Interior's Integrity of Scientific and Scholarly Activities policies.
USGS research addresses many of society's greatest challenges for
national security, health, and welfare. Several are highlighted below.
--Natural hazards--including earthquakes, hurricanes, tsunamis,
volcanic eruptions, wildfires, and landslides--are a major
cause of fatalities and economic losses. Recent natural
disasters, including the Camp, Carr, and Woolsey fires and
Hurricanes Michael and Florence, provide unmistakable evidence
that the United States remains vulnerable to staggering losses.
An improved scientific understanding of geologic hazards will
reduce future losses by informing effective planning and
mitigation.
Decision makers in many sectors rely upon USGS data to respond
to natural disasters. For example, USGS volcano monitoring provides key
data to enable decisions on aviation safety. Data from the USGS network
of stream gages is used by the National Weather Service to issue flood
and drought warnings. Earth and space observations provide data
necessary to predict severe space weather events, which affect the
electric power grid, satellite communications and information, and
space-based position, navigation, and timing systems. GSA urges
Congress to support efforts for USGS to modernize and upgrade its
natural hazards monitoring and warning systems, including additional 3-
D elevation mapping and earthquake early warning systems. The recent
enactment of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program
Reauthorization Act of 2018 indicates the support of Congress and the
administration for this important research and programs that enable
advance warning of impending hazards.
--On December 20, 2017, President Trump signed an executive order
entitled A Federal Strategy to Ensure Secure and Reliable
Supplies of Critical Minerals, that finds,
``The United States is heavily reliant on imports of certain
mineral commodities that are vital to the Nation's security and
economic prosperity. This dependency of the United States on foreign
sources creates a strategic vulnerability for both its economy and
military to adverse foreign government action, natural disaster, and
other events that can disrupt supply of these key minerals.''
GSA supports increases in minerals science, research,
information, data collection and analysis that will allow for more
economic and environmental management and utilization of minerals. In
addition, GSA supports increases in funding for research to better
understand domestic sources of energy, including conventional and
unconventional oil and gas and renewables. GSA appreciates
congressional support for the Earth Mapping Resources Initiative (Earth
MRI), formerly known as 3DEEP, which will provide new resources and
build upon the existing and successful 3-D elevation mapping and
National Cooperative Geological Mapping Program to accelerate
geological and geophysical mapping, identify critical mineral sites for
further scientific review, and provide a host of additional benefits to
local, State, and Federal entities for safety, security, scientific,
and industrial uses.
--The quality and quantity of surface water and groundwater have a
direct impact on the wellbeing of societies and ecosystems, as
evidenced by flooding and drought impacts experienced across
the U.S. during the past year, as well as the dependence of
much of our society on groundwater. Greater scientific
understanding of these resources through monitoring and
research by the USGS is necessary to ensure adequate and safe
water resources for the health and welfare of society.
--USGS research on climate impacts is used by local policymakers and
resource managers to make sound decisions based on the best
possible science. The Climate Adaptation Science Centers
(CASC), for example, provide scientific information necessary
to anticipate, monitor, and adapt to the effects of climate
change at regional and local levels, allowing communities to
make smart, cost-effective decisions. For example, The North
Central CASC supported the development of a new experimental
drought-monitoring and early warning guidance tool called the
Landscape Evaporative Response Index.
--The Landsat satellites have amassed the largest archive of remotely
sensed land data in the world, a tremendously important
resource for natural resource exploration, land use planning,
and assessing water resources, the impacts of natural
disasters, and global agriculture production. GSA supports
investment in earth observations, including interagency efforts
to develop the next generation Landsat. Increased funding will
be critical to implement the recommendations of the recent
National Academy of Sciences' Earth Science and Applications
from Space (ESAS) Decadal Survey report, which states:
``Earth science and applications are a key part of the Nation's
information infrastructure, warranting a U.S. program of Earth
observations from space that is robust, resilient, and appropriately
balanced.''
Activities from hazard monitoring to mineral forecasts are
supported by the Core System Sciences, Facilities, and Science Support.
These programs and services, such as geologic mapping and data
preservation, provide critical information, data, and infrastructure
that underpin the research of the USGS. Funding is particularly needed
in Facilities to address many deferred maintenance issues and GSA
appreciates the committee's recent investments in this area.
Knowledge of the earth sciences is essential to scientific literacy
and to meeting the environmental and resource challenges of the 21st
century. GSA is very concerned that cuts in Earth science funding will
cause students and young professionals to leave the field, potentially
leading to a lost generation of professionals in areas that are already
facing worker shortages. Investments in these areas could lead to job
growth, as demand for these professionals now and in the future is
assessed to be high. Emerging Workforce Trends in the Energy and Mining
Industries: A Call to Action, found, ``In mining (nonfuel and coal) a
personnel crisis for professionals and workers is pending and it
already exists for faculty.'' Another recent study by the American
Geosciences Institute, Status of the Geoscience Workforce Report 2018,
found an expected deficit of approximately 118,000 geoscientists by
2026. Strong investments in geoscience research are needed to prepare
citizens for these job opportunities.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony about the U.S.
Geological Survey. For additional information or to learn more about
the Geological Society of America--including GSA Position Statements on
climate change, water resources, mineral and energy resources, natural
hazards, and public investment in Earth science research--please visit
www.geosociety.org or contact GSA's Director for Geoscience Policy
Kasey White at [email protected]
[This statement was submitted by Kasey White, Director for
Geoscience Policy.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife
Commission (GLIFWC)
1.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS, OPERATION OF
INDIAN PROGRAMS
a.
Trust-Natural Resources Management, Rights Protection
Implementation (RPI).--At least the $40,273,000 provided in fiscal year
2019 and a proportionate share for Great Lakes Area Resource
Management.
b.
Trust-Natural Resources Management, Tribal Management/Development
Program (TM/DP).--At least the $12,036,000 proposed by the Senate and
House in fiscal year 2019 and the TM/DP requests of GLIFWC's member
Tribes.
c.
Trust-Natural Resources Management, Invasive Species.--At least
$6,773,000, the amount proposed by the Senate and House in fiscal year
2019.
d.
Tribal Government, Contract Support.--Full funding, estimated to
be at least $242,000,000 in fiscal year 2019.
Funding Authorizations: Snyder Act, 25 U.S.C. s. 13; Indian Self-
Determination and Education Assistance Act, (Public Law 93-638), 25
U.S.C. ss. 450f and 450h; and the treaties between the United States
and GLIFWC's member Ojibwe Tribes.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Specifically, the Treaty of 1836, 7 Stat. 491, Treaty of 1837,
7 Stat. 536, Treaty of 1842, 7 Stat. 591, and Treaty of 1854, 10 Stat.
1109. The rights guaranteed by these treaties have been affirmed by
various court decisions, including a 1999 U.S. Supreme Court case.
2.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
a.
Environmental Programs and Management, Geographic Programs, Great
Lakes Restoration.--The historical allocation of $300,000,000,
including a Tribal program of no less than $15,000,000.
b.
State and Tribal Assistance Grants, Categorical Grants, Tribal
General Assistance Program.--At least the fiscal year 2018 and fiscal
year 2019 amounts of $65,476,000.
Funding Authorizations: Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. s. 1268(c);
Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act, Public Law 114-
322 s. 5005; and treaties cited above.
Funding through these programs fulfills Federal treaty, trust and
contract obligations to GLIFWC's member Tribes, providing vital
resources to sustain their governmental programs. We ask that Congress
maintain these programs and provide funding at no less than the fiscal
year 2019 levels.
GLIFWC'S Fiscal Year 2020 Funding Request Highlights
1.
GLIFWC would be pleased to accept an allocation of appropriated RPI
funding that is in the same proportion as it currently receives.
2.
Full restoration of Great Lakes Restoration Initiative funding to
its historical $300,000,000 level, with no less than $15,000,000 for a
distinct Tribal program.
3.
Full funding for contract support costs, as required by the ISDEA
Act.
4.
Sufficient funding in the Tribal Management and Development line
item for GLIFWC's member Tribes to fulfill their needs for reservation-
based natural resource programs and to fund the Circle of Flight
wetlands program.
GLIFWC'S Goal--A Secure Funding Base To Fulfill Treaty Purposes and
Legal Obligations
For 35 years, Congress has funded GLIFWC to implement comprehensive
conservation, natural resource protection, and law enforcement programs
that: (1) protect public safety; (2) ensure member Tribes are able to
implement their treaty reserved rights to hunt, fish, and gather
throughout the ceded territories; (3) ensure a healthy and sustainable
natural resource base to support those rights; and (4) promote healthy,
safe communities. These programs also provide a wide range of public
benefits, and facilitate participation in management partnerships in
Wisconsin, Michigan, and Minnesota.
GLIFWC'S Programs--Promoting Healthy Communities and Educating Tribal
Members Through Treaty Rights Exercise
Established in 1984, GLIFWC is a natural resources management
agency of 11 member Ojibwe Tribes with resource management
responsibilities over their ceded territory (off-reservation) hunting,
fishing and gathering treaty rights. These ceded territories extend
over a 60,000 square mile area in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and
Michigan.\2\ GLIFWC employs over 80 full-time staff, including natural
resource scientists, technicians, conservation enforcement officers,
policy specialists, and public information specialists.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ GLIFWC's programs do not duplicate those of the Chippewa-Ottawa
Resource Authority or the 1854 Treaty Authority. GLIFWC also
coordinates with its member Tribes with respect to Tribal treaty
fishing that extends beyond reservation boundaries by virtue of the
Treaty of 1854 and the reservations' locations on Lake Superior.
GLIFWC strives to implement its programs in a holistic, integrated
manner consistent with the culture and values of its member Tribes,
especially in light of Tribal lifeways that the exercise of treaty
rights supports. This means not only ensuring that Tribal members can
legally exercise their rights, but supporting community efforts to
educate them about the benefits (physical, spiritual, and cultural) of
harvesting and consuming a more traditional diet, as well as promoting
inter-generational learning and the transmission of traditional
cultural and management practices. These programs, in turn, promote
safe and healthy communities by encouraging healthy lifestyles,
intergenerational connections, and cultural education.
GLIFWC and its member Tribes thank Congress, and particularly this
subcommittee, for its continuing support of these treaty obligations
and its recognition of the ongoing success of these programs. There are
two main elements of this fiscal year 2020 funding request:
--BIA Great Lakes Area Management (within the RPI line item).--A
proportionate share of the $40,273,000 as provided in 2019 for
the RPI line item. The fiscal year 2019 increase of $112,000 is
greatly appreciated. GLIFWC continues to support allocating
increases to the RPI line item in the historically
proportionate amounts.
There is a long history of Federal funding for treaty rights
protection and implementation programs. For more than 30 years,
Congress and each administration have appropriated funding for these
programs. GLIFWC has testified about the fact that the need is
consistently greater than RPI funding, and the impacts that
underfunding has on treaty rights programs. The Federal Government, as
a treaty signatory, is required to uphold treaty rights. It has
appropriately chosen to invest in our programs as efficient, cost-
effective service delivery mechanisms at the governmental level most
appropriate to implement Federal court orders and to protect and
restore the natural resources on which the treaty rights are based.
GLIFWC's holistic approach to protecting treaty rights and the
natural resources that support them requires that we undertake a
variety of activities that promote Tribal lifeways and inform natural
resource management activities. These include scientific, technical and
policy analyses, promotion of healthy foods, and language
revitalization. To this end, maximum flexibility should be provided to
GLIFWC and its Tribes to define for themselves the science and research
activities best suited to the needs of their member Tribes and the
particular issues within their region. GLIFWC would be pleased to
accept funds from the RPI account in the same proportion as it received
in fiscal year 2019.
--EPA Environmental Programs and Management: $300,000,000.--GLIFWC
supports continued funding for the Great Lakes Restoration
Initiative (GLRI) as an important non-regulatory program that
enhances and ensures coordinated governance in the Great Lakes,
fulfillment of international agreements, and substantive
natural resource protection and restoration projects. GLIFWC
supports consistent funding for the GLRI at $300 million, the
level that has been provided and received unwavering bipartisan
support since 2011.
GLIFWC appreciates the directive in the Fiscal Year 2018
Consolidated Appropriations Act's explanatory statement that EPA should
work with Tribes and the BIA to develop a proposal for a distinct
Tribal program within the GLRI. GLIFWC is working with those agencies
to develop such a program. GLIFWC understands that in 2020, the program
will be funded at $15 million. This will help ensure that Tribes have
the flexibility to develop the programs that are of the highest
priorities to their communities, fulfills the spirit of self-
determination, meets treaty obligations, and carries out Federal trust
responsibilities.
Sustained funding for the GLRI allows GLIFWC to maintain its
participation in interjurisdictional governance structures, including
the implementation of the revised Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement
(GLWQA). With GLRI funding, GLIFWC has been able to provide active
support on numerous implementing Annexes, including the Lakewide Action
and Management Plan, Aquatic Invasive Species, and Chemicals of Mutual
Concern Annexes.
Sustained GLRI funding also allows GLIFWC to augment and leverage
its current natural resource protection and enhancement activities.
This includes enhancing GLIFWC's participation in interagency efforts
to assess the impacts of mining waste (stamp sands) on an important
whitefish and lake trout spawning reef in Lake Superior, and to explore
remediation options and strategies.
Results and Benefits of GLIFWC'S Programs
1.
Maintain the Requisite Capability To Meet Legal Obligations, To
Conserve Natural Resources and To Regulate Treaty Harvests.--While more
funding would increase program comprehensiveness, sustained funding at
the fiscal year 2019 level supports Tribal compliance with various
court decrees and intergovernmental agreements that govern the Tribes'
treaty-reserved hunting, fishing and gathering rights. Funding for
science and research enhances GLIFWC's capability to undertake work and
participate in partnerships to address ecosystem threats that harm
treaty natural resources, including those related to climate change.
2.
Remain A Trusted Management and Law Enforcement Partner, and
Scientific Contributor in the Great Lakes Region.--GLIFWC has become a
respected and integral part of management and law enforcement
partnerships that conserve natural resources and protect public safety.
It brings a Tribal perspective to interjurisdictional Great Lakes
management fora and would use its scientific expertise to study issues
and geographic areas that are important to its member Tribes but that
others may not be examining.
3.
Maintain the Overall Public Benefits That Derive From Its
Programs.--Over the years, GLIFWC has become a recognized and valued
partner in natural resource management. Because of its institutional
experience and staff expertise, GLIFWC has built and maintained
numerous partnerships that: (1) provide accurate information and data
to counter social misconceptions about Tribal treaty harvests and the
status of ceded territory natural resources; (2) maximize each
partner's financial resources and avoid duplication of effort and
costs; (3) engender cooperation rather than competition; and (4)
undertake projects that achieve public benefits that no one partner
could accomplish alone.
4.
Encourage and Contribute to Healthy Tribal Communities.--GLIFWC
works with its member Tribes' communities to promote the benefits of
treaty rights exercise. These include the health benefits associated
with a more traditional diet and the intergenerational learning that
takes place when elders teach youth. In addition, GLIFWC sponsors a
camp each summer where Tribal youth build leadership skills, strengthen
connections to the outdoors, and learn about treaty rights and careers
in natural resource fields.
[This statement was submitted by Michael J. Isham Jr., Executive
Administrator.]
______
Prepared Statement of Griffin Sanders, Student at York Community High
School
In accordance to the prospective fiscal year budget of 2020,
President Donald Trump's administration proposed a 31 percent budget
cut to the Environment Protection Agency, the largest cut to a
department in the entire budget. The passing of this budget would
result in a 2.7 billion dollar change to the budget of the
Environmental Protection Agency, leaving the department with only 6.1
billion dollars to operate. While the President may want to reduce
spending for the 2020 fiscal year, his budget includes increasing the
funding to departments such as Defense by 33.3 billion dollars, giving
the department a total of 718 billion dollars to operate. Due to the
importance of the tasks of the Environmental Protection Agency in
reducing the damages done to the Earth by humans, it is imperative that
the Committee of Appropriations in the Senate does not pass this
proposed cut to such a critical department.
The Environmental Protection Agency performs a variety of tasks in
order to ensure the public's health. The agency is responsible for
regulating noxious gas emissions and establishing industry standards in
order to preserve our environment. Furthermore, the department provides
funding for research into how to further reduce the harmful particle
and gasses that are polluted, as well as educate Americans on the
importance of being environmentally friendly. If the Environmental
Protection Agency is defunded, they will not be able to execute these
tasks to their full potential. With the EPA being restricted by a lack
of funding, they will not be able to enforce environmental standards
and educate fellow citizens. Consequently, corporations in the
automotive, chemical, and energy sectors will be able to evade these
regulations, further damaging the environment, as well as the air in
which we breathe. While many legislators may see the defense budget as
a top priority in order to save the lives of Americans, the air
pollution caused by industrialization is killing more Americans than
any foreign enemy. According to many studies from a myriad of
accredited sources such as Harvard and Medicare, a particulate matter
concentration of 30 mg/m\3\ is enough to reduce life expectancy by as
much as 5.4 years. Attached is a table synthesizing each study
conducted on the relationship between elevated mortality risk and
difference in life expectancy. Although each study has different
estimates for mortality risk and life expectancies, each one concludes
that air pollution causes an increase in mortality risk, while
decreasing the expected length of life. While this concentration of
particulate matter may be high for most parts of the United States,
according to Arden C. Pope, a renowned expert in environmental science,
even the concentrations in which the common American is exposed to, air
pollution contributes to cardiovascular diseases and a diminished life
expectancy. This lower life expectancy can be contributed to the many
diseases brought on by air pollution. Some of these diseases include,
but are not limited to vascular dysfunction, bronchitis, asthma,
pulmonary oxidative stress, and even neurological diseases like
Alzheimer's and depression. With the Environmental Protection Agency
being restricted to operate by their budget, more Americans will be
affected by these diseases.
Although this budget only is for the Federal Government of the
United States of America, the harm done to the environment by human
presence is a global issue. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate change, the effect of the greenhouse gasses being released
through air pollution is catastrophic: In their report, they estimate
that there will be an average increase of 1.5 degrees Celsius by the
year 2050. This may not seem like a lot, but this is detrimental to the
ecosystems across the world, as well as the everyday lives of all
people. This change will melt the ice caps by the poles, destroying the
environment in which many arctic animals reside, effectively driving
them into distinction. The melting of the ice caps would also raise the
sea level, flooding many cities on shoes with low elevation such as New
Orleans, Miami, and New York. Additionally, there are many more less
obvious effects of these greenhouse gasses emitted, such as an increase
in food scarcity, poverty, natural disasters, and a change of climate
in cities across the world. As appropriately worked by Vox, ``several
Northern cities will look and feel a lot like how Southern cities do
today. In some cities, it'll be like moving two States south''.
Fortunately, it is not too late to change this fate. These disastrous
changes will only occur if humanity continues to burn fossil fuels as
the same rate at which it does today. Many nations have already taken
action to save the planet by committing to the Paris Agreement, vowing
to reduce the damages done to the environment before it is too late:
The United States is not one of them. Defunding the Environmental
Protection Agency would only be a step backwards in working to reduce
emissions. Without adequate funding, the agency will become less
effective in combating climate change, and the rate in which these
ruinous changes occur will only increase.
With the dangers of air pollution being so eminent and cataclysmic,
it is vital that the budget for the Environmental Protection Agency is
not reduced. The agency has proven itself to be effective in their
roles in regulated emissions and educating the public about the dangers
of pollution. If funded properly, the EPA will continue to work
constructively and help to reduce harmful gas emissions, improving the
air quality for Americans and giving them a better quality of life.
Without the Environmental Protection Agency operating at its full
capacity, Americans will expect an onslaught of many diseases and a
shorter life. As a legislator of one of the most powerful nations in
the world, you are in control of whether we as Americans act to save
our dying planet. This decision on the budget of the EPA not only
affects this generation, but future generations, by not cutting funding
to the Environmental Protection Agency, we will help to ensure that our
children, and our children's children will be able to live their best
possible lives on the planet that we all share.
Thank you,
Griffin Sanders
Student at York Community High School
[email protected]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Difference in
Elevated
Life
Study
Difference in Exposure
Mortality Risk
Expectancy
(%)
(estimates)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Harvard Six Cities Cohort study...............
30 mg/m\3\ PM2.5................
56
5.4
ACS CPS-II Cohort study.......................
30 mg/m\3\ PM2.5................
20
2.2
Medicare Cohort study.........................
30 mg/m\3\ PM2.5................
12
1.3
Canadian Cohort study.........................
30 mg/m\3\ PM2.5................
33
3.4
Meta Estimate of Cohort Studies...............
30 mg/m\3\ PM2.5................
20
2.2
First Difference analysis of United States
30 mg/m\3\ PM2.5................
..............
1.8
country-level changes in life expectancy
(1980-2000).
First Difference analysis of United States
30 mg/m\3\ PM2.5................
..............
1.1
country-level changes in life expectancy
(2000-2007).
China Quasi Experimental, regression
30 mg/m\3\ PM2.5................
14
3.0
discontinuity study North vs South of Huai
River.
Active Smoking................................
Active smoker vs never smoker...
100
7.8
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
______
Prepared Statement of Heidi K. Williams, Mayor, City of Thornton,
Colorado
Dear Chairwoman Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall:
As members of the WaterNow Alliance, we write to respectfully
request your support to fund the Environmental Protection
Administration's WaterSense Program at the fiscal year 2019 level of
$3.1 million or higher. WaterSense shares resources and encourages the
adoption of water efficient practices and products that use less water
across the Nation. The proposed fiscal year 2020 budget calls for the
elimination of this small but important program. We urge you to reject
this proposal and fund the WaterSense Program at least at its current
level. While miniscule in terms of the overall Federal budget,
WaterSense has an outsize beneficial impact on local communities like
Thornton.
Since 2006, WaterSense partnerships have saved more than 3 trillion
gallons of water. Additionally, WaterSense labeled products have saved
over 400 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity and approximately $65
billion in water and energy bills for Americans in every State.
Using water efficiently makes sense for consumers, communities, and
the environment as populations are faced with supply issues, aging
infrastructure, extreme weather, and growth. It is critical to fund the
WaterSense Program at the very minimum of the fiscal year 2019 funding
level of $3.1 million or higher in the fiscal year 2020 budget to
support utilities and consumers in the efforts to conserve this vital
resource. Public and private partners, municipalities, and utilities
across the Nation rely on WaterSense labeled products for conservation
and efficiency programs.
For all of these reasons, we believe that the WaterSense Program is
deserving of your support to fund at $3.1 million or higher. Thank you
for your consideration.
Sincerely,
Heidi K. Williams
Mayor--City of Thornton
______
Prepared Statement of the Humane Society of the United States, Humane
Society Legislative Fund, and Doris Day Animal League
Thank you for this opportunity to offer testimony on matters of
importance to our organizations. We urge the subcommittee to address
the following requests in the fiscal year 2020 Department of Interior,
Environment, and Related Agencies budget:
--EPA New Approach Methodologies development and implementation:
strong funding
--BLM, Wild Horse and Burro Program: (1) $135,000,000, contingent on
immediate implementation of a management program based on four
prongs detailed below; (2) fiscal year 2019 enacted language to
protect wild horses and burros from slaughter
--USFS, Wild Horse and Burro Program: fiscal year 2019 enacted
language to protect USFS wild horses and burros from slaughter
--FWS, Multinational Species Conservation Fund: $15,000,000, with no
funds from conservation programs to promote trophy hunting,
trade in animal parts, or other consumptive uses of wildlife
--FWS, Office of International Affairs: $18,000,000
--FWS, Office of Law Enforcement: $85,000,000
We also request that the budget exclude any language that would in
any way impede efforts to combat wildlife trafficking, relax
regulations on imports of sport-hunted trophies, or undermine the
Endangered Species Act. In addition, we request a block on funds for
the International Wildlife Conservation Council. Further, we request
that any ESA-related funds be directed toward the following FWS
programs: Listing; Recovery; Planning and Consultation; Conservation
and Restoration; and the Cooperative Endangered Species Conservation
Fund.
environmental protection agency--new approach methodologies development
and implementation
Thousands of chemicals are currently used, and hundreds of new ones
are introduced each year, for which EPA needs to conduct toxicity
assessments. The EPA is also tasked with evaluating and registering
pesticides as well as evaluating chemicals for possible endocrine
activity. In addition, since 2016, there is new mandate to develop and
implement non-vertebrate test methods for chemical safety evaluation
under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA). To address these needs,
EPA must shift significant focus to New Approach Methodologies (NAM)--
defined by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences as
``non-animal technology, methodology, approach, or combination thereof
that can be used to provide information on chemical hazard and risk
assessment'' and by EPA as equivalent to the non-vertebrate test
methods defined in in the revised TSCA.
The EPA's National Center for Computational Toxicology (NCCT), in
collaboration with the National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences, the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, and
the Food and Drug Administration, has developed an extensive database
of chemical safety information, is screening thousands of chemicals
using hundreds of high-throughput non-animal methods, and is developing
improved models for estimating exposure. Although these newly
developing NAMs are beginning to reduce animal use while improving the
speed and accuracy of chemical evaluation relevant to several programs,
further development and implementation is necessary to effectively
carry out EPAs mandates.
We support strong funding of NCCT and other programs within EPA's
Office of Research and Development that focus on development and
implementation of NAMs in order for EPA to fulfill its mandates and
assure a more efficient and relevant chemicals safety assessment
process.
bureau of land management--wild horse and burro program
The HSUS is one of the leading advocates for the protection and
welfare of wild horses and burros in the United States, with a long
history of working collaboratively with BLM--the agency mandated to
protect America's wild horses and burros--on the development of
effective and humane management techniques.
For years, the HSUS has strongly cautioned against continuing to
gather large numbers of wild horses and burros from our rangelands
annually without implementing any program for suppressing population
growth. This approach has led BLM into a continuous cycle of roundups
and removals, even as long-term, cost-efficient, and humane management
strategies, such as fertility control, are readily available.
Because of this strategy, BLM has long removed many more wild
horses and burros from the range than it could expect to adopt, while
simultaneously being unable to stabilize on-range populations.
Consequently, the cost of the wild horse and burro program has
continued to grow, without any benefit to wild horses, to the
government, or to our public rangelands.
To move the agency away from this failed paradigm, appropriations
language in the past few years has requested that BLM create a long-
term, humane, and financially sustainable management path that
incorporates large-scale use of fertility control tools. This approach
is supported by the National Academy of Sciences report, which called
for increased use of on-the-range management tools, including the
fertility control vaccine Porcine Zona Pellucida (PZP). Further,
studies have shown that incorporating fertility control into the
management of wild horses and burros would significantly lower the
program's carrying costs. A 2008 paper determined that on-the-range
contraception could reduce total wild horse and burro management costs
by 14 percent, saving $6.1 million per year. In addition, the results
of a paper describing an economic model commissioned by the HSUS
indicates that treating wild horses on one hypothetical Herd Management
Area (HMA) with PZP could save BLM approximately $5 million dollars
over 12 years, while achieving and maintaining Appropriate Management
Levels of 874 horses. Since BLM estimates that almost 82,000 wild
horses roam in the United States, PZP use could save tens of millions
of dollars if applied broadly across all HMAs.
However, instead of pursuing Congressional recommendations to
increase the use of fertility control tools, BLM has consistently
failed to implement any humane management plan. In fact, in 2018 the
agency treated only 702 horses with fertility control out of an
estimated rangeland population of approximately 82,000--less than 1
percent of the population.
The program must be altered to ensure that wild horses and burros
are managed humanely--and that populations begin to gradually decline.
As such, we recommend a sustainable management program which should
include four prongs:
1.
Conduct targeted gathers and removals at densely populated HMAs
to reduce herd size in the short term.
2.
Treat gathered horses with fertility control prior to returning
to the range. This program should continue until 90 percent of the
mares on the range have been treated and continued consistent fertility
control is implemented.
3.
Relocate horses in holding facilities, and those taken off the
range to large cost-effective pasture facilities funded through public-
private partnerships.
4.
Promote adoptions in order to reduce captive populations and
costs.
We ask that you fund the BLM Wild Horse and Burro Program at
$135,000,000, contingent on the agency's immediate implementation of a
management program based on the four points listed above.
We request the same language barring BLM wild horses and burros
from being sent to slaughter that figured in the fiscal year 2019
Appropriations bill: ``Appropriations herein made shall not be
available for the destruction of healthy, unadopted, wild horses and
burros that results in their destruction for processing into commercial
products,'' (Division E, p. 7, lines 5-10).
We also request the same protections for wild horses and burros
transferred to other agencies that were included in the fiscal year
2019 Appropriations bill, ensuring that transferred wild horses and
burros shall not be: destroyed in a way that results in their
destruction into commercial products; sold or otherwise transferred in
a way that results in their destruction for processing into commercial
products; or euthanized except upon the recommendation of a licensed
veterinarian, in cases of severe injury, illness, or advanced age
(Division G, p. 61-62, lines 20-15).
forest service--wild horse and burro program
We request inclusion of language barring USFS wild horses and
burros from being sent to slaughter that mirrors the language that
appeared for the BLM in the fiscal year 2019 Appropriations bill:
``Appropriations herein made shall not be available for the destruction
of healthy, unadopted, wild horses and burros that results in their
destruction for processing into commercial products.''
fish and wildlife service--multinational species conservation fund
We urge the subcommittee to appropriate $15 million for the MSCF,
which supports critical conservation programs for some of our world's
most iconic species: African and Asian elephants, rhinos, tigers, great
apes, and sea turtles.
The HSUS joins a broad coalition of organizations in support of
MSCF, while asking that proceeds of MSCF semi-postal stamps remain
supplementary to annual appropriations.
While we wholeheartedly support continued funding for MSCF, we are
concerned about past incidents and oppose any future use of funds from
these conservation programs to promote trophy hunting, trade in animal
parts, and other consumptive uses--including live capture for trade,
captive breeding, entertainment, or for the public display industry--
under the guise of conservation. The use of MSCF grants must be
consistent with the spirit of its authorizing law.
fish and wildlife service--office of international affairs
We request that you appropriate $18 million for OIA, whose programs
provide critical resources to help stakeholders on the ground fight
wildlife trafficking and poaching. In particular, funds will be used
for comprehensive and holistic solutions in other countries to mitigate
the threats of wildlife poaching and trafficking--including community
engagement, law enforcement, reducing consumer demand for trafficked
wildlife, and international collaboration.
In the past year, the American public has reacted with dismay and
disapproval to the administration's actions to allow increased imports
of sport-hunted trophies into the United States. We ask that the
subcommittee exclude any language from the Appropriations bill that
would relax regulations on imports of such trophies. We also request
the subcommittee to urge the Fish and Wildlife Service to refrain from
relaxing regulations on imports of such trophies.
fish and wildlife service--office of law enforcement
We urge the subcommittee to fund OLE at $85 million. The United
States is among the world's largest consumers of illegal wildlife,
underscoring the importance of OLE's work fighting transnational and
domestic wildlife crime.
Accomplishments from the past year illustrate how OLE has
capitalized on past investments to make progress toward these goals.
The OLE has ongoing operations to combat the illegal trade of elephant
ivory, glass eels, and other wildlife products. Operation Crash, aimed
at rhino horn trafficking, secured the September 2017 conviction of a
California man for selling rhino horn. In January 2018, another
investigation yielded the conviction of two Florida men for stealing
more than 650 sea turtle eggs from their nests.
We also ask that the bill exclude language to weaken the
enforcement or implementation of the June 6, 2016 rule combating ivory
trade in the United States (81 Fed. Reg. 36387).
fish and wildlife service--international wildlife conservation council
We urge the subcommittee to block all funding for the International
Wildlife Conservation Council (IWCC). The IWCC was established under
the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App. 2) but violates its
criteria in several ways. The council is not essential, as it is
duplicative of past and present councils. It is not balanced or
protected from undue influence of special interests, as almost all of
its nongovernmental members come from the world of hunting and have
personal, financial, or other vested interests in loosening
restrictions on hunting wildlife internationally. Further, the IWCC is
not in the public interest. As such, the IWCC is not a responsible use
of American taxpayers' money.
endangered species act
The Endangered Species Act (ESA) is fundamental to the protection
of our planet's most imperiled animals. This law, which is supported by
90 percent of American voters, has prevented the extinction of 99
percent of the species under its care, including the bald eagle. Under
the ESA, the responsibility to list and delist species lies with
Federal agencies, which must make these listing decisions based on the
best available science. The authority to make these science-based
management decisions should remain with Federal agencies.
We ask that any funding related to the implementation of the ESA be
directed toward the following programs: Listing; Recovery; Planning and
Consultation; Conservation and Restoration; and the Cooperative
Endangered Species Conservation Fund.
We also ask that the fiscal year 2020 budget exclude any language
preventing agencies from making listing or delisting decisions based on
sound science, or that otherwise undermine the ESA.
______
Prepared Statement of the International Fund for Animal Welfare
On behalf of the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) and
our members and supporters nationwide, thank you for the opportunity to
offer testimony on the fiscal year 2020 Interior, Environment and
Related Agencies Appropriations Act. The International Fund for Animal
IFAW has 17 offices globally and works in more than 40 countries around
the world. IFAW takes a holistic approach to innovating solutions for
tough conservation challenges like conflicts between humans and
wildlife, and illegal wildlife trafficking. Recognizing the unbreakable
link between animals and human wellbeing, we support and empower
communities to coexist with and value native wildlife and help those
communities develop tools to protect their wild heritage. IFAW
appreciates this subcommittee's support in the current fiscal year 2019
in providing funding for many important conservation programs, and
requests your continued support for these programs in fiscal year 2020,
including full funding for the Endangered Species Act, the
Multinational Species Conservation Funds ($18 million), the
International Affairs program within the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
($18 million), and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Office of Law
Enforcement ($81 million). With respect to the Endangered Species Act
(ESA), IFAW requests (1) the subcommittee commission a report on proper
funding levels necessary to fully implement the Act; (2) until a report
has been finalized, raise ESA funding in line with any increases to
defense spending; and (3) deny support for any projects that seek to
circumvent the ESA or National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA).
Finally, we urge the subcommittee to prioritize infrastructure projects
that are sustainable and resilient.
Healthy, biodiverse ecosystems are fundamentally necessary to human
health and wellbeing; they provide a bulwark against catastrophic
events, increase or resilience, and serve as an insurance policy
against future loss. Unfortunately, wildlife and wild lands are in
peril around the world. Trafficking in wildlife and wildlife parts
remains the fourth most lucrative criminal enterprise worldwide. Here
at home, years of scarce funding have left an overwhelming backlog of
species awaiting evaluation for protections under the Endangered
Species Act (ESA). And just this month, the Intergovernmental Science-
Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) released
a summary of its landmark Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services. The comprehensive report, authored by more than 145
experts from 50 countries over 3 years, warns that ``1 million animal
and plant species are now threatened with extinction, many within
decades, more than ever before in human history''.\i\ This
unprecedented threat to biodiversity makes all of us more vulnerable,
and imperils the very fabric of this planet we call home.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\i\ https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/blog/2019/05/nature-
decline-unprecedented-report/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, at IFAW we see reasons for hope. If we invest wisely now,
we can begin to stem the tide of extinction. And by doing so, we will
help to ensure plentiful food, clean drinking water, and breathable air
for ourselves and future generations. Moreover, we will save financial
resources overall: it is always more expensive to treat disease
outbreaks than it is to prevent them, or to restore a damaged landscape
than to preserve an undamaged ecosystem. The good news is that many of
the programs that are best able to address today's grim challenges fall
within the jurisdiction of this subcommittee.
No NEPA or ESA Waivers: Broadly, IFAW urges this subcommittee to
consider the health of wildlife and the environment in all of its
actions. At a minimum, no federally-supported construction project,
including disaster remediation projects, should be exempted from such
fundamental laws as the ESA and NEPA. NEPA and ESA analyses protect
against substantial social, environmental, and economic harm. These
reviews allow construction projects to move forward while ensuring full
disclosure of potentially harmful outcomes, informed decisionmaking,
effective design, and risk mitigation. There has been a distressing
trend to exempt projects from NEPA, ESA, or other environmental reviews
and we urge the subcommittee to reverse this trend by denying funding
for any plan that does not include a commitment to bedrock conservation
and environmental reviews.
Infrastructure: As Congress moves to address our aging
infrastructure, we have an unparalleled opportunity to invest in
environmental safeguards and conservation innovations that will ensure
American wellbeing and security, and create jobs and prosperity for the
citizens of today and for many future generations. IFAW urges this
subcommittee to review any infrastructure plans within your
jurisdiction through the lens of wildlife conservation and
environmental sustainability. We advocate prioritizing funding for
projects that: rely on sustainable or natural materials to increase
infrastructure resiliency and longevity; reintroduce or preserve native
flora; create resilient and sustainable water and waste management
systems, particularly through implementing natural alternatives like
wetlands, dune restoration, and natural vegetation buffers; and reduce
wildlife conflict using wildlife corridors and crossings.
Additionally, natural areas on public lands provide numerous
valuable ecosystem services to the American people including clean
water and water purification, filtration and storage; flood control;
soil stabilization; climate regulation; wildlife habitat and corridors;
and recreation opportunities. Unfortunately, some existing
infrastructure may threaten ecosystem services, especially if in a
degraded condition. For example, national forests contain more than
380,000 miles of roads \ii\ (more than 7 times as many miles as the
interstate highway system \iii\), some 7000 bridges \iv\ and over 1,700
dams. Efforts must be made to repair or in some cases remove
infrastructure that poses a threat to ecosystem and public interest
values. As with all infrastructure projects, we urge the subcommittee
to give preference to projects that use sustainable and natural
materials that provide better resilience to changing conditions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\ii\ According to USDA that is an estimated 380,000 miles of Forest
Service roads not including public roads such a State, county and
private roads maintained by others on National Forest System. https://
www.fs.fed.us/eng/road_mgt/factsheet.shtml last observed 1/24/19
\iii\ According to the Federal Highway Administration: Currently,
the Interstate System is 46,876 miles long https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/
interstate/faq.cfm#question3
\iv\ https://www.fs.fed.us/eng/road_mgt/factsheet.shtml
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
u.s. fish and wildlife service priority programs
Endangered Species Act: In spite of years of relatively flat
funding, our Nations' most important conservation law, the Endangered
Species Act, remains effective and has been successful in protecting 99
percent of listed species. More than 2,300 plant and animal species are
currently listed. Saving species from extinction is more than just
about preserving iconic wildlife for generations to come. We are also
protecting integral parts of the ecosystem that provides the air we
breathe, the water we drink, the parks we enjoy, and the medicine we
need. The Endangered Species Act protects wildlife within the United
States, and species around the globe by requiring agencies to ensure
that federally supported international activities protect species
survival and preserve important habitat and by generally prohibiting
the import of listed species.
The ESA has faced frequent attacks in recent years, through
spending riders, authorizing legislation, and administrative action.
IFAW thanks this subcommittee for its efforts to fend off
appropriations riders in past bills, and asks that any riders aimed at
undermining the ESA be excluded from the fiscal year 2020 Act.
Additionally, while species face ever-mounting pressures from
climate change, habitat loss, and other factors, funding for the ESA
has not kept pace with the need. There is a backlog of species awaiting
consideration for protections under the Act. IFAW urges the
subcommittee to direct the Congressional Research Service (CRS) to
provide on funding levels necessary for FWS to fully implement the ESA.
In the meantime, we ask the subcommittee to increase funding for ESA
programs at a rate commensurate with increases to defense spending in
order to better reflect the increasing need of imperiled species.
FWS International Affairs: The FWS International Affairs (IA)
program is tasked with coordinating domestic and international efforts
to protect and restore wildlife and ecosystems. By overseeing domestic
conservation laws and international conservation treaties, including
the Convention in International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES),
the IA program has become a keystone of U.S. leadership on the
international stage. Importantly, the IA program supports transboundary
regional projects as well as those that focus on target species,
promoting habitat conservation and restoration in areas where wildlife
is most at risk from habitat loss. IFAW requests $18 million for this
important program.
Multinational Species Conservation Fund (MSCF): IFAW is part of a
diverse coalition of groups, including animal welfare, environmental,
sporting, and industry organizations, that support the MSCF. These
funds protect tigers, rhinos, African and Asian elephants, great apes,
and marine turtles, all of which are in constant danger from illegal
poaching and wildlife trafficking, habitat destruction, climate change,
and other pressures. Wild members of these species may live outside our
borders, but these iconic animals remain important to the American
people. None of us wants this to be the generation to preside over the
extinction of elephants or tigers in the wild. MSCF programs have
helped to sustain wildlife populations by funding groundbreaking
projects that combat poaching, reduce human-wildlife conflict and
protect the vital habitat of priority species. By promoting community
engagement and combatting trafficking, the MSCF programs also promote
the rule of law abroad and contribute to our domestic security. These
programs are highly efficient, with low administrative costs ensuring
that more than 95 percent of appropriated funds were distributed
through grants in fiscal year 2017. The MSCF received a small increase
in fiscal year 2019, but with pressures on these species mounting, IFAW
requests that $18 million be appropriated for the MSCF for fiscal year
2020.
Office of Law Enforcement: The U.S. remains one of the world's
largest illegal markets for wildlife and wildlife products. Our
leadership within the global community is also a key driver in
convincing nations around the globe to invest in protecting endangered
wildlife. The Office of Law Enforcement (OLE) within the FWS is on the
front lines of wildlife crime, inspecting wildlife shipments,
conducting investigations, and enforcing Federal wildlife laws to
protect fish, wildlife, plants, and ecosystems. The OLE combats
poaching and wildlife trafficking, breaking up international criminal
rings that not only harm wildlife, but may also engage in other illicit
activities. Among other things, the small but mighty force at OLE sends
experienced FWS attaches to strategic regions where they combat
wildlife trafficking by supporting and advising foreign partners. This
program is critical both to domestic and international conservation
efforts and to U.S.security. IFAW requests $81 million for OLE.
In closing, thank you for the opportunity to share IFAW's priority
requests to promote conservation in the fiscal year 2020 Interior, the
Environment and Related Agencies Appropriations Act. Wildlife and their
habitats are more than our national heritage, they are essential to
human health and happiness. We appreciate the continued support of this
subcommittee for conservation efforts globally and within the United
States. With your support, we look forward to a bright and healthy
future for generations of wildlife lovers and all Americans. Thank you.
______
Prepared Statement of the Interstate Mining Compact Commission
My name is Thomas L. Clarke and I serve as Executive Director of
the Interstate Mining Compact Commission. My address is 459 Carlisle
Drive, Herndon, VA 20190. My email is [email protected] I appreciate
the opportunity to present this statement to the subcommittee regarding
the views of the Interstate Mining Compact Commission's 26 member
States on the fiscal year 2020 Budget Request for the Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSMRE) within the U.S. Department
of the Interior. In its proposed budget, OSMRE is requesting $43.9
million to fund Title V grants to States for the implementation of
their regulatory programs, a reduction of $24.7 million below the
fiscal year 2019 enacted level. We believe this is inadequate and urge
that funding be continued at the fiscal year 2019 enacted level of
$68.59 million.
The Compact is comprised of 26 States that together produce some 95
percent of the Nation's coal, as well as other important minerals. The
Compact's purposes are to advance the protection and restoration of
land, water and other resources affected by mining through the
encouragement of programs in each of the party States that will achieve
comparable results in protecting, conserving and improving the
usefulness of natural resources and to assist in achieving and
maintaining an efficient, productive and economically viable mining
industry.
OSMRE has projected an amount of $43.9 million for Title V grants
to States in fiscal year 2020, an amount which is matched by the
States. These grants support the implementation of State regulatory
programs under the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA)
and as such are essential to the full and effective operation of those
programs.\1\ Pursuant to these primacy programs, the States have the
most direct and critical responsibilities for conducting regulatory
operations to minimize the impact of coal extraction operations on
people and the environment. The States accomplish this through a
combination of permitting, inspection and enforcement duties,
designating lands as unsuitable for mining operations, and ensuring
that timely reclamation occurs after mining.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ OSMRE recognizes the significant role played by the states in
its budget justification document on page 44 where it notes that
``primacy states have the most direct and critical responsibilities for
conducting regulatory operations to minimize the impact of coal
extraction operations on people and the environment. The states have
the capabilities and knowledge to regulate the lands within their
borders.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In fiscal year 2019, Congress approved $68.590 million for State
and Tribal Title V grants pursuant to the Omnibus Appropriations Bill.
This continued a much-needed trend whereby the amount appropriated for
these regulatory grants aligned with the demonstrated needs of the
States. The States are greatly encouraged by the amount approved by
Congress for Title V grant funding over the past several fiscal years.
These grants had been stagnant for many years and the gap between the
States' requests and what they received was widening. This debilitating
trend was compounding the problems caused by inflation and other costs
beyond the control of the States, thus undermining State efforts to
realize needed program improvements and enhancements and jeopardizing
their efforts to minimize the potential adverse impacts of coal
extraction operations on people and the environment. OSMRE acknowledges
the importance of this funding on page 43 of its budget justification
document where the agency explains that ``primacy States will continue
to need a diverse and multidisciplinary cadre of personnel skilled in
scientific and engineering areas to review mine permits, determine
whether performance bond coverage and amounts are sufficient to ensure
reclamation, conduct mine site inspections and implement enforcement
actions when necessary.''
In past budget requests, OSMRE displayed a pattern of proposing
inadequate funding for State Title V regulatory programs. Congress
consistently rejected the proposed reductions and funded the programs
at amounts that more closely aligned with the States' projected needs.
OSMRE's fiscal year 2020 budget proposal once again moves the grants
marker in the wrong direction by continuing to propose increasing cuts
in regulatory grants, year after year, that are rejected by Congress
year after year. The proposed cut for fiscal year 2020 is $8.6 million
more than the cut OSMRE proposed for fiscal year 2019, (which was
double the cut it had proposed in fiscal year 2018). OSMRE States that
``this request fully funds the projected 2020 activity requirements,
based on a downward trend in State grant execution and an historical
return of unexecuted appropriated funds at the end of the grant cycle
each year.''
What OSMRE fails to note in its analysis is that, given fiscal
constraints on State budgets, some States have only recently been able
to move beyond hiring and salary freezes and restrictions on equipment
and vehicle purchases, all of which have inhibited the ability of some
States to spend the full amount of their Federal grant money in some
years. With many States now recovering enough to utilize their full
grant amount, it is imperative that funding be maintained at a level
that meets the States' estimates of program needs. Those estimates
reflect the ongoing work associated with State program implementation
including permit reviews, inspections and enforcement at all
inspectable units. Even with the downturn in coal production, the
States' workload has not decreased--and in some cases has increased
given the tenuous condition of some coal companies. In the latter
situation, higher levels of vigilance are necessary to insure
contemporaneous reclamation and abatement of violations.
OSMRE goes on to note that it will ``continue to support State
regulatory grant requests by re-distributing the available prior year
funds as needed.'' We believe this plan to be shortsighted in that it
fails to consider the improving fiscal conditions in many States and
the damaging precedent set by appropriating suboptimal grant amounts.
Our analysis of State program funding needs for fiscal year 2020 based
on recent estimates indicate that a full Federal appropriation of $68.6
million will be required. In some States, additional matching Federal
funds may be necessary to meet program needs. It should be noted that
in the future, the States' needs may increase. By fiscal year 2021, we
can expect that Tennessee will have attained primacy and add another
million dollars or so to the States' grant needs.
Furthermore, there is no guarantee that these carryover funds will
be available into the future or that they would not be reprogrammed for
other purposes. Congress should specifically mandate through report
language that all carryover funds from past fiscal years can only be
used to fund State regulatory program needs. It would also be
beneficial to State program implementation if OSMRE was authorized to
utilize these carryover funds for State program enhancement activities
(without matching requirements) for such critical program topics as
electronic permitting, mine mapping, and benchmarking workshops.
We acknowledge that the amount of carryover funding specifically
targeted for State regulatory grants has increased over the years, to
approximately $28 million according to OSMRE's estimates. This is the
result of two factors: (1) the fact that appropriations for State
regulatory grants are treated as 2-year money, thereby providing
flexibility for the use of these moneys and (2) a few tough years where
States faced particular challenges in obtaining State share match
moneys and/or expending grant funding before the end of the Federal
fiscal year. With an improving economy and the ability to better manage
State program expenditures, States are expending almost all of what
they receive. Furthermore, having a cushion of available carryover
funding from year to year provides the certainty and confidence that
both OSMRE and the States require in managing funding for these
critical programs.
Clear indications from Congress that reliable, consistent funding
will continue into the future has done much to stimulate support for
these programs by State legislatures and budget officers who, in the
face of difficult fiscal climates and constraints, have had to deal
with the challenge of matching Federal grant dollars with State funds.
This is particularly true for those States whose match is partially
based on permit fees from the mining industry, where significant
reductions in permitting activity translate to fewer permit fees (but
not in the amount of regulatory work for State regulatory agencies).
Recall that any cut in Federal funding generally translates to an
additional cut of an equal amount for overall program funding for many
States, especially those without Federal lands, since these States can
generally only match what they receive in Federal money.
We are encouraged with language in OSMRE's budget justification
document that ``in furtherance of cooperative Federalism, OSMRE will
continue its oversight steering committee with State Regulatory
Authorities to discuss impediments to meaningful and effective
oversight including revising current OSMRE oversight directions
[sic].'' IMCC approached OSMRE in September of 2017 to pursue these and
other programmatic concerns, including the processing of State program
amendments, NEPA requirements and funding protocols. Since that time,
the States have engaged in a series of meetings with OSMRE to advance
our common goals under SMCRA. However, the proof is in actual
implementation of these laudable goals. Based on our experience with
program operations, some of the very areas OSMRE identifies as reasons
for its oversight activity are either dependent on State involvement
(training) or have seen little in the way of progress over the years
(State program amendment review and approval). We are hopeful that our
recent engagement with OSMRE on these critical program elements will
come to fruition, unlike past efforts which either stalled or lacked
leadership support.
The overall performance of the States as detailed in OSMRE's annual
State program evaluation reports, together with the fact that
nationwide, 90 percent of the sites inspected did not have off-site
impacts, demonstrates that the States are implementing their programs
effectively and in accordance with the purposes and objectives of
SMCRA. In our view, this suggests that OSMRE is adequately
accomplishing its statutory oversight obligations with current Federal
program funding and that any increased workloads are likely to fall
upon the States, which have primary responsibility for implementing
appropriate adjustments to their programs identified during Federal
oversight. To the extent that OSMRE is looking for ways to improve and
enhance the overall implementation of SMCRA at both the State and
Federal level, we urge the agency to move forward with the findings and
recommendations that IMCC has presented to OSMRE to address the
continuing fiscal impacts on program implementation, particularly with
respect to duplicative inspection and enforcement requirements.
For all the above reasons, we urge Congress to approve not less
than $68.6 million for State and Tribal Title V regulatory grants in
fiscal year 2020, the same amount enacted by Congress over the past few
fiscal years. In doing so, Congress will continue its commitment to
ensuring the States have the resources they need to continue their work
on the forefront of environmental protection and preservation of public
health and safety.
We are concerned about the proposal to increased funding for the
``Enhanced Geomine Project'' by $500,000. The Geomine Project was a
pilot program covering three of IMCC's member States in the Appalachian
region. We understand OSMRE abandoned more this pilot program than 5
years ago. Without more information regarding the intended use of these
funds, we question whether expenditure of this money on an abandoned
project is appropriate.
We are pleased to see that OSMRE's proposed budget generally
maintains the level of expenditures for the National Technical Training
Program (NTTP) and the Technical Information and Professional Service
(TIPS), with a slight increase in funding for Title Regulatory
Programs. The States rely heavily on the NTTP and TIPS training classes
for their new employees and for refresher courses for more seasoned
employees. These training programs are especially important as States
find themselves at a point where many of their employees are finishing
careers and must be replaced with less experienced people. Any
adjustments to these two programs should involve the States working
through the NTTP/TIPS Steering Committee.
With regard to funding for State Title IV Abandoned Mine Land (AML)
program grants, the States and Tribes should receive the mandatory
appropriation of $188.4 million in fiscal year 2020. In its proposed
fiscal year 2020 budget, OSMRE seeks to eliminate $115 million for the
AML economic development pilot projects due to the fact that this
funding ``overlaps with existing mandatory AML grants''. We believe
that funding for pilot projects is separate and distinct from other AML
funding sources. This funding is targeted for economic and community
development and reuse goals. We strongly support continued funding
(from the General Fund) for these pilot projects. We also recommend
concerted action to reauthorize fee collection under Title IV of SMCRA
IMCC also supports a continuation of funding for the watershed
cooperative agreements at $1.55 million. Much valuable work has been
accomplished through this program, especially given the matching funds
that come from other sources besides OSMRE's share for these worthwhile
projects.
We appreciate the opportunity to submit this statement on the
Office of Surface Mining's proposed budget for fiscal year 2019. We
also endorse the statement of the National Association of Abandoned
Mine Land Programs (NAAMLP), which goes into greater detail regarding
the implications of OSMRE's funding for the States and Tribes related
to the AML program. We would be happy to answer any questions.
______
Prepared Statement of the Izaak Walton League of America
The Izaak Walton League of America appreciates the opportunity to
submit testimony for the record concerning appropriations for fiscal
year 2020 for various agencies and programs under the jurisdiction of
the subcommittee. The League is a national, nonprofit organization with
more than 40,000 members and 200 local chapters nationwide. Our members
are committed to advancing common sense policies that safeguard
wildlife and habitat, support community-based conservation, and address
pressing environmental issues. The following pertains to programs
administered by the Departments of Agriculture, Interior, and
Environmental Protection Agency.
departments of agriculture and the interior, land and water
conservation fund (lwcf)
The League requests a total of $524 million for the LWCF in fiscal
year 2020. It is important to invest in strategic land acquisition to
protect critical habitat, secure valuable in-holdings, and expand
recreational access to existing Federal public lands. Dramatically
reducing funding for LWCF, as the President's budget requests, will not
provide meaningful savings to taxpayers because LWCF is capitalized
with revenue from off-shore oil and gas drilling. As importantly,
diverting resources from LWCF to offset other expenditures from the
general treasury directly undermines the fundamental premise on which
LWCF is based. The common sense premise that a portion of the revenue
generated by natural resource extraction should be invested in
conserving other natural resources at the national, regional, and State
levels is the foundation of the fund's enactment.
department of the interior, fish and wildlife service, national
wildlife refuge system
The League joins other members of the Cooperative Alliance for
Refuge Enhancement (CARE), a diverse coalition of 22 wildlife,
sporting, conservation, and scientific organizations representing
approximately 15 million of members and supporters, in requesting $514
million for operations and maintenance of the National Wildlife Refuge
system.
The League and CARE groups appreciate the importance of fiscal
discipline and making strategic spending decisions. CARE annually
develops an estimate of the operations and maintenance budget that is
necessary to effectively provide visitor services and law enforcement
and conserve and manage fish, wildlife, and habitat across the refuge
system. CARE estimates operations and maintenance needs total $900
million annually. Although our long-term goal is to make steady
progress toward a budget which more accurately reflects demands on the
ground, the fiscal year 2020 request balances fiscal responsibility
with pressing resource conservation, visitor services, and law
enforcement needs.
department of the interior, fish and wildlife service, state and tribal
wildlife grants
The League urges the subcommittee to provide at least $71 million
in fiscal year 2020 for State and Tribal Wildlife Grants. This amount
equals the House subcommittee's appropriation. State Wildlife Grants
support proactive conservation projects aimed at preventing wildlife
from becoming endangered. Experience shows that efforts to restore
imperiled wildlife can be particularly contentious and costly when
action is taken only after species are formally listed as threatened or
endangered pursuant to the Endangered Species Act. State Wildlife
Grants augment State and community-based efforts to safeguard habitat
and wildlife before either reaches the tipping point. The Federal
investment leverages significant funding from private, State, and local
sources.
department of the interior, national park service, deferred maintenance
The League requests the subcommittee to provide $657 million to the
Park Service in fiscal year 2020 for addressing chronically underfunded
maintenance and repairs. The Park Services estimates that more than $11
billion is needed to adequately address repairs and maintenance on
roads, buildings, utility systems, and others structures and facilities
that have been deferred due to budget constraints. America's national
parks provide millions of visitors with world-class experiences every
year and have preserved some of our most iconic landscapes. Maintaining
the infrastructure within our parks allows visitors to experience
nature, history, and all the wonders of our national park system safely
and comfortably. Years of underfunding have led to this huge backlog of
maintenance and now is the time to begin to seriously address the needs
of our world class parks.
environmental protection agency, great lakes restoration initiative
The League supports providing $300 million for the Great Lakes
Restoration Initiative in fiscal year 2020. The Great Lakes provide
drinking water to 35 million people and support jobs and recreational
opportunities for millions more. However, the health of the Great Lakes
is seriously threatened by untreated sewage, toxic pollution, invasive
species, and habitat loss. The eight States that border the Lakes and
many non-governmental organizations have invested significant resources
to safeguard these national treasures. Sustained Federal investment at
a significant level is also needed or the problems will only get worse
and cost even more to fix.
Cleaning up the Great Lakes will provide many benefits, including
economic development in the region. Great Lakes restoration efforts
produce at least $2 in economic return for every $1 invested.
Restoration projects create jobs for engineers, landscape architects,
and construction workers and improve water quality, support outdoor
recreation, and reestablish healthy fish and wildlife habitat. These
results lay the foundation for long-term prosperity in the region.
environmental protection agency, chesapeake bay program
The League asks that the subcommittee to fund the Chesapeake Bay
Program at $73 million in fiscal year 2020, matching last year's
enacted spending. The Chesapeake Bay is the largest estuary in the
United States and one of the largest in the world. More than 16 million
people live within the Bay watershed. The Bay is a critical economic,
environmental, and recreational resource for these residents and the
Nation as a whole. However, the productivity and health of this
nationally significant resource remain seriously impaired by nutrient
pollution from multiple sources throughout the watershed.
The EPA and States have launched a significant and rigorous effort
to cut pollution and improve water quality. Few would argue that
implementing the total maximum daily load (TMDL) will not be
challenging or not require significant investment to reduce point and
non-point source pollution. However, the president's budget request in
inadequate and fails to support States, local governments, and other
partners as they implement the TMDL. The League believes it is
essential to provide technical and financial assistance to achieve
results on-the-ground and secure a foundation for sustained pollution
reductions over the long-term.
environmental protection agency, south florida geographic initiative
The League respectfully requests the subcommittee appropriate $1.7
million for the South Florida Geographic Initiative for Fiscal Year
2020. The administration's request does not meet the minimum amount
needed annually to reduce polluted discharges from leaking septic
systems and other toxic cesspits, adequately restore the Everglades,
and protect drinking water for 8 million Americans living in Florida.
Economic benefits that would come from restoration of the Everglades
are astronomical. Gains in biodiversity, groundwater purification and
aquifer storage, increasing property values, park visitation, carbon
sequestration, and improved fish and wildlife habitat that would come
from a full restoration of the Everglades, as described in the Army
Corps' Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan, would drive an
economic increase of $46.5 billion. The EPA investment in the
restoration of south Florida and the Everglades is an important piece
of the strategy to restore traditional water flows, protect drinking
water, and conserve biodiversity.
environmental protection agency, non-point source management program
(clean water act section 319)
The League is concerned that the administration has proposed severe
reductions and even elimination for Section 319, the Non-point Source
Management Program. These reductions are counterproductive as EPA and
many States report that non-point source pollution is the leading cause
of water quality problems, including harmful effects on drinking water
supplies, recreation, fisheries and wildlife. Based on the pressing
nature of the problem, it makes sense to invest resources that help
States and local governments more aggressively tackle non-point source
pollution. The League urges the subcommittee to match last year's
funding for Section 319 at $169 million for fiscal year 2020.
The Izaak Walton League appreciates the opportunity to testify
about these important issues.
[This statement was submitted by Jared Mott, Conservation
Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Jamestown S'Klallam Tribe
On behalf of the Jamestown S'Klallam Tribe, I am pleased to submit
this written testimony on our funding priorities and requests for the
fiscal year 2020 Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), Indian Health Service
(IHS) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) budgets. The
S'Klallams entered into the Point-No-Point Treaty with the United
States in January of 1855 effectively sanctioning our Tribes unique
status as a sovereign nation and solidifying our legal standing in
accordance with the U.S. Constitution. Our Tribe relinquished vast
tracks of our Tribal homelands and resources in exchange for the U.S.
Government's solemn promise to uphold and protect our Tribes inherent
right to Self-Governance and to provide adequate resources to secure
the well-being of our community and Tribal citizens. This trust
responsibility is a legally enforceable fiduciary obligation on the
part of the U.S. to protect Tribal treaty rights, lands, assets and
resources.
Despite the U.S. Government's trust obligations and our Tribes
legally sanctioned rights, Federal funding and unmet needs in Tribal
communities is at a crisis level as documented by the U.S. Commission
on Civil Rights recently released 2018 Report, ``Broken Promises:
Continuing Federal Funding Shortfall for Native Americans.'' The Report
found that inadequate Federal funding undermines Tribal sovereignty and
that the Federal Government's failure to uphold their trust obligations
has resulted in American Indians/Alaska Natives (AI/AN) facing
disproportionate challenges as compared to other Americans in health,
education and employment outcomes that are exacerbated by insufficient
funding. In order to address these inequities and trust violations, the
Commission has recommended that Congress substantially invest in AI/AN
programs and services.
The need for providing steady, equitable, non-discretionary funding
directly to Tribal Nations to support core government programs and
services is well documented and we have shown time and again that the
Federal investment in our community is a good investment. Self-
Governance has allowed us to redesign programs and services and utilize
the Federal investment in a way that best addresses the needs of our
community. Some of our more notable successes include most of our
Tribal citizens seeking secondary or higher education degrees, the
growth of our Tribal businesses and revenue and the Tribe's status as
the second largest employer in our region, the Northern Olympic
Peninsula. The success we have attained demonstrates that continued
Federal support is invaluable to growing sustainable Tribal economies
and bolstering surrounding regional economies. Yet, as we seek to
identify opportunities that support our goal of self-reliance, we must
also acknowledge the barriers that impede our ability to reach our full
potential, including, the severe and persistent underfunding of Tribal
programs and services despite the trust obligation, the absence of data
to support funding requests for Tribal programs and services,
management weaknesses \1\ and the consistently late distribution of
funding. All of these, and many other factors attribute to the
persistent shortfalls and overwhelming unmet needs/unfulfilled Federal
obligations in Tribal communities.\2\ Data collection for Tribal
programs throughout the Federal system is substandard or non-existent
and it is difficult, if not impossible, to show program success and
justify the need for program increases if funding is not received in a
timely fashion. Recently, the BIA announced a moratorium on the
collection of unmet needs data for Tribal programs and services. We
view this action by the agency to be inconsistent with their trust
responsibility. The agencies need to be held accountable and directed
to work in partnership with Tribes to collect data that quantifies the
true unmet needs in Indian country with credible metrics that will
provide an accurate profile of the unmet needs in Indian country.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO High Risk Reports on BIA, IHS and BIE--GAO-17-589T, GAO-17-
790T, and GAO-18-616T.
\2\ GAO-19-87 Interior Should Address Factors Hindering Tribal
Administration of Federal Programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tribal Specific Appropriation Priorities
1.
$101.4 million increase for the Indian General Assistance Program
(IGAP) and Beyond GAP EPA
2.
$50 million Puget Sound EPA
$101.4 million increase--Indian General Assistance Program (GAP)--
and Beyond GAP EPA.--Although our Treaty guarantees our Tribe and its
citizens the right to hunt, fish, and gather shellfish in our usual and
accustomed areas that right is meaningless if there are no elk to hunt,
fish to catch, or clams/oysters and berries to harvest. The Indian
General Assistance Program has allowed us to make tremendous strides in
advancing techniques that identify and reduce pollution, improve water
quality, assess the status of public health needs, restore habitat, and
replenish depleted fish and shellfish stocks, that are on the brink of
extinction. The Beyond GAP initiative will move the Federal/Tribal
partnership from capacity building to enable implementation of
comprehensive and consistent environmental programs.
$50 million--Puget Sound EPA.--The Geographic/Ecosystems program
provides funding for our Tribe to protect and restore the Puget Sound
ecosystem, including, restoration of the Olympia oyster habitat with
hatchery-propagated oyster seed, habitat restoration, floodplain
restoration and protection. This funding enables Tribes to implement a
wide range of projects aimed at improving the health of Puget Sound and
Tribal Treaty Resources.
National Requests and Recommendations for the BIA and IHS
1.
Advanced Appropriations for Tribal Programs and Services
2.
Increase Funding for Tribal Base Budgets/Recurring Programs
3.
Invest in Tribal Infrastructure
Advanced Appropriations for Tribal Programs and Services.--
Continuing Resolutions and late distributions of funding,
sequestration, across the board budgetary rescissions and/or
reductions, spending caps and numerous and prolonged government
shutdowns have further exacerbated the funding crisis in Indian
country. Although Tribal Nations are resilient, the abrupt disruptions
of our governmental services due to a delay or lapse in Federal funding
attenuates our ability to protect the health and well being of our
communities and citizens. The recent government shutdown put our Treaty
rights at risk jeopardizing the survival of our resources and, in turn,
our culture, inhibited our economic development potential, our ability
to recruit and retain staff, and delayed the process for the
reacquisition of our Tribal homelands.
In order to keep programs and services fully operational, we had to
identify alternative funding resources whether through Tribal funds,
loans or other means without any assurances that we would be reimbursed
for these expenditures. Providing appropriations 1 year in advance will
mitigate the adverse financial effects of Federal budgetary
uncertainties on Tribes and enable the BIA and IHS to uphold their
fiduciary obligations and more adequately and effectively serve AI/AN.
Tribes will also be able to engage in more effective strategic
planning, spend funds more efficiently, grow our Tribal economy and
businesses and increase the quality of care and well-being of our
Tribal citizens and community.
Increase Funding for Tribal Base Budgets/Recurring Programs.--For
over two decades, there has been funding reductions/permanent
rescissions of numerous Tribal programs and services in order to pay
for tax cuts, wars, natural disasters and technology upgrades. These
budgetary rescissions are permanent, unsupportable reductions to Tribal
base programs which are core governmental functions. When you factor in
the inflationary rate, Tribes are not even maintaining level funding--
we are losing ground. Compounding the fiscal volatility of Federal
funding, there has been a growing trend among agencies to fund Tribal
programs and services with grant dollars rather than provide base
recurring funding. Grant funding undermines Self-Governance because it
is short term funding which creates uncertainty in planning, imposes
extensive regulation and reporting requirements and restricts the use
of indirect costs. We would urge Congress to increase funding for
Tribal base budgets by funding Tribal Priority Allocations and other
Recurring Programs because it will benefit all Tribes as opposed to
creating more grants that will only benefit a few Tribes.
Invest in Tribal Infrastructure.--Tribal governments and their
citizens face profound infrastructure challenges that are acute and
longstanding. The breadth and severity of the unmet infrastructure
needs are measured by the high rates of injury and death in our
communities. Decaying, unsafe infrastructure is not only a public
health issue but an impediment to economic development and job growth
and reflects a failure of the government to uphold its trust
obligations. Increased Federal funding and investments could effectuate
Tribal infrastructure development efforts.
National Requests and Recommendations for the BIA
1.
$10 million Natural Resources TPA
2.
$50 million Economic Development TPA
3.
$25 million Indian Guaranteed Loan Program/Surety Bonds
$10 million--Natural Resources (TPA).--Climate change is having
profound impacts on Tribes and our Tribal Treaty Rights are at risk
because of our close relationship with nature we are the most at risk.
The vitality and sustainability of our Natural Resources is integral to
the health and welfare of our Tribal citizens, communities, culture and
religious practices and economies. The Federal investment in Tribal
Natural Resources can only continue to foster Tribal self-sufficiency
and support Tribal economies by cultivating cross jurisdictional
partnerships with State and local governments that create jobs and
promote and advance trade. This investment also advances several
ancillary but equally important cultural and religious practices,
creates community cohesiveness and improves the environmental
conditions on our Tribal homelands and in surrounding communities.
$50 million--Economic Development (TPA).--Increased funding,
reduced regulatory burdens and greater access to financing tools and
incentives will allow us to continue to diversify our successful
business portfolio and expand our revenue generating opportunities
resulting in a stronger Tribal economy and less dependence on the
Federal component of our resources. A $50 million investment in
economic development would allow our Tribe to leverage funds and invest
in business opportunities projected to create 500 jobs for Tribal
citizens and our non-Indian neighbors.
$25 million--Indian Guaranteed Loan Program/Surety Bonds.--The
Federal Government is in a unique position to help advance Tribal
projects and provide sustainable economic opportunities for Indian
businesses and Tribal governments through the Loan Subsidy Program and
Surety Bonding for Indian contractors. Loan guarantees are an
attractive financial tool because Tribes are able to leverage limited
Federal funding in a prudent budget effective way and promote economic
growth by investing in projects that are capable of generating their
own revenue streams. Federal credit programs should continue to
facilitate Tribal access to private capital markets where Tribes
frequently encounter market resistance to conventional lending.
National Requests and Recommendations for the IHS
1.
$189 million Increase Funding to Support Current Services
2.
$407 million Increase Funding for Purchased and Referred Care
$189 million Increase Funding to Support Current Services.--The
Federal responsibility to provide healthcare was prepaid by the Tribes
with their land and resources. To maintain current services, factors
such as the inflationary rate, pay costs, contract support costs,
population growth and staffing needs for recently constructed
facilities all need to be fully-funded. When these mandatory factors
are not funded, Tribes must supplement programs with their own limited
revenue, or chose between limiting services or shutting down services
completely. It is critical that the IHS budget honors and respects the
Federal trust obligation.
$407 million Purchased and Referred Care (PRC).--Most IHS and
Tribally-operated direct care facilities do not provide the required
emergency and specialty care services so Tribes are forced to turn to
the private sector to fulfill this need. PRC funds are used to purchase
essential healthcare services, including inpatient and outpatient care,
routine emergency ambulatory care, transportation and medical support
services, such as diagnostic imaging, physical therapy, laboratory,
nutrition and pharmacy services. When PRC funds are depleted, services
are denied to Tribal patients.
The Jamestown S'Klallam Tribe continues to support the requests and
recommendations of our Regional and National Indian Organizations.
Thank you.
[This statement was submitted by W. Ron Allen, Tribal Chairman/
CEO.]
______
Prepared Statement of John Gates, City of Greeley Mayor
support for epa watersense and bor watersmart programs
Dear Chairwoman Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall:
The City of Greeley is writing to respectfully request your support
to continue to fund, at or above fiscal year 2019 levels, two programs
we know to be a critical support of demand management and responsible
water conservation efforts in the West: the Environmental Protection
Agency's WaterSense Program, and the Bureau of Reclamation's WaterSMART
Program.
In keeping with Greeley's century-long tradition as a water
conservation leader in Colorado, Greeley has partnered for more than a
decade with the EPA in its WaterSense programs to encourage, educate,
and facilitate water conservation both indoors and outdoors. Greeley is
engaged in a New Cache Irrigation Co. water sharing pilot project that
is funded by WaterSMART grants and stakeholder contributions; a project
that is key in the preservation of highly productive farm lands in the
Greeley area. Greeley Water has also sought 2020-2021 WaterSMART grant
matching funds to aid in our efforts to drive customer responsiveness
to demand management. The City's Water Department supports Water SMART
fixture certification and independent testing. Only WaterSense toilets,
fixtures and showerheads are sold in Colorado, and it would be a step
backwards if this program were defunded.
These Federal water programs are essential to how the West manages
a growing population, robust economies, hydraulic variability and water
resource scarcity. Further, they are essential to Greeley's on-going
efforts to use our limited water resources more efficiently, and limit
to the extent possible the need to dry up farms to secure water supply
for economic and population growth.
Greeley has supported Colorado's focus on these issues and funding
solutions. Greeley strongly supports efforts to more efficiently use
scarce water resources, supports Drought Contingency Planning and the
exploration of demand management on the Colorado River, and we strongly
urge the Federal Government to continue to be our vested partner in
this regard. WaterSense and WaterSMART Programs are both important
elements in those efforts. We appreciate your consideration of this
issue, and urge your support.
Respectfully submitted this 24th day of April, 2019
John Gates
Mayor
City of Greeley
[email protected]
______
Prepared Statement of the Karuk Tribe
April 4, 2019
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski
The Honorable Tom Udall
Chairwoman
Ranking Member
Senate Appropriations Subcommittee
Senate Appropriations Subcommittee
on Interior, Environment and
on Interior, Environment and
Related Agencies
Related Agencies
131 Dirksen Senate Office Building
125 Hart Senate Office Building
Washington, D.C. 20510
Washington, D.C. 20510
Dear Chairwoman Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall:
We are writing to request that you support economic development,
job creation, and our national heritage by appropriating up to $141
million in fiscal year 2020 funding for the Historic Preservation Fund
(HPF). Of this total, we would request that $60 million support State
Historic Preservation Offices (SHPOs), $20 million support Tribal
Historic Preservation Offices (THPOs), and $5 million fund a
competitive grant program for State or Tribal Historic Preservation
Offices to invest in geographic information systems-based mapping of
historic resources. SHPOs and THPOs tie our Nation's historic
preservation programs together. SHPOs carry out the National Historic
Preservation Act, which provides citizens the tools they need to
revitalize, rehabilitate, and protect American heritage.
THPOs carry out many of the same functions as SHPOs for Tribal
governments. Just as the SHPOs review Federal undertakings on State
lands, the THPOs review Federal undertakings on Tribal government
lands. Collectively, they exercise responsibilities over a land base
exceeding 50 million acres in 30 States, and the HPF is the sole source
of dedicated Federal funding for THPOs. More Tribes establish THPO
programs each year, representing an exercise of Tribal sovereignty, but
funding has not kept pace with this growing number. There were only 12
THPOs when they first received funding in 1996 and today, there are
nearly 200 THPOs. As a result, in 2018, 179 Tribes received an average
of $64,000, which was nearly $20,000 each less than when the program
first started. Our recommended $20 million in fiscal year 2020 for the
THPO line item would provide the nearly 200 THPOs an average of
$100,000 to run their programs, which is still meager but would start
to close the critical mission gap.
There are two cornerstones of this work. First, reconnecting Native
peoples to their cultural heritage, traditions, and places has the
power to help heal deep generational wounds. Revitalizing traditions,
languages, and practices serves to rebuild critical individual self-
worth and community foundations. To continue this work in Indian
country, it is essential that THPO programs receive increased funding
to meet the increasing need.
Second, funding THPOs and staff creates jobs, generates economic
development, and spurs community revitalization. It also facilitates
environmental and historic review processes, including for
infrastructure and energy permitting. Agencies are required to conduct
government-to-government consultation on all actions they take, which
means working with tribes to identify potentially affected resources
and properties and taking mitigation measures. When agencies and
project applicants call, someone must be there to pick up the phone and
do the work.
The current level of funding the Karuk Tribe receives only allows
for a 0.33 FTE position. This does not meet the baseline need for
carrying out primary functions on 1800 acres of Tribal Trust Land. In
additions, our large landscape conservation efforts are being applied
to a 1.2 million acre landscape. This is not sufficient for meeting the
need of the advise and assist role as we move into a new era of shared
stewardship. Tying focal species, to landscape and vegetative
characteristics, as they relate to sites, features, objects and
cultural expressions such as the ``pa arrarahi pikyav'' (the people's
fix the world stories) will be critical to the successful efforts of
addressing wildland fire management in a changing climate. Since 2014
our THPO department has grown from this .33 FTE to 3.5 FTE's in 2018 in
planning at the 5,500 acre scale. We are on a trajectory to replicate
the processes carried out in the Somes Bar Integrated Fire Management
Project throughout the aforementioned 1.2 million acre collaborative
planning area. The approval of this project through the NEPA Process
without entering objection proceedings provides proof of concept in
regards to this shared stewardship model. Stabilizing this capacity
will be a critical success factor in progressing this effort to scale.
Though this request supports the efforts of THPO's nationwide, Karuk
specificity adds to the request that the acreage associated with large
landscape conservation endeavors through the principles of shared
stewardship be included in the budget formulas for the distribution of
these funds.
As the remaining THPO's have not considered this factor in regard
to formulation of the program request preceding this Karuk specific
ask, and in all fairness, we urge you to consider an additional $10
million set aside for Tribes engaging in collaborative large landscape
conservation efforts.
Funding these historic preservation programs is vital to ensuring
that the unvarnished story of America is told. It is an investment in
towns and cities throughout the country, helping to improve the economy
of these communities by boosting tourism through their historic sites
and by leveraging public and private investment in restoring historic
buildings. This funding is both an economic and historical imperative
that creates construction jobs and protects historic resources that
might otherwise be lost forever.
We greatly appreciate the strong support Congress has shown for the
preservation of our Nation's heritage. We look forward to working with
you throughout the appropriations process and thank you for your
consideration.
Sincerely,
Russell Attebery
Chair, Karuk Tribe
______
Prepared Statement of the Lac Du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior
Chippewa Indians
On behalf of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
Indians, I submit written testimony concerning the Tribe's fiscal year
2020 budget needs within the appropriations of the Environmental
Protection Agency, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Bureau of Indian Education
and Indian Health Service. Our Tribe of 4,000 members is located in
Vilas, Oneida and Iron Counties Wisconsin. Our Tribe is the largest
employer in Vilas County. Together with Tribal enterprises, the Tribe
employs 800 individuals, with nearly one in four of our 190 employees
paid in full or in part with appropriations made under this
subcommittee's jurisdiction. Our reservation has one of the densest
concentrations of fresh water in the country and it is our obligation
to safeguard the waters, fish, waterfowl, animals and vegetation for
our great grandchildren. The bounty we draw from 260 lakes, 71 miles of
streams and rivers, approximately 42,000 acres of forested land and
roughly 42,000 acres of water and wetlands, help feed our members,
improve their health and generate jobs. We also have treaty rights and
lands that provide hunting, gathering and fishing opportunities in
Wisconsin, Minnesota and Michigan for our members. We are working hard
to build and maintain a stable, healthy Tribal community, amid many
challenges.
The Tribe thanks the subcommittee for its leadership and bipartisan
commitment to Indian Tribes which honors the Nation's trust
responsibility to the Indian people. The Tribe appreciates that
Congress provided increased funds in fiscal year 2019 for BIA, IHS and
EPA programs and the other programs across the Federal Government. The
35-day partial government shutdown put a lot of stress on our community
which we never want to experience again.
My testimony addresses EPA, BIA, BIE and IHS programs that are
vital to the Lac du Flambeau Band. There is an interconnectedness among
these programs which help promote healthy Tribal members and
communities; essential building blocks for stable communities. It is
also essential to understand that clean, air water and land are
required in order for us to have a healthy community. Without these key
ingredients, and adequate Federal resources, our members cannot hunt,
fish and gather animals, plants and medicines which are safe for them
to eat.
i. natural resources (epa and bia)
The Tribe has one of the leading Tribal Natural Resources programs
in the Country. Our program includes a Fish Hatchery for several
species of fish, Fisheries Management, Waterfowl habitat protection,
Great Lakes Restoration Initiative, Wild Rice Restoration, Conservation
Law Enforcement, Wildlife protection, Historic Preservation, and
numerous environmental programs, including Water Resources. Our Natural
Resources Department employs fish/wildlife/wild rice technicians, fish
hatchery operators, hydrologists, environmental specialists and
administrators, many of whom are paid in full or in part with EPA and
BIA funds and critical to our work protecting the resources that were
promised to us in our Treaties. We urge the subcommittee to increase
fiscal year 2020 funds for the BIA and EPA Natural Resources programs
that are critical to protecting our culture, our health and our
economy; part of Wisconsin's $19 billion hunting, fishing, recreation
and tourism industry.
The subcommittee and Congress has once again restored $300 million
for the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative for fiscal year 2019 (flat
funded for the last few years). Even with existing funding, we struggle
to meet the demands we face to maintain clean air, water and lands from
the many contaminants that threaten our community. The highest
concentrations of mercury tainted lakes are in Wisconsin's northern
most counties, including Vilas and Oneida. Minnesota and Wisconsin
again lead the Nation with mercury-contaminated lakes. The Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources continues to list 146 lakes where fish
health mercury advisories remain in place. Our lands and waters are
also threatened by mineral exploration and mineral leasing sites,
combined with relaxed regulatory enforcement by State and Federal
agencies. There are approximately 100 Mines, Mineral Exploration and
Mineral leasing sites within the Lake Superior Watershed. We cannot eat
contaminated fish that are otherwise a staple of our diet. Chronic
Wasting Disease (CWD) is another threat to our treaty protected
resources. CWD has been detected in deer in our ceded territories and
is moving closer to the Reservation's deer population. We need Federal
resources if we are to properly monitor, manage and report ongoing
environmental threats.
A. Underground Storage Tank Fund (LUST)
The $1-$2 million appropriation available to Tribes for cleanup
under the Leaking Underground Storage Tank (LUST) program is inadequate
for Indian Country. Insufficient funds result in ongoing contamination
of ground waters that threaten Tribal resources. We have spent almost a
decade working with State and EPA officials to clean up the Tower
Standard/Haskell Lake, a LUST site located within the Tribe's exterior
boundaries. This site is contaminated with petroleum, benzene, lead,
dibromoethane, and other contaminants. EPA recently estimated that $1.7
million was required for ``interim'' action measures for the site. This
estimate would consume nearly the entire fiscal year 2019 LUST cleanup
budget appropriated for the Nation's 573 federally-recognized Tribes.
The Haskell Lake is one of 23 LUST sites on our reservation alone.
In 2015, we engaged in consultation with EPA and together we agreed
on the steps to take to assess and remediate the Haskell Lake site.
Since then, EPA has walked back most of the commitments it made to us
and reversed an earlier commitment that it would clean up the LUST site
pursuant to Tribal standards. We do not have confidence in EPA's latest
recommended interim action because the site assessment EPA relies on is
incomplete in its content and because an associated evaluation omits
EPA's own data regarding known contaminants of concern (COC). We
encourage the subcommittee to instruct EPA in report language to fully
engage in meaningfully consultation with Tribes, especially Tribes that
have ``treatment as a State'' status under the Clean Water Act, as we
do, and honor Tribal cleanup standards when developing interim and
final action plans to remediate LUST sites located on reservations.
Please increase funds for EPA's LUST program dedicated to Tribes to
include funding for site cleanup and Tribal program support.
B. Trust-Natural Resources Management
In fiscal year 2019, Congress appropriated $206.8 million for the
BIA's Trust-Natural Resources Management programs, a $2.7 million
increase from fiscal year 2018. We greatly appreciate the increase, but
given the importance of natural resources to our culture and economy,
more Federal resources are required. Our Tribe alone needs nearly a
$500,000 increase for our Tribal Fish Hatchery Operations and Tribal
Management/Development Program for fiscal year 2020.
C. Circle of Flight: Wetlands Waterfowl Program
We urge the subcommittee to continue to provide support for the BIA
Circle of Flight Program. This modest BIA program supports Tribal
efforts throughout the Great Lakes Region to restore and preserve
wetlands and waterfowl habitat and enhances wild rice gathering within
Tribal territories throughout the three States along the Mississippi
flyway.
D. Great Lakes Restoration Initiative
Thank you for restoring the $300 million appropriation for the
Great Lakes Restoration Initiative. For the Tribes of Wisconsin, the
Great Lakes represent the lifeblood of our culture and the foundation
of our economies. Please consider an increase in funding for the
Initiative in the fiscal year 2020 budget so Tribes can do more.
E. EPA Tribal General Assistance Program
For fiscal year 2019, Congress approved $65.4 million for the
Tribal general assistance program (GAP). The Tribal GAP program
provides base funds to assist Tribes build their environmental capacity
to assess environmental conditions, utilize available data and build
their environmental programs to meet local needs. While we strongly
support the Tribal GAP funding, that funding is limited to capacity
building and it is critical that we expand Tribal EPA funding to
include program implementation.
ii. bia and bie appropriations
A. Law Enforcement
The Tribe is working collaboratively with our State and local
partners to address drug trafficking and gang activity on and off the
reservation. There remains a great need for cooperation among the
Tribe, the State and Federal law enforcement agencies to address the
significant impact of drug trafficking on the public safety of our
community.
As a Tribe in a Public Law 280 State, we have long suffered from
the lack of sufficient support by the Federal Government for our law
enforcement and Tribal court needs. We have one full time judge who
handle a range of cases ranging from domestic abuse orders to child
support enforcement. In addition, we a three court clerks and a
prosecutor. We greatly appreciate the Committee's support of $13
million for Tribal justice systems for Tribes in Public Law 280 States.
We provide an important service to the people of our Reservation that
if we did not perform, the State courts would have to perform. We urge
Congress to continue this funding in the fiscal year 2020 budget.
Related to this is the need to provide specific funding for
conservation law enforcement officers. Our conservation officers,
provide a critical role in the management of our natural resources and
sometimes are the first line in identifying drug and other illegal
activities on the Reservation.
B. Indian Education
In fiscal year 2019, Congress maintained $34.9 million for Adult
Scholarships and $2.9 million for special higher education
scholarships. We recommend this subcommittee continue to support and
increase funds for these programs that provide needed support to Tribal
members seeking higher education.
The Lac du Flambeau Public School and Lakeland Union High School
educate our Tribal youth. The High School is approximately 23 percent
Native American and 86 percent of high school graduates went on to
attend 4- and 2-year colleges/technical schools, 9 percent entered the
workforce or pursued other activities and 5 percent entered the
military. For this reason, we appreciate the Committee's continued
funding of the Johnson O'Malley Program ($14.9 million for fiscal year
2019). JOM funds address the unique cultural needs of Indian students
attending public schools through a supplemental program of services
planned, developed and approved by the Local Indian Education
Committee, comprised of parents of eligible Indian students. Indian
children deserve the supplemental programs that JOM funds enable that
honor and celebrate their Native heritage and help them grow into
confident, well-adjusted adults who give back to their families.
C. Road Maintenance Program
The Tribe appreciates Congress including a $1.1 million increase in
funding for the Road Maintenance Program for fiscal year 2019. We
believe a $10 million increase is justified for fiscal year 2020.
Recent funding increases have been prioritized by Congress for use on
gravel school bus routes, thus limiting the Tribes that receive
additional funds. At $90,000 annually, we receive about $1,285 per mile
from the Program to maintain our BIA-owned roads. Our budget is
actually closer to $2 million annually. A year's road maintenance
budget can be consumed in the winter months alone removing snow and
salting/sanding roads to ensure freedom of movement. Transportation
barriers undermine Federal and Tribal efforts to improve Native health,
educate our youth and attract businesses and jobs to remote, rural
communities like ours. The Road Maintenance Program is a jobs program
and well-maintained roads save lives. Please consider unrestricted
increases to this important public safety program.
iii. indian health service programs
The Tribe appreciates the Committee's commitment to increase
funding for the IHS. Our IHS allocations account for about one-third of
our health program budget. The Tribe operates the Peter Christensen
Health Center, Dental Program, a Family Resource Center, and an In-
patient Treatment Center with a total annual operating budget in excess
of $24 million. These programs are vital to ensuring the support and
preservation of family life and wellbeing by providing such services as
outpatient mental health, inpatient & outpatient alcohol and other drug
abuse, and psychological consults. The Health Center provides quality
healthcare and offers a full range of family medical services by Board
Certified family physicians, advanced practice nurse practitioner and
physician-assistants serving 5,500 patients and providing 48,000
patient appointments annually. Together, our Tribal Health Program
employs a staff of 150 individuals. The Tribe asks that Congress
continue to prioritize funding increases to the IHS budget in fiscal
year 2020.
We are seeing how important proactive and preventive health
services are for our community. In particular, like the rest of the
Nation, our community continues to deal with the opioid epidemic. It
has tragically claimed the lives of Lac Du Flambeau members.
Approximately 60 percent of the Tribe's annual births result in opioid-
addicted babies. In 2017 alone, 48 of the Tribe's 80 births resulted in
opioid-addicted babies. Early treatment is critical. We urge the
subcommittee to increase funds for preventive health programs such as
Drug Endangered Children (DEC) and Drug Endangered Elders (DEE). These
programs can save lives and empower our Tribe to help our citizens
address addictions and mental health issues, especially targeting our
Tribal youth. Please continue to prioritize increases in fiscal year
2020 IHS funding for Hospitals and Clinics, mental health, substance
abuse treatment and P/RC funds so that we can take a proactive stance
by investing wisely in preventive health services.
We thank the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee for all its support
and for the opportunity to provide written testimony concerning our
fiscal year 2020 budget needs within the subcommittee's jurisdiction.
[This statement was submitted by Joseph Wildcat, President.]
______
Prepared Statement of the League of American Orchestras
The League of American Orchestras urges the Senate Interior,
Environment, and Related Agencies Appropriations Subcommittee to
support $167.5 million in fiscal year 2020 funding for the National
Endowment for the Arts (NEA). Bipartisan support in Congress for the
ongoing work of the NEA has been especially appreciated in the past
several years, and we are grateful for the subcommittee's leadership.
Increased support in fiscal year 2020 will enable the agency to provide
more direct grants, which will boost meaningful arts participation for
more Americans.
The League of American Orchestras leads, supports, and champions
America's orchestras and the vitality of the music they perform. Its
diverse membership of more than 2,000 organizations and individuals
includes world-renowned orchestras, community groups, summer festivals,
student and youth ensembles, businesses serving orchestras, and
individuals who love symphonic music. As orchestras navigate the myriad
changes coursing through American society, they are continually honing
the ways the orchestral experience serves communities. NEA support via
Art Works and Challenge America grants helps to expand the capacity of
orchestras to present concerts and programs to communities of all
sizes, and each NEA direct grant dollar leverages more than $9 of
additional non-Federal or private investment. The following ten
orchestral projects from fiscal year 2019 total $155,000 in direct
Federal support and offer a sampling of the remarkable orchestral
partnerships serving the public in responsive ways.
National Endowment for the Arts funding increases public access to the
arts
The NEA is committed to helping small- and mid-sized organizations
extend the reach of the arts to populations whose arts opportunities
are limited by geography, economics, or disability. The Kansas City
Symphony, employing 80 full-time musicians and 35 full-time staff,
offers a series of free chamber music concerts featuring symphony
musicians performing a wide range of music, from baroque to
contemporary, that is not readily available elsewhere in the community.
Curated by the musicians, these weekday, early evening, casual programs
are designed to remove barriers of formality, access, and financial
ability, and they draw more than 1,200 people to every performance.
Nearly one-third of audience members has the opportunity to experience
a new musical form and enjoy the cultural richness of their own
community for the first time, thanks in part to an NEA Art Works grant,
which leads to broad financial support for the symphony from
foundations, businesses, and individuals throughout the community.
The Adrian Symphony Orchestra's Challenge America grant will
support a week of activities specifically designed for youth and the
rural Lenawee County community in Michigan. The symphony, with a small
but dedicated staff of four, will present Carmina Burana, featuring
local choirs and soloists Allison Prost and Jonathan Lasch, as well a
new work, Broad Band of Light, by American composer Conni Ellisor with
soloist Stephen Seifert on the mountain dulcimer. The project and
ancillary activities would not otherwise be possible without additional
support, and the NEA grant and its multiplying effect mean that local
teachers will be able to receive a pre-concert guide with information
about the orchestra, music director, composers, guest artist, and the
mountain dulcimer, and the orchestra will able to present a Young
People's Concert for children in kindergarten through second grade,
offering unique opportunities to connect with the soloists and
composer.
The Billings Symphony Orchestra & Chorale (BSO&C), which employs 90
staff and musicians, received a Challenge America grant to support
performances and community engagement in honor of Black History Month
and the 60th anniversary of the founding of Motown Records. In addition
to performing at the Alberta Bair Theater, guest artists Sydney Morton
and Jarran Muse visited the St. Charles Indian Mission on the rural
Crow Indian Reservation; the Yellowstone Boys and Girls Ranch (a
therapeutic and residential treatment center for children with
emotional and behavioral challenges); Riverside Middle and Senior High
Schools, which are Title I schools in Billings; and the Montana State
Women's Prison to work with the women's prison choir. The program
included discussions about racism and discrimination, being a friend to
people who may be different from you, music performances that included
Motown hits such as What's Going On, and discussion of the history of
Motown music. The BSO&C is committed to bringing musical experiences to
underserved communities, and this program in particular was designed to
facilitate the Billings community engaging with and learning from
artists of color.
National Endowment for the Arts advances equity, diversity, and
inclusion
In addition to increasing public access to the arts, support from
the National Endowment for the Arts provides opportunities to recognize
and celebrate the diverse backgrounds that comprise communities
throughout the country. The Quad City Symphony Orchestra (QCSO)
received a Challenge America grant for a performance and related
engagement activity by the Kaia String Quartet. The quartet will
perform at the Boys and Girls Club of the Mississippi Valley Teen
Center in Moline, Illinois as part of a QCSO series focused on work by
Latino composers, and it will also visit Bicentennial Elementary and
the bilingual Lincoln-Irving Elementary that serves Floreciente
Neighborhood students. The symphony, which is supported by a staff of
12 people, is also partnering with the Greater Quad Cities Hispanic
Chamber of Commerce to promote the event to the broader Latino
community and provide discounted tickets through their member
businesses. A portion of the ticket price will benefit the Club, and
donations will be requested at the event for Club's cello programs.
With 7 full-time staff and 7 part-time project-based staff
employees, the Princeton Symphony Orchestra will use an Art Works grant
to support a free community event featuring Mexican-American author
Sandra Cisneros, composer Derek Bermel, and mezzo-soprano Paulina
Villarreal. Cisneros will discuss her experiences growing up amidst two
cultures and how those experiences informed her award-winning novel,
The House on Mango Street. Cisneros' discussion will be augmented by a
performance of excerpts from Bermel's Mango Suite, which was inspired
by the book. The planning process has enabled the Princeton Symphony to
partner with organizations such as the Latin American Legal Defense and
Education Fund, Princeton Community Housing Group, and Corner House
Youth Leadership programs, as well as the Princeton and Trenton Public
Schools. The symphony has taken such an interest due to the recent
significant increase of Latino family immigration to the Princeton and
surrounding Mercer County area. Princeton Symphony hopes the
performance of Mango Suite will be an opportunity to address the
experiences of immigrant families and work toward creating a more
diverse and welcoming environment for all. At the event, audience
members will have an opportunity to talk with Cisneros one-on-one, and
on the day prior Bermel will visit local schools with significant
immigrant populations to lead students in songwriting workshops
exploring these same issues of identity and assimilation.
The New Haven Symphony Orchestra (NHSO), which employs 9 full-time
staff and 229 part-time employees, is utilizing its Art Works grant to
commemorate the 80th anniversary of Marian Anderson's April 9, 1939,
concert at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C. The program will
take place at Lyman Center for the Performing Arts at Southern
Connecticut State University in New Haven and will feature celebrated
artists Kristen Renee Young and Harolyn Blackwell and include
orchestral works like Old and Lost Rivers by Tobias Picker; an
arrangement of traditional spirituals by Joel Martin; Lincoln Portrait,
Down a Country Lane, and John Henry by Aaron Copland; Hip-Hop Essay #1
by Daniel Bernard Romain; and Joseph Schwantner's New Morning for the
World. Accompanying visual images will be curated by Peabody Award-
winning broadcaster, producer, and director Elliott Forrest. Students
from local public schools will also have the opportunity to perform
side-by-side with orchestra musicians, and members of the NHSO's
Harmony Fellowship for Underrepresented Musicians will perform as well.
New Haven's Mayor, the honorable Toni Harp; the Reverend Jerry Streets;
and SCSU faculty will serve on a pre-concert panel that will discuss
the music and the historical context of the program.
National Endowment for the Arts supports youth engagement
Lifelong engagement with the arts begins early, and the NEA has
been a strong supporter of arts education and projects that foster
youth engagement with art. The San Francisco Symphony Youth Orchestra's
Artist Development Program is designed to enhance the artistic growth
of its student participants and increase their comprehension of and
skill in orchestral music. An Art Works grant will serve 100 percent of
the youth orchestra musicians--a total of 116 students from the Greater
Bay Area region, from Sacramento to Santa Cruz. The program includes
intensive weekly coaching by musicians of the San Francisco Symphony
and collaboration with internationally renowned guest artists such as
composer John Adams. The project arranges for the youth orchestra to
perform free of charge in community settings, for senior groups, for a
holiday concert for young children, and for the biannual Bay Area Youth
Orchestra Festival, which convenes half a dozen regional youth
ensembles with a culminating concert that benefits homeless and
undeserved youth. In addition to this performance-based activity, the
program also provides paid apprenticeships to prepare interested youth
orchestra members for careers as music librarians, personnel managers,
and arts administrators. Apprentices work closely with San Francisco
Symphony staff up to 20 hours per week to receive on-the-job training
and learn skills not available through arts administration curricula.
The El Paso Symphony also received an Art Works grant for its youth
orchestra, which will facilitate the first of an annual learning and
performing festival in El Paso, the Southwest Youth Orchestra Festival,
for underserved youth in the Southwest U.S. and Northern Mexico region.
The week-long youth orchestra festival will allow youth ensembles to
come together as one voice to learn, study, and perform music. The
festival will provide students the opportunity to learn from music
instructors and conductors other than their own in an intense musical
``boot-camp'' setting. Auditions will place participants into groups
with the goal of creating ensembles of varying cultures, ethnicity, and
heritage. Groups will perform separately and in a joint group orchestra
in three to four different venues.
The National Endowment for the Arts supports contemporary works and
living composers
Many orchestras are devoted to expanding their contemporary
repertoire to offer a broad selection of musical styles to their
communities. The NEA is helping several orchestras support the work of
contemporary composers. The Utah Symphony & Opera (USUO), with 52 full-
time and 15 part-time staff, embraces the work of living composers as a
way of enhancing both musicians' and the public's understanding of and
enthusiasm for classical music. An Art Works grant will support a
performance project highlighting works by Pierre Boulez, Vivian Fung,
Zhou Tian, Joan Tower, and Andrew Norman. Chinese-American composer
Zhou Tian, a 2018 GRAMMY nominee, has been commissioned for a piece to
celebrate the 150th anniversary of the Transcontinental Railroad.
Andrew Norman, Musical America's 2017 Composer of the Year, is USUO's
first Composer-in-Association in 2018-19. Two of Mr. Norman's works,
Suspend and Play, will be performed by Utah Symphony during this
season. Both Zhou and Norman will spend time working with students,
providing valuable insight into the creative process, and inspiring
members of the community to engage more deeply with music.
Another Art Works recipient is the Saint Paul Chamber Orchestra
(SPCO), which, with its more 34 full-time staff, 13 part-time staff,
and 21 musicians, inaugurated Tapestry19, a festival celebrating life
stories through music. Programming included premiere performances of
new works such as a collaboration (Let the Crows Come) by Minneapolis-
based Bharatanatyam dancer and choreographer Ashwini Ramaswamy and
composer, DJ, and author Jace Clayton; A Requiem for Zula by composer
and interdisciplinary artist PaviElle French in a tribute to her
mother, who grew up in St. Paul's historically African-American Rondo
neighborhood; a new work by composer and clarinetist Kinan Azmeh which
expanded on his previous work Do Not Repeat After Me, about the
collective memories of growing up in Syria in the 1980s; and a new
work, Say Home, by Beecher, inspired by the poetry of Chris Santiago,
the son of Filipino immigrants. For his piece, Beecher conducted
interviews with 47 community members and made 26 visits to 13
elementary schools in Minneapolis and St. Paul where he integrated
brief student audio responses into a brand-new work that was given its
world premiere at each of the school visits.
Thank you for this opportunity to illustrate the tremendous value
of NEA support for the communities that orchestras serve in every
corner of our country. We applaud the NEA's national leadership in
promoting public engagement with high-quality artistry, and we urge you
to increase our Nation's creative potential and access to the arts by
approving $167.5 million for the National Endowment for the Arts in
fiscal year 2020.
[This statement was submitted by Jesse Rosen, President and CEO.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe
On behalf of the Lower Elwha Klallam Tribes, I submit this
testimony for the record for the fiscal year 2020 budgets for the
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), Indian Health Service (IHS) and
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). I am Frances Charles,
Chairwoman, an elected position that I have been honored to hold for
the past 13 years. My testimony identifies our most urgent Tribal-
specific funding needs. We are also supporting the Regional and
National budget requests which will benefit the Lower Elwha citizens
and community.
tribal-specific requests for lower elwha klallam tribe
Bureau of Indian Affairs $5.43 Million
1.
$4.972 Million Dam Removal and Fisheries Restoration--Public
Law 102-495, Elwha River Ecosystem and Fisheries Restoration Act
a.
$702,000--Salmon Hatchery O&M
b.
$270,000--Flood Control Levee O&M
c.
$4 million--Land Acquisition
2.
$267,000--Tribal Court Enhancement and Implementation of Tribal
Law and Order Act (TLOA) and Violence Against Women Act (VAWA)
3.
$191,000--Tiwahe Initiative--Tribe seeks to fully exercise its
jurisdiction under existing law, in its own court system, over all
cases arising under the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) and to become a
licensing agency for foster homes
Indian Health Service $500,000--Mental Health and Chemical Dependency
programs
Environmental Protection Agency $536,000--Environmental Programs
1.
$125,000--General Assistance Grant (GAP)
2.
$ 81,000--Clean Water Act Sec. 106 Grant
3.
$180,000--Puget Sound Partnership (PSP) Implementation Grant
4.
$150,000--PSP Tribal Capacity Grant
Contract Support Costs--Past, Present and Future
We appreciate that the Appropriators fully support the BIA and IHS
estimated CSC needs in a separate indefinite account that will ensure
the continuance of fully funding this priority. Tribes agree that this
structure achieves the Nation's legal obligation to fully pay CSC and
the trust and treaty obligations to Tribes.
Indian Programs Advance Appropriation Act (IPAAA)
The BIA, IHS and Bureau of Indian Education like most Federal
agencies use appropriations in the year they are enacted. However, the
recent lack of ``regular order'' in the appropriations process has
resulted in a problematic cycle of continuing resolutions and
shutdowns. Why should Tribes continue to be the greatest casualty when
the legislative and administrative branches of the United States
Government have policy differences? Tribes were crippled in 2019 far
beyond the imagination and expectation of not only this subcommittee
but the entire Congress--just like we were during the 16-day shutdown
in 2013. The IPAAA is modeled on the Veterans Health Care Budget Reform
and Transparency Act of 2009 and the Surface Transportation and
Veterans Health Care Choice Improvement Act of 2015. It would move IHS
and BIA programs, as well as `638' contract support costs, to an
advance appropriations cycle beginning in fiscal year 2020.
lower elwha klallam tribe background
The Lower Elwha Indian Reservation is located at the mouth of the
Elwha River along the Strait of Juan de Fuca on the northern Olympic
Peninsula, about 8 miles west of the City of Port Angeles, Washington.
The Lower Elwha Tribe has roughly 820 members and a total land base-
Reservation and adjacent trust lands-of about 1,000 acres. We are a
salmon people with fishing rights in a large expanse of marine and
fresh waters, reserved in the 1855 Treaty of Point No Point. Only in
recent years have we made strides in our economic development, and in
the long term we believe our prospects will be tied to natural
resources restoration and preservation in an ecologically rich region
where an extraction-based economy is well past its prime.
lower elwha tribal-specific funding requests
$5.43 Million--Bureau of Indian Affairs
1.
$4.972 Million--Dam Removal and Fisheries Restoration--We were
the leading advocate for the removal of the two hydro-electric dams on
the Elwha River. In accordance with Congress's direction in the Elwha
River Ecosystem and Fisheries Restoration Act of 1992 (Elwha Act),
Public Law 102-495, we continue to work closely with the National Park
Service and other agencies to remove the last remnants of the dams and
restore the once famously abundant runs of native Elwha River salmon
and steelhead. Unfortunately, removal of the dams caused a short-term
threat to the salmon runs (due to sediment released from behind the
former dams) and has adversely impacted our small Tribal land base and
our Tribal budgets. We are strongly committed to the restoration of
fisheries, fish habitat, streams and rivers, and the Port Angeles
Harbor. We urgently need increased Self-Governance funds to support the
operation of dam removal mitigation and restoration features and to
revive our other Self-Governance activities from which we have been
forced to transfer funds to support dam removal mitigation.
a.
$702,000--Salmon Hatchery O&M Costs--Fish Hatchery
Operations Budget for the ongoing operation and maintenance
(O&M) of our state-of-the-art hatchery, which went online in
2011. This is a significant increase of $601,929 annually, but
one that is amply justified by the crucial role that our
hatchery serves in dam removal and fishery restoration. Our
hatchery is a genetic preserve for native Elwha salmonids,
which have been on the verge of extirpation from the impacts of
the dams and which have been further threatened by the enormous
sediment load unleashed by dam removal. The National Marine
Fisheries Service would not have approved dam removal under the
Endangered Species Act without the hatchery's native salmonid
programs. The Tribe should not have to bear the O&M cost of
this important restoration facility that in fact benefits the
entire region.
b.
$270,000--Flood Control Levee O&M Costs--The levee on
our lands had to be expanded prior to dam removal in order to
protect Tribal lands from the newly unleashed Elwha River and
to conform to new Federal standards-clearly it is a mitigation
feature of the dam removal project. In the 1992 Elwha Act,
Congress intended that courts not be asked to address problems
where legislative solutions would be far more effective in
covering all the bases. Twenty-five years of inflation since
1992 more than justifies this increase in the current annual
operations allocation of $10,400.
c.
$4 million for Land Acquisition--Section 7(b) of the
Elwha Act authorized $4 million so that the Secretary could
acquire trust lands for the Tribe in Reservation status in
Clallam County, Washington, for economic development and
housing. But those funds have never been appropriated. In 1934,
an Interior Department report concluded that the then-proposed
Reservation should be at least 4,000 acres, but in 1937 the
initial Reservation was fewer than 400 acres and even now we
have only 1,000 acres, several hundred of which (on the river's
side of the levee) have to be maintained in undeveloped status
as floodplain habitat. In addition, we need legislative
direction to ensure that former hydro-project lands (now held
by Interior for the interim) are transferred to the Tribe as
contemplated in Section 3(c)(3) of the Elwha Act. The Elwha
people have struggled for a century from the harm to their
culture and economies caused by the Elwha River dams. We had to
endure the destruction of not only the fisheries but the treaty
fishers themselves and the attendant loss of our traditional
and cultural livelihood; we have lost an opportunity-which will
only return after another generation-to teach our children the
ways of their ancestors and the Elwha life as designed by the
Creator.
2.
$267,000--Funding for Tribal Court Enhancement and to Implement
TLOA and VAWA. Consistent with the Interior Department's and Tribe's
high priority on Tribal Court enhancement, Lower Elwha has made
progress in adopting the enhanced sentencing provisions authorized by
the 2010 Tribal Law and Order Act (TLOA) and in particular the expanded
Domestic Violence Criminal Jurisdiction under the 2013 Violence Against
Women Act (VAWA). We now have the first in-house Chief Judge in the
Tribe's history but our efforts remain limited due to the lack of
adequate base funding for Court development. Requested funding will
provide for: (a) mandatory criminal defense counsel (including basic
legal assistance for domestic violence victims); (b) legal counsel for
parents in abuse/neglect cases; (c) detention services; (d) probation
services that focus on solutions and restorative justice by sharing
coordinated case management and re-entry referrals; and (e) basic court
security. Full funding for TLOA-mandated provisions and increased base
funding for our Tribal Court will enable Elwha to benefit from: BIA
regional assessments using Trial Court Program Standards; specific
technical assistance and training identified through these assessments;
targeted training for specific Tribal court personnel (judges,
prosecutors, public defenders, clerks); development of Tribal Court
bench books; identification of funding sources for pilot programs; and
captured data covering criminal pre-trial to post-conviction matters,
including any collateral civil legal issues.
3.
$191,000--Funding for ICW-related services from BIA's Tiwahe
(Family) Initiative. Lower Elwha faces a community crisis with the
increasing number of child abuse/neglect cases, which stem from
inordinately high rates of drug/substance abuse by parents or
caregivers. This crisis severely impacts services in all facets of
Tribal government. A coordinated community response must be based on
multi-disciplinary, culturally informed case planning and service
delivery, coupled with a strong commitment to restorative justice
ideals and (in criminal cases) solutions-based sentencing. A major
obstacle to implementing this approach is our lack of infrastructure to
assume jurisdiction over all local cases clearly arising under the
Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA); 65 percent of our current ICWA cases
remain in the State court system (a deceptively low percentage due to
reduced State court filings resulting from staff turnover). In
addition, because we are dependent on an inadequate State system for
licensing foster care providers, we are often unable to make proper
placements to assist our families. For the past three fiscal years, the
Tribe's base Federal funding (BIA Self-Governance ICWA) has remained
flat-lined at a mere $45,000. We seek $191,000 additional annual
funding from the BIA's Tiwahe (Family) Initiative, which would enable
the Tribe to exercise jurisdiction in its own court system over all
cases arising under the ICWA and to become a licensing agency for
foster homes.
indian health service elwha tribal-specific funding requests
$500,000 for Elwha Health Department Programs
The drug abuse and mental health crisis threatens to destroy the
potential and the cultural connections of many Tribal members and
families. In fiscal year 2016, the Tribe's Mental Health and Chemical
Dependency programs served 275 American Indian/Alaskan Native (AI/AN)
patients, with the potential to reach approximately 1,500 within
Clallam and Jefferson County. The Tribe currently subsidizes its
chemical dependency program with third-party revenue and gaming revenue
to fund prevention health initiatives and chemical dependency programs,
yet these critical health epidemics remain severely underfunded. To
remedy this, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services formula must
be expanded to inpatient chemical dependency treatment programs at the
current encounter rate of $391/per day, with annual increases.
environmental protection agency elwha tribal-specific funding requests
$536,000 for Elwha Tribal Environmental Programs
General Assistance Grant, $125,000
Clean Water Act Sec. 106 Grant, $81,000
Puget Sound Partnership (``PSP'') Implementation Grant,
$180,000
PSP Tribal Capacity Grant: $150,000
Lower Elwha's environmental programs have, over the past two
decades, developed a strong pragmatic capability to protect human and
basic environmental health for not only the Tribal community but also
the greater Port Angeles and northern Olympic Peninsula communities. By
focusing on collaboration with local governments and other
stakeholders, we have maximized the efficiency of our small but skilled
staff. This would not be possible without the basic EPA funding that we
seek to continue. This funding supports: basic staff salaries,
including for our highly experienced program director (General
Assistance Grant); water quality monitoring in significant local rivers
and lakes (Clean Water Act Sec. 106 Grant); implementation of crucial
in-the-field projects consistent with the PSP's Action Agenda (PSP
Implementation Grant); Tribal participation and influence in local,
State, and Federal environmental planning and review activities
(General Assistance and PSP Tribal Capacity Grants). PSP Implementation
funding has enabled the Tribe to complete numerous stream restoration
projects that support the PSP Action Agenda. EPA funding is critical to
our participation in the cleanup of toxic contamination of Port Angeles
Harbor, which was nominated for Superfund listing but deferred to State
cleanup authority; under this deferral arrangement, the Tribe has a
unique and important role as the sole local representative working
directly with the responsible State agency to ensure that the cleanup
will protect the health of all residents of the greater Port Angeles
area.
regional and national budget requests
Elwha supports the Fiscal Year 2020 Regional Budget Priorities of
the Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission, Affiliated Tribes of
Northwest Indians, and the Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board,
and also the Fiscal Year 2020 National Budget Priorities of the
National Congress of American Indians and National Indian Health Board.
[This statement was submitted by Frances G. Charles, Chairwoman.]
______
Prepared Statement of Members of the WaterNow Alliance in Support for
the EPA WaterSense Program
Dear Chairwoman Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall:
As members of WaterNow Alliance, we write to respectfully request
your support to fund the Environmental Protection Administration's
WaterSense Program at the fiscal year 2019 level of $3.1 million or
higher. WaterSense shares resources and encourages the adoption of
water efficient practices and products that use less water across the
Nation. The proposed fiscal year 2020 budget calls for the elimination
of this small but important program. We urge you to reject this
proposal and fund the WaterSense Program at least at its current level.
While miniscule in terms of the overall Federal budget, WaterSense has
an outsize beneficial impact on local communities like ours.
Since 2006, WaterSense partnerships have saved more than 3 trillion
gallons of water. Additionally, WaterSense labeled products have saved
over 400 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity and approximately $65
billion in water and energy bills for Americans in every State.
Using water efficiently makes sense for consumers, communities, and
the environment as populations are faced with supply issues, aging
infrastructure, extreme weather, and growth. It is critical to fund
WaterSense Program at the very minimum at the fiscal year 2019 funding
level of $3.1 million or higher in the fiscal year 2020 budget to
support utilities and consumers in the efforts to conserve this vital
resource. Public and private partners, municipalities, and utilities
across the Nation rely on WaterSense labeled products for conservation
and efficiency programs.
For all of these reasons, we believe that the WaterSense Program is
deserving of your support to fund at $3.1 million or higher. Thank you
for your consideration.
WaterNow Alliance is a nationwide network of over 400 local water
leaders supporting sustainable water solutions to build community
resilience. WaterNow is a WaterSense Partner.
Alan Buchanan
Alexander R. Coate
Amy Deming
Councilmember
General Manager
Community Outreach Specialist
Camp Verde, AZ
East Bay Municipal Utility District,
Madison Water Utility, WI
CA
Amy Peterson
Andrew Kricun
Anna T. Hamilton
Water Conservation Specialist
Executive Director/Chief Engineer
County Commissioner
City of Surprise, AZ
Camden County MUA, NJ
Santa Fe County, NM
Bart A. Forsyth
Bart Turner
Bob Roth
Assistant General Manager
Councilmember
Mayor Pro Tem
Jordan Valley Water Conservation
City of Glendale, AZ
City of Aurora, CO
District, UT
Brett Christensen
Bridget Donnell Newton
Carmen Ramirez
Councilmember
Mayor
Mayor Pro Tem
Payson City, UT
City of Rockville, MD
City of Oxnard, CA
Cindy Dyballa
Cynthia Pratt
Dan Devine
Councilmember
Deputy Mayor
Mayor
City of Takoma Park, MD
City of Lacey, WA
City of West Allis, WI
Dan Ferons
David Cantu
Debra L. Kring
General Manager
Alderperson, Place 2
Councilmember
Santa Margarita Water District, CA
City of San Elizario, TX
City of Mission, KS
Dick Weatherly
Emily Gorgol
Francisco R. Flores
Councilmen, Place 5
Councilmember
Chief Operator Water Plants
City of Lago Vista, TX
Fort Collins, CO
City of San Juan, TX
George Baroody
Gill Sorg
Guy Phillips
Councilmember, Place 2
Mayor Pro Tem
Councilmember
City of Kerrville, TX
City of Las Cruces, NM
Scottsdale, AZ
Harris Sondak
Hattie Portis-Jones
Heidi K. Williams
Mayor
Councilmember
Mayor
Town of Alta, UT
WaterNow Leadership Council
City of Thornton, CO
Fairburn, GA
Henry Hash
Jamie Whelan
Jason Brown
Director of Public Works
Councilmember
City Manager
City of Tukwila, WA
City of Flagstaff, AZ
Beaver City, UT
John Gates
John H. Guldner
John H. Weed
Mayor
Town Administrator
Director
City of Greeley, CO
Town of Alta, UT
Alameda County Water District, CA
John Kmiec
Kalen Jones
Karen Guzman-Newton
Water Director
Councilmember
Councilmember
Marana Water, AZ
Moab City, UT
Moab City, UT
Kevin Shafer
Kirsten Keith
Lauren Kuby
Executive Director
Director
Vice Mayor
Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewage
Bay Area Water Supply and
City of Tempe, AZ
District, WI
Conservation Agency
Menlo Park, CA
Mark Gallegos
Marshall Brown
Nancy Smith
Mayor
General Manager
Councilmember
Village of Questa, NM
Aurora Water, CO
City of Sunnyvale, CA
Nickole Nesby
Patrick J. Martin
Paul Roberts
Mayor
Water Use Efficiency Manager
Councilmember
City of Duquesne, PA
Miami Dade Water & Sewer Dept., FL
City of Everett, WA
Pete Laybourn
R. Michael Kasperzak, Jr.
Richard Gonzales
Councilmember
Former Mayor
Water Utility Manager
City of Cheyenne, WY
City of Mountain View, CA
City of Monterey Park, CA
Rick Maloy
Robert J. Beste
Rosemarie Russo
Water Conservation Manager
Public Works Director
Sustainability Director
Central Utah Water Conservancy
City of Torrance, CA
City of Moab, UT
District, UT
Stacy Taylor
Steven Elie
TJ Cawley
External Affairs Manager
Director
Mayor
Mesa Water District, CA
Inland Empire Utilities Agency, CA
Town of Morrisville, NC
______
Prepared Statement of the Metropolitan Water District of Southern
California
Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee:
The Metropolitan Water District of Southern California
(Metropolitan) encourages the subcommittee's support for fiscal year
2020 Federal funding of $2.0 million in financial assistance from the
Bureau of Land Management's (BLM) Soil, Water and Air Program for the
Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Program (Salinity Control
Program) to prevent further degradation of Colorado River water quality
and increased economic damages.
The salt concentration in the Colorado River causes over $454
million in damages to water users each year. While this figure is
significant, had it not been for the efforts of the Salinity Control
Program, damages would be much higher. Salinity Control Program actions
have reduced salinity concentrations of Colorado River water over 90
milligrams per liter (mg/L) from what they would have been without the
actions. Modeling by Reclamation indicates that the economic damages
will rise to approximately $574 million by the year 2035 without
continuation of the program.
Metropolitan is the regional water supplier for most of urban
Southern California, providing supplemental water to retail agencies
that serve approximately 19 million people. Water imported via the
Colorado River Aqueduct has the highest level of salinity of all of
Metropolitan's sources of supply, averaging around 630 mg/L since 1976.
This salinity level causes economic damages to all sectors. For
example, high salinity leads to:
--A reduction in the useful life of water heaters, faucets, garbage
disposals, clothes washers, and dishwashers, and an increased
use of water softeners in the household sector;
--An increase in the cost of cooling operations, additional need for
and cost of water softening, and a decrease in equipment
service life in the commercial sector;
--An increase in the use of water and the cost of water treatment,
and an increase in sewer fees in the industrial sector;
--A decrease in the life of treatment facilities and pipelines in the
utility sector;
--Difficulty in meeting wastewater discharge requirements to comply
with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
terms and conditions;
--A reduction in the ability to re-claim and reuse water due to high
salinities in the water delivered to water treatment and
reclamation facilities;
--An increase in desalination and brine disposal costs due to
accumulation of salts in groundwater basins, and fewer
opportunities for recycling due to groundwater quality
deterioration;
--Increased cost of desalination and brine disposal for recycled
water in the municipal sector; and,
--A reduction in the yield of salt sensitive crops and increased
water use for leaching in the agricultural sector.
Concern over salinity levels in the Colorado River has existed for
many years. To deal with the concern, the International Boundary and
Water Commission signed Minute No. 242, Permanent and Definitive
Solution to the International Problem of the Salinity of the Colorado
River in 1973, and the President signed the Colorado River Basin
Salinity Control Act of 1974 (Act) into law. To further foster
interstate cooperation and coordinate the Colorado River Basin States'
efforts on salinity control, the seven Basin States formed the Colorado
River Basin Salinity Control Forum.
The Forum is charged with reviewing the Colorado River's water
quality standards for salinity every 3 years. In so doing, it adopts a
Plan of Implementation consistent with these standards. The Plan of
Implementation, as adopted by the States and approved by EPA in 2017,
calls for 63,500 tons of additional salinity control measures to be
implemented by Reclamation, the Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) and the BLM by 2020.
EPA has identified that more than 60 percent of the salt load of
the Colorado River comes from natural sources. The majority of land
within the Colorado River Basin is federally owned, much of which is
administered by BLM. In implementing the Colorado River Basin Salinity
Control Act in 1974, Congress recognized that most of the salts in the
Colorado River originate from these federally owned lands. Title I of
the Salinity Control Act deals with the U.S. commitment to the quality
of waters being delivered to Mexico. Title II of the Act deals with
improving the quality of the water delivered to users in the United
States. This testimony deals specifically with Title II efforts.
In 1984, Congress amended the Salinity Control Act and directed
that the Secretary of the Interior develop a comprehensive program for
minimizing salt contributions to the Colorado River from lands
administered by BLM. In 2000, Congress reiterated its directive to the
Secretary and requested a report on the implementation of BLM's program
(Public Law 106-459). In 2003, BLM employed a Salinity Coordinator to
increase BLM efforts in the Colorado River Basin and to pursue salinity
control studies and to implement specific salinity control practices.
BLM is now working on creating a comprehensive Colorado River Basin
salinity control program as directed by Congress. In January 2018 BLM
issued A Framework for Improving the Effectiveness of the Colorado
River Basin Salinity Control Program, 2018-2023. This document lays out
how BLM intends to implement Colorado River Basin salinity control
activities over the next 5 years.
Meaningful resources have been expended by BLM in the past few
years to better understand salt mobilization on rangelands. With a
significant portion of the salt load of the Colorado River coming from
BLM administered lands, the BLM portion of the overall program is
essential to the success of the effort. Inadequate BLM salinity control
efforts will result in additional economic damages to water users
downstream.
Implementation of salinity control practices through BLM is a cost
effective method of controlling the salinity of the Colorado River and
is an essential component to the overall Colorado River Basin Salinity
Control Program. Continuation of adequate funding levels for salinity
within the Soil, Water and Air Program will assist in preventing the
water quality of the Colorado River from further degradation and
significant increases in economic damages to municipal, industrial and
irrigation users. A modest investment in source control pays huge
dividends in improved drinking water quality to nearly 40 million
Americans
Metropolitan urges the subcommittee to support funding for fiscal
year 2020 of $2.0 million from the Bureau of Land Management's (BLM)
Soil, Water and Air Program for the Colorado River Basin Salinity
Control Program.
[This statement was submitted by Jeffrey Kightlinger, General
Manager.]
______
Prepared Statement of the National Association of Abandoned Mine Land
Programs
My name is Autumn Coleman and I serve as Manager of the Abandoned
Mine Lands Program within the Montana Department of Environmental
Quality. I am providing this statement on behalf of the National
Association of Abandoned Mine Land Programs (NAAMLP), which I currently
serve as President. NAAMLP represents 32 States and Tribes, of which 28
implement federally approved abandoned mine land reclamation (AML)
programs authorized under Title IV of the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act (SMCRA). My address is P.O. Box 200901, Helena,
Montana, 59620-0901. My email is [email protected]
As you know, the 2006 amendments to Title IV of SMCRA significantly
changed how State and Tribal AML grants are funded. These grants are
still based on receipts from a fee on coal production, but beginning in
fiscal year 2008, the grants are funded primarily by mandatory
appropriations. As a result and based on current OSMRE projections, the
States and Tribes should receive $188.4 million (before sequestration)
in fiscal year 2020.
OSMRE's budget includes a discretionary funding request that would
provide $24.4 million. From this amount, OSMRE must meet the
supplemental grant needs of States operating at ``minimum program''
status (``minimum program make-up funds''), as well as fund other
activities and obligations including the agency's own AML work,
administration of the AML Fund, and other activities in support of the
AML program. While the amount provided should be sufficient to cover
minimum program funding needs,\1\ it should be noted that a decrease
might strain the agency's ability to meet its other programmatic
obligations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ In fiscal year 2018 for example, 12 minimum program States
received minimum program make-up funds totaling approximately $18
million. It should be noted that other AML programs may become minimum
programs in the future requiring additional funds for this category.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SMCRA has been successful largely as a result of the cooperative
Federalism model that it employs. While the States and Tribes
understand and appreciate OSMRE's role in the AML program under SMCRA,
we caution against using limited OSMRE funding for unproductive ends,
for example OSMRE oversight that second-guesses State/Tribal
assessments or requires unnecessary levels of supplemental information
that does not advance program purposes. Rather than having OSMRE simply
engaging in more oversight, the States and Tribes would benefit from a
more collaborative relationship with OSMRE in completing the hard work
associated with these program requirements. Minimum program States are
particularly reliant on this type of support. For example, we believe
that funding for technical assistance and applied science projects
related to AML work is particularly important. We also urge the
Subcommittee to maintain necessary funding for OSMRE's training program
and TIPS, including moneys for State/Tribal travel. These programs are
central to the effective implementation of State and Tribal AML
programs as they provide necessary training and continuing education
for State/Tribal agency personnel, as well as critical technical
assistance.
We also strongly support maintaining funding for the Watershed
Cooperative Agreements in the amount of $1.5 million. This funding
serves an important role in facilitating State and local partnerships,
thereby helping to leverage outside sources of funding and preserve
precious reclamation grant funding.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Funding for these agreements will also potentially be a key
support for Good Samaritan programs and projects should Congress adopt
legislative language supporting Good Samaritan clean up activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NAAMLP strongly recommends an increase in annual funding available
to minimum program States. These States often have very significant AML
inventories but funding under the current grant distribution formula is
not enough to make efficient progress with their AML inventories.\3\ In
the interest of enabling these AML programs to fulfill their potential,
NAAMLP believes an increase in minimum program funding to an annual
grant amount of at least $5 million would be very beneficial.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ At the current rate, some minimum program States have AML
inventories that would literally take hundreds of years to reclaim
completely.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further to the goal of efficiency in the use of limited AML grant
funding, sequestration of AML grants under the Budget Control Act of
2013 is an increasing concern to the State and Tribal AML programs. In
fiscal year 2019, a sequestration reduction of 6.2 percent translated
to $19.2 million withheld for a total of approximately $137.8 million
withheld since 2013.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ For minimum program States only receiving $3 million per year
the loss is especially problematic.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NAAMLP recommends that Congress consider the exemption of the AML
fund from sequestration a priority as it pursues legislative
initiatives related to AML, as the benefits are patent, and every
dollar of AML funding is needed. Because the AML fee is paid by the
coal mining industry for the exclusive purpose of AML remediation,
withholding that funding does not actually reduce the Federal budget
deficit--but it does mean less money returned to local economies.
NAAMLP also recommends that the subcommittee explore mechanisms to
release the growing balance of withheld AML moneys related to
sequestration as part of the appropriations process.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ According to OSMRE, the specific amounts that have been
withheld from each State or Tribe are being tracked so that, once OSMRE
has authority to distribute those funds, they could be repaid to the
State and Tribal AML programs for which they were originally intended.
According to OSMRE, there is no authority to distribute withheld funds
unless provided by Congress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NAAMLP also recommends attention be given to the way AML
emergencies are handled under Title IV. Responding to sudden
emergencies such as sinkholes and landslides is one of the AML
programs' most important functions. Starting in 2010, OSMRE instituted
a policy whereby State and Tribal AML programs must fund AML
emergencies from their regular AML grants. This change has proven
problematic, especially in that it diverts grant funding away from
progress with AML inventories.\6\ NAAMLP recommends a return to the
pre-2010 system wherein AML programs received reimbursement from the
OSMRE discretionary share for emergency projects. This will encourage
efficient progress with reclamation as well as ensure that the State
and Tribal AML programs are well equipped to fulfill their important
public safety role.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ This is a particular problem for minimum program States, who
can have entire years worth of progress with their limited annual grant
be preempted by a single emergency project.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Committee's recognition of the important role played by the AML
program is evidenced by the ongoing provision of AML Economic
Development Grant funds. The projects underway due to this pilot
program exhibit potential economic as well as safety and environmental
benefit, though the types of projects undertaken and benefits they hope
to achieve have varied significantly between the States. The pilot has
also served to inform potential future economic development-focused
reclamation efforts. NAAMLP therefore opposes the reduction of funding
for the pilot program in OSMRE's fiscal year 2020 proposed budget, and
notes that these grants are not redundant to regular AML grant funding;
pilot funding has a distinctly economically-focused purpose, whereas
regular AML grant funding is focused on human and environmental health.
While the pilot program has been generally successful so far, and
OSMRE's guidance documentation has been helpful, the States involved
with the pilot program recommend that OSMRE's project vetting process
could be more efficient. Several States are experiencing back-ups as
they await project approvals from OSMRE for their pilot project
proposals, which could cause significant delays if construction seasons
are allowed to expire before projects can get underway. A degree of
shift in the direction of efficiency may aid the overall success of the
program at this juncture.
Beyond the coal sector, NAAMLP represents many States with
significant hardrock AML problems within their borders.\7\ In the
absence of a hardrock AML funding source comparable to Title IV funding
for coal AML, State and Tribal hardrock AML programs struggle to
maintain adequate funding and make consistent progress. There is no
comprehensive account of the scale of the hardrock AML problem, but it
is often cited as being in the tens of billions of dollars. In light of
the disparity between available funding and the scale of the problem,
NAAMLP expressed concern with significant reduction to hardrock AML
funding contained in BLM's previous years' (fiscal year 2019) proposed
budget. We are encouraged by the change contained in the fiscal year
2020 proposed budget in this respect, which would still combine the AML
program with the hazardous materials program, but would maintain the
total funding previously provided.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ For example, Arizona alone estimates that they have in excess
of 50,000 hazardous historic-mining hazards. More information about
remaining AML reclamation costs and reclamation accomplishments can be
found in NAAMLP's 2018 Update of the ``Safeguarding, Reclaiming,
Restoring'' booklet.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
BLM hardrock AML funding is one of very few resources available for
hardrock AML reclamation and water treatment. The majority of hardrock
AML problems occur on Federal lands, meaning that the BLM AML program
is the primary means of addressing public safety and environmental
impacts. What's more, BLM cooperates closely with the State and Tribal
AML programs to conduct this work, meaning that the cut to BLM funding
will have a cascading negative effect on the State level programs.
NAAMLP recommends BLM's hardrock AML program funding be maintained
going forward.
Returning to discussion of coal AML--with the AML fee on which the
Title IV program relies set to expire in 2021, NAAMLP has been in
engaged in serious discussions regarding the program's future. It is
clear that the continuing need for these programs is strong. The AML
pilot highlights the fact that AML work is especially important to the
struggling communities in Appalachia who have been hit hardest by
downturns in coal related employment--the mitigation of which has been
a congressional and administration priority in recent years. AML sites
endanger public health and safety, degrade the environment, and dampen
economic prospects, which severely constrains well-being and growth in
AML-impacted communities nationwide. AML programs have been contending
with these issues for almost 40 years and have learned much about the
true depth and scale of AML impacts over that time, as well as the
health and economic benefits these projects bring to nearby
communities.
Despite the progress that has been made, the time allotted to the
AML programs to restore impacts from more than two hundred years of
unregulated coal mining has simply not been adequate to complete that
mission by the time the AML fee expires in 2021. Current OSMRE
estimates project that over $10 billion in reclamation costs will
remain, and NAAMLP believes the true costs are significantly higher.
There can be little question that if the AML program is to complete its
mission, and if its fundamental contributions to living conditions and
economic circumstances in coalfield communities are to continue,
additional AML funding will be required beyond 2021. If the AML fee is
not reauthorized, consideration must be given to how the more than $10
billion in public liability represented by remaining coal AML costs
will be contended with.
NAAMLP believes that discussion around reauthorization of the AML
program will soon come to forefront. At that time, important questions
will be asked about how much and what type of AML work is being
accomplished and what types of AML problems remain. It should be noted
that the AML accomplishments data furnished by OSMRE through its budget
justifications document and the e-AMLIS database represent only a
selective portion of the work that is being accomplished through AML
grant funding. This is mainly due to the fact that e-AMLIS only records
construction costs and does not include data on costs such as program
administration, project management, and most importantly, project
design. NAAMLP has been working with OSMRE to examine data related to
the AML program and is in the late stages of developing information to
more accurately tell the story of the AML program. As an example of
what has so far been produced by that effort, the NAAMLP 2017
Accomplishments report can be found in the footnote below.\8\ The State
and Tribal AML programs have been in the lead role in conducting
reclamation and tracking progress for the last 40 years. We hope to
work closely with the Committee as it considers the future of the AML
program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ NAAMLP 2017 Accomplishments Report: http://www.naamlp.net/
memberinfo/NAAMLP
AccomplishmentReport2017.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this statement regarding
OSMRE's proposed budget for fiscal year 2020. I would be happy to
answer any questions you may have or provide additional information.
[This statement was submitted by Autumn Coleman, Manager of the
Abandoned Mine Lands Program of the Montana Department of Environmental
Quality on Behalf of the National Association of Abandoned Mine Land
Programs re. the fiscal year 2020 Proposed Budget for the Office of
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSMRE) and Bureau of Land
Management (BLM).]
______
Prepared Statement of the National Association of Clean Air Agencies
On behalf of the National Association of Clean Air Agencies
(NACAA), thank you for this opportunity to provide testimony on the
fiscal year 2020 budget for the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), particularly grants to State and local air pollution
control agencies under Sections 103 and 105 of the Clean Air Act (CAA),
which are part of the State and Tribal Assistance Grant (STAG) program.
NACAA has three recommendations with respect to fiscal year 2020
appropriations. First, the association urges Congress to increase
Federal grants to State and local air pollution control agencies by $82
million above fiscal year 2019 levels (i.e., approximately $158 million
above the administration's fiscal year 2020 request), for a total of
$310 million. In light of the need for additional funding, NACAA
opposes the administration's proposal to cut State and local air
quality grants by 33 percent (from $228 million in fiscal year 2019 to
$152 million in fiscal year 2020). Such cuts would be detrimental to
the public's health and welfare. Second, NACAA recommends that State
and local air quality agencies be provided the flexibility to use any
additional grants to address the highest priority programs in their
areas. Third, NACAA requests that Congress retain grants for monitoring
fine particulate matter (PM2.5) under the authority of
Section 103 of the Clean Air Act, rather than shifting it to Section
105.
NACAA is the national, non-partisan, non-profit association of air
pollution control agencies in 41 States, including 114 local air
agencies, the District of Columbia and four territories. These agencies
have the ``primary responsibility'' under the Clean Air Act for
implementing our Nation's clean air programs. As such, they carry out
an array of critical activities intended to improve and maintain air
quality and protect public health.
NACAA first wishes to thank the subcommittee for the commitment to
air quality that you have shown for many years. We recognize there are
insufficient resources for you to support all the requests you receive
from many competing and worthwhile programs. While over the years there
have been some recommendations from the administration to cut funding
for State and local air quality grants, you have steadfastly recognized
the importance of these programs and have opted to not reduce our
resources. We would like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation and to explain the importance of providing additional
funding for these important programs going forward.
there is a strong need for additional air quality funding
A good national air quality program is an essential investment in
America. The sad fact is more Americans die or get sick from air
pollution than from almost any other environmental or domestic problem
facing our Nation. Tens of thousands of people die prematurely each
year in this country as a result of exposure to such air pollutants as
particulate matter, ozone and hundreds of toxic compounds.
Additionally, millions suffer serious health problems, such as cancer
and cardiovascular, respiratory, neurological and reproductive damage.
According to EPA's estimates, in 2016 over 120 million people lived in
counties with air quality that did not meet the health-based standards
for at least one of the six ``criteria pollutants.'' \1\ Additionally,
millions of Americans are exposed to risks from hazardous air
pollutants.\2\ State and local air pollution control agencies work
tirelessly, and without sufficient resources, to address these threats
to public health and welfare by implementing the Clean Air Act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-08/documents/
fy-2018-2022-epa-strategic-plan-print.pdf (page 8)
\2\ https://www.epa.gov/national-air-toxics-assessment/2014-nata-
assessment-results#nationwide
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The responsibilities facing these agencies have continued to grow
while, unfortunately, Federal funding has lagged behind. Federal grants
to State and local air quality agencies under Sections 103 and 105 of
the CAA were $228 million in fiscal year 2019, which is the same amount
these agencies received 15 years ago, in fiscal year 2004. If the
fiscal year 2004 figure is adjusted for inflation, level funding would
translate to approximately $310 million in today's dollars--an $82-
million difference. While the need for increases is far greater,
NACAA's recommendation for Section 103 and 105 grants in fiscal year
2020 is merely for level funding, adjusted for inflation--or $310
million.
State and local air quality agencies have made do with inadequate
resources for many years. While the Clean Air Act envisioned the
Federal Government supporting up to 60 percent of the cost of State and
local air programs, the truth is it provides only 25 percent and in
some cases much less, while State and local agencies provide the
remaining 75 percent. While we understand Congress is not able to grant
increases to fully meet the needs of our clean air programs, even the
modest increases we are requesting will help.
On a day-to-day basis, as part of our ``core'' programs, our
agencies carry out a host of essential resource-intensive activities,
including monitoring, compiling emission inventories, planning,
conducting sophisticated modeling, permitting and inspecting sources
and adopting and enforcing regulations. It takes a tremendous effort to
keep up with our existing responsibilities, especially when one
considers that since fiscal year 2004, we have received the same dollar
amount we do now while the purchasing power of our grants has
diminished by more than 30 percent.
The ongoing and essential core programs we have identified are only
a part of the picture. State and local air quality agencies are also
called upon to address new and emerging issues. Our responsibilities
continue to expand as new regulations, technologies, monitoring,
controls and other elements of our programs become more sophisticated.
Additionally, the public is demanding more information and assistance
from State and local air quality agencies, including, for example, data
related to wildfires and natural disasters that can be used to
understand the level of risk and how they may protect themselves.
Air quality monitoring is just one area where the public expects
and demands new and evolving State and local efforts. The State of
technology is advancing at a rapid pace, including the ability of
individuals and organizations to obtain and use localized monitoring
and sensor equipment. Our agencies will need resources to manage the
air quality data that the public is generating and to develop the
sensible programs that the public will demand to address any air
quality issues that may come to light.
Another activity for which additional Federal funding is critically
needed is training of State and local air quality staff. We are facing
an unprecedented rate of retirements and staff turnover, resulting in a
loss of invaluable institutional knowledge. Having well-trained staff
not only helps air agencies to operate more effectively, but it allows
them to be more efficient and provide better customer service to the
public and the regulated community. It is critically important that we
have the resources to ensure that air agency staff are well trained and
ready to take on the responsibilities they will face in an ever more
complicated program.
In addition to the aforementioned examples, how else would State
and local air quality agencies spend increased Federal grants? The list
is very long, but a few activities for which additional funding is
necessary include the following:
--reducing concentrations of fine particulate matter;
--improving small business compliance assistance;
--modernizing modeling and other estimation tools;
--improving emission inventories of air pollutants;
--increasing the frequency of inspections;
--developing new strategies to meet our health-based air quality
standards;
--improving risk assessment capabilities; and
--helping the public better understand air pollution and how to
protect their health.
All these activities are critical to our mission to reduce air
pollution, maintain the many improvements we have already made and
continue to protect public health and welfare, as we have been charged
to do by the people of this country. Additionally, well-funded and
well-functioning air agencies can help support the economy through
timely, well-reasoned responses and actions.
flexibility in the use of funds is important
Each area of the country faces its own unique air quality
challenges. A one-size-fits-all strategy would not result in the best
use of additional funding. For example, while an area in the West may
wish to use additional resources on activities related to air pollution
from wildfires, an area in the East may find a better use of increased
funding for ozone-related programs. It is important, therefore, that
State and local agencies be provided with the flexibility to use the
increased funds on the highest priority programs in their areas.
nacaa recommends that authority for monitoring grants remain under
section 103
EPA has proposed in recent years to begin shifting funds for
PM2.5 monitoring from Section 103 authority, where no State
or local matching funds are needed, to Section 105, which would require
additional matching funds. We recommend that the funds remain under
Section 103 authority. For individual agencies that have concerns about
the matching requirements, this will ensure that they do not have to
refuse essential monitoring funds because they do not have the
resources to provide the required match. In past years, Congress has
been very responsive to our requests on this issue, for which we are
very grateful, and we recommend that Congress again call for these
grants to be provided under Section 103 authority.
conclusion
State and local clean air agencies work to protect the public every
day. Investing in them pays major dividends in avoided healthcare
costs. NACAA urges Congress to (1) increase Federal grants to State and
local air agencies by $82 million above the fiscal year 2019 level of
$228 million, for a total of $310 million (i.e., $158 million above the
administration's fiscal year 2020 request); (2) provide flexibility to
State and local air agencies to use any additional grants to address
the highest priority programs in their areas; and (3) retain grants for
monitoring fine particulate matter under the authority of Section 103.
Thank you very much for this opportunity to provide testimony. If
you have any questions or require additional information, please
contact Miles Keogh, Executive Director of NACAA, at
[email protected] or Mary Sullivan Douglas, Senior Staff Associate,
at [email protected]
______
Prepared Statement of the National Association of Clean Water Agencies
The National Association of Clean Water Agencies (NACWA) represents
a growing network of 325 public wastewater and stormwater agencies
nationwide who collectively serve more than 125 million Americans.
NACWA thanks the subcommittee for its work to provide strong funding
for clean water programs, and in particular for the significant funding
increases achieved the past two fiscal years for core water
infrastructure programs. Looking to build on that strengthened Federal
funding partnership, below are our fiscal year 2020 EPA Appropriations
priorities.
Program: Clean Water State Revolving Fund
Funding Request: $3.4 B (2x fiscal year 2019 enacted)
The Clean Water State Revolving Fund (CWSRF) is a critical tool
which municipal clean water agencies leverage to help meet their
Federal obligations under the Clean Water Act (CWA). In the United
States, more than 90 percent of water infrastructure investment
currently comes through local ratepayer and State investment.
Importantly, the low-interest loans--and in limited cases, grants and
loan forgiveness--that the CWSRF facilitates help clean water agencies
finance infrastructure investments at favorable rates and better manage
impacts to ratepayers.
The CWSRF has demonstrated success in facilitating infrastructure
investment in communities large and small. NACWA greatly appreciates
the subcommittee's work to increase funding from $1.394B in fiscal year
2017 to $1.694B in fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019. We urge
continued support and consideration for further increased funding to
reflect the ongoing need for infrastructure investment.
The CWSRF is even more crucial at a time when sewer and water rate
increases are outpacing the rate of inflation. Preliminary analysis
from NACWA's annual rate survey found that in 2018, the national
average cost of wastewater services rose faster than the rate of
inflation for the 17th year in a row, rising 3.8 percent. Key drivers
of rising rates include Federal consent decrees requirements,
associated capital construction and debt service, combined sewer
overflow (CSO) and sanitary sewer overflow (SSO) control projects,
sewer rehabilitation and replacement, and the increasing cost of
addressing regulatory requirements related to water quality challenges
like nutrient impairment.
In many communities, the CWSRF has been instrumental to their
success in complying with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permits, implementing secondary (biological) treatment
of wastewater, reducing the frequency and size of sewer overflows
during wet weather events and upgrading infrastructure. The CWSRF is
also essential for many communities working to implement new regulatory
requirements ranging from updated water quality standards for toxics to
tightening nutrient limitations. The CWSRF is increasingly used to
implement innovative stormwater and nutrient management projects and
green infrastructure.
Program: Sewer Overflow and Stormwater Reuse Municipal Grants
Funding Request: $225 M
The 115th Congress authorized $225 million in the America's Water
Infrastructure Act (Public Law115-270) in fiscal year 2020 for grants
to States and municipal entities for treatment works to intercept,
transport, control, treat, or reuse municipal combined CSO, SSO, and/or
stormwater. This new program was proposed for funding ($61.45M) in the
President's fiscal year 2020 budget proposal.
Controlling sewer overflows and ensuring proper stormwater
management are essential to protecting public health and the
environment. Compliance is very costly, however, placing financial
strain on many communities and their ratepayers. It can be especially
challenging for older communities dealing with aging infrastructure
alongside population and economic shifts. For these reasons, NACWA was
thrilled to see these grants authorized by Congress and believes it is
critical that this authorization is fully funded. These Federal
investment grants will help communities and their ratepayers more
affordably meet their compliance obligations and mitigate against the
negative impacts of CSO and SSO discharges into local waterbodies. The
inclusion of stormwater management will help in developed areas with
impervious surfaces where stormwater systems can be overwhelmed and may
create flooding, infrastructure and environmental concerns, or where
stormwater presents water reuse opportunities.
Program: Integrated Planning (EPA Environmental Programs & Management)
Funding Request: Provide $2 M for implementation of Integrated Planning
legislation and the Office of Municipal Ombudsman
Last Congress, the bipartisan Water Infrastructure Improvement Act
(Public Law No: 115-436) was passed into law, codifying EPA's
Integrated Planning (IP) Framework to provide local communities with
critical flexibilities in meeting their CWA obligations and ensuring
residents continue receiving safe, reliable, and affordable clean water
services. The bill also included a provision which establishes a
Municipal Ombudsman's office within EPA to provide municipalities with
a dedicated point of contact within the Agency who can represent their
interests to help them comply with their CWA and other environmental
obligations, as well as ensure Agency policies are being implemented
appropriately and consistently at the local level.
These are essential developments to help public clean water
utilities and the communities they serve. The integrated planning
approach helps communities prioritize their specific clean water
obligations and better manage costs over time. EPA will need to work
collaboratively with the States and municipalities to build awareness
of this voluntary approach and provide appropriate guidance/
facilitation to help States and clean water utilities make full use of
integrated planning in line with Congress's intent. The establishment
of a Municipal Ombudsman office is important at a time when regulatory
compliance is becoming more onerous and complicated for communities to
navigate. The ombudsman will provide a crucial role as it acts as a
liaison between EPA and the municipal regulated community to help
address these regulatory concerns.
Directing Federal resources toward implementation will help ensure
EPA has the resources to fully implement the law and assist the States
and interested municipalities. NACWA urges $2 million in fiscal year
2020 for EPA to fund implementation of the Water Infrastructure
Improvement Act.
Program: Innovative Water Infrastructure Workforce Development Program
Funding Request: $1 M
Over the next decade, the clean water sector is expected to incur a
large wave of retirements among utility workers. Some municipalities
could be facing a situation where up to 50 percent of their staff are
eligible for retirement at the same time. This presents a challenge--
most of these jobs require education and training--but also an
opportunity since these positions provide a good career with
competitive wages.
America's Water Infrastructure Act responded to this issue by
establishing a new competitive grant program at EPA for water workforce
development activities. Under the legislation, the program is
authorized to develop and utilize innovative activities relating to
water utility workforce development, expand public awareness about
water utilities and connect individuals to careers. This new program
was proposed for $300,000 in the President's fiscal year 2020 budget
proposal.
Program: Stormwater Infrastructure Funding Task Force
Funding Request: $1 M
America's Water Infrastructure Act directed EPA to establish a task
force to study and develop recommendations on stormwater infrastructure
funding. The task force is to be comprised of Federal, State, local,
and non-governmental entities and would evaluate public and private
funding sources for constructing, rehabilitating, operating and
maintaining stormwater infrastructure. NACWA requests $1 million in
fiscal year 2020 to get the task force up and running.
Program: Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act (WIFIA)
Program
Funding Request: $68 Million
The WIFIA program is a compliment to the SRFs, providing an
additional financing tool to address water infrastructure investment by
leveraging limited Federal resources. First authorized in 2014, it was
designed primarily to fund large water infrastructure projects over $20
million. NACWA has been engaged and pleased with the Agency's efforts
to establish the program and provide financing assistance. NACWA is
strongly supportive of the increased funding WIFIA received in fiscal
year 2019, at a level of $68 million, and encourages that amount for
fiscal year 2020.
Program: Geographic Programs
Funding Request: Full funding across EPA's Geographic Programs
EPA's Geographic Programs, such as the Great Lakes Restoration
Initiative, Chesapeake Bay Program, and Long Island Sound among others,
support critical watershed-based investments. The goals and impacts of
these programs cross multiple States, impact waters of national
significance, and leverage significant State, local, and private
dollars. In many cases, the geographic programs have helped forge
partnerships between clean water agencies, upstream landowners,
conservation groups, and other stakeholders to strategically advance
water quality, reduce historic contamination, restore habitat, and
advance the CWA goals of fishable and swimmable waters. NACWA is
encouraged by the strong bipartisan congressional support these
programs enjoy and urges Appropriators to maintain full funding for
these programs in fiscal year 2020.
Program: Categorical Grants: Nonpoint Source Sec. 319
Funding Request: $170.1 M (Maintain fiscal year 2019 enacted level)
The CWA has been remarkably successful in reducing point source
discharges. In many watersheds, nonpoint sources remain the largest
outstanding driver of water quality impairments. Thus, continued
progress on improving water quality under the CWA relies in large part
on the ability to improve nonpoint source management. Nonpoint sources
also contribute to acute public health risks such as harmful algal
blooms and threats to drinking water.
Nonpoint source grants are provided to State, Tribes, and
territories to aid implementation of EPA approved Nonpoint Source
Management Programs under Sec. 319 of the CWA. Activities provided
under these programs include technical and financial assistance to
municipalities, outreach, and technology transfer and training. These
programs also help monitor and assess the impacts of nonpoint
management projects, an area where continued research and documentation
is in demand by public entities and the private sector.
Program: Categorical Grants: Pollution Control Sec. 106
Funding Request: $230.1 M (Maintain fiscal year 2019 enacted level)
Under Sec. 106 of the CWA, EPA provides Federal assistance for
States and Tribes in implementing their water pollution control
programs in accordance with CWA. Strong State programs are essential to
the cooperative Federalism approach of the Act. The clean water
agencies represented by NACWA continually engage with their State
programs offices on all aspects of CWA permitting, compliance and
enforcement. Reductions in funding may impact the functioning of State
programs to the detriment of the regulated community.
Program: National Priorities Water Research Program
Funding Request: $20 M
Since 2012, Congress supported the National Priorities Water
Research grant program by providing approximately $4 million in EPA's
Science and Technology Account. This funding has advanced the science
of priority research topics through applied, extramural research. This
successful program provides direct benefit to water sector utilities
through increased knowledge, tools, and transformative approaches that
can improve public health outcomes and lower costs. However, more
funding is needed to meet growing challenges. NACWA urges increased
funding for the National Priorities Water Research grant program to $20
million for fiscal year 2020.
Program: Innovative Financing for State Loan Funds
Funding Request: $5 M
America's Water Infrastructure Act included a pilot program
provision allowing state financing authorities that administer the SRFs
to apply for WIFIA loans directly through EPA, applying with a single
application in which the State would bundle multiple projects on the
State's approved intended use plan. Under this provision, such WIFIA
loans to States would allow for 100 percent WIFIA financing (as
compared to the existing program, in which WIFIA financing can total no
more than 49 percent of total project cost), require only one credit
rating letter (rather than two), and provide expedited application
review for States. NACWA requests that the $5 million authorized under
the legislation be appropriated in fiscal year 2020.
Thank you for your consideration. Please do not hesitate to contact
NACWA to discuss.
______
Prepared Statement of the National Association of Conservation
Districts
March 8, 2019
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski
The Honorable Tom Udall
Chairman
Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and
Subcommittee on Interior,
Related Agencies
Environment, and Related
Committee on Appropriations
Agencies
United States Senate
Committee on Appropriations
Washington, DC, 20510
United States Senate
Washington, DC, 20510
Dear Chairman and Ranking Member:
I am Tim Palmer, President of the National Association of
Conservation Districts (NACD) which represents America's 3,000
conservation districts and the 17,000 men and women who serve on their
governing boards. Conservation districts are local units of government
established under State law to carry out natural resource management
programs at the local level. Districts work with millions of
cooperating landowners and operators to help them manage and protect
land and water resources on all private lands and many public lands in
the United States. The following requests are for the EPA, the U.S.
Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management.
The 319 Nonpoint Source Grants are critically important to stream
bank stabilization, stormwater management, low-impact development, and
other projects led by conservation districts to address water quality
at the local level. Working lands are under increased pressure to
produce food, feed, fuel, and fiber for the world's growing population.
Because of this reality, it is more important than ever that we
dedicate the resources necessary to ensure local communities continue
to have access to and realize the benefits of clean water. For fiscal
year 2020, NACD respectfully requests an appropriation of $171 million
for Environmental Protection Agency's 319 Nonpoint Source Grants.
State and Private Forestry is one of the few U.S. Forest Service
(USFS) programs that provide technical and financial assistance to
private landowners. For this reason, State and Private Forestry
programs should be staffed and funded at levels that allow for strong
public-private partnerships and ensure greater forest management and
economic opportunity on private, non-industrial forest lands. NACD
requests $339 million in the fiscal year 2020 Interior appropriations
bill for the U.S. Forest Service's State and Private Forestry programs,
which includes a small increase to the incredibly important Forest
Stewardship program to $23 million.
The Wild Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971 as amended
directs U.S. Federal agencies to manage wild herds to ``maintain a
thriving natural ecological balance and multiple-use relationship'' on
herd management areas (HMAs). Bureau of Land Management (BLM)
scientists have established appropriate management levels (AML) to
achieve that balance. Unfortunately, current management efforts
including limited gathers, fertility control via PZP, adoptions and
sales have failed to control the ever-increasing horse and burro
population, which continues to strain the natural resource capabilities
of these lands beyond their carrying capacity, resulting in rangelands
that in certain areas are already unrecoverable. As a programmatic
request, NACD supports the removal of the Interior Appropriations
language that prevents BLM from using all the tools to bring the horse
and burro population to AML provided under the Act and opposes similar
language being applied to the U.S. Forest Service.
The Federal Government currently owns an estimated 640 million
acres, equivalent to the combined size of Alaska, Texas and California.
NACD believes that the Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF) should
no longer be used for additional land acquisition, but rather provide
maintenance to our roads, bridges, buildings and other infrastructure.
According to the Department of the Interior, there is $16 billion in
deferred maintenance needs among its agencies with the National Park
Service making up the largest share of that total. As a programmatic
request, NACD supports a prohibition of funds from LWCF for new land
acquisition and recommends LWCF be used to pay for the deferred
maintenance.
Thank you for your consideration of these requests. We look forward
to working with you as we continue to serve the nation through locally-
led natural resource conservation.
Sincerely,
Tim Palmer
NACD President
______
Prepared Statement of the National Association of State Energy
Officials
Chair Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee, I am David Terry, Executive Director of the National
Association of State Energy Officials (NASEO), which represents the 56
State and Territory Energy Directors and their Offices. NASEO is
submitting this testimony in support of funding for the ENERGY STAR
program (within the Climate Protection Partnership Division of the
Office of Air and Radiation) at the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA). NASEO supports funding of at least $50 million in fiscal
year 2020, including specific report language directing that the funds
be utilized only for the ENERGY STAR program. The ENERGY STAR program
is successful, voluntary, and cost-effective. The program has a proven
track record--it makes sense, it saves energy and money and Americans
embrace it. ENERGY STAR helps consumers and businesses control
expenditures over the long term. The program is strongly supported by
product manufacturers, utilities and homebuilders, and ENERGY STAR
leverages the States' voluntary efficiency actions. Voluntary ENERGY
STAR activities are occurring in public buildings, such as schools, in
conjunction with State Energy Offices, in Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas,
California, Colorado, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia,
Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, Michigan,
Minnesota, Mississippi, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey,
New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma,
Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Virginia
Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. The proposed
elimination of this program is a grave mistake. We also strongly oppose
the creation of a ``fee-based'' funding model, which could erode the
program's integrity. The States and the public utilize ENERGY STAR
because it is seen as unbiased and delivers cost-savings benefits to
businesses, consumers and State and local governments.
The ENERGY STAR program is focused on voluntary efforts that reduce
the use of energy, promotes energy efficiency and renewable energy, and
works with States, local governments, communities and business to
achieve these goals in a cooperative, public-private manner. NASEO has
worked very closely with EPA and approximately 40 States are ENERGY
STAR Partners. With very limited funding, EPA's ENERGY STAR program
works closely with the State Energy Offices to give consumers and
businesses the opportunity and technical assistance tools to make
better energy decisions and catalyzes product efficiency improvements
by manufacturers without regulation or mandates. The program is
voluntary.
ENERGY STAR focuses on energy efficient products as well as
buildings (e.g., residential, commercial, and industrial). Over 300
million ENERGY STAR qualified products were sold in 2016 alone. The
ENERGY STAR label is recognized across the United States.
Approximately, 90 percent of households recognized the ENERGY STAR
label when it was shown to them. It makes the work of the State Energy
Offices much easier, by working with the public on easily recognized
products, services, and targets. In order to obtain the ENERGY STAR
label a product has to meet established guidelines. ENERGY STAR's
voluntary partnership programs include ENERGY STAR Buildings, ENERGY
STAR Homes, ENERGY STAR Small Business, and ENERGY STAR Labeled
Products. The program operates by encouraging consumers and working
closely with State and local governments to purchase these products and
services. Marketplace barriers are also eradicated through education.
State Energy Offices are working with EPA to promote ENERGY STAR
products, ENERGY STAR for new construction, ENERGY STAR for public
housing, etc. A successful example of how State Energy Offices are
leveraging this key national program is the Nebraska Energy Office,
which since 2005, has utilized ENERGY STAR as the standard for
certifying home and office electronics that are eligible under the
State's successful and long-running Dollar and Energy Savings Loan
program. Another ENERGY STAR success is in the manufactured housing
sector. States, such as South Carolina, offer modest rebates for
ENERGSTAR manufactured homes in order to deliver both energy cost
savings to homeowners and lower overall electric grid operation costs
for all customers.
In 2016, millions of consumers and 16,000 voluntary partners, that
included manufactures, builders, businesses, communities and utilities,
tapped the value of ENERGY STAR and achieved impressive financial and
environmental results.
An estimated 91,000 energy efficiency home improvement projects
were undertaken through the whole house retrofit program, Home
Performance with ENERGY STAR (HPwES), in 2016. More than 700 utilities,
State, and local governments and non-profits utilize ENERGY STAR, as do
1,800 manufacturers.
The State Energy Offices are very encouraged with progress made at
EPA and in our States to promote programs to make schools more energy
efficient, in addition to an expanding ENERGY STAR Business Partners
program. In Kentucky, the State has partnered with school districts and
engineering firms to advance ENERGY STAR rated schools, resulting in
more than 325 ENERGY STAR rated schools in the State, a 67 percent
increase since 2012. Over the past few years, Kentucky has moved
aggressively to promote and build zero-net energy schools. Other States
that have over 150 ENERGY STAR rated schools include Arizona,
California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota,
New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, Utah,
Virginia, Washington and Wisconsin. Over 27 percent of Utah's K-12
schools are certified as ENERGY STAR.
EPA provides technical assistance to the State Energy Offices in
such areas as ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager (how to rate the
performance of buildings), setting an energy target, and financing
options for building improvements and building upgrade strategies.
ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager is used extensively by State Energy
Offices to benchmark performance of State and municipal buildings,
saving taxpayer dollars. Portfolio Manager is the industry-leading
benchmarking tool which has been used voluntarily in approximately 50
percent of the commercial buildings in the U.S. Portfolio Manager is
used to measure, track, assess, and report energy and water
consumption.
Additionally, the industrial sector embraces ENERGY STAR and
companies such as GM, Eastman Chemical, Nissan, Raytheon, Boeing and
Toyota are recognized for sustained energy excellence by the program.
At the close of 2014, the number of industrial sites committed to the
ENERGY STAR Challenge for Industry grew, while 306 sites met or
exceeded their targets by achieving an average 20 percent reduction in
industrial energy intensity.
The State Energy Offices are working cooperatively with our peers
in the State environmental agencies and State public utilities
commissions to ensure that programs, regulations, projects and policies
are developed recognizing both energy and environmental concerns. We
have worked closely with this program at EPA to address these issues.
We encourage these continued efforts.
conclusion
The ENERGY STAR program saves consumers billions of dollars every
year. The payback is enormous. NASEO supports robust program funding of
at least $50 million in fiscal year 2020. Funding for the ENERGY STAR
program is justified. It is a solid public-private relationship that
leverages resources, time and talent to produce tangible results by
saving energy and money. NASEO endorses these activities and the State
Energy Offices are working very closely with EPA to cooperatively
implement a variety of critical national programs without mandates.
Contact: David Terry, NASEO Executive Director ([email protected]),
1300 North 17th Street, Suite 1275, Arlington, VA 22209, and Jeff
Genzer, NASEO Counsel ([email protected]).
[This statement was submitted by David Terry, Executive Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of the National Association of State Foresters
The National Association of State Foresters (NASF) appreciates the
opportunity to submit written public testimony to the House Committee
on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and Related
Agencies regarding our fiscal year 2020 appropriations recommendations.
Our priorities focus primarily on appropriations for the USDA Forest
Service (Forest Service) State and Private Forestry (S&PF) programs.
State foresters deliver technical and financial assistance, along
with forest health, water, and wildfire protection for more than two-
thirds of the Nation's 751 million acres of forests. The Forest Service
S&PF mission area provides vital support to deliver these services,
which contribute to the socioeconomic and environmental health of rural
and urban areas. The comprehensive process for delivering these
services is articulated in each State's Forest Resource Assessment and
Strategy (Forest Action Plan), authorized in the 2008 Farm Bill and
continued in the 2018 Farm Bill. S&PF programs provide a significant
return on the Federal investment by leveraging the boots-on-the-ground
and financial resources of State agencies to deliver assistance to
forest landowners, Tribes, and communities. As Federal and State
governments continue to face financial challenges, State foresters, in
partnership with the S&PF mission area of the Forest Service, are best
positioned to maximize effectiveness of available resources by focusing
work on priority forest issues where resources are needed most.
Your support of the following programs is critical to helping
States address the many and varied challenges outlined in Forest Action
Plans.
wildland fire and forest fuels
NASF applauds Congress' hard work and dedication to achieve a
bipartisan wildfire suppression funding solution to permanently end the
raiding of the Forest Service's non-wildfire suppression programs,
including the Agency's S&PF programs. We appreciate your continued
support, as demonstrated in the fiscal year 2019 Appropriations bill,
in this critical area through additional funding for the Agency's fire
suppression and prevention accounts, as well as increased funding for
hazardous fuels mitigation on both Federal lands and cross boundary
areas. Fire knows no boundaries and State forestry agencies play a
significant role in helping to reduce threats from fire as well as
costs. The increased funding for both State Fire Assistance (SFA) and
Volunteer Fire Assistance (VFA) in fiscal year 2019 is a wise
investment and we encourage further financial support for these
programs.
state fire assistance and volunteer fire assistance \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The President's Budget renamed these programs National Fire
Capacity and Rural Fire Capacity respectively.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
More people living in fire-prone landscapes, high fuel loads,
drought, and deteriorating forest health are among the factors that led
most State foresters to identify wildland fire as a priority issue in
their Forest Action Plans. We now grapple with increasingly expensive
and complex wildland fires--fires that frequently threaten human life
and property. In 2018, more than 58,083 wildland fires burned nearly
8.8 million acres.\2\ State and local agencies respond to the majority
of wildfires across the country; in 2018 State and local agencies were
responsible for responding to 45,559 (78 percent) of the 58,083
reported wildfires across all jurisdictions.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ National Interagency Fire Center, Historical Wildland Fire
Summaries, pg. 7. Last accessed March 4, 2019 at https://
www.predictiveservices.nifc.gov/intelligence/2018_statssumm/intro_
summary18.pdf.
\3\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SFA and VFA are the fundamental Federal mechanism for assisting
States and local fire departments in responding to wildland fires and
in conducting management activities that mitigate fire risk on non-
Federal lands. SFA also helps train and equip local first responders
who are often first to arrive at a wildland fire incident and who play
a crucial role in keeping fires and their costs as minimal as possible.
The fiscal year 2019 Forest Service Budget Justification highlights
program success in Alaska during fiscal year 2017 when the State used
$1.6 million in SFA funds to increase capacity by paying for additional
positions, including air attack operators for initial and extended
operations, command staff for the statewide control centers, and
technical experts for interagency fire plans. Funding supported the
training of over 1,700 personnel, and was also used to defray the costs
of senior level firefighters in the State of Alaska. These same
personnel are also dispatched to assist in firefighting efforts across
the Nation. By directing resources to actions that help reduce the
number of large wildland fires-including prevention education,
preparedness activities, and fuels mitigation-the SFA program directly
addresses concerns over rising wildland fire suppression costs while
also reducing wildland fire risk to communities.
In 2015, 85 percent of all local and State crews and engine
dispatched outside of their geographic area were responding to Federal
fires, primarily on initial attack. In 2016, 82 percent of the total
number of fires were where State and local departments had primary
jurisdiction. Attacking fires when they are small is the key to
reducing fatalities, injuries, loss of homes, and cutting Federal fire-
fighting costs. The need for increased funding for fire suppression on
Federal lands has broad support. The need to increase fire suppression
funding for State and private lands, where roughly 80 percent of
wildfires occur, and where many Federal fires begin, is just as urgent.
NASF supports funding the State Fire Assistance program at $87 million
and Volunteer Fire Assistance at $18 million in fiscal year 2020.
forest pests and invasive plants
Also among the greatest threats identified in the Forest Action
Plans are native and non-native pests and diseases. These pests and
diseases have the potential to displace native trees, shrubs and other
vegetation types in forests; the Forest Service estimates that hundreds
of native and non-native insects and diseases damage the Nation's
forests each year. The growing number of damaging pests and diseases
are often introduced and spread by way of wooden shipping materials,
movement of firewood, and through various types of recreation. In 2015,
more than 6 million forested acres suffered mortality from insects and
diseases, 1.3 times greater than the previous year,\4\ and there is an
estimated 81 million acres at risk of attack by insects and disease
over the next 8 years.\5\ These losses threaten clean and abundant
water availability, wildlife habitat, clean air, and other
environmental services. Further, extensive areas of high insect or
disease mortality can set the stage for large-scale, catastrophic
wildfire.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Man, Gary. 2015. Major Forest Insect and Disease Conditions in
the United States: 2015 Update. Last accessed on March, 5, 2019 at:
http://www.fs.fed.us/foresthealth/publications/
ConditionsReport_2015.pdf.
\5\ Tkacz, Bory, et al. 2014. NIDRM 2012 Report Files: Executive
Summary. 2013-2027 National Insect and Disease Forest Risk Assessment.
Last accessed on March, 5, 2019 at: http://www.fs.fed.us/foresthealth/
technology/pdfs/2012_RiskMap_Exec_summary.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Cooperative Forest Health Management program supports
activities related to prevention, monitoring, suppression, and
eradication of insects, diseases, and plants through provision of
technical and financial assistance to States and territories to
maintain healthy, productive forest ecosystems on non-Federal forest
lands. The Cooperative Forest Health Management program plays a
critical part in protecting communities already facing outbreaks and in
preventing exposure of more forests and trees to the devastating and
costly effects of damaging pests and pathogens. NASF supports funding
the Forest Health-Cooperative Lands Program at $51 million in fiscal
year 2020.
assisting landowners and maintaining working forest landscapes--forest
stewardship program \6\ and forest legacy program
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The President's Budget renamed this program Working Forest
Lands.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Working forest landscapes are a vital part of the rural landscape,
providing an estimated 900,000 jobs, clean water, wood products, and
other essential services to millions of Americans. Private forests make
up two-thirds of all the forestland in the United States and support an
average of eight jobs per 1,000 acres.\7\ However, the Forest Service
estimates that 57 million acres of private forests in the U.S. are at
risk of conversion to urban development over the next two decades.
Programs like the Forest Stewardship Program (FSP) and the Forest
Legacy Program are key tools identified in the Forest Action Plans for
keeping working forests intact and for providing a full suite of
benefits to society.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Forest2Market. The Economic Impact of Privately-Owned Forests.
2009.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
FSP is the most extensive family forest-owner assistance program in
the country. Management assistance is delivered in cooperation with
State forestry agencies through technical assistance services and the
development and implementation of Forest Stewardship Plans. The program
works to ensure that private landowners have the best information to
help them manage their land for wildlife, recreation, aesthetics,
timber production, and many other goals. In fiscal year 2018, nearly 24
million acres of private forest lands across the Nation were managed
under Forest Stewardship Plans, and of this total nearly 13 million
acres are within high priority landscape areas identified in State
Forest Action Plans. Additionally, FSP supported direct outreach to
roughly 475,000 landowners which includes 11,888 new Forest Stewardship
Plans. The technical assistance provided through FSP is a gateway to
other effective USDA, State, and private sector programs designed to
help keep working forests intact. For instance, the FSP enables
landowners to participate in USDA programs including the Forest Legacy
Program and Environmental Quality Incentives Program. NASF supports
funding the Forest Stewardship Program at $29 million and the Forest
Legacy Program at $62 million in fiscal year 2020.
urban and community forest management challenges
Urban forests are important to achieving energy savings, improved
air quality, neighborhood stability, aesthetic value, reduced noise,
and improved quality of life in municipalities and communities around
the country. Urban trees and forests provide a wide array of social,
economic, and environmental benefits to people living in urban areas;
today, more than 83 percent of the Nation's population lives in urban
areas.\8\ Yet, urban and community forests face serious threats, such
as development and urbanization, invasive pests and diseases, and fire
in the wildland urban interface (WUI).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ USDA Forest Service fiscal year 2016 Budget Justification at
pg. 119.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since its expansion under the Cooperative Forestry Assistance Act
of 1990 (CFAA), the Forest Service's Urban and Community Forestry
(U&CF) program has provided technical and financial assistance to
promote stewardship of urban forests in communities of all sizes across
the country. The program is delivered in close partnership with State
foresters and leverages existing local efforts that have helped
thousands of communities and towns manage, maintain, and improve their
tree cover and green spaces. In fiscal year 2016, the U&CF program
delivered technical, financial, educational, and research assistance to
nearly 8,000 communities across all 50 States, the District of
Columbia, U.S. territories and affiliated Pacific Island nations.\9\
NASF supports funding the Urban and Community Forestry program at $35
million in fiscal year 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ USDA Forest Service fiscal year 2018 Budget Justification at
pg. 64.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
importance of forest inventory data in monitoring forest issues
The Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) program, managed by Forest
Service, Forest and Rangeland Research, is the only comprehensive
inventory system in the United States for assessing the health and
sustainability of the Nation's forests across all ownerships. FIA
provides essential data related to forest species composition, forest
growth rates, and forest health data, and it delivers baseline
inventory estimates used in Forest Action Plans. Further, this data is
used by academics, researchers, industry, and others to understand
forest trends and support investments in forest products facilities
that provide jobs and products to society. The program provides
unbiased information used in monitoring of wildlife habitat, wildfire
risk, insect and disease threats, invasive species spread, and response
to priorities identified in the Forest Action Plans.
As the key partner in FIA program delivery via State contribution
of matching funds, State foresters look forward to continued work with
the Forest Service to improve efficiency in delivery of the program to
meet the needs of the diverse user groups for FIA data. NASF supports
funding the Forest Inventory and Analysis program at $83 million in
fiscal year 2020.
landscape scale restoration
The Landscape Scale Restoration (LSR) program is an important way
that States, in collaboration with the Forest Service and other
partners, address critical forest priorities across the landscape. LSR
projects focus on the most critical priorities identified in each
State's Forest Action Plan and on achieving national goals as laid out
in the State and Private Forestry national themes. As a result, LSR
contributes to achieving results across the landscape and to making
meaningful local, regional, and national impacts. NASF supports funding
the Landscape Scale Restoration program at $20 million in fiscal year
2020.
NASF appreciates the opportunity to share our fiscal year 2020
appropriations recommendations for the USDA Forest Service with the
subcommittee.
______
Prepared Statement of the National Association of Tribal Historic
Preservation Officers
TRIBAL CULTURAL PRESERVATION NEEDS
Chair Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee, I appreciate this opportunity to present the National
Association of Tribal Historic Preservation Officers (NATHPO)'s
recommendations for fiscal year 2020 appropriations. My name is Valerie
Grussing and I am the new Executive Director. In this year of
transition for the organization, we have some grand and exciting plans,
some of which rely on this subcommittee's continued support for the
budgetary needs of Tribal cultural preservation activities. Each of the
recommended line item amounts are discussed in detail below.
1.
National Park Service, Historic Preservation Fund, Tribal line
item ($20 million)
2.
National Park Service, National NAGPRA Program:
a.
Exclusively for NAGPRA Grants ($2.331 million)
b.
Program administration ($1 million for Program Use)
3.
Bureau of Indian Affairs--Create line items and support the
following divisions:
a.
12 Regional Offices support for Cultural Resource
compliance ($3 million)
b.
Central Office cultural resource efforts throughout the
bureau ($200,000)
c.
NAGPRA compliance work ($765,000)
d.
To fight ARPA crimes on Indian reservations ($200,000)
4.
Smithsonian Institution: For repatriation activities, including
Review Committee and repatriation office ($1.25 million)
Background Information:
What are Tribal Historic Preservation Officers (THPOs)? THPOs are
appointed by federally recognized Tribal governments that have entered
into an agreement with the Department of the Interior to assume the
Federal compliance role of the State HPO, per the National Historic
Preservation Act. Tribal historic preservation plans are grounded in
self-determination, traditional knowledge and cultural values, and may
involve projects to improve Indian schools, roads, health clinics and
housing. THPOs are the first responders when a sacred site is
threatened, when an ancestral home is uncovered, and when Native
ancestors are disturbed by development. THPOs are also often
responsible for their Tribe's oral history programs and operating
Tribal museums and cultural centers. They perform many functions and
responsibilities in Indian country and, through their activities,
represent an active expression and exercise of Tribal sovereignty.
What is the National Association of Tribal Historic Preservation
Officers? NATHPO is a national non-profit membership association of
Tribal government preservation officials committed to protecting
culturally important places that perpetuate Native identity,
resilience, and cultural endurance. NATHPO assists Tribal communities
in protecting their historic properties, whether they are naturally
occurring in the landscape or are manmade structures.
1. HISTORIC PRESERVATION FUND (HPF), ADMINISTERED BY THE NATIONAL PARK
SERVICE--TRIBAL LINE ITEM
($20 MILLION)
As of May 1, 2019, there are 185 National Park Service (NPS)-
recognized Tribal Historic Preservation Officers (THPOs). Each THPO
represents an affirmative step by an Indian Tribe to assume the
responsibilities of the State Historic Preservation Officers for their
respective Tribal lands, as authorized by Congress in the 1992
amendments to the National Historic Preservation Act. Collectively,
these Tribes exercise responsibilities over a land base exceeding 50
million acres in 30 States. The HPF is the sole source of Federal
funding for THPOs and the main source of funding to implement the
Nation's historic preservation programs. HPF revenue is generated from
oil and gas development on the outer Continental Shelf. We recommend
$20 million to carry out the requirements of the National Historic
Preservation Act. This would provide the nearly 200 federally
recognized THPOs an average of $100,000 to run their programs. Funding
THPOs and staff creates jobs, generates economic development, and spurs
community revitalization. It also facilitates environmental and
historic review processes, including for infrastructure permitting.
What is at stake? As the number of Indian Tribes with THPO programs
increases, the amount of HPF funding appropriated and apportioned to
THPOs must keep pace. Native American cultural properties on millions
of acres of Tribal lands are at risk. For the past several years, each
THPO program has been asked to conduct important Federal compliance
work with fewer financial resources. In the first year of congressional
funding support for THPOs (fiscal year 1996), the original 12 THPOs
each received an average of $83,000 per THPO, while in fiscal year
2018, 179 Tribes received an average of $64,000. There are expected to
be almost 200 THPOs in fiscal year 2020. Reconnecting Native peoples to
their cultural heritage, traditions, and places has the power to help
heal deep generational wounds. To continue historic preservation and
cultural revitalization in Indian country, it is essential that THPO
programs receive increased funding to meet the increasing need. The
chart below demonstrates the program growth and funding need.
Additional HPF programs administered by the National Park Service:
NATHPO appreciates the strong HPF funding levels the Committee has
provided in recent years. We support the request of the National Trust
for Historic Preservation that Congress provide a total fiscal year
2020 HPF appropriation of $148.5 million. Within that funding we
recommend:
--$60 million for State Historic Preservation Officers (SHPOs);
--$20 million for Tribal Historic Preservation Officers (THPOs);
--$5 million for a competitive grant program for SHPOs and THPOs to
conduct mapping and digitization of historic resources--which
would enable their identification at the very earliest stages
of project planning, leading to both protection of historic
sites and increased efficiency of infrastructure projects
(minimizing controversy, legal challenges, and delays);
--$30 million for grants to preserve the sites and stories of
underrepresented communities;
--$10 million for grants to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities;
--$15 million for Save America's Treasures grants;
--$7.5 million for preservation grants to revitalize significant
historic properties;
--$1 million for competitive grants for the survey and nomination of
properties associated with communities currently
underrepresented on the National Register of Historic Places
and National Historic Landmarks.
HPF Tribal appropriation has steadily increased, as has the number of
THPOs.
Therefore the average apportionment per THPO has remained the same.
2. NATIONAL PARK SERVICE, NATIONAL NAGPRA PROGRAM
The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA)
provides for the disposition of Native American cultural items \1\
removed from Federal or Tribal lands, or in the possession or control
of museums or Federal agencies, to lineal descendants, Indian Tribes,
or Native Hawaiian organizations based on descent or cultural or
geographic affiliation. NAGPRA prohibits trafficking of Native American
cultural items and created a grants program exclusively for Indian
Tribes, Native Hawaiian organizations, and public museums.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Cultural items include human remains, funerary objects, sacred
objects, and objects of cultural patrimony.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NAGPRA Grants Program:
a.
$2.331 million to be used exclusively for NAGPRA Grants to
Indian Tribes, Native Hawaiian organizations, and museums. We recommend
that the Committee restore the amount that the NAGPRA grants program
received each year for most of its history prior to when the NPS began
to divert a greater amount of funds for administrative use within the
cultural resource division. NAGPRA grants have been ``level-funded'' at
$1.65 million. NATHPO requests that the Congress restore the grants to
the $2.331 million funding level.
Administration of National NAGPRA Program:
b.
$1 million, additionally, for NAGPRA program administration,
including the publication of Federal Register notices, grant
administration, civil penalty investigations, and Review Committee
costs.
3. BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS--CREATE LINE ITEMS AND SUPPORT THE
FOLLOWING DIVISIONS
The BIA has federally mandated responsibilities to work with Indian
Tribes and comply with the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA),
the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), and NAGPRA. Currently the
BIA does not have any budget line items that are devoted to complying
with these Federal laws, nor does the BIA have resources dedicated to
compliance with the Archaeological Resources Protection Act (ARPA) and
executive orders and directives in the cultural resource field. Funds
are not only needed for the BIA to comply with their internal
development efforts, such as roads and forestry, but also to conduct
project reviews of outside development projects, such as oil and gas
development that are estimated to number over 7,000 per year. ARPA
crime on Indian reservations continues to be a major problem, as
looters and traffickers continue to steal valuable cultural resources
from Tribal and Federal lands. The BIA does not have any special agents
or law enforcement forces to combat this uniquely destructive crime in
Indian country and we urge the creation of a dedicated line item within
the BIA.
NATHPO recommends the BIA create line items and support the following
divisions:
a.
To support Cultural Resource compliance at the 12 Regional BIA
Offices ($250,000 x 12 regional offices = $3 million)
b.
Central Office cultural resource efforts throughout the bureau
($200,000)
c.
NAGPRA compliance work ($765,000)
d.
To fight ARPA crimes on Indian reservations ($200,000)
4. SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION, NATIONAL MUSEUM OF THE AMERICAN INDIAN AND
THE NATIONAL MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY
REPATRIATION PROGRAMS
NATHPO requests that the Smithsonian Institution receive $1.25
million for its repatriation activities, including operation costs of
the Review Committee and repatriation office.
Thank you for considering our testimony. I would be pleased to
answer any questions you may have.
[This statement was submitted by Valerie J. Grussing, Executive
Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of National Center for American Indian Enterprise
Development
Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall and Members of the
subcommittee, the National Center for American Indian Enterprise
Development (NCAIED) presents this testimony to urge approval of fiscal
year 2020 funding above the fiscal year 2019 enacted levels for the
Indian Loan Guarantee Program and the budget for the Economic
Development Division of the Office of Indian Energy and Economic
Development (OIEED) within the Department of the Interior (DOI).
1. Indian Loan Guarantee Program:
The essential Indian Loan Guarantee Program has long been supported
by NCAIED and other leading national organizations representing Indian
Tribes, Alaska Native corporations, and enterprises owned by them or
their community members. Testimony and letters to the House and Senate
Appropriations Subcommittee on Interior, Environment and Related
Agencies called for doubling the funds for the Indian Loan Guarantee
Program in fiscal year 2019, so we were gratified when your House
counterparts recommended, and the full House approved, $19,279,000 for
this program ``to remain available through September 30, 2020'' with
$1,702,000 for administrative expenses and a most welcome volume cap of
$329,260,000 in private loans that could be subject to guarantee. Your
subcommittee recommended slightly more than level funding, and the
conference agreement approved in the fiscal year 2019 minibus was
$10,779,000 (up $3 million, but not the $10 million plus up the House
approved).
On March 27, 2019, the NCAIED's annual Reservation Economic Summit
(RES2019) hosted the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs' Listen Session
on Federal Loan Guarantee Programs. When Committee staff asked whether
the Indian Loan Guarantee Program should be eliminated in favor of
other loan guarantee programs (as the fiscal year 2020 Budget Request
proposes), not one person raised a hand of the 100+ session
participants. Every lender and Indian borrower at the Listening Session
agreed that this valuable program is the only one designed to
facilitate access to private loans for Tribal and Tribal member
projects on trust lands or other rural native communities generally
ignored by most private lenders. So, once again, NCAIED and other
leading national Tribal organizations respectfully request that the
subcommittee approve an increase--preferably up to $25 million or at
least double the fiscal year 2019 enacted level--for the Indian Loan
Guarantee Program with bill language to enable the funds ``to remain
available through September 30, 2021.''
Under this Program, administered by OIEED's Division of Capital
Investment (DCI), private lenders certified by DCI make conventional
loans to eligible Tribal and individual Native borrowers for businesses
and economic development projects. To qualify for the guarantee, the
loan must have an economic impact on a native community or Bureau of
Indian Affairs service area. DCI-certified lenders (including numerous
Tribal-owned banks) understand that Tribal law may apply, including
Tribal court jurisdiction, and are familiar with collateral
restrictions when lending to borrowers on Tribal lands. DCI allows its
certified lenders to use their own forms and underwriting standards,
including longer loan terms to enable borrowers to meet debt repayment
schedules. Lenders and borrowers prefer DCI's more flexible, simpler
process that facilitates financing of profit or nonprofit businesses,
large or small loans, business startups or expansions, construction,
refinancing, and lines of credit. On average, DCI issues about 30 loan
guarantees and loan insurance certificates annually, but could issue
more with (1) increased credit subsidy, (2) some insulation from
funding interruptions (due to repeated Continuing Resolutions and
partial government shutdown), and (3) leeway to hire one or more
permanent staff.
While the President's budget seems to favor the larger Small
Business Administration (SBA) loan guarantee program, the SBA program
is far less suited to Indian Country lending. The SBA imposes more
rigid underwriting criteria and collateral requirements, its guarantee
amount is smaller, loan closings take longer, most SBA staff and SBA
lenders are unfamiliar with Indian borrowers, Tribes and non-profits
are not eligible, Tribal enterprise borrowers must waive sovereign
immunity, Tribal member borrowers on trust lands also may have to
obtain a sovereign immunity waiver, and disputes must be resolved in
Federal court.
Indian Country needs the Indian Loan Guarantee Program, and support
for it is fully justified based on its successful track record, a low
loss rate, and an impressive return of about $17 in private financing
for every $1 of Federal funds invested. For some examples, see https://
bia.gov/WhoWeAre/AS-IA/IEED/DCI/SuccessStories/index.htm and below:
Alaska: At least 6 successful projects in Alaska have been
privately financed with DCI's loan guarantees. Several projects spurred
economic development in Hoonah, AK, with three guaranteed loans
totalling over $38 million. The first two loans, from Northrim Bank and
Alaska Pacific Bank, helped to purchase, renovate and transform a old
salmon cannery into a tourism attraction with restaurant, gift and
retail facilities (employing 63 during construction, and 35
permanently), and later develop deep water cruise ship pier facilities
in 2015. A third guaranteed loan financed an Alaska Native-owned
touring company that offers scenic tours to cruise ship visitors. In
2009, Wells Fargo provided $800,000 in tax exempt financing, guaranteed
by DCI, to enable Cook Inlet Tribal Council to construct a social
service center and bus barn. The Seldovia Native Association financed a
hotel's construction with an $8.3 million loan from Wells Fargo with a
DCI guarantee. DCI also has guaranteed several loans to help Alaska
Native entrepreneurs launch their businesses, including ArXotical
(triplet sisters' indigenous beauty products company), and Bayview
General Merchandise (a general store built and run by a Toksook Bay
shareholder).
New Mexico: Since 1987, the DCI program has guaranteed several
loans totaling over $15 million to enable the Indian Pueblo Cultural
Center in Albuquerque to expand its cultural center and retail
development (e.g., Starbucks, restaurant, a self-storage business),
increasing annual revenue from under $1 million to over $30 million
(employing almost 200 people, 44 percent Native American). In another
successful project, the Picuris Pueblo constructed the now popular
Hotel Santa Fe with financing, DCI-guaranteed, of $11.1 million from
Palm Desert National Bank. In addition to its distinction as the only
Tribal-owned hotel in Santa Fe, the successful enterprise is a large
employer and features art, architecture, music and language of the
Pueblo people.
Navajo Nation Tribal Utility Authority: Navajo Tribal Utility
Authority (NTUA) secured a $23.5 million loan with a DCI guarantee to
acquire a greater ownership interest in NTUA Wireless, LLC, the first
Tribal wireless/Internet enterprise, and to meet underserved and
unserved communications needs within Navajo Nation. Employing more than
80 fulltime (45 within NTUA Wireless and 35 within NTUA), NTUA services
now include communications, electricity, natural gas, water,
wastewater, and photovoltaic power (solar).
Nevada: To finance the design and construction of the Northern
Nevada Transitional Housing Center for the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony
(RSIC) and State of Nevada, the Tribe worked with the State, U.S. Bank,
and DCI on an $8 million loan. With the DCI guarantee, U.S. Bank agreed
to extend the loan for 20 years so that the Tribe could afford the debt
service payments. The project expanded essential services to the Tribal
community, and has contributed to the economic growth of the greater
Reno-Sparks area.
Other Southwest Projects: About $32 million in loan guarantees have
supported financing for convenience store projects in various Tribal
communities in the West and Southwest, including in California, Nevada,
Arizona and New Mexico. Creating jobs and significant revenues for
Tribes and individual native entrepreneurs, some of the stores operate
in remote areas and provide their communities essential goods and
services (e.g., gasoline, basic food items, money order and wire
transfer services). Several of the stores complement other Tribal
attractions, such as hotels, casinos, and artisan communities.
Wisconsin: Over 2018-2019, the Oneida Tribe secured $37 million in
combined financing from four banks (three Tribal-owned), with a DCI
loan guarantee, to refurbish and remodel two hotels and refinance old
higher interest rate debt. The Tribal banks are Mille Lacs-owned
Woodlands Bank, Oneida-owned Bay Bank, and Native American Bank (owned
by over 30 Tribes and Alaska Native corporations).
Washington: The program guaranteed a $130,000 loan to enable a
Quinault Indian Nation Tribal member to purchase a fishing vessel, the
Pacific Rooster, and employ other Tribal members in exercising their
Tribal treaty fishing rights, catching fish and delivering their catch
to Quinault Pride Seafood.
In 2006, Congress increased this program's authorization for the
aggregate of loans subject to program guarantees or insurance to grow
from $500 million to $1.5 billion. So far, that higher lending level
has not been attained because far too little is appropriated annually
for the program's credit subsidy, keeping the volume cap on loans
subject to guarantee far too low--despite ever-increasing demands for
financing in Indian Country.
The National Center, the National Congress of American Indians
(NCAI), Native American Finance Officers Association and others
organizations in Indian Country have urged Congress repeatedly to
double the funding for the Indian Loan Guarantee Program. NCAI calls
for $25 million for the program in its fiscal year 2020 Indian Country
Budget Request (see p. 91). More funding would enable DCI-certified
lenders to finance more projects (and attract more banks to participate
in the program) to support financing for business expansions, Tribal
development projects, lines of credit for working capital and payrolls
for more employees, and even infrastructure and small energy
development projects. Given the substantial return on the modest
Federal investment, Congress should increase the program's funding
beyond the fiscal year 2019 enacted level and allow it some more staff
and a higher volume cap for guaranteed loans.
2. Economic Development Division within OIEED:
For fiscal year 2019 funding for DOI's Community and Economic
Development account, the House approved $51.5 million, but the Senate
approved only $46.5 million. Fortunately, the fiscal year 2019 enacted
level of $47.5 million included, according to the conference report, an
increase for OIEED of $1 million: ``to provide assistance to Tribes to
enhance economic development and improve access to private financing of
development projects . . . assist with feasibility studies and provide
technical assistance to Tribes to establish commercial codes, courts
and other business structures . . . build Tribal capacity to lease
Tribal lands and manage economic and energy resource development . . .
[and] foster incubators of Tribal-owned and other Native American-owned
businesses.'' H. Rept. 116-9, p. 729. For fiscal year 2020, NCAIED and
other leading national Tribal organizations urge Congress to add to
last year's increase to provide at least $3 million with report
language directing that the increase ``be dedicated to OIEED's Economic
Development programs to support: more feasibility studies of
development projects; greater access to private financing for such
projects; technical assistance on Tribal legal and business structures
to enhance economic development, and building capacity for leasing
Tribal lands and managing economic and energy resource development; and
incubators of Tribal-owned and other Native American-owned businesses''
(as proposed in S. 294). Support for the OIEED increase is reflected in
NCAI's fiscal year 2020 Indian Country Budget Request on page 92.
In sum, the National Center urges the subcommittee to approve
upwards of $25 million for the Indian Loan Guarantee Program and
increase OIEED's budget by $5 million, with $3 million for its Economic
Development to leverage substantial private sector financing and other
initiatives to advance economic development in Indian Country.
Chris James, President & CEO
National Center for American Indian Enterprise Development
______
Prepared Statement of the National Conference of State Historic
Preservation Officers
Fiscal Year 2020 State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) Historic
Preservation Fund (HPF) Apportionment Total Request:
--$60 million for State Historic Preservation Offices (SHPOs)
--$20 million for Tribal Historic Preservation Offices (THPOs)
--$30 million for competitive grant programs related to the Civil
Rights Movement
--$10 million Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs)
--$7.5 million for grants to preserve historic resources in rural
communities
--$7.5 million for Save America's Treasures grant program.
Funded through withdrawals from the Historic Preservation Fund (16
USC 470h) U.S. Department of the Interior's National Park Service.
Unique and Successful Federal-State Partnership
Recognizing the importance of our national heritage, in 1966
Congress passed the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA16 USC
470), which established historic preservation as a priority of the
Federal Government. Recognizing that State officials have local
expertise, the Act's authors directed Federal entities charged with its
implementation--the Department of the Interior and the Advisory Council
on Historic Preservation--to partner with the States. Duties delegated
to the SHPOs include: (1) locating and recording historic resources;
(2) nominating significant historic resources to the National Register
of Historic Places; (3) cultivating historic preservation programs at
the local government level; (4) providing funds for preservation
activities; (5) commenting on Federal rehabilitation tax credit
projects; (6) review of all Federal projects for their impact on
historic properties; and (7) providing technical assistance to Federal
agencies, State and local governments and the private sector.
To assist the States in accomplishing this federally-delegated
work, in 1976, Congress established the HPF. The HPF is funded from
outer-continental shelf lease revenues--not tax dollars, so that the
depletion of one non-renewal resource can be used to help preserve
another non-renewable resource--our heritage. And the States also
contribute toward this effort, matching at least 40 percent of the HPF
funding they receive.
Finding and Saving America's Heritage
The first step in preserving and protecting America's heritage is
identifying it--which requires survey, documentation and stewardship
and sharing of digital historic site data. These sites represent the
many people, places, and events that have shaped our national identity.
Adequate funding is essential for SHPOs to conduct historic resource
identification, documentation and digitization activities. Having
accurate, up-to-date, digitally accessible information on our Nation's
historic resources would dramatically increase the efficiency and
effectiveness of all local, State, and Federal projects. From deciding
on the design of local in-fill development, to State transportation
planning projects, to Federal large-scale energy projects and disaster
recovery efforts--every single project, and the American people would
benefit from enhanced and accessible historic resource databases.
Once identified and documented, America's historic resources are
primarily recognized at the local, State, and national levels by
listing on National and State Historic Registers. State Historic
Preservation Officers, through the authority of the National Historic
Preservation Act assist, support and encourage communities with their
efforts. National Register recognition by the Secretary of the Interior
confirms citizens' belief in the significance of their communities.
The National Historic Preservation program is primarily one of
assistance, not acquisition. The Federal Government does not own,
manage, or maintain responsibility for the vast majority of the
historic assets in the National Historic Preservation program. Instead,
the program, through the SHPOs, provides individuals, communities, and
local, State, and Federal Governments with the tools they need to
identify, preserve, and utilize the historic assets of importance to
them.
In addition to the SHPO funding, the NCSHPO supports robust funding
for the Tribal Historic Preservation Offices (THPO). THPOs assume the
Federal compliance role of the SHPO on their respective Tribal lands.
The number of THPOs continues to increase annually. Funding increases
are necessary to prevent a decrease in the average THPO grant.
NCSHPO also supports $7.5 million for the Historic Revitalization
Subgrant Program to preserve historic resources in rural communities,
$7.5 million for the Save America's Treasure's grant program, $30
million for competitive grants to preserve the sites and stories
related to the Civil Rights movement, and $10 million for a similar
program for Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
Jobs, Economic Development & Community Revitalization
Historic preservation has stimulated economic growth, promoted
community education and pride, and rescued and rehabilitated
significant historic resources in communities throughout the country.
In many cases, historic preservation combats the effects of blight and
vacancy by using the historic built environment as a catalyst for
community change. These changes result in historic downtown districts
and neighborhoods that are dynamic destinations for visitors and
residents alike.
The Federal Rehabilitation Tax Credit (HTC) program, administered
by the State Historic Preservation Offices in cooperation with the
National Park Service, is an important driver for economic development.
Since inception, the HTC has rehabilitated more than 43,000 buildings,
created more than 2.5 million jobs and leveraged $144 billion in
private investment nationwide. On average, the HTC leverages $5 dollars
in private investment for every $1 dollar in Federal funding creating
highly effective public-private partnerships. In many States, including
my own State of Texas, the HTC has been expanded through adoption of
State tax credit programs that complement the HTC. By way of example,
in the four-year period between 2012 and 2015, 21 Federal tax credit
projects were completed in Texas. In the subsequent three-year period
(since our State tax credit went into effect in 2015), 53 Federal tax
credit projects have been completed, more than doubling our previous
activity, and including private investment that exceeds $1 billion per
year. This would not be possible without a robust Federal program.
Historic preservation also stimulates economic development through
heritage tourism. Cultural and heritage travelers spend an average of
$994 per trip and contribute more than $192 billion annually to the
U.S. economy.\1\ SHPOs are essential, ground level partners in
identifying and interpreting the historic places that attract these
visitors. A modest increase in SHPO funding would allow SHPOs to expand
their public outreach and assistance efforts, enabling communities to
take greater advantage of heritage tourism opportunities which lead to
job creation, new business development and enhanced community pride.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Cultural and Heritage Tourism Study (October 2009)
conducted by Mandala Research, LLC for U.S. Cultural & Heritage Tourism
Marketing Council, U.S. Department of Commerce, and Gozaic/Heritage
Travel Inc., a subsidiary of the National Trust for Historic
Preservation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
State Historic Preservation Offices' Accomplishments
Although it has been authorized at $150 million, appropriation
levels have never approached that amount. Even with chronic
underfunding, through the end of 2018, the HPF has facilitated more
than 1.8 million listings in the National Register, the survey of
millions of acres for cultural resources, and administers the Historic
Tax Credit, which has generated more than $32.4 billion in Federal tax
revenue from historic rehabilitation projects.
Conclusion
On behalf of all 59 SHPOs, I'd like to thank you, Chairwoman
Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and members of the U.S. Senate
Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and
Related Agencies for the opportunity to submit testimony.
Historic preservation recognizes that what was common and ordinary
in the past is often rare and precious today, and what is common and
ordinary today may be extraordinary--50, 100 or 500 years from now. I
would like to thank the committee for their commitment to historic
preservation. The Federal Government plays an invaluable role in
preserving our Nation's history and our collective sense of place.
Through our partnership, SHPOs remain committed to working together to
identify, protect, and maintain our Nation's heritage.
[This statement was submitted by Mark S. Wolfe, President of the
National Conference of State Historic Preservation Officers, and
Executive Director of the Texas Historical Commission.]
______
Prepared Statement of the National Congress of American Indians
On behalf of the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI),
thank you for the opportunity to provide written testimony regarding
fiscal year 2020 Interior-Environment appropriations. Founded in 1944,
NCAI is the oldest and largest representative organization serving the
broad interests of Tribal governments and communities. For 75 years
NCAI has advocated for Tribal governments and communities, NCAI has
fought to preserve the treaty and sovereign rights of Tribal nations,
advance the government-to-government relationship, and remove historic
structural impediments to Tribal self-determination.
NCAI's following requests are rooted in the treaties and agreements
that our ancestors made with the U.S. Government. When Tribal nations
ceded millions of acres of land to the U.S., the Federal Government
promised to safeguard our right to govern ourselves, to enable Tribal
governments to deliver essential services, and provide them adequate
resources to do so effectively. However, a recent assessment from the
U.S. Civil Rights Commission has found that ``Federal funding for
Native American programs across the government remains grossly
inadequate to meet the most basic needs the Federal Government is
obligated to provide.'' \i\ Tribal leaders and citizens have known this
for decades, and we urge Congress to fully fund the U.S. Government's
treaty and statutory obligations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\i\ U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. (2018). Broken Promises:
Continuing Federal Funding Shortfall for Native Americans
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The update also found that in the past 15 years, efforts undertaken
by the Federal Government have resulted in minor improvements and in
some ways have lost ground. While Congress has dealt with a spending
environment hampered by an austerity fiscal policy, including
sequestration and tight limits on discretionary accounts, the Federal
trust and treaty obligations were no less imperative. The fact that
these solemn agreements that are funded in the Federal budget have been
subject to political impasses, including a recent 35-day government
shutdown, highlights the need for solutions to protect vital Tribal
governmental services from interruptions.
The Indian Health Service (IHS) and Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA)
provide core governmental services for Tribal nations, including
hospitals, schools, law enforcement, child welfare programs, social
services, and more. For many Tribal nations, most Tribal governmental
services are funded by Federal sources as part of the treaty and trust
responsibility. This is particularly important because Tribal nations
lack the tax base and parity in tax authority under Federal law to
raise governmental revenue to deliver services.
Federal funding remains critical to ensure essential government
services are delivered to Tribal citizens. In addition to the
appropriations requests below, NCAI urges Congress to fund IHS and BIA
through advance appropriations to protect Tribal governments and
citizens from future shutdowns as well as cash flow problems that
regularly occur at the start of the fiscal year.
bureau of indian affairs
Along with the IHS, the BIA is one of the primary agencies
responsible for providing services throughout Indian Country, either
directly or through compacts or contracts with Tribal governments. As
part of the fiscal year 2020 budget formulation process, Tribes from
each BIA region completed a survey to outline which ten budget lines
they would prefer to provide increased funding to and why. The
formulation process provides a window into which program areas Tribes
would prefer to see increases designated. The results of this process
show that BIA Social Services, Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA), Tribal
Courts, Aid to Tribal Government, Scholarships and Adult Education,
Criminal Investigations/Policing, Road Maintenance, Housing, Johnson
O'Malley, Detentions and Corrections, and Welfare Assistance made up
the top 11.
For Public Safety and Justice Programs, one of the most fundamental
aspects of the Federal Government's trust responsibility is the
obligation to protect public safety on Tribal lands. Congress and the
United States Supreme Court have long acknowledged this obligation,
which Congress most recently reaffirmed in the Tribal Law and Order Act
expressly ``acknowledging the Federal nexus and distinct Federal
responsibility to address and prevent crime in Indian Country.'' In
2018 the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights found that there continues to
be ``systematic underfunding of Tribal law enforcement and criminal
justice systems, as well as structural barriers in the funding and
operation of criminal justice systems in Indian Country'' that
undermine public safety.\ii\ Recent experience demonstrates that
addressing the lack of justice funding can make rapid and dramatic
strides toward improving public safety.\iii\ Tribal justice systems
simply need the resources to put their tools to work so they can
protect women, children and families, address substance abuse,
rehabilitate first-time offenders, and put serious criminals behind
bars.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\ii\ U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. (2018). Broken Promises:
Continuing Federal Funding Shortfall for Native Americans (p. 32).
Received from https://www.usccr.gov/pubs/2018/12-20-
Broken-Promises.pdf.
\iii\ Michael S. Black, Acting Assistant Secretary--Indian Affairs,
U.S. Department of the Interior, Testimony, Briefing Transcript, p.
136; see also Dep't of the Interior, press release, March 4, 2014,
https://www.bia.gov/sites/bia.gov/files/assets/public/press_release/
pdf/idc1-025752.pdf (announcing Tiwahe Initiative to promote the
stability and security of Native American families).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The underfunding of Tribal law enforcement and justice systems is
well-documented. Most recently, the BIA submitted a report to Congress
in 2017 estimating that to provide a minimum base level of service to
all federally-recognized Tribes: $1 billion is needed for Tribal law
enforcement, $1 billion is needed for Tribal courts, and $222.8 million
is needed to adequately fund existing detention centers.\iv\ Based on
recent appropriation levels, BIA is generally funding Tribal law
enforcement at about 22 percent of estimated need, Tribal detention at
about 41 percent of estimated need, and Tribal courts at a dismal 4.5
percent of estimated need.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\iv\ Bureau of Indian Affairs, Office of Justice Services. ``Report
to Congress on Spending, Staffing, and Estimated Funding Costs for
Public Safety and Justice Programs in Indian Country,'' Aug, 16, 2016,
available at https://www.bia.gov/cs/groups/xojs/documents/document/
idc2-051817.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NCAI recommends an increase in base funding for Tribal courts, for
a total of $83 million, which would include courts in Public Law 280
jurisdictions. NCAI also recommends an increase to BIA Law Enforcement
of $200 million, for a total of $573 million.
BIA Social Services help to address the underlying conditions such
as drug addiction, poverty, and violence that tend to create and
perpetuate the circumstances that produce victims. Sub-activities
include services in the areas of family and domestic violence, child
abuse and neglect, and protective services. However, many Tribes'
Social Services departments are understaffed and experience high
turnover rates. As an example, in fiscal year 2017, Osage Nation case
workers averaged 25-30 cases a month each. This exceeds the standard of
one case worker for every 15 cases administered. A lack of increased
yearly funding tends to hinder these protective services. NCAI
recommends $55 million for BIA Social Services in fiscal year 2020.
In addition to public safety and human services, infrastructure
remains an area of high need. A transportation program that is vital to
infrastructure in Indian Country is the BIA Road Maintenance Program,
which is funded and authorized under the Department of the Interior.
The BIA Road Maintenance Program is critical to BIA owned roads and
facilities. Currently, BIA is responsible for maintaining approximately
29,400 miles of roads in Indian Country including 900 bridges. The
condition of these roads is increasingly concerning for Tribal citizens
and all surrounding communities. The lack of sufficient transportation
infrastructure also hampers economic development opportunities for
Tribal nations and their citizens.
According to a recent GAO Report published in May 2017, Better Data
Could Improve Road Management and Inform Indian Student Attendance
Strategies,\v\ BIA did not provide adequate documents on road
maintenance and no process exists for Tribal nations to properly report
on road maintenance. The BIA conducted a road maintenance survey, which
found that the cost of road maintenance more than doubled the allocated
amount of funding for proper maintenance in fiscal year 2018 and that
deferred maintenance had risen to $392 million for BIA roads. Further
data on road maintenance is needed to adequately address the deferred
maintenance of roads throughout Indian Country. Increased funding for
the BIA Road Maintenance program is needed in order to begin to address
public safety and commercial activity concerns that affect all
Americans. $50 million is requested to begin to address the deferred
roads maintenance need in Indian Country.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\v\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2017, Publication
No.GAO-17-423
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Overall, BIA provides funding for many public safety, education,
human services, and natural resource programs that cannot be addressed
fully in this testimony. NCAI supports the testimony of other national
Tribal organizations, such as the National Indian Child Welfare
Association, National Indian Education Association, American Indian
Higher Education Consortium, and others who have also developed
rigorous requests to address the treaty and trust obligations funded in
the Interior-Environment spending bill.
indian health service
The Federal responsibility for healthcare is also rooted in the
treaty and trust promises. Yet, the Federal Government has never fully
lived up to this responsibility. Appropriations for the IHS have never
been adequate to meet basic patient needs, and healthcare is delivered
in mostly third world conditions. The Indian healthcare delivery system
faces significant funding disparities, notably in per capita spending
between the IHS and other Federal healthcare programs. The IHS has been
and continues to be a critical institution in securing the health and
wellness of Tribal communities. In fiscal year 2017, the IHS per capita
expenditures for patient health services were just $3,332, compared to
$9,207 per person for healthcare spending nationally. New healthcare
insurance opportunities and expanded Medicaid in some States may expand
healthcare resources available to AI/ANs.
NCAI recommends the amount requested by the IHS Tribal Budget
Formulation Workgroup for fiscal year 2020, a total of $7.03 billion
for the Indian Health Service in fiscal year 2020. This amount would
include an increase to maintain current services and other binding
obligations and allow for program expansions, as listed in the
Workgroup's fiscal year 2020 report.
environmental protection agency
NCAI requests funding for the Tribal General Assistance Program at
$99.5 million. Program capacity-building is a top environmental
priority identified by Tribes as part of the EPA National Tribal
Operations Committee National Tribal Caucus. The Indian General
Assistance Program (IGAP) is unique among Federal programs in that it
provides a foundation which Tribes can leverage to support other
greatly-needed programs, such as planning for climate change and
natural resource management, energy efficiency activities, and small
scale renewable energy projects. GAP funding is particularly critical
to Alaska Native villages, where it provides 99 percent of the overall
funding to address their fundamental and often dire needs, such as safe
drinking water and basic sanitation facilities, and the on-the-ground
presence to help confront profound climate change impacts, such as
eroding shorelines, thawing permafrost, threats to subsistence
resources, and permanent relocation of Alaska Native communities.
This increased collaborative leveraging potential makes GAP a wise
investment of Federal dollars. However, GAP funding has not kept pace
with the growth of Tribal environmental programs over the years,
forcing Tribes to perform the increased duties of maturing programs
with fewer funds. Furthermore, the average cost for Tribes to sustain a
basic environmental program was set at $110,000 per Tribe in 1999 and
has not been adjusted for inflation since then. Tribal demand for
program implementation across various media includes the pressing need
to establish climate change adaptation plans. A $175,000 per Tribe
distribution, totaling approximately $99.5 million, reflects an
equitable adjustment.
conclusion
We look forward to working with this subcommittee on a nonpartisan
basis to protect the Federal trust and treaty obligations in the
budget. Thank you for your consideration of this testimony.
______
Prepared Statement of the National Council of Urban Indian Health
My name is Maureen Rosette and I am the President of the National
Council of Urban Indian Health (NCUIH), which represents the 42 urban
Indian healthcare organizations (UIOs) across the Nation who provide
high-quality, culturally-competent care to urban Indians, constituting
approximately 78 percent of all American Indians/Alaska Natives (AI/
AN). I would like to thank Chairwoman Murkowski and Ranking Member
Udall for the opportunity to submit written testimony. Today's
testimony will focus on the needs of urban Indian organizations (UIOs)
that have title V contracts with the Indian Health Service (IHS).
As a preliminary issue, ``urban Indian'' refers to any AI/AN person
who is not living on a reservation, either permanently or temporarily--
often because of the Federal Government's forced relocation policy or
in search of economic or educational opportunity. Congress has long
recognized that the Federal Government's obligation to provide
healthcare for AI/AN people follows them off of reservations. UIOs are
an integral part of the Indian health system, which is comprised of the
IHS, federally recognized Tribes, Tribal organizations, and urban
Indian organizations (I/T/Us). Currently, UIOs receive less than 1
percent of the IHS budget, and the IHS budget is currently underfunded
at less than 50 percent of need creating serious budget constraints.
UIOs do not have access to many of the critical cost saving programs
available to the other facets of the I/T/U system.
Listed are NCUIH's recommendations to the Senate Subcommittee on
Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies on Fiscal Year 2020
Appropriations:
Include Urban Indian Organizations in Language for ALL Health Programs
When Urban Indian Organizations (UIOs) are not specifically
mentioned in programmatic language they are most often excluded from
participating in such programs. Many programs in the Health and Human
Services appropriations bills include language for Indian Tribes and
Tribal organizations, but not for urban Indian organizations. Urban
Indian Organizations are not considered Tribal organizations, which is
a common misconception. Therefore, UIOs must be explicitly included to
receive funding. Behavioral health grants, suicide prevention grants,
and others. It is imperative UIOs receive parity for funding as UIOs
rely on less than 1 percent of the Indian Health Service (IHS) funds,
despite urban Indians being over 78 percent of the AI/AN population.
UIOs also do not have access to other IHS line items like IHS and
Tribal facilities. UIOs do not receive hospitals and health clinics
money, purchase and referred care dollars, or IHS dental services
dollars, and are not eligible for facilities dollars. UIOs operate from
one line item in the IHS budget, the urban Indian line item, which
provides 42 programs with $51.3 million. We know IHS is underfunded at
around $3,000 per patient, we know for urban Indian health patients
that number is less than $400 per patient. NCUIH requests an increase
to the urban Indian health line item to at least $81 million to $116
million, which would be a mere 2 percent of the IHS budget. The House
Appropriations Committee has released a draft fiscal year 2020
Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies funding bill that includes
an almost $30 million increase to the urban Indian line item, bringing
funding to $81 million--once passed, this would create a more equitable
funding level for all AI/ANs.
Provide Protections from Shutdown Impacts with Funding Uncertainties
When limited UIO funding is delayed or cut off during events such
as a government shutdown, UIOs suffer greatly. AI/AN people healthcare
should not be held hostage by unrelated government shutdowns. NCUIH
strongly recommends that UIO funding have the same protections and
considerations as other Federal funding during times of sequestration
and government shutdowns. For instance, Native American Lifelines of
Baltimore is a small clinic that received three overdose patients
during the last shutdown, two of which were fatal. They only receive
$922k from IHS to operate two facilities, one in Baltimore, one in
Boston. IHS only gives them $691 for mental health services for both
facilities. The Indian Health Service system (I/T/U) should be provided
with funding to ensure our patients don't suffer.
Provide UIOs With 100 Percent Federal Medical Assistance Percentage
(FMAP)
The amount of Medicaid service costs paid by the Federal Government
is set by law at 100 percent for IHS and Tribes, but not for UIOs,
because UIOs did not exist when that law was written. Although Congress
intended 100 percent FMAP to support the Indian Health system, the
Federal Government only pays 100 percent of the costs incurred by
States to reimburse IHS and Tribal facilities for Medicaid services
provided to an AI/AN, without the same consideration for the high-
quality, culturally-competent care provided by UIOs. Created by
Congress at the urging of Tribes to ensure that their Tribal citizens
would receive appropriate healthcare off of reservations, UIOs are an
integral part of the IHS system. Consequently, the failure to provide
UIOs with 100 percent FMAP harms facilities that already do not have
access to many resources, and it severely limits services for patients.
Unfortunately, CMS needs Congress to add UIOs to 1905(b) of the Social
Security Act to create parity. Therefore, we ask that you correct this
problem in fiscal year 2020. Receiving 100 percent FMAP has a huge
impact on the financial stability of UIOs. One of NCUIH's two Oklahoma
facilities (the only two UIOs in the country that get 100 percent FMAP)
reported that in the event of a prolonged shutdown they could remain
open for 18 months; whereas 6 of 13 UIO-respondents reported that they
could only sustain normal operations for 1 month or less.
Include UIOs in the Coverage of the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA)
Under FTCA, a facility's employees and eligible contractors are
considered Federal employees and are immune from lawsuits for medical
malpractice. IHS and Tribal providers, as well as other comparable
Federal healthcare centers, are covered by the FTCA. Arbitrarily denied
FTCA coverage, however, UIOs must buy their own expensive malpractice
insurance. Two large, highly-regarded UIOs in Oklahoma each pay
$250,000 per year for malpractice insurance. Any help your subcommittee
can provide would maximize the value of your appropriations to IHS and
we would profoundly appreciate any assistance, including prompting
relevant committees.
Implement the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) Between IHS and the VA
for the Provision of Health Care to AI/AN Veterans
The VA and IHS have implemented this MoU for IHS and Tribal
providers, but not for UIOs. AI/AN veterans often prefer to use Indian
healthcare providers for reasons related to performance, cultural
competency, or availability of non-healthcare-related but Indian-
specific services. The VA sometimes experiences surges in demand, which
can often be satisfactorily offset through the use of UIOs. A recent
Office of the Inspector General report found that 215 deceased veteran
patients at the Phoenix VA Health Care System were awaiting specialist
consultations on the date of their deaths. Native Health, a UIO that
provides comprehensive services, is within walking distance of the
Phoenix, AZ VA facility, and could have provided these services to AI/
AN veterans, enabling the VA to focus on specialty services and reduce
some of these wait times, in turn reducing the number of patient deaths
that occur. Given their sacrifices, it is grievously wrong to oppose
the provision of accessible, high-quality, culturally-competent
healthcare by UIOs to AI/AN veterans.
Create Critical Funding Mechanism for Behavioral Health
In addition, IHS is currently considering moving its behavioral
health initiatives, including the Domestic Violence Prevention Program
and Suicide and Substance Abuse Prevention Program, from grants to
direct distribution through Indian Self Determination Education and
Assistance Act (ISDEAA) contracts and compacts, for which UIHPs are not
eligible. It is widely known that behavioral health is a major issue in
the AI/AN community. Thus, if IHS transfers distribution of its
behavioral health initiatives to ISDEAA contracts and compacts, there
must be a UIO set-aside of approximately $12.2 million for Title V
UIOs. This amount would enable all Title V UIOs to receive the current
average level of behavioral health grant funding available to urban
organizations, as is rightfully available only to IHS-certified Title V
UIOs. In addition, I'd like to express appreciation for inclusion of
UIOs in the Special Behavioral Health Program for Indians. We support
this being structured similar to Special Diabetes Programs for Indians
(SDPI), which has been a resounding success for many UIOs. If this
funding is instead transferred to direct funding to Tribes, there must
be a set-aside of at least 20 percent to ensure this funding reaches
urban AI/AN communities. In addition, it is critical that this funding
remain available beyond current grant terms. With current funding for
the Substance Abuse and Suicide Prevention Program, which has
demonstrated considerable success in addressing behavioral health
disparities and saving lives in Indian Country, expiring in 2021,
Congress must act to ensure this success continues.
Hold UIOs Harmless from Unrelated Cost Assessments
UIOs are faced with chronic and severe underfunding and depend on
every Federal dollar they receive to provide culturally-competent
services to their urban AI/AN patients. Funds for Medical inflation and
pay costs are necessary to cover the intended purpose; these costs
often increase at high rates in urban areas where UIOs are located,
thereby straining UIOs' already constrained budgets. Last year, IHS
utilized a portion of the inflation funding increases from the fiscal
year 2019 appropriations for a purpose distinct from inflation--to
cover costs of Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act
(ISDEAA) Section 105(l) leases. As a result, UIOs only received a small
portion of the amount of inflation funding designated to be dispersed
to UIOs. The amount of 105(l) lease applications is increasing and
UIOs' inflation funding is once again at risk. Inflation funding for
UIOs should not be the solution to cover an unrelated budgetary
constraint. UIOs are not eligible for, nor are they otherwise
beneficiaries of, Section 105(l) leases and thus derive no benefit from
this program. All UIO funds should thus not be impacted by this budget
shortfall. A separate appropriation line item for these lease payments
would provide a long-term fix to this issue and prevent additional harm
from trickling down to urban AI/AN patients.
Reauthorization of the Special Diabetes Program for Indians
The Special Diabetes Program for Indians (SDPI) is critical to
urban American Indian and Alaska Native communities who experience a
higher prevalence of diabetes and a greater diabetes mortality rate
than the general U.S. population living in those areas. Since the SDPI
program began in 1997, UIOs have seen improvements in key diabetes care
outcome for AI/ANs at their urban facilities over a 10 year period,
from 2001-2011. It is imperative that SDPI be reauthorized before its
expiration in September 2019.
We thank the committee for its efforts towards prioritizing funding
to Indian Country and for holding this hearing. The staff at NCUIH is
available to follow up on any future inquires related to the submitted
testimony or other urban Indian healthcare issues of policy or service.
______
Prepared Statement of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation
Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall and Members of the
subcommittee:
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony regarding fiscal
year 2020 funding on behalf of the National Fish and Wildlife
Foundation (NFWF), and thank you for your years of steadfast support
for the natural resource conservation work of NFWF.
NFWF's fiscal year 2020 appropriations request will be matched at
least dollar for dollar with non-Federal match to conserve fish,
wildlife and their habitats through local partnerships. By law, NFWF
will accomplish this by applying 100 percent of the appropriated
funding to on-the-ground conservation projects at ZERO administrative
cost to the Federal Government.
We believe that NFWF is a sound investment in a time of constrained
budgets because of our proven track record and statutory requirement to
leverage Federal funding with private contributions to maximize
conservation benefit. We appreciate the subcommittee's past support and
respectfully request your approval of funding at the following levels:
--$ 2.0 million with bill language through the Bureau of Land
Management's Management of Lands and Resources appropriation
($2 million above fiscal year 2019);
--$ 7.022 million with bill language through the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service's Resource Management appropriation (Same
level as fiscal year 2019); and
--$ 3.0 million with the standard annual bill language through the
Forest Service's National Forest System appropriation (Same
level as fiscal year 2019).
bureau of land management
The fiscal year 2018 appropriation for the Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) and NFWF partnership was made discretionary to the
Director of the BLM. The Director chose to direct $2.0 million in
funding to NFWF. NFWF worked closely with the BLM, other Department of
the Interior agencies and eleven Western States to implement a program
to improve wildlife corridors for big game and other wildlife. This
investment by BLM allowed NFWF and ConocoPhillips to bring in more than
$8.6 million in matching contributions, generating a total conservation
impact of more than $10.7 million. These projects will improve wildlife
migrations as well as reduce the number of vehicle strikes with
wildlife enhancing human safety.
NFWF did not receive a direct appropriation in fiscal year 2019,
but prior to that, NFWF received directly appropriated funding from BLM
since fiscal year 1995. In the 5-year span from fiscal year 2014-fiscal
year 2018, NFWF leveraged $14.0 million in BLM funds into $75.2 million
in on-the-ground conservation projects.
In fiscal year 2018 and continuing into fiscal year 2019, NFWF
began a new and exciting partnership in the Pecos watershed with eight
oil and gas companies (Anadarko Petroleum Company, Chevron Corp., Noble
Energy, Occidental Petroleum, Shell Oil Company, Apache Corp., Marathon
Oil Corp., and XTO Energy, Inc.), the USDA Natural Resource
Conservation Service, and the States of New Mexico and Texas to
proactively bolster populations of at-risk species. NFWF would add a
portion of any fiscal year 2020 appropriated BLM funding to this new
and creative partnership.
NFWF also utilized past BLM direct appropriations to partner with
the Yukon River Fisheries Association and local Tribal Councils to aid
in the delivery of Chinook salmon spawning grounds and engage Yukon
River anglers in the voluntary conservation of Chinook salmon. Without
the direct BLM appropriations, the ability to fund projects such as
these will be diminished.
Requested BLM Bill Language:
``; of which $2,000,000 shall be available in fiscal
year 2020 subject to a match by at least an equal
amount by the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation for
cost shared projects supporting conservation of Bureau
lands; and such funds shall be advanced to the
Foundation as a lump-sum grant without regard to when
expenses are incurred.''
united states fish and wildlife service
The United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) has been a
trusted partner since NFWF was created by Congress in 1984 and signed
into law by President Reagan. In the past 5 years (fiscal year 2014-
fiscal year 2018), the FWS appropriated funds received by NFWF have
generated $176.8 million in conservation impact through 434 projects.
The funds appropriated to NFWF serve as a magnet to attract funds from
the private sector to create public-private partnerships critical to
restoring fish, wildlife and their habitats.
In the past, the FWS appropriation for NFWF has existed in the
report accompanying the appropriations bill. However, we respectfully
request that it be included in bill language. This will make NFWF's
direct appropriations in the Interior, Environment and Related Agencies
Bill consistent across all agencies in the bill and expedite the
permitting of conservation projects.
Requested FWS Bill Language
``; of which $7,022,000 shall be available in fiscal
year 2020 subject to a match by at least an equal
amount by the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation for
cost-shared projects supporting conservation of
wildlife and other natural resources; and such funds
shall be advanced to the Foundation as a lump-sum grant
without regard to when expenses are incurred.''
Because NFWF also works with FWS on discretionary cooperative
agreements for conservation programs, we also respectfully support the
highest possible funding levels for the Recovery Challenge matching
grants, Delaware River Basin Conservation Act, Klamath Basin
Restoration, and efforts to combat white-nosed syndrome in bats within
the FWS, Resource Management appropriation.
united states forest service
Congress has appropriated approximately $3 million in annual
funding to NFWF for partnerships with the United States Forest Service
(USFS) since fiscal year 1998. From fiscal year 2014 to fiscal year
2018, NFWF turned $15.0 million in USFS funds into $114.2 million in
on-the-ground conservation investments.
In fiscal year 2016 and fiscal year 2018, NFWF was recognized by
the USFS's Region 5 as the ``Partner of the Year'' for the
collaborative work with the USFS on post-fire watershed restoration,
community engagement and hazardous fuels reduction.
NFWF also used direct USFS appropriations to continue the Alaska
Native Science and Engineering Program to hire Alaska Native youth with
traditional ecological knowledge and who also speak the languages of
local subsistence communities to work on conservation projects, and
allowed NFWF to launch new programs such as the Central Appalachian
Habitat Stewardship Program which promotes forest health and management
in the States of Tennessee, West Virginia, Virginia, Pennsylvania and
Ohio.
As directed in the Statement accompanying the fiscal year 2019
Omnibus Appropriation, NFWF is excited to report on the funding USFS
has provided NFWF for each of the past 10 fiscal years, including
specific projects and activities. We believe this report will
illustrate the impressive power of private leverage and grantee match
to stretch the Federal conservation dollar in tough budgetary times.
environmental protection agency
NFWF has partnered with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
since fiscal year 1997 and since fiscal year 2000 has worked with EPA
to make grants to States and other grantees within the Geographic
Programs appropriation. Therefore, we respectfully support the highest
possible funding levels for the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative,
Chesapeake Bay, and Long Island Sound within the Environmental
Protection Agency Geographic Programs. We also respectfully ask that
the long-standing report language that delineates the amount of funding
for nutrient and sediment removal grants and small watershed grants
within the Chesapeake Bay program be continued (final fiscal year 2019
language is below).
``Chesapeake Bay.--The bill provides $73,000,000 for the
Chesapeake Bay program. From within the amount provided,
$6,000,000 is for nutrient and sediment removal grants and
$6,000,000 is for small watershed grants to control polluted
runoff from urban, suburban and agriculture lands.''
In addition to the Geographic Programs, EPA continues to be a major
partner on NFWF's Five Star Urban Waters Program. In fiscal year 2018,
NFWF worked with volunteers and resource based organizations to remove
and improve the habitat for Chinook salmon along the Chena River in
Fairbanks, Alaska. NFWF also partnered with EPA, Rocky Mountain Youth
Corps, and local volunteers to implement a riparian habitat and
education project near Albuquerque, New Mexico.
nfwf background
NFWF was established by Congress in 1984 to catalyze private
investments to conserve fish, wildlife and their habitats. In addition,
every dollar directly appropriated to NFWF by Congress goes to on-the-
ground conservation projects and NFWF charges no administrative costs.
NFWF raises private funds not only to leverage appropriated dollars,
but also to support the associated management costs of implementing the
appropriated funds. Since its creation by Congress in 1984, NFWF has
invested $5.3 billion in to more than 17,500 projects while partnering
with more than 4,500 organizations.
NFWF is required by law to match each directly federally-
appropriated dollar with a minimum of one non-Federal dollar. We
consistently exceed this requirement by leveraging Federal funds at
more than a 2:1 average ratio while building consensus and emphasizing
accountability, measurable results, and sustainable conservation
outcomes.
NFWF remains fully transparent and is required by law to notify
Congress 30 days in advance of every grant that exceeds $10,000 in
Federal funds. Details of all projects awarded during fiscal year 2018
can be found in NFWF's annual investment guide and all of NFWF's grants
can be found on our website: https://www.nfwf.org/whatwedo/grants/
search/Pages/Grant-Search.aspx
In fiscal year 2018, NFWF was audited by an independent accounting
firm and they issued an unqualified report with no material weaknesses
identified and no deficiencies identified. This is the TENTH
consecutive year of unqualified audits. In addition, NFWF has
continually qualified as a low risk auditee under OMB guidelines.
In fiscal year 2018, through voluntary discretionary cooperative
agreements, NFWF partnered with 16 Federal agencies or departments and
more than 30 corporations to support implementation of Federal
conservation priorities. These efforts focused on working landscapes,
private landowner outreach, natural resource conservation, coastal
resiliency and community-based restoration.
conclusion
For more than three decades, NFWF has been at the forefront of
national conservation activity. With our partners, NFWF has contributed
to some of the Nation's most important conservation programs, invested
millions in worthy and successful projects, and spearheaded programs to
conserve our Nation's most treasured natural resources. We have a
successful model of coordinating and leveraging Federal funds to
attract support from the private sector to address the most significant
threats to fish and wildlife populations and their habitats.
Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall and members of the
subcommittee, we greatly appreciate your continued support and stand
ready to answer any questions you or your staff might have.
[This statement was submitted by Greg E. Knadle, Vice President of
Government Affairs.]
______
Prepared Statement of the National Ground Water Association
The National Ground Water Association (NGWA) requests that $5
million be allocated in the fiscal year 2020 Interior, Environment &
Related Agencies appropriations bill to the United States Geological
Survey (USGS) within the Water Resources program to continue and expand
implementation and maintenance of a national groundwater monitoring
network (NGWMN).
In addition to funding, NGWA is also requesting report language
extending eligibility of cooperative grant funding to Tribes, as well
as State and local governments. Tribes are currently able to provide
data to the network, but are not eligible to receive funding to create
and/or maintain a groundwater monitoring network.
NGWA's interest in this program comes from its position that
management of groundwater resources should be a coordinated effort
between Federal, State and local governments based on the strengths of
each government level, the best science available, and the nature of
the resource. NGWA is the world's largest association of groundwater
professionals, representing public and private sector engineers,
scientists, water well contractors, manufacturers, and suppliers of
groundwater related products and services.
The NGWMN is a great example of cooperation between levels of
government, in order to manage and protect a vital natural resource.
Water is one of the most critical natural resources to human,
ecosystem and economic survival. Nationally, over 40 percent of the
drinking water supply comes from groundwater and, in some locations, it
is relied on by 80 percent of Americans for drinking water. Groundwater
also serves as a key source of agricultural irrigation water.
Despite the reliance on this natural resource, no systematic
nationwide monitoring network is in place to measure what is currently
available and how groundwater levels and quality may be changing over
time. As with any valuable natural resource, groundwater reserves must
be monitored to assist in planning and minimizing potential impacts
from shortages or supply disruptions. Just as one cannot effectively
oversee the Nation's economy without key data; one cannot adequately
address the Nation's food, energy, economic, and drinking water
security without understanding the extent, availability and
sustainability of a critical input--groundwater.
Congress acknowledged the need for enhanced groundwater monitoring
by authorizing a national groundwater monitoring network in Public Law
111-11 (Omnibus Public Land Management Act) in 2009, the SECURE Water
Act, and viability of the network was proven through the completion of
pilot projects in six States-Illinois, Indiana, Minnesota, Montana, New
Jersey, and Texas. These States voluntarily pilot-tested concepts for a
national groundwater monitoring network as developed by the Federal
Advisory Committee on Water Information's (ACWI) Subcommittee on Ground
Water (SOGW).
Following completion of the pilots and reports on the viability of
the NGWMN, congressional support for the network has enabled national
implementation of the program:
--Fiscal year 2015: $2.6 million (11 projects funded)
--Fiscal year 2016: $3.6 million (24 projects funded)
--Fiscal year 2017: $3.6 million (19 projects funded)
--Fiscal year 2018: $3.6 million (24 projects funded)
--Fiscal year 2019: $3.6 million (Awards pending)
Thirty-three States are currently contributing data to the network,
and entities receiving cooperative agreements are able to apply for one
or 2 years of support. Because of this limit on the number of years
funding can be providing, the costs of ongoing maintenance of the
network are expected to be minimal once all States are connected.
The NGWMN goes to great lengths to promote partnerships with State
and local agencies receiving grants or providing data to the network.
The State and local data providers retain ownership of the data and are
credited as the providers.
Once implemented nationwide, the NGWMN would provide consistent,
comparable nationwide data that would be accessible through a public
web portal for Federal, State, local government and private sector
users. In these tight fiscal times, the proposed network would build on
existing State and Federal investments, maximizing their usefulness and
leveraging current dollars to build toward systematic nationwide
monitoring of the groundwater resource.
Grants are funded at a maximum of $150,000 per award, and funding
from the NGWMN will be used for two purposes:
1.
Provide grants to cost share increased expenses to upgrade
monitoring networks for the 50 States to meet the standards necessary
to understand the Nation's groundwater resources. Activities funded
include: site selection, web services development, well drilling, well
maintenance, among others.
2.
Support the additional work necessary for USGS to manage a
national groundwater monitoring network and provide national data
access through an Internet web portal.
A selection of State projects funded is listed below to demonstrate
to type of work being funded by Congress in recent rounds of
cooperative agreements:
Fiscal Year 2015.--Utah Geological Survey: Project is to become
a new data provider for the NGWMN. Will use EPA Storet to serve
water-quality data to the NGWMN. Well construction and
Lithology web services will be established to connect to the
Portal. Wil also select and classify wells for the NGWMN,
populate the NGWMN Well Registry, document data-collection and
data management processes, and produce a final report. Will be
providing water-quality data to the NGWMN.
Fiscal Year 2015.--Mississippi Department of Environmental
Quality: Project is to become a new data provider for the
NGWMN. Tasks include: Establish webservices to provide data to
NGWMN Portal, select and classify wells for the NGWMN, populate
the NGWMN Well Registry, document data-collection and data
managementprocesses, and produce a final report. Will be
providing water-level data.
Fiscal Year 2016.--Minnesota Pollution Control Agency: A 2-year
project to become a data provider to the NGWMN in the first
year and provide persistent data support in the second year.
The Minnesota PCA was a Pilot project participant with the
Network; however, the web services they set up for the Pilot
were no longer functional due to database upgrades. For this
project, they will be updating their web services to serve data
to the Portal again. This project will expand their coverage to
all Principal aquifers across the State.
Fiscal Year 2017.--Missouri Department of Natural Resources:
The Missouri DNR is a data provider through a Cooperative
agreement with the USGS Missouri WSC. This is a 1 year project
to remediate three wells that have been identified as having
shallow groundwater enter the wells. The wells were examined
using a borehole camera. The wells will be reconstructed by
installing a shallow diameter liner and packers and grouting
the well above the screen.
Fiscal Year 2017.--Texas Water Development Board: This is a 1
year project for providing persistent data services and site
information gap filling. Lithology data for 900 wells will be
entered into their new database from paper files as part of the
site information gap filling work.
Fiscal Year 2018.--Florida Department of Environmental
Protection: This is a 2-year project to become a new data
provider of water-quality data to the NGWMN. Sites will be
selected from a groundwater trend network of 49 wells and two
springs. They will be providing persistent data service for
year two of the project. Lithology data for selected wells will
be updated in year two of the project.
Fiscal Year 2018.--Ohio Department of Natural Resources: The
Ohio DNR is a current data provider through a Cooperative
agreement with the USGS Ohio WSC. This is a 2-year project to
do well maintenance and well drilling work. Well Maintenance
work involves performing slug tests on 48 wells to determine
connection to the aquifer. Two new wells will be drilled to
fill gaps in the NGWMN coverage in Ohio.
A complete list of all cooperative agreements funded is available
on the cooperative agreements page of the NGWMN portal's website . Each
recipient of funding must also provide USGS a report, following the
conclusion of the funding period.
Increased funding would enable the NGWMN to continue to grow and
expand the number of States providing water quality and water level
data. In addition, the types of work that could be funded by the
network could also expand.
Though the amount of funding requested is small in the context of
the Department of Interior's annual budget request, funding is vital
considering that, for a small investment, States and the USGS can
implement adequate monitoring of the hidden resource that provides over
40 percent of the Nation's drinking water supply and serves as a key
driver for our economy.
Thank you for your consideration of this request. With questions or
in request of additional information, please contact Lauren Schapker,
NGWA Government Affairs Director, at [email protected]
[This statement was submitted by Lauren Schapker, Government
Affairs Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of the National Humanities Alliance
Dear Chairman Murkowski and Members of the subcommittee:
I am writing to testify on behalf of the National Humanities
Alliance in support of the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH)
and particularly the crucial role it plays in preserving our cultural
heritage in the face of disaster. With NEH support, the Foundation for
Advancement in Conservation has trained and mobilized teams across the
country to respond quickly and effectively to emergencies, saving
countless artifacts, artworks, and books that would otherwise be lost.
A few examples illustrate the need for this work. In the days after
Hurricane Katrina, firearms from the Civil War, covered in mud, sat on
the banks of the Mississippi Gulf Coast. Following Hurricane Sandy,
costumes, props, and programs from the famed Martha Graham Dance
Company floated in their storage space inundated by the storm surge. In
the weeks after Hurricane Maria, swirls of mold covered the walls--from
floor to ceiling--of a Puerto Rican library.
The sense of loss that accompanies disasters is acute. That sense
is heightened when our collective cultural heritage is imperiled as
well.
We rely on objects to learn from past generations and to carry our
legacy into the future. Books, letters, records, photographs, film,
works of art--whether located in our Nation's great museums or the
cedar chest at home, our tangible cultural heritage is found in objects
that are at risk of decomposing.
It is the job of cultural heritage conservators to slow down the
processes of decay, working with museums, libraries, and archives
collections staff to provide the best environmental conditions possible
and perform treatments on objects as needed. Conservators are an
impressive bunch. Versed in art history, studio art, and chemistry,
they go through rigorous training in order to do the essential work of
preserving our cultural heritage. In my role at the Foundation for
Advancement in Conservation, I work with a team of conservators and
collections care professionals who volunteer their time and expertise
to help collections affected by emergencies and disasters. This team,
known as the National Heritage Responders, has done incredible work to
salvage items when it seemed that all was lost.
The team's work has been consistently supported by the NEH. The
agency has funded research projects that have informed response
protocols and supported innovative publications. The NEH has likewise
supported team deployments following major disaster events, providing
these volunteers with the equipment and resources needed for success.
National Heritage Responders have a knowledge of materials on the
molecular level that helps drive their decisionmaking processes in
order to determine appropriate action. For example: while mold is a
major threat for objects exposed to damp environments, some wet items
can actually be frozen in order create a hostile setting for mold
growth. Those objects can later be thawed and dried. Research and
development of techniques in this area have moved forward in leaps and
bounds over the past several decades. The NEH has played an important
role in supporting this response work.
While having measures in place to effectively respond to disasters
is essential, those activities don't take into account the full scope
of the disaster cycle. Preparedness and mitigation require foresight,
innovation, and cooperation. The Foundation for Advancement in
Conservation manages a program called Alliance for Response which aims
to bring together collections professionals with emergency managers and
first responders on the local level.
These communities form cooperative disaster networks that work
together to achieve collective goals: a network on the Mississippi Gulf
Coast works closely with their emergency managers to share information
with their members about upcoming storms, while a network in South
Florida has a cultural heritage representative in their country
Emergency Operations Center.
The NEH has been supporting the work of Alliance for Response
networks since 2010. The agency's investment in the program has allowed
for the launch of new networks across the country while providing
resources for the existing networks, such as training opportunities and
informational webinars.
Collaborating on the local level is essential, as each region faces
their own challenges in terms of natural hazards. Increasingly extreme
weather patterns are changing those hazards as well: California
institutions face increased risk of wildfires, while hurricanes gather
more power over warmer water, threatening those in their paths. Local
networks are nimble in responding to these changing risks.
The NEH has, through their history of funding, recognized the
importance of supporting collecting institutions as they prepare for,
respond to, and recover from emergencies and disasters. The impact of
these efforts is significant.
When Hurricane Irma hit Florida in 2017, the Vizcaya Museum and
Gardens in Miami--located on Biscayne Bay--suffered significant storm
surge damage. However, just 4 months prior, the museum hosted an NEH-
funded workshop on disaster response for the South Florida Alliance for
Response network. After the storm, the museum's conservator knew to
call the National Heritage Responders for assistance, which helped
Vizcaya staff quickly stabilize the environment and minimize the impact
of mold.
Conservators and collections care professionals face significant
challenges in protecting our cultural heritage for future generations.
There is ample evidence to show that strategic funding by the NEH has
laid important groundwork, but there is still much work to be done.
With increased funding, the NEH can support the networking and training
that are essential in protecting cultural heritage from emergencies and
disasters. This important work must continue to make sure that the
human story is preserved.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this testimony.
The National Humanities Alliance
The National Humanities Alliance (NHA) is a nationwide coalition of
organizations advocating for the humanities on campuses, in
communities, and on Capitol Hill. Founded in 1981, NHA is supported by
over 200 member organizations, including: colleges, universities,
libraries, museums, cultural organizations, State humanities councils,
and scholarly, professional, and higher education associations. It is
the only organization that brings together the U.S. humanities
community as a whole.
Foundation for Advancement in Conservation
The Foundation for Advancement in Conservation (FAIC) supports
conservation education, research, and outreach activities that increase
understanding of our global cultural heritage.
[This statement was submitted by Jessica Unger, Emergency Programs
Coordinator, Foundation for Advancement in Conservation.]
______
Prepared Statement of the National Indian Health Board
Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in
regards to fiscal year 2020 appropriations. On behalf of the National
Indian Health Board (NIHB) and the 573 federally-recognized Tribes we
serve, I submit this testimony on the Indian Health Service (IHS)
fiscal year 2020 budget.
Over the course of a century, the United States Federal Government
entered into over 500 individual treaties with Tribal Nations that
established the foundation for what we now call the Federal trust
responsibility, which encompasses the provision of healthcare and
public health services. This trust responsibility for health has been
reaffirmed by Supreme Court rulings, Federal legislation, and
presidential executive orders. The Indian Health Service (IHS) is the
primary Federal agency entrusted with carrying out this duty; however,
IHS has never been funded at the level of need. In fact, fiscal year
2017 per capita expenditures for medical care amounted to just $4,078
within IHS, compared to $9,726 nationally. Chronic underfunding of IHS
has resulted in a lower quality of life and higher burden of
preventable diseases among American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/
ANs). For example, in South Dakota, average life expectancy for
American Indians and Alaska Natives is 58 years, compared to 82 years
for non-Hispanic Whites.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ South Dakota Department of Health. 2012. Mortality Rates.
https://doh.sd.gov/Statistics/2012Vital/Mortality.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ihs advance appropriations
First, NIHB wishes to thank Chairwoman Murkowski and Ranking Member
Udall for their leadership and strong support for securing advance
appropriations for IHS. The most recent 35-day government shutdown
destabilized Tribal governments and Native health delivery systems; as
well as Native families, children and individuals. In fact, IHS was the
only Federal health system impacted by the shutdown. Moreover, while
IHS funding is not responsible for the Federal deficit nor were budget
disputes preceding the shutdown specific to IHS, the Indian health
system nevertheless felt the burden of the shutdown as many Tribes
scrambled to keep health facilities open, to keep providers on their
payroll, and to maintain services.
Advance appropriations honors the Federal trust responsibility and
helps ensure that the Federal Government meets its obligations for
health services to Tribes. Advance appropriations also protect Native
health systems in the event that Congress cannot pass a full budget by
the start of each fiscal year. In September 2018, the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) issued a report (GAO-18-652) stating, ``. .
. uncertainty resulting from recurring continuing resolutions and from
government shutdowns has led to adverse financial effects on Tribes and
their healthcare programs.'' Thus, advance appropriations would help
provide better continuity of care, and would help insulate Tribes from
unrelated budget negotiations. While advance appropriations will not
solve chronic underfunding of IHS, Tribes and NIHB believe that advance
appropriations are an important interim step that will prepare the IHS
for a transition to mandatory funding.
sequestration
We also urge you to fully exempt the Indian Health Service (IHS)
from sequestration cuts that might occur in fiscal year 2020. Even a 2
percent reduction is too much for an agency that provides direct health
services and is already severely underfunded. Failure to completely
exempt Tribal governments from sequestration will mean that Tribal
communities are deprived of essential functions, resulting in loss of
opportunity and even loss of life.
fiscal year 2020 funding recommendations
Tribes and NIHB were pleased to see new line item requests in the
fiscal year 2020 President's budget including a $25 million line item
to modernize Electronic Health Records (EHRs); $25 million for HIV/AIDS
and Hepatitis C prevention and treatment; and $20 million for a
national Community Health Aide Program (CHAP). But while Indian Country
supports funding for these initiatives, they must not come at the
expense of other vitally important line items. For example, Tribes were
dismayed at the proposed elimination of the Health Education program;
by the roughly $39 million in cuts to the Community Health
Representative (CHR) program; approximately $80 million in cuts to the
Health Care Facilities Construction budget; and $52 million in proposed
cuts to preventive health services in the President's budget. These
cuts would devastate an Indian health system that has little dedicated
funding for public health and preventative services. Thus, we strongly
urge the Committee to ensure critical programs are maintained and
increased, in addition to securing funding for the new line items.
ihs tribal budget formulation workgroup recommendations
The following budget recommendations reflect the IHS Tribal Budget
Formulation Workgroup (TBFWG) recommendations for fiscal year 2021. The
workgroup is comprised of Tribal leaders, technicians and researchers
who come together each year to form Indian Country's priorities as they
relate to IHS. Tribes recommend $36.8 billion to fully fund IHS.
Specifically, this amount includes $22 billion for Medical Services;
$1.77 billion for Dental and Vision Services; $4.29 billion for
Community and Public Health Services; and $9.28 billion for facility
upgrades and upfront costs (non-recurring investments). To begin the 12
year phase-in of the full $36.8 billion request, Tribes recommend a
$7.1 billion appropriation in fiscal year 2020. While all areas of the
IHS budget are essential and an in need of strong increases for fiscal
year 2020, Tribes have identified several top priorities: Hospitals &
Clinics; Purchased/Referred Care (PRC); Mental Health; Alcohol &
Substance Abuse Services; and Dental Services.
Hospitals and Clinics
In fiscal year 2020, Tribes recommend $2.5 billion for Hospitals
and Clinics (H&C) which is $349 million over the fiscal year 2019
enacted level. The H&C line item provides the base funding for the 650
hospitals, clinics, and health programs that operate on Indian
reservations, predominantly in rural settings. IHS H&C are challenged
by factors including increased demand resulting from a significantly
growing population; increased rate of chronic diseases; rising medical
inflation; difficulty in recruiting and retaining providers in rural
healthcare settings; and lack of adequate facilities and equipment.
Increasing H&C funding is necessary as it supports the following: all
primary medical care services, including inpatient care; routine
ambulatory care; and medical support services, such as laboratory,
pharmacy, medical records, and information technology. It also provides
the greatest flexibility to support public health initiatives targeting
health conditions disproportionately affecting AI/ANs such as diabetes,
cancer, and hepatitis.
Community Health Aide Program/Community Health Representatives
For fiscal year 2020, Tribes recommend $83.2 million for the CHR
program, which is an increase of $20.3 million above the fiscal year
2019 enacted level. The President's budget request for fiscal year 2020
proposes to phase out the CHR Program and replace it with a national
CHAP initiative. While the CHAP initiative has shown much success, its
expansion should not come at the expense of the critically important
and highly successful CHR program. If this request were to be accepted,
health services would fall flat and neither program would likely be
able to effectively operate. For generations, CHRs have been integral
to the fabric of health delivery in Indian Country and Tribes do not
wish to see this historic program discontinued. CHRs provide services
such as in-home patient assessment of medical conditions, glucose
testing and blood pressure tests, preventive health screenings, and
case management. They also help interpret prescriptions, which is
critical for patient safety, especially for drugs with high risk of
misuse.
There are more than 1,600 CHRs representing over 250 Tribes in all
12 IHS Areas, and 96 percent of CHR programs are operated by Tribes in
partnership with IHS--one of the best examples of the Nation to Nation
relationship between Tribes and the Federal Government. Program data
from fiscal year 2016 demonstrated that CHRs conducted 340,270 home
visits and provided 1,102,164 patient contacts/services on a variety of
health related conditions. It is likely that far more contacts were
made but not reflected in data due to reporting challenges. The Tribal
recommendation for this line item would be to increase funding for the
sole purpose of service delivery of CHR program services and functions.
The CHAP program is also supported as a separate recommendation.
Health IT
IHS does not receive dedicated and sustainable funding to
adequately support health IT infrastructure and training, including
full deployment of EHRs. The current Resource and Patient Management
System (RPMS) is a comprehensive suite of applications that supports
virtually all clinical and business operations at IHS and most Tribal
facilities, from patient registration to billing. Many Tribes are
choosing to leave the system because IHS cannot properly maintain and
update the system due to budget constraints and interoperability
challenges. In addition, the Veterans' Health Administration (VHA) has
announced a move to a commercial off the shelf system. This puts RPMS
at risk because it is linked to the VHA EHR and receives technical
updates and changes as a result of the VHA's work. NIHB echoes the
TBFWG request to create a separate funding line item for Health IT to
protect H& C funds to support direct care services. The President's
budget has proposed a dedicated line item for EHR, so that IHS can
either update the current EHR or initiate a process similar to that of
the VHA.
Purchased/Referred Care (PRC)
For fiscal year 2020, Tribes recommend $1.4 billion for the
Purchased/Referred Care (PRC) program. This is $426 million above the
fiscal year 2019 enacted level. The PRC budget supports essential
healthcare services from non-IHS or non-Tribal providers. In fiscal
year 2016, PRC denied over $423.6 million in services--that's 92,354
needed healthcare services that AI/ANs were denied from receiving due
to budget constraints. That is unacceptable. Deferral of care costs
lives in Indian Country, and contributes to the lower health status of
AI/ANs.
Mental Health
For fiscal year 2020, Tribes are recommending $254.7 million. This
is $149.4 million above fiscal year 2019 enacted. Addressing mental
health disparities remains a top priority in Indian Country, and a
significant increase in this line item helps ensure Tribal communities
can develop innovative and culturally appropriate prevention programs.
Research has demonstrated that AI/ANs do not prefer to seek mental
health services through Western models of care due to lack of cultural
sensitivity; which suggests that AI/ANs are not receiving the services
they need to help reduce these alarming statistics.\2\ In the
California Area, for example, lack of funding is reflected by 2017
Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) data. Of patients that
were diagnosed with depression, only 30 percent received a prescription
for antidepressants with enough medication and refills to last 12
weeks, and only 10 percent received enough to last 6 months. An
increase in funding and subsequent staffing would allow a greater
percentage of the population to be seen and treated by behavioral
health specialists.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Walls, M. L., Johnson, K. D., Whitbeck, L. B., & Hoyt, D. R.
(2006). Mental health and substance abuse services preferences among
American Indian people of the northern Midwest. Community Mental Health
Journal, 42, 521-535.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alcohol and Substance Abuse
For fiscal year 2020, Tribes recommend $351.2 million for the
Alcohol and Substance Abuse budget. This is $105.7 million above the
fiscal year 2019 enacted level. Alcohol and substance addiction have
grave impacts that ripple across Indian Country causing adverse health
outcomes that break the social fabric of Tribal traditions and ties.
NIHB was pleased to see $10 million allocated for the Special
Behavioral Health Pilot Program in the fiscal year 2019 conference
report. We encourage the Committee to continue building on this
investment, and work with authorizing committees to enact mandatory
appropriations for this program, as is the case for the Special
Diabetes Program for Indians (SDPI). SDPI works because it is
consistent, broad-based funding that reaches a significant amount of
Tribes, with a funding structure that Tribes prefer.
Dental Health
For fiscal year 2020, Tribes recommend $288 million for Dental
Health. This is $83.3 million above the fiscal year 2019 level. In the
general U.S. population, there is one dentist for every 1,500 people;
but in Indian Country, there is only one dentist for every 2,800
people. Nationally, AI/AN children have the highest rate of tooth
decay. This is why Tribes continue to advocate for the expansion of
Dental Therapists (DTs), whom have been practicing successfully in
Alaskan Native Villages for over a decade. DTs are primary oral health
providers that live and work in the communities they serve providing
routine care to patients so that the need for emergency services is
minimized and patients are experiencing greater overall oral health
outcomes.
Facilities
For fiscal year 2020, Tribes recommend a total of $887.9 million
for facilities appropriations which is an increase of $9 million over
the fiscal year 2019 enacted level. These increases will be used to
improve maintenance of IHS facilities, speed up the funding of projects
on the IHS Healthcare priority list, and improve sanitation conditions
in Tribal communities. IHS facilities are some of the oldest health
facilities in the Nation. Whereas the average age of mainstream
hospital is roughly 10 years, at current rates of funding, an IHS
facility built today would not be replaced for another 400 years! \3\
Investments in Indian health facilities will allow the care provided in
our communities to commensurate other health systems in the United
States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Federal Indian Trust Responsibility: ``The Quest for Equitable
and Quality Indian Healthcare--The National Tribal Budget Formulation
Workgroup's Recommendations on the Indian Health Service Fiscal Year
2018 Budget.'' June 2016. P. 64.
[This statement was submitted by Victoria Kitcheyan, Chairperson.]
______
Prepared Statement of the National Parks Conservation Association
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony on
behalf of National Parks Conservation Association (NPCA). Founded in
1919, NPCA is the leading national, independent voice for protecting
and enhancing America's National Park System for present and future
generations. I appreciate the opportunity to provide our views
regarding the National Park Service (NPS) fiscal year 2020 budget and
funding issues facing our national parks this year.
National parks protect America's heritage and deliver robust
economic returns of $10 in economic benefits nationally for every
dollar invested in the NPS. In 2017, more than $18 billion in visitor
spending supported nearly $36 billion in economic activity and 306,000
jobs. NPCA and other polling indicates the vast popularity of national
parks and strong bipartisan support for adequately funding them. And of
course, they are deeply loved by the American people in part because
they protect our cultural and natural heritage.
We acknowledge the tremendous challenge the subcommittee faces in
setting thoughtful spending priorities, so we are grateful for your
consistent support for the National Park Service. NPCA and our partners
in the National Parks Second Century Action Coalition commend your
subcommittee for providing needed increases for the National Park
Service the last six fiscal years, with particularly commendable
increases in fiscal year 2016 and fiscal year 2018. This will be
helpful for parks to address their funding challenges. As they are
still considerably behind where they need to be to meet their mission,
we urge you to do your best to build on this support in fiscal year
2020.
Top three fiscal year 2020 Priorities: NPCA requests appropriated
funding for NPS with a focus on these accounts:
1.
$2.606 billion for `Operation of the National Park System'
2.
$508.6 million for `National Parks Construction'
3.
$30 million for `National Park Partnerships'/Centennial
Challenge
These requests are based upon the proportional increases in fiscal
year 2016, recognizing that Congress has met these goals before. There
are numerous other NPS accounts and programs important to us, and we
outline several of them later in this testimony.
The President's fiscal year 2020 budget: Not helpful to your work
in fiscal year 2020 is yet another draconian and unrealistic
president's budget. Cuts to park service staffing, repairs and other
needs would set the park service back considerably. Proposed deep cuts
to EPA and other agencies important to protecting parks' environment
are further damaging. We commend Congress for wholeheartedly rejecting
these cuts last year and urge that you continue to support our parks.
The need for a funding deal and an improved 302(b) allocation for
the Interior and Environment subcommittee: We respect that this fiscal
year was painful and hope that fiscal year 2020 can be far more
functional. We urge decision-makers and the president to work together
to agree to a deal to lift the budget caps for the final 2 years of the
Budget Control Act. To do otherwise would be vastly damaging to
nondiscretionary needs including for our national parks. We urge an
improved 302(b) allocation to meet needs at parks and for other
agencies and programs under your jurisdiction.
Appropriated funding for the deferred maintenance backlog: The
backlog continues to threaten the protection of nationally significant
resources and, eventually the experience of visitors. Investments are
needed for visitor centers, trails, water systems, and more. The
subcommittee's recent increases for maintenance accounts the last
several years have been very helpful for national parks. Unfortunately,
the backlog grew by more than $300 million during fiscal year 2017 and
despite increases since then, we know that more is needed to build on
that good work to chip away at the now $11.9 billion backlog.
Support for our request would help address the backlog with
investments in the repair/rehab and cyclic maintenance Operations
subaccounts, and line-item construction subaccount. For your
information, we are also urging the Transportation, Housing and Urban
Development subcommittee to fund at the fully authorized $100 million
annually the Nationally Significant Federal Lands and Tribal Projects
Program, which funds transportation infrastructure for parks and other
Federal lands, and Tribal lands. We were grateful for the $25 million
appropriated to this fund in fiscal year 2019. We hope that
subcommittee can meet the fully authorized amount this fiscal year, and
even provide a full $175 million to catch up on the shortfall in this
year's appropriation.
Centennial Challenge: This program provides Federal funds to match
private funds for projects throughout the park system that improve the
visitor experience, including but not limited to deferred maintenance
projects. We commend this subcommittee for the increases for the
program the last three fiscal years. This support has leveraged more
than two dollars for every dollar invested for signature projects
across the National Park System that enhance the visiting experience.
Many more philanthropic opportunities await, so we hope the
subcommittee can increase funding for this successful program that
enjoys strong bipartisan support.
We commend Congress for passage of the Centennial Act in 2016 to
dedicate funding to that program and to a newly established endowment.
Given the extraordinary philanthropic interest in the program,
sustained or increased appropriations in addition to those funds would
help leverage additional philanthropic dollars-a wise investment. We
understand the intent of the committee in directing Centennial
Challenge dollars to focus on deferred maintenance. While deferred
maintenance projects funded by this program are critical, NPCA
respectfully reminds the committee of the importance of other
philanthropically-driven projects that improve the visiting experience
in ways beyond maintenance.
Dedicated backlog funding: We continue to urge Congress to
recognize that a more realistic long-term solution is needed to address
the maintenance backlog. Under current allocations established by the
Budget Control Act, and even beyond given the constraints of the
appropriations process, it is difficult to see how this subcommittee
will be able to address even the highest priority non-transportation
facilities' needs. We also recognize the constraints of the Highway
Trust Fund in meeting the bulk of park transportation infrastructure
needs. These funding sources are simply limited in their ability to
address the large size of the backlog.
NPCA is a strong advocate for the Restore Our Parks/Restore Our
Parks and Public Lands Act (S. 500/H.R. 1225). We urge the members of
the committee to cosponsor the bill and work with other members of
Congress and the administration to ensure passage of a bill that
dedicates robust and dependable funding to the maintenance challenge.
We respectfully request Operations investments for non-maintenance
needs: While the maintenance backlog is one of our highest funding
priorities, we do not want a focus on the backlog to cause other needed
work to fall further behind; therefore, we respectfully request broad
investments in park operations to address the many operating needs
beyond maintenance.
In recent years, NPS has experienced a gradual erosion of staff in
most years. As you know, these losses can be damaging, with impacts
such as less day-to-day maintenance, less scientific inventory and
monitoring, reduced hours or even closed public facilities, fewer
visitor programs, and other challenges to parks fulfilling their
mission. The challenge is compounded by significant increases in
visitation that require staff time. Between 2011 and 2018, NPS
experienced a 14 percent reduction in staff while at the same time the
National Park System experienced a 14 percent increase in visitation.
We appreciate the committee's attention to these ongoing needs, and
that while the maintenance backlog is a profound problem that NPCA and
others are prioritizing, these other needs must be addressed.
Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF): The acquisition of
inholdings is directly related to better managing the places in which
our Nation already has made a significant investment. Thus, we urge
support for the NPS Federal land acquisition and management portion of
LWCF, a critical tool for protecting our national parks. We applaud
Congress for the recent permanent reauthorization of LWCF, which was an
exciting show of support for this important program. We ask Congress to
build on this support by providing more robust appropriations and
dedicated funding at its fully authorized amount of $900 million
annually. Accordingly, we urge support for S. 1081, the Land and Water
Conservation Fund Permanent Funding Act.
We commend the recent congressional recognition for supporting both
LWCF and deferred maintenance and urge Congress to support dedicated
funding for both these important needs.
National Heritage Areas (NHAs): NPCA is a strong supporter of the
National Heritage Area program. The more than fifty existing NHAs have
generated $12 billion in economic activity and $1.2 billion in tax
revenues and generated over 900,000 volunteer service hours. This
mighty program with a modest budget deserves support from both Congress
and the president.
Historic Preservation Fund (HPF): The HPF provides the primary
source of funding for State Historic and Tribal Historic Preservation
Offices in all 50 States. The HPF also supports the Historic Tax Credit
program, responsible for the rehabilitation of over 40,000 buildings,
the creation of 2.5 million jobs and the leveraging of $117 billion in
private investments in historic preservation projects. We request
continued support for this important program, with gradual increases
until it reaches its fully authorized amount of $150 million annually.
Policy Riders: Efforts to attach environmentally damaging policy
riders only further threatens the appropriations process, so we were
grateful that the final fiscal year 2019 bill was largely free of the
many proposed riders that would have threatened parks, their
ecosystems, and the health of visitors and wildlife within them. We
urge continued rejection of efforts to attach damaging riders.
National Park Fees: NPCA recognizes that fees play an important
role in supplementing Federal funds, but they can never realistically
be a major funding source for parks. We forcefully opposed the
administration's excessive effort to increase fees at 17 parks during
peak season and commend their withdrawing that effort. While the new
fees will be more modest, on top of recent fee increases, we fear the
higher amounts could price Americans out of the parks they own. We are
urging the administration to research the price point at which fees do
not discourage visitation, particularly for lower income families. We
ask Congress to consider setting those fee levels to be adjusted every
two or 3 years by inflation automatically, thus reducing the
complications that arise with fee decisions and keeping fees at a fair
and even rate in constant dollars.
We urge the committee in general to continue exercising oversight
of fees to keep parks affordable.
The Administration's Department of the Interior Reorganization
Effort: We remain deeply concerned about the administration's proposal
to reorganize the Department. Our chief concerns are: a lack of
transparency and public involvement; a lack of clarity on the problems
to be solved, the purposes and goals of the proposal and its
components, and the suggested timeline for implementation; the
potential for the proposal to erode the unique NPS mission; shifting
the number and role of regional offices and staff; the potential for
the effort to reduce the capacity, presence or coordinating capacity of
the Washington Support Office (WASO), Denver Service Center and
regional support offices; the potential cost of the proposal to an
under-resourced park service; and the potential this proposal could be
connected with a workforce reduction effort.
We commend the committee's extensive and improved fiscal year 2019
report language exercising oversight over this proposal and appreciate
your continued oversight to ensure the integrity of NPS and the
Department more broadly. This proposal threatens to undermine the
authority of the National Park Service.
The recent government shutdown: The recent government shutdown was
extraordinarily damaging to our national parks, their visitors, partner
groups, park staff and businesses. It should never be repeated. This
shutdown was made much worse not only by its extended duration-more
than twice the length of the October 2013 shutdown-but by the
administration's damaging decisions to leave many parks partially open
despite a lack of staff, and then to use fee dollars intended for other
purposes to extend this damaging situation.
We contend the administration violated, at a minimum, the spirit of
several laws but was also in clear violation of the Organic Act that
established the park service by leaving parks open to harm and
continuing the situation despite this clear harm. We commend Chairwoman
McCollum for exercising oversight to hold the administration
responsible for its decisions and urge you to continue this oversight.
Among other fears we continue to have is that the Department of the
Interior will seek to reprogram badly needed operating dollars for
staffing at the border, as they did last year. The administration
appears to be of the philosophy that parks can operate with
insufficient staff and resources and that they can shift funds by going
around appropriators, who hold the power of the purse as you know well.
Furthermore, decisions such as these only contribute to the funding
woes with which the park service already struggles.
In conclusion: We recognize the subcommittee's constrained
allocation, and thus commend the recent funding increases to NPS and
commitment to our parks well-being. We urge a budget deal, an improved
subcommittee allocation, and for you to provide the best funding level
possible for NPS in fiscal year 2020 to help the agency recover from
underfunding. Further, we appreciate your oversight over the
administration's proposals regarding fees and reorganization, and the
reprogramming of funds and other damaging decisions during the shutdown
and beyond.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[This statement was submitted by John Garder, Senior Director of
Budget and Appropriations.]
______
Prepared Statement of the National Trust for Historic Preservation
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee, I appreciate this opportunity to present the National
Trust for Historic Preservation's recommendations for fiscal year 2020
appropriations. My name is Tom Cassidy and I am the Vice President of
Government Relations and Policy. The National Trust is a privately-
funded nonprofit organization chartered by Congress in 1949. We work to
save America's historic places to enrich our future.
We look forward to working with this subcommittee as you address
the ongoing needs for investments to sustain our Nation's rich heritage
of cultural and historic resources that also generate lasting economic
and civic vitality for communities throughout the Nation.
National Park Service: Historic Preservation Fund.--The Historic
Preservation Fund (HPF) is the principal source of funding to implement
the Nation's historic preservation programs. The National Trust is
enormously appreciative of the strong funding levels the Committee has
provided in recent years, including fiscal year 2019's $102.66 million,
the highest level of HPF funding in history. HPF funding supports
fundamental preservation activities such as survey, nomination of
properties to the National Register of Historic Places, public
education, as well as project review required the Federal Historic
Rehabilitation Tax Credit (HTC) projects.
We request that Congress provide a total fiscal year 2020 HPF
appropriation of $148.5 million. Within that funding we recommend:
--$60 million for State Historic Preservation Officers (SHPOs);
--$20 million for Tribal Historic Preservation Officers (THPOs);
--$5 million for a competitive grant program for SHPOs and THPOs to
invest in geographic information systems-based mapping and
digitization of historic resources--this would bring 21st
century technology to the identification of historic resources
at the very earliest stages of project planning leading both to
protection of historic sites and promoting more efficient
delivery of infrastructure projects;
--$30 million for competitive grants to preserve the sites and
stories of efforts to advance civil rights of underrepresented
communities, $20 million of which is to preserve the sites and
stories of the African American Civil Rights movement--this
will ensure grants to preserve the sites and stories of civil
rights for all Americans;
--$10 million for grants to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to preserve and rehabilitate historic buildings;
--$15 million for Save America's Treasures grants;
--$7.5 million for preservation grants to revitalize historic
properties of national, state, and local significance;
--$1 million for competitive grants for the survey and nomination of
properties associated with communities currently
underrepresented on the National Register of Historic Places
and National Historic Landmarks.
National Park Service: Operation of the National Park System.--The
National Park Service (NPS) is responsible for 421 units of the
National Park System ranging from the battlefields where our ancestors
fought and died to recent additions like the Birmingham Civil Rights
National Monument and the Reconstruction Era National Monument. Over
the past 25 years, more than 50 new parks have been added to the park
system, many of which preserve historic places and themes that have
been underrepresented within the system. We encourage the Committee to
provide at least level funding of $2.5 billion from fiscal year 2019 to
maintain stewardship of historic and cultural resources and prevent
reductions in visitor services at a time when our national parks are
more popular than ever. Within this funding, we recommend robust
funding for Resource Stewardship, including $2 million for the National
Underground Railroad Network to Freedom, $2 million for the recently
established African American Civil Rights Network, and $2 million for
the Reconstruction Era National Historic Network established in the
John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act
(Public Law 116-9).
National Park Service: Deferred Maintenance.--The National Park
Service (NPS) is responsible for maintaining a system comprised of more
than 84 million acres that tells the stories of remarkable people and
events in our country's history. Unfortunately, after 100 years of
operation and inconsistent public funding, the National Park System
faces a deferred maintenance backlog estimated at nearly $12 billion,
of which 47 percent is attributed to historic assets. Deferred
maintenance in our national parks puts historic and cultural sites at
risk of permanent damage or loss, and in the absence of funding, the
condition of these assets will continue to deteriorate and become more
expensive to repair and preserve in the future.
--Construction.--We recommend at least $160 million for Line Item
Construction projects that address the deferred maintenance for
the NPS' highest priority non-transportation assets with
projects greater than $1 million.
--Repair and Rehabilitation; Cyclic Maintenance.--We are enormously
appreciative of the Committee's commitment to enhancing these
accounts with significant investments since fiscal year 2016;
it is making a significant impact on addressing the long-term
maintenance needs of the parks. We recommend a continuation of
these impactful investments with $150 million for Repair and
Rehabilitation, an increase of $14 million above fiscal year
2019 enacted and $166 million for Cyclic Maintenance, an
increase of $15 million above fiscal year 2019 enacted.
--Dedicated Funding for Deferred Maintenance.--We strongly support
the creation of a reliable, dedicated Federal funding source
distinct from annual appropriations to address the deferred
maintenance backlog, as provided in the bipartisan Restore Our
Parks Act (S. 500) introduced in the Senate and the Restore Our
Parks and Public Lands Act (H.R. 1225) introduced in the House.
--Leasing Historic Structures in National Parks.--We appreciate the
Committees' strong support of expanded use of historic leasing
authorities by the NPS. Leasing is a well-established tool that
can bring non-Federal resources to the rehabilitation and use
of under-utilized or abandoned buildings within the parks. I
testified at a House Natural Resources Committee field hearing
on this topic in Hot Springs, AR last September. We are hopeful
that the administration will give greater priority to this
important issue this year.
--Volunteerism.--The National Trust recognizes that direct Federal
funding is insufficient to provide all the resources necessary
to maintain the parks. As part of our commitment to assist the
NPS with reducing the maintenance backlog of historic
properties, the National Trust launched the HOPE Crew (which
stands for the Hands-On Preservation Experience) initiative in
2014. The HOPE Crew program has trained over 700 young people
and veterans and engaged 3,000 volunteers at over 150 projects
nationwide, completing 120,000 hours and helping to support $18
million in preservation work. This work includes rehabilitating
structures at Martin Luther King, Jr. National Historical Park,
Little Big Horn Battlefield National Monument, Golden Gate
National Recreation Area, and Shenandoah National Park.
Projects like these help to reduce the maintenance backlog
while providing job skills and education for the next
generation of stewards of America's most important historic
sites.
National Park Service: Cultural Programs.--Within its cultural
programs, the NPS manages the National Register of Historic Places
certifies Federal Historic Tax Credit projects, coordinates Federal
archaeology programs, and provides funding through the Native American
Graves Protection and Repatriation Act Grants, Japanese American
Confinement Sites Grants, and American Battlefield Protection Program
Assistance Grants. The National Trust recommends $28 million in fiscal
year 2020, an increase of about $2.5 million from fiscal year 2019.
Increased funding will enhance preservation of and access to the
National Register, including modernizing its information system. It
will also support sustained demands to review and approve Federal
historic tax credits.
National Park Service: International Park Affairs, Office of
International Affairs.--The National Trust recommends $1.926 million
for International Park Affairs, including at least $1.25 million for
the Office of International Affairs to ensure engagement in the World
Heritage Program and support the dozens of communities and sites across
the country seeking nomination to the World Heritage List. This would
be a $278,000 increase above the fiscal year 2019 enacted level. The
Office of International Affairs is responsible for selecting sites for
the World Heritage Tentative List and shepherding them through the
detailed nomination process. Examples of pending sites include Hopewell
Ceremonial Earthworks (Ohio) and Civil Rights Movement Sites (Alabama,
Arkansas, Georgia, Mississippi). We oppose the administration's
proposal to shift the Southwest Border Resource Protection Program into
the Office of International Affairs and at the same time drastically
reduce overall program funding.
National Park Service: National Heritage Areas.--We recommend $32
million for the Heritage Partnership Program and National Heritage
Areas (NHAs). This funding supports commissions and grants to the now
55 individual NHAs, as well as administrative support for coordination,
guidance, assistance, and training. According to the Alliance of
National Heritage Areas, enhanced funding of $32 million will ensure
that current areas can continue their work.
Bureau of Land Management: Cultural Resources Management.--The BLM
oversees the largest, most diverse and scientifically important
collection of historic and cultural resources on our Nation's public
lands, as well as the museum collections and data associated with them.
The cultural resources program also supports NHPA Section 106 review of
land-use proposals, Section 110 inventory and protection of cultural
resources, compliance with the Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act, and consultation with Tribes and Alaska Native
Governments. We recommend $20 million, a modest increase of about $3
million above the fiscal year 2019 enacted level. Increased funding is
necessary to fulfill BLM's statutory requirements for inventory and
protection of cultural resources. Funding would also support ongoing
collaboration with western SHPOs through the Cultural Resources Data
Partnership to digitize and standardize data in a GIS format through
the National Cultural Resources Information Management System. This
effort promotes consideration of cultural resources early in the
planning process when it can inform siting decisions and reduce
potential conflicts with cultural resources.
Bureau of Land Management: National Landscape Conservation
System.--The BLM's National Landscape Conservation System (National
Conservation Lands) includes 36 million acres of congressionally and
presidentially designated lands, including National Monuments, National
Conservation Areas, Wilderness, Wilderness Study Areas, National Scenic
and Historic Trails, and Wild and Scenic Rivers. This includes new
additions such as the Bears Ears National Monument. We encourage the
Committee to provide $45 million to the base program for the National
Landscape Conservation System, an increase of $5.181 million above the
fiscal year 2019 enacted level. An increase will allow for greater
inventory and monitoring of cultural resources, prevent critical damage
to the resources found in these areas, ensure proper management, and
provide for a quality visitor experience. We also support providing at
least level funding for wilderness management and national monument
management on Oregon and California Grant Lands.
Department-Wide: Land and Water Conservation Fund.--The National
Trust supports robust funding for the Land and Water Conservation Fund
(LWCF), and we encourage the Committee to continue increasing LWCF
toward its authorized level of $900 million. Many of the Nation's most
significant historic and cultural landscapes have been permanently
protected through LWCF investments, including Martin Luther King Jr.
National Historical Park, Canyons of the Ancients National Monument,
and Hopewell Culture National Historic Park. In total, more than $550
million has been invested to acquire historic sites and 137,000 acres
in 162 NPS units. Within LWCF funding, we encourage the Committee to
provide at least level funding of $10 million for the American
Battlefield Protection Program.
Independent Agencies: National Endowment for the Arts and National
Endowment for the Humanities.--We urge the Committee to provide $167.5
million each for the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) and National
Endowment for the Humanities (NEH). NEA and NEH funding is critical to
communities around the country. It has also supported efforts by the
National Trust's Historic Sites and others to tell a fuller American
story and engage visitors with history in compelling ways. For example,
support from the NEA has created programs like Art and Shadows at the
Shadows-on-the-Teche in Louisiana. which put regionally-based artists
in residence at the site, resulting in programming that attracted new
audiences and brought people from around the country to the town's
downtown commercial district. NEH support has brought teachers from
around the country to learn about history in the places that it was
made and to carry those experiences back to their classrooms, including
exploring the Constitution at James Madison's Montpelier and
discovering the rich, but largely unknown, African American history in
the President's neighborhood at Decatur House.
Independent Agencies: Advisory Council on Historic Preservation.--
We recommend at least $7 million for the Advisory Council on Historic
Preservation (ACHP). In fiscal year 2020, the ACHP will continue to
play an important role in efforts to improve the delivery of major
infrastructure projects and continue to focus on improving consultation
with Indian Tribes to make environmental reviews more efficient and
expeditious for infrastructure projects. An increase in funding would
enable the ACHP to better address new requirements regarding
information technology and cybersecurity and annual government mandated
personnel cost increases, which put a strain on the ACHP's budget.
Thank you for considering our testimony. I would be pleased to
answer any questions you may have.
[This statement was submitted by Tom Cassidy, Vice President for
Government Relations and Policy.]
______
Prepared Statement of the National Wildlife Refuge Association
Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee:
The National Wildlife Refuge Association and its membership of
representatives from Refuge Friends organizations and concerned
citizens thank you for your support for the National Wildlife Refuge
System (Refuge System) particularly for the small funding increases
over the last several fiscal years. We appreciate the opportunity to
offer comments on the fiscal year 2020 Interior Appropriations bill and
respectfully request:
--$586 million for the Operations and Maintenance (O&M) accounts of
the Refuge System;
--$900 million for the Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF), with
$150 million allocated for the FWS, including these high
priority requests:
--$10 million for Everglades Headwaters NWR and Conservation Area
(FL);
--$6 million for Silvio O. Conte NFWR (CT, NH, VT, MA);
--$3 million for Cache River NWR (AR);
--$2 million for Bear River Watershed Conservation Area (WY, ID,
UT);
--$2 million for Blackwater NWR (MD);
--$2 million for Clarks River NWR (KY);
--$8 million for Hakalau Forest NWR (HI); and
--$8 million for the Dakota Grasslands Conservation Area (ND, SD);
--$50 million for the Refuge Fund;
--$75 million for the FWS Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program;
--$75 million for the State and Tribal Wildlife Grants Program;
--$47.6 million for the North American Wetlands Conservation Fund;
--$6 million for the Neotropical Migratory Bird Fund.
All of the programs delineated above add value both to wildlife
conservation in all 50 States and to the economic activity in local
communities. Wildlife refuges and the NWRS average almost $5 in
economic return for every $1 appropriated. By far, the biggest
challenge facing the Refuge System today is the completely inadequate
budgets that fail to cover the cost of maintaining the incredibly rich
and diverse wildlife habitats that make up the Refuge System.
The funding gap that has arisen due to low budget allocations over
the last decade has degraded critical wildlife habitat and imperil
important species. We must change this trajectory.
The Refuge System is currently responsible for 835 million acres of
land and water. Of that total, 740 million acres are included in the 5
Marine National Monuments created by Presidents Bush and Obama, yet
very little additional funding has been provided to these water
resources since their initial creation in 2006.
The Service is also expanding its outreach by working to make
conservation more accessible to the American public via urban refuges
and urban partnerships. To begin bridging these gaps, the Refuge
Association urges Congress to fund these critical programs that
leverage Federal dollars and serve as economic drivers.
national wildlife refuge system--operations & maintenance
The Refuge Association chairs the Cooperative Alliance for Refuge
Enhancement (CARE), a 25-year-old diverse coalition of 23 sporting,
conservation, and scientific organizations representing more than 16
million Americans that supports increased funding for the Refuge
System. CARE estimates the NWRS needs at least $900 million annually to
manage its 95 million land acres and 740 million acres of marine
national monuments. Yet the Refuge System is currently funded at
roughly half that amount--$487.7 million or 58 cents per acre.
The Refuge System cannot fulfill its obligation to the American
public, our wildlife, and 55.8 million annual visitors without
increases in maintenance and operation funds.
Funding for the Refuge System has declined substantially from a
funding level of $503 million in fiscal year 2010 to its current fiscal
year 2019 $488 million--$92 million below the $580 million it needs
just to keep pace with inflation and salary increases. This has forced
the Service to cut back on programs and create efficiencies whenever
possible--efficiencies that are sometimes harmful or even dangerous.
For example, many refuges have been placed into complexes, where staff
travel sometimes large distances to juggle duties on multiple refuges.
Three States have no refuge law enforcement staff on the ground, and 13
others have only one law enforcement officer for the entire State.
Several States have no visitor services or environmental education
staff.
Even with these challenges, the Service has risen to the occasion
and taken care of the lands and waters entrusted to it. Staff work
overtime and on weekends. Law enforcement staff are pulled off their
duty station to cover shifts on the southern border. And the Service
has cut its deferred maintenance backlog in half from $2.7 billion to
$1.16 billion. But budget cuts also led to the loss of 488 positions
since fiscal year 2011. Because most refuge lands and waters are highly
managed to provide optimal habitat conditions, this deterioration in
staffing has had a dramatic impact resulting in significant declines in
habitat protection and management, hunting, fishing, volunteerism and
scientific research.
Visitation to all refuges jumped by 8 million over the last 6
years. Overall, more people are looking to recreate on wildlife
refuges, yet understaffed refuges struggle to provide those
opportunities. Reductions in visitor services can be extremely
troubling to constituencies who want to visit. At Tualatin River NWR in
Oregon, elimination of the visitor services position cut all teacher
training workshops and community outreach. Prior to this loss, over 100
teachers were trained each year at the refuge. Due to budget
shortfalls, Patuxent Research Refuge in Maryland--the refuge closest to
the Nation's Capitol--has cut back on school programs, reduced its
visitor service staff by half, and even closed its visitor's center
every Thursday.
Equally troubling is a 15 percent drop in the number of volunteers
since fiscal year 2011. At a time when record numbers of Americans are
retiring and have the capability and desire to give back, the Service's
ability to oversee their efforts has been curtailed. Volunteers provide
an additional 20 percent of work on our national wildlife refuges, yet
they are being turned away when the System needs them the most.
We cannot emphasize enough how important it is to the health of our
Nation's national wildlife refuges that funding be increased, and
increased substantially. We are asking that your subcommittee provide
nearly a $100 million increase, and we do not ask this lightly. We
understand the budget challenges this committee faces, but the
situation on the ground is critical. The Refuge System is bare bones
right now and cannot face more cuts. Every year, more and more refuges
are closed to the public, habitat degrades, and visitors are turned
away.
The Refuge Association appreciates the subcommittee's consideration
of our request of $586 million for fiscal year 2020 for National
Wildlife Refuge System Operations and Maintenance.
strategic growth--land and water conservation fund (lwcf)
The Land and Water Conservation Fund is an essential tool for
protecting the integrity of the Refuge System and is the primary
funding source for land and conservation easement acquisition by
Federal land agencies. Some in Congress have argued that public lands
like the Refuge System can't manage what they have and thus, all land
acquisition should end. We believe that land acquisition in fee simple
and as part of a targeted easement program will provide an important
mix of habitats that will only increase the habitat value of the Refuge
System.
Conservation easements add very little to operations and management
costs, compared to other kinds of protected lands. In many cases, land
acquisition is required to conserve intact and functional natural
habitat. The Refuge System is responsible for safeguarding population
levels of a range of species, including many that require specific
habitat conditions, such as beaches for sea turtles and isolated
springs for endemic desert fish. Other species require multiple habitat
types during their life cycle. By acquiring critical habitat areas and
linking conserved lands, the Refuge System enhances the integrity of
the System and strengthens our network of habitat to give wildlife
space and time to respond to changes, whether from climate or changing
land use patterns.
The Refuge Association calls on Congress to fund LWCF at $900
million per year, with $150 million provided in fiscal year 2020 to the
USFWS, including the projects enumerated at the beginning of this
statement and those advocated by Refuge Friends.
commitment to refuge communities--refuge fund
The Refuge System uses net income derived from permits and timber
harvests to make payments to local communities to offset property tax
revenue lost when the federally-acquired lands are removed from local
tax rolls. The System relies on congressional appropriations to the
Refuge Fund to compensate for the shortfall between revenues and tax
replacement obligations. However, declining revenues and lack of
appropriations have resulted in the Service paying less than 50 percent
of its tax-offset obligations since 2001. Reduced funding threatens the
partnerships that are so important for successful conservation, and the
negative impact on local communities is felt even more starkly in
difficult economic times.
We also ask that this subcommittee consider converting or rolling
the Refuge Fund into the PILT (Payment in Lieu of Taxes) program. Some
refuge lands are included in PILT and others are included in the Refuge
Fund. One funding mechanism for all refuge lands makes sense and would
streamline the process of returning funds to local communities.
The Refuge Association requests $50 million for the Refuge Fund. We
also call for a review of the Refuge Revenue Sharing Act of 1935 as
amended, and consideration of conversion to a Payment-in-Lieu of Taxes
(PILT) program to be consistent with other Federal land management
agencies and to provide Refuge communities with more equitable
payments.
partnerships--partners for fish and wildlife program (partners program)
With 75 percent of all fish and wildlife species dependent upon
private lands for their survival, the Partners Program is one of the
most powerful tools for protecting wildlife where it lives. By building
effective partnerships between public agencies and private landowners
to conserve America's expansive working landscapes, the Partners
Program has implemented nearly 29,000 restoration projects in the past
25 years, restoring over one million acres of wetlands, three million
acres of uplands, and 11,000 miles of streams. The Partners Program
leverages Federal dollars, generating nearly $16 in economic return for
every $1 appropriated for projects.
The Refuge Association and the landowner-led Partners for
Conservation request $75 million for fiscal year 2020. Such a funding
level would result in an additional $400 million worth of conservation
across the Nation.
fish and wildlife service grant programs
The North American Wetlands Conservation Act (NAWCA), Neotropical
Migratory Bird Conservation Act (NMBCA), and the State and Tribal
Wildlife Grants (SWG) have been incredibly beneficial for national
wildlife refuges.
--The NAWCA program delivers an average 3:1 match for all Federal
standard and small grants, and has restored wetlands on
wildlife refuges across the Nation. The Refuge Association
fully supports a return to this program's high water mark of
$47.6 million.
--The SWG program provides funding to State wildlife agencies for
developing and implementing programs that benefit wildlife
habitat for both hunted and non-hunted species. This funding is
critical for research, wildlife surveys, species restoration,
and habitat management on State lands, which all contribute to
a system of healthy Federal and State lands. The States are
essential partners to the Refuge System, and we support funding
for this program of $75 million.
--The NMBCA program protects neotropical bird species across the
Americas, with $66 million in Federal grants having been
matched by $250 million in partner funds. As wonderful as
refuge lands are, wildlife conservation must also take place on
State and private lands, as well as in other countries,
particularly for migratory species. We support fiscal year 2020
funding at $6 million for the NMBCA.
We believe that with sound conservation policy, increased funding,
and the power of more than 40,000 dedicated volunteers, the Refuge
System can fulfill its mission to provide wildlife dependent recreation
for Americans and protect the habitat for more than 700 species of
birds, 220 species of mammals, 250 reptile and amphibian species and
more than 1,000 species of fish.
We look forward to working with Congress to accomplish this goal
and appreciate your consideration of our requests. Please let me know
if you have any questions.
______
Prepared Statement of the Native Village of Eyak
The Native Village of Eyak makes the following requests and
comments on the fiscal year 2020 Indian programs appropriations:
--Bridge and Road Repair: Support the Tribe's efforts to repair the
36-Mile Bridge and protect Copper River salmon runs
--Section 105(1) Leases: Identify sufficient funding for healthcare
facility leases under Section 105(1) of the Indian Self-
Determination and Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA).
--Contract Support Cost Funding: Continue to fund Contract Support
Costs at 100 percent.
--Advance Appropriations for IHS: Place IHS funding on an advance
appropriations basis.
--Subsidies for Telecommunications Connectivity: Continue to support
Tribal telecommunications subsidies.
--Tribal Courts: Fully fund BIA 638 compacts supporting Tribal
courts.
--Climate Change: Support the Tribe's efforts with grants to fund
research to respond to climate change threats to the Tribe.
introduction
The Native Village of Eyak is a federally recognized Tribal
government located in Cordova, Alaska, on the southeast shores of
Prince William Sound in the North Gulf Coast. The Tribe is a co-signer
to the Alaska Tribal Health Compact with the Indian Health Service
(IHS) and operates a wide range of healthcare programs, including
primary care services and behavioral health. The Tribe also has a self-
governance compact under the ISDEAA with the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
The Native Village of Eyak focuses on self-determination and self-
governance as a means of improving the lives and health of our Tribal
citizens. We are not only responsible for providing quality, available
healthcare services, but also for promoting opportunities and
partnerships for our citizens, protecting our traditional land and
natural resources, and for strengthening our culture.
bridge and road repair
In 2011, erosion destroyed a portion of Bridge 339 (the ``36 Mile
Bridge''), leading to the closure of the Copper River Highway which
connects the communities in which our members live. The situation
continues to decline, and a total failure of the bridge would be
detrimental to the Copper River red and king salmon runs and to the
water quality of the Copper River, which is of great significance to
the Tribe. The repairs to the bridge and road will cost tens of
millions of dollars, and we have been investigating our options to
contribute to the repair. One option is a Better Utilizing Investments
to Leverage Development (BUILD) Transportation Grants. We understand
that the BUILD program does not fall under this subcommittee's
jurisdiction, but we appreciate you support in this and any other
funding sources to help us reconnect our community and protect the
Copper River.
section 105(l) leases
Like many other Tribes, Eyak relies on section 105(l) leases to
address our chronically underfunded facilities operation, maintenance,
and replacement costs. We are gratified that IHS has been funding
Section 105(l) leases for Tribal health clinics, as it was required to
do by the Federal courts in the 2016 Federal court decision in Maniilaq
v. Burwell, which held that section 105(l) of the ISDEAA provides an
entitlement to full compensation for leases of Tribal facilities used
to carry out ISDEAA agreements. We appreciate your supplemental
appropriations in fiscal year 2019 to cover these costs, and we ask
that funding continue to be made available for these important leases.
This Committee has invited IHS to submit a report on the budget impact
of meeting its responsibility. We stand with other Tribes to oppose any
appropriations rider, such as those included in the administration's
budget proposals for fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019, which would
allow IHS to avoid its responsibility to compensate Tribes fully for
these costs. We ask that Congress again decline to include such a
provision in the fiscal year 2020 IHS appropriation.
contract support cost funding
We appreciate the successful efforts of the House and Senate
Interior appropriations subcommittees over the past several years
supporting the full payment of Contract Support Costs (CSC) by both the
IHS and the BIA. We are also very pleased that the administration has
continued to request that CSC be maintained as a separate
appropriations account in IHS and in BIA, and with an indefinite
funding of ``such sums as may be necessary''. The full payment of CSC
has been crucial to the strengthening of Tribal governments' ability to
successfully exercise their rights and responsibilities as sovereign
governments.
advance appropriations for ihs
We are appreciative of the increased attention to the issue of
advance appropriations for the IHS as evidenced by the legislation
introduced by Ranking Member Udall and in the House by Representative
Don Young and Interior Appropriations Chair McCollum and Ranking Member
Joyce. The bills differ somewhat and address advance appropriations for
IHS (placing it on the same schedule as veterans healthcare) and
programs in the BIA and BIE/Predictability in our funding is very
important for us as we endeavor to meet the healthcare needs of our
community. As you know, when IHS funding is subject to a Continuing
Resolution, as it has been over many years, Tribal healthcare providers
like us receive only a portion of funding at a time, making it
particularly difficult to implement long-range planning and to
effectively use and leverage limited resources. Under advance
appropriations, we would know our budget a year in advance which would
resolve our budget uncertainty. The IHS budget should be treated the
same way as VA health programs.
subsidies for telecommunications connectivity
Eyak understands that the subcommittees do not directly control
funding subsidies under the Federal Communications Commission and
Universal Service Administrative Company (USAC). Telecommunications
Subsidies. But, as you know, Internet connectivity is critical to
providing healthcare services to our remote villages. Last year you
heard from us and other Tribes regarding the cap on Universal Service
Rural Health Care funds. We appreciate your support in eliminating the
cap last year, and efforts to stabilize the Universal Service Fund
Rural Health Care program and make sure that our telehealth obligations
to our community members remain fully funded.
tribal courts
As Tribes become partners within the corrections and court system
in the State of Alaska, we have a need for more funding to adequately
staff Tribal Courts and run optimal programs. We appreciate that
Congress rejected the administration's proposal to zero out Tribal 280
Court funds for fiscal year 2019, maintaining the $13 million level
enacted in fiscal year 2018. Specifically, we would like a sustainable
amount of Tribal Court funds to be recurring rather than one time funds
that are applied for each year.
climate change
Eyak continues to experience weather and climate change. Rivers and
lakes that used to freeze all winter freeze minimally or even stay
open. Eyak is used to receiving 180 inches of rain on average per year
and about 6 feet of snow annually. This rain and snowfall has decreased
dramatically, which poses dangers to local hydropower, commercial
fishing and the ability to have adequate drinking water. Increases in
Natural Resources funding would allow our Tribe to implement research
projects to study these changes and how they impact our natural
lifestyle and determine how to respond. Respectfully,
[This statement was submitted by Darrel Olsen, Tribal Council
Chairman.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Natural Science Collections Alliance
The Natural Science Collections Alliance appreciates the
opportunity to provide testimony in support of fiscal year 2020
appropriations for the Smithsonian Institution and the Department of
the Interior. We encourage Congress to make new investments that
address agency backlogs in the preservation and curation of scientific
and cultural collections within the Department of the Interior and the
Smithsonian Institution. We request that Congress provide new funding
to the National Museum of Natural History to correct for it being flat
funded the past 2 years. We further request that Congress restore the
$1.6 million in funding for the U.S. Geological Survey's Biological
Survey Unit housed at the Smithsonian Institution.
The Natural Science Collections Alliance is a non-profit
association that supports natural science collections, their human
resources, the institutions that house them, and their research
activities for the benefit of science and society. Our membership
consists of institutions that are part of an international network of
museums, botanical gardens, herbaria, universities, and other
institutions that contain natural science collections and use them in
research, exhibitions, academic and informal science education, and
outreach activities.
Scientific collections, and the collections professionals and
scientists who make, care for, and study these resources, are a vital
component of our Nation's research infrastructure. Whether held at a
museum, government managed laboratory or archive, or in a university
science department, these scientific resources consist of data (for
example, genetic, tissue, organism, and environmental) that are a
unique and irreplaceable foundation from which scientists are studying
and explaining past and present life on earth. Research results improve
human health, enhance food security, and provide monitoring for
responses to environmental change and species conservation.
The institutions that care for scientific collections are important
research centers that enable other scientists to study the basic data
of life; conduct biological, geological, anthropological, and
environmental research; and integrate research findings from across
these diverse disciplines. Their professional staff members train
future generations with the tools and expertise required to move
science forward. In-house institutional staff expertise is vital to the
development and deployment of this critical research infrastructure.
According to the Federal Interagency Working Group on Scientific
Collections, ``scientific collections are essential to supporting
agency missions and are thus vital to supporting the global research
enterprise.'' Preservation of specimens and the strategic growth of
these collections are in the best interest of science and the best
interest of taxpayers. Existing scientific collections that are
properly cared for and accessible are a critical component of the U.S.
science infrastructure and are readily integrated into new research on
significant questions. Specimens that were collected decades or
centuries ago are now routinely used in research in diverse fields
related to genomics, human health, biodiversity sciences, informatics,
environmental quality, and agriculture.
The Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History
(NMNH) is a valuable Federal partner in the curation and research on
scientific specimens. The scientific experts at the NMNH care for 140
million specimens and ensure the strategic growth of this
internationally recognized scientific research institution. To increase
the availability of these scientific resources to researchers,
educators, other Federal agencies, and the public, NMNH is working on a
multi-year effort to digitize its collections. That effort will
substantially increase the scientific uses of these collections.
The National Museum of Natural History has also been working to
strengthen curatorial and research staffing and to backfill positions
left open by retirements and budget constraints. The current staffing
level is insufficient to provide optimal care for the collections.
Future curatorial and collections management staffing levels may be
further jeopardized given funding cuts at science agencies, such as the
USGS, that support staff positions at the National Museum of Natural
History.
Interior is an important caretaker of museum collections as well;
the Department has an estimated 146 million items, comparable in size
only to the Smithsonian Institution. Although many of the department's
collections are located in bureau facilities, numerous artifacts, and
specimens are also housed by non-governmental facilities, such as
museums and universities.
In addition, the United States Geological Survey (USGS) furthers
the preservation, inventory, and digitization of geological scientific
collections, such as rock and ice cores, fossils, and samples of oil,
gas, and water. The National Geological and Geophysical Data
Preservation program helps States with collections management, improves
accessibility of collections data, and expands digitization of
specimens to ensure their broader use. One example of the returns from
this program is the potash mineral deposit discovered in Michigan that
is valued at an estimated $65 billion. Rock samples from Michigan were
entered into a national database, where private companies discovered
the deposit's existence and are now assessing the potential for mining.
USGS also supports the documentation and conservation of native
pollinators through its Native Bee Inventory and Monitoring Lab.
The Biological Survey Unit consists of USGS scientists stationed at
the National Museum of Natural History, where they curate and conduct
research on USGS-specimens of fish, reptiles, birds and mammals that
are curated at the NMNH. USGS has more than a million specimens of
birds, mammals, amphibians, and reptiles that are housed at the
Smithsonian. This arrangement goes back to 1889, but has been proposed
for elimination by the administration. This is irresponsible. These
specimens, data and the research they enable are required to inform
Department of the Interior land and natural resource management
decisions, and often also support decisionmaking by State and Tribal
governments. We urge Congress to fund this valuable program at $1.6
million and to direct the USGS to sustain this effort.
The Bureau of Land Management has a large backlog of cultural
resources to inventory on public lands. Currently, only 10 percent of
public lands have been assessed for heritage resources. Such
assessments need to be conducted before unique resources are lost to
looting, vandalism, fire, or environmental change.
The National Park Service must continue its investments in
scientific collections, including cataloging millions of museum objects
and connecting those databases to national and global data portals. The
National Park Service curates a wide range of specimens and artifacts,
from historical and cultural items to preserved tissues from protected
species and living microorganisms collected in our National Parks.
Several parks have made progress on addressing planning, environmental,
storage, security, and fire protection deficiencies in museum
collections, but much work remains. The President's budget request
would undo past progress, with the percentage of museum collections in
'good' condition decreasing from 75 percent in fiscal year 2014 to 69
percent by the end of fiscal year 2019.
Conclusion
Scientific collections are critical infrastructure for our Nation's
research enterprise and a national treasure. Research specimens connect
us to the past, are used to solve current problems, and are helping to
predict threats to human health, methods for ensuring food security,
and the impact of future environmental changes. Sustained investments
in scientific collections are in our national interest.
The budget for NMNH has remained flat over the past 2 years. We
urge Congress to provide NMNH with at least $53 million in fiscal year
2020 to allow the museum to undertake critical collections care, make
needed technology upgrades, and conduct cutting edge research. Please
support adequate funding for the Department of the Interior's Capital
Working Fund, as well as programs within Interior bureaus, such as the
Biological Survey Unit, that support the preservation and use of
scientific collections--a truly irreplaceable resource.
Thank you for your thoughtful consideration of this request.
[This statement was submitted by John Bates, President.]
______
Prepared Statement of The Nature Conservancy
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to submit recommendations
for fiscal year 2020 appropriations. The Nature Conservancy is an
international, non-profit conservation organization working around the
world to protect ecologically important lands and waters for nature and
people. Our mission is to conserve the lands and waters upon which all
life depends.
As we enter the fiscal year 2020 budget cycle and another year of a
challenging fiscal environment, the Conservancy wishes to thank this
subcommittee for the final fiscal year 2019 funding levels for
conservation programs. Our budget recommendations this year reflect a
balanced approach with funding levels consistent with fiscal year 2018
and fiscal year 2019 funding levels. Of particular note, we wish to
work with this subcommittee and the authorizing Committees on
identifying a permanent funding solution for the Land and Water
Conservation Fund. We strongly support the emphasis on funding for sage
grouse conservation and urge Congress to continue support for ongoing
sage grouse conservation efforts. We also support funding practical,
innovative climate solutions to create an energy future that is
cleaner, more secure and gives consumers more energy choices. Investing
in nature brings strong returns for our security, the economy and our
communities and families. The Conservancy is focused on supporting
programs and investments that ensure economic and environmental
benefits are enhanced today and made sustainable for tomorrow.
The Conservancy would like to take the opportunity to thank the
Committee for its long-standing support of the fire funding fix in the
fiscal year 2018 Omnibus appropriations bill passed last year. The
passage of this much-needed funding solution means that dollars
appropriated by this committee to the fire management accounts of both
the USDA Forest Service and Department of the Interior (DOI) can be
used for their intended purposes and not be drained to fight
catastrophic wildfires in upcoming fire seasons. Our forest management
funding requests seek to reinvest savings resulting from a fire fix and
would reduce wildfire risk and improve forest health and resilience.
Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF).--The fiscal year 2019
Omnibus dedicated $435 million in discretionary appropriations for
LWCF. The Fund has strong bipartisan support and the Conservancy
appreciates Congress's commitment to funding important on-the-ground
conservation and recreation projects. The Conservancy supports $600
million in discretionary appropriations for LWCF for fiscal year 2020
and looks forward to working with Congress to find a permanent funding
solution for LWCF.
Forest Legacy.--The Conservancy support $100 million for the Forest
Legacy Program.
Endangered Species.--The Conservancy supports continuing funding of
at least $53 million for the Cooperative Endangered Species Fund
consistent with fiscal year 2019 levels. This funding provides critical
matching grants to States and territories for conservation and species
recovery efforts on non-Federal lands. Further, we request your
continued support for Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP) funding,
specifically HCP Land Acquisition Grants. The demand for HCP
acquisition grants has significantly outpaced available resources in
recent years.
State and Tribal Wildlife Grants.--The Conservancy supports the
fiscal year 2019 Omnibus funding level of $64.5 million for this
program. Strong Federal investments are essential to ensure strategic
actions are undertaken by State, Tribal and Federal agencies and the
conservation community to conserve wildlife populations and their
habitats and to prevent species from being listed as threatened or
endangered.
Wildlife Conservation Programs.--The variety of wildlife
conservation programs conducted by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(FWS) continue a long and successful tradition of supporting
collaborative conservation in the United States and internationally. We
urge the Committee to continue funding such established and successful
programs as the North American Wetlands Conservation Act (NAWCA),
Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Fund, the Migratory Bird Joint
Ventures, FWS Migratory Bird Management Program and the FWS Coastal
Program at no less than fiscal year 2019 Omnibus funding levels. We
support, at a minimum, sustained funding for the Partners for Fish and
Wildlife Program and the Cooperative Landscape Conservation and
Adaptive Science programs. The latter will help support DOI in
addressing large scale conservation challenges across all ownerships,
supporting collaborative problem solving for some of our Nation's most
challenging conservation issues. We also request strong funding for the
National Fish Habitat Initiative.
International Programs.--The international conservation programs
appropriated annually within the Department of Interior are relatively
small but are effective and widely respected. They encompass the FWS
Multinational Species Conservation Funds, the FWS Wildlife Without
Borders regional and global programs, and the U.S. National Park
Service's International Program. We are requesting modest increases
over fiscal year 2019 funding levels for these programs.
National Wildlife Refuge System.--The Conservancy supports stronger
funding for the Refuge System's Operations and Maintenance accounts.
Found in every U.S. State and territory, national wildlife refuges
conserve a diversity of America's environmentally sensitive and
economically vital ecosystems, including oceans, coasts, wetlands,
deserts, tundra, prairie, and forests. The Conservancy requests $586
million for fiscal year 2020. This represents the funding necessary to
maintain management capabilities for the Refuge System.
Hazardous Fuels and Restoration.--Strategic, proactive hazardous
fuels and restoration treatments have proven safer and more cost-
effective in reducing risks to communities and forests by removing
overgrown brush and trees, leaving forests in a more natural condition
resilient to wildfires. The Conservancy recommends investing $500
million in the USDA Forest Service's Hazardous Fuels program and $210
million in the DOI's Fuels Management program, in addition to
instructions for allocating funds to priority landscapes in both WUI
and wildland settings. We also support increasing the CFLR program to
$80 million to allow for new projects, Vegetation & Watershed
Management to $210 million (carving out $20 million for ecological
reforestation) and re-instating the Legacy Roads and Trails program at
$50 million. Additionally, we request this Committee provide funding to
establish the new Watersource Protection program, enacted in the 2018
Farm Bill.
Research and Joint Fire Science.--The USDA Forest Service's Forest
and Rangeland Research program offers the scientific bases for policies
that improve the health and quality of urban and rural communities.
This program is vital for the long-term health and utility of our
American forests and rivers. The Conservancy requests funding research
at $315 million. We ask to also include $8 million for each the USDA
Forest Service and DOI's Joint Fire Science programs, which have proven
great success in supporting practical science that reduces fire risk
and enhances economic, ecological and social outcomes nationwide.
Sage Grouse Conservation.--The Conservancy requests continued
investments to provide ongoing efforts to restore and conserve
sagebrush habitat and the Greater Sage-grouse across Federal, State,
Tribal and private lands. These resources are needed to implement on-
the-ground projects and monitor habitat treatments, address rangeland
fire and broader wildland fire prevention, suppression and restoration
efforts, and facilitate the partnership and science necessary for
effective conservation. Importantly, we ask that you remove language in
Sec. 120 of the fiscal year 2019 Conference Report that bars the
Service from proposing a rule to list the sage grouse under the
Endangered Species Act (ESA). This language undercuts good faith
conservation efforts by removing the critical backstop of a listing
should conditions on the ground warrant such a step. The Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) is facing perhaps the single most challenging effort
in its history in conserving key sagebrush habitat, addressing
identified threats to sage-grouse and promoting sustainable economic
development across some 165 million acres in coordination with State
and local managers and private land owners. We hope that all of our
work together can avoid the need to list the sage grouse in the future
BLM Land Management and Renewable Energy Development.--The
Conservancy supports smart planning and management of public lands
through implementation of Rapid Ecoregional Assessments, Resource
Management Planning improvements, Regional Mitigation Planning,
coordination with LCCs, and the Assessment, Inventory, and Monitoring
Strategy. Many BLM programs contribute to these cross-cutting
initiatives including: National Landscape Conservation System ($39.8
million); Resource Management Planning program ($63.125 million); and
the new Wildlife and Aquatic Habitat Management budget line ($128.846
million with $21.587 allocated to threatened and endangered species).
Additionally, the Conservancy supports continued funding for BLM's
renewable energy development program at the fiscal year 2018 Omnibus
level of $28.3 million. Collectively, these efforts will help BLM
manage its lands efficiently and effectively for energy development,
species and habitat conservation, recreation, and other uses to
maximize the public benefit from these lands.
Environmental Protection Agency's Geographic Programs.--EPA's
geographic programs, including the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative,
Chesapeake Bay, Puget Sound, Long Island Sound, and Gulf of Mexico
programs, make a significant contribution to protecting habitat and
water quality in the large landscapes where they work. These programs
have a proven record of supporting the States' voluntary restoration
efforts, and the Conservancy urges the Committee to continue the strong
funding for these programs it allocated in fiscal year 2019.
Colorado River Basin Recovery Programs.--The Upper Colorado River
Endangered Fish Recovery Program and San Juan River Basin Recovery
Implementation Program take a balanced approach to recovering four
endangered fish species in the Colorado River basin. The Upper Colorado
and San Juan recovery programs are highly successful collaborative
conservation partnerships involving the States of New Mexico, Colorado,
Utah, and Wyoming, as well as Indian Tribes, Federal agencies, and
water, power and environmental interests. These programs provide
critically important ESA compliance for over 2,450 Federal, Tribal,
State, and private water projects across the Upper Colorado River
Basin. Through these efforts, water use and development have continued
in growing Western communities in full compliance with the ESA, State
water and wildlife laws, and interstate compacts. Implementation of the
ESA has been greatly streamlined for Federal agencies, Tribes and water
users. The Conservancy supports robust funding at FWS for the Colorado
River Basin recovery programs, including recovery funds for both the
Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish Recovery Program and San Juan
River Basin Recovery Implementation Program, as well as fish hatchery
needs associated with the recovery plans.
National Streamflow Network.--The National Streamflow Network
provides continuous streamflow information at over 8,200 locations
across the country and is managed within the U.S. Geological Survey's
Groundwater and Streamflow Information Program. Water managers,
scientists, and other decisions makers, including within the
Conservancy, rely on data from the National Streamflow Network to plan
for floods, droughts, and other extreme events; design infrastructure,
including the operation of Federal reservoirs; facilitate energy
generation; protect aquatic species and restore habitat; and manage
Federal lands. The Conservancy supports funding in fiscal year 2020 to
fully implement the National Streamflow Network.
Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Program.--Subtitle C of
Title V of the Water Resources Reform and Development Act of 2014
provides authority for low-cost credit that can leverage private
investment for water infrastructure. The criteria include whether a
project protects against extreme weather events or helps maintain the
environment. The Conservancy appreciates the strong funding the
Committee allocated to the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation
Program in fiscal year 2019 and urges continued support for it.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit The Nature Conservancy's
recommendations for the fiscal year 2020 Interior, Environment and
Related Agencies Appropriations Bill.
[This statement was submitted by Kameran Onley, Director of U.S.
Government Relations.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Nez Perce Tribe
Honorable Chairwoman and Members of the subcommittee, the Nez Perce
Tribe (Tribe) provides the following recommendations as the Committee
evaluates and prioritizes fiscal year 2020 appropriations, in relation
to the needs of Tribal nations, for the Indian Health Service (IHS),
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
U.S. Forest Service (FS), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), and the
Bureau of Land Management (BLM). The Tribe wants to acknowledge and
thank this subcommittee for its efforts to understand the needs of
Indian Country and advocate for increased appropriations to the many
programs in its jurisdiction that benefit the citizens, the Tribal
governments, and all members of our communities. We are deeply grateful
that the many funding increases to Tribal programs across the final
fiscal year 2019 Consolidated Appropriations Act will build on
increases Congress provided in fiscal year 2017 and in fiscal year
2018.
Like any government, the Tribe performs a wide array of work and
provides a multitude of services to its Tribal membership as well as
the community at large. The Tribe has a health clinic; a Tribal police
force; a social services department; and a comprehensive natural
resources program that does work related to forestry, wildlife
management, land services and land management, habitat restoration, air
quality and smoke management, water quality and sewer service. The
Tribe also operates one of the largest fisheries departments of any
Tribe in the nation working on the recovery of listed species under the
Endangered Species Act (ESA). Each of these programs is necessary and
vital for the Tribe as a sovereign nation that preserves and protects
the Treaty rights of the Nez Perce People and provides day-to-day
governmental services to our members and surrounding communities.
The Tribe has long been a proponent of self-determination for
Tribes and believes our primary obligation is to protect the Treaty-
reserved rights of the Tribe and our members. All of the Tribe's work
is guided by this principle. The Tribe works extensively with many
Federal agencies and proper funding for those agencies and their work
with, for, and through Tribes is of vital importance. To accomplish
this work, the U.S. must affirm its trust responsibility to Indian
Tribes by properly funding programs. The Tribe supports the recent
report of the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, Broken Promises, as well
as the National Congress of American Indians' publication of Indian
Country's fiscal year 2020 budget request, Winds of Change.
bureau of indian affairs
The Tribe appreciates the $3.08 billion in overall funding for the
BIA and Bureau of Indian Education in fiscal year 2019 and requests
that this $17.5 million increase be maintained in fiscal year 2020. The
Tribe also supports the indefinite appropriation for contract support
costs and believes that at least the $247 million appropriated in
fiscal year 2019 should be provided in fiscal year 2020. These costs
should also be reclassified from discretionary to mandatory.
In relation to the BIA Public Safety and Justice (PS&J) account,
the Tribe advocates for maintaining at least the $411.5 million in
funding for law enforcement that was enacted for that account in fiscal
year 2019. The Nez Perce Reservation spans 1,200 square miles, covering
five counties, and has a mixture of Tribal and non-Tribal residents.
The Tribe provides a full-service law and justice program. The Tribe
has a fully trained and staffed police force, a fully staffed Tribal
court, a prosecutor, a public defender, and other personnel that
perform related administrative functions. The Tribe received $953,214
in base funding from PS&J in fiscal year 2017. Currently, the Tribe
contributes $1,974,530 annually to cover the shortfall in BIA funding
for the Tribe's law enforcement, $527,984 for judicial services/
probation, $390,832 for prosecutorial services, $256,636 for public
defender services, and $300,000 for prisoner boarding. This
supplemental funding of nearly $3.5 million is derived from Tribal
taxes on goods and fuel and Tribal gaming revenues that would otherwise
be used for Tribal governmental services. Funding for these programs
needs to be maintained and ultimately increased to account for
shortfalls in funding the Tribe has to absorb in order to continue the
operation of these important services on the Reservation.
The Tribe requests total funding of $35 million be provided for
scholarships and adult education and special higher education
scholarships and that funding for the Johnson O'Malley program be
substantially increased from the $14.9 million provided in fiscal year
2019 to the level of $42 million that NCAI recommends. Johnson O'Malley
program funding has remained static for many years resulting in the
decrease of per student funding. The Tribe also supports $2.5 million,
if not an increase, in funding for Tribal education departments along
with increases for Tribal colleges and universities that support
institutions like Northwest Indian College which operates a satellite
campus on the Nez Perce Reservation.
The Tribe also relies on the BIA for funding for our work related
to endangered species and protection of the Tribe's Treaty resources,
including Chinook and steelhead salmon. The funding is used to
supplement research efforts of the Tribe relative to other sensitive
species. The Tribe recommends a $1 million increase for the BIA
Endangered Species Program. This account provides Tribes with technical
and financial assistance to protect endangered species on trust lands.
Also, the Tribe recommends an increase of $2.8 million for BIA Natural
Resource Tribal Priority Allocations which will help increase Tribal
land and management capabilities.
In addition, the funding provided under the BIA Rights Protection
Implementation account is critical to support the exercise of treaty-
reserved, off-reservation hunting and fishing for Tribes. The Tribe
supports, at a minimum, funding of $41.3million, the fiscal year 2019
enacted level. BIA single-line dollars provide the foundation for core
program administration and treaty rights protection activities, such as
harvest monitoring. These efforts are central to the Tribe's fisheries
management responsibilities as established by the Nez Perce Treaties of
1855 and 1863 and further delineated in court decisions regarding
implementation of hunting and fishing Treaty rights. It is important to
understand that this funding is used for job creation.
The Tribe also supports $15.3 million in funding for the BIA Fish,
Wildlife and Parks. The Tribe, through our fisheries programs, has
invested a significant amount of personnel and resources into the
restoration of salmon. The States of Oregon, Washington, and Idaho, as
well as sports fisheries, directly benefit from this work. These
programs have been successful with funding under the Tribal Management
and Development Program which is critical for the Tribe's management of
fish and wildlife. We recommend funding in the amount of $17 million
for the Tribal Management and Development Program, a $5.3 million
increase from fiscal year 2019.
indian health service
The Tribe operates Nimiipuu Health, a healthcare clinic on the Nez
Perce Reservation in Lapwai, Idaho, and its satellite facility located
65 miles away in Kamiah, Idaho. Nimiipuu Health provides services to
approximately 4,000 patients each year. Annually, this computes to
40,000 medical provider visits which does not include pharmacy or
laboratory visits. Our expenditure total of Federal funds in fiscal
year 2018 was $16,403,788.97, an increase of $1.1 million from that in
fiscal year 2017. Purchased/Referred Care (P/RC) costs for outpatient
services in fiscal year 2018 totaled $4,340,402.73, an increase of
$600,000 from fiscal year 2017.
For fiscal year 2020, the Tribe recommends, at a minimum,
continuing the $5.8 billion in funding enacted for IHS in fiscal year
2019. This funding amount will allow Nez Perce and other Tribes to pay
costs, maintain current services, and allows programs and facilities to
keep up with medical and non-medical inflation and population growth.
The Tribe appreciates the $2.1 million increase in funding for P/RC
provided in fiscal year 2019 and recommends that this $964.8 million
allocation be preserved or increased by up to $20 million to continue
to meet the P/RC spending needs of Tribal health facilities.
The Tribe supports $822.2 million for contract support costs in
fiscal year 2020 and the inclusion of bill language to classify this
appropriation as indefinite so that, if needed, additional funds may be
provided as they were in fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019. The
Tribe appreciates that Congress chose to fully fund contract support
costs in fiscal year 2019--as it should, per any agreement. In
addition, the Tribe supports reclassifying contract support costs for
the BIA and IHS as mandatory and not discretionary. However, this
change in funding should not be accomplished or be off-set by reducing
other funding for these agencies that would adversely affect services
or programs. This funding should not be reduced by excessive set-asides
for administration. Finally, the Tribe recommends permanent, mandatory
funding of the Special Diabetes Program at no less than $150 million
per fiscal year.
u.s. fish and wildlife service and u.s. forest service and bureau of
land management
The Tribe relies heavily on funding sources within the FWS and the
FS. First, the operations of Kooskia National Fish Hatchery are funded
by FWS. The Tribe manages the hatchery pursuant to the terms of the
Snake River Water Rights Act of 2004 (Act). FWS requires full funding
for the operations of this important facility to ensure the U.S. meets
its obligations under the Act. Second, the FWS-administered State and
Tribal Wildlife Grants program is an important and cost-effective
expenditure for the government and is one of the few sources of funds
Tribes can tap into for wildlife research. Since 2005, we have received
five such grants funding work on diverse issues such as gray wolf
monitoring, bighorn sheep research, rare plant conservation, and Condor
habitat research. Continued funding for the State and Tribal Wildlife
Grant program will allow recipient Tribes to build capacity and
maintain involvement in key conservation issues. The Tribe strongly
urges this subcommittee to increase funding for these competitive
grants to $66 million and increase the Tribal share from $4.2 million
to $6.5 million.
The Nez Perce Reservation and its usual and accustomed areas are
rich in natural resources and encompass eleven national forests. The
Tribe works closely with each forest's administration to properly
manage its resources on behalf of the Tribe. These range from
protecting and properly managing the products of the forest to
providing habitat for the vast wildlife in each one such as elk, deer,
bighorn sheep and wolves. Increased funding is necessary so that the FS
can meet these trust obligations and continue to work with Tribes on a
government-to-government basis without being hampered by lack of
funding to fill positions. With regard to management of bighorn sheep,
the Tribe would note the House Subcommittee for Interior appropriations
has included report language to both the BLM and FS over the last
several years that encourages research related to disease transmission
between domestic sheep and bighorn sheep. The Tribe encourages this
type of research mandate be restricted to laboratory settings and not
be allowed to occur in the field where impact and harm would be more
difficult to control. The bighorn sheep populations within the Tribe's
aboriginal territories are too fragile and too important to be put at
risk.
environmental protection agency
The Tribe works closely with EPA on a large number of programs that
are essential to the health and safety of the 18,000 Tribal and non-
Tribal citizens residing within the Nez Perce Reservation and that also
protect the Treaty-reserved resources of the Tribe that the U.S. has a
trust obligation to preserve. These programs include: the Clean Water
Act 106 Program; the Clean Water Act 319 Nonpoint Source (NPS)
Pollution Prevention Program; the Indian General Assistance Program;
the Tribal Brownfields Response Program; the Underground Storage Tank
Program; the Delegation of Nez Perce Federal Implementation Plan; the
Clean Air Act 103 Grant-Nez Perce Tribe Air Quality Project; and the
EPA Region 10 Pesticide Circuit Rider Program. The Tribe currently
implements over $1.5 million in programmatic funding under these
programs. The Tribe recommends the Indian General Assistance Program be
increased from $65.5 million to $75 million, the Tribal allocation
under the Clean Water Act 106 program be increased by 20 percent, $13
million for Tribal Air Quality Management, $87 million for the
Brownfields Program and $13 million be provided in lieu of the percent
cap on Tribal funding for NPS pollutant control.
The Tribe requests the subcommittee fund the Columbia River Basin
Restoration Program, authorized under the Water Infrastructure
Improvements for the Nation Act of 2016, at no less than the $1 million
provided to EPA in fiscal year 2019 but recommends that number be
substantially increased.
As you can see, the Tribe does a tremendous amount of work in a
variety of areas. It is important that the U.S. continue to fund this
work and uphold and honor its trust obligations to tribes. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify today.
______
Prepared Statement of the Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission
Chair Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Honorable Members of the
subcommittee, my name is Lorraine Loomis and I am Chair of the
Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission (NWIFC). The NWIFC is comprised
of the 20 Tribes in western Washington that are party to United States
v. Washington, which upheld the Tribes' treaty-reserved right to
harvest and manage natural resources on and off-reservation, including
salmon and shellfish. On behalf of the NWIFC, we are providing
testimony for the record on our natural resources management and
environmental program funding requests for the Bureau of Indian Affairs
(BIA), Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS) and Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) fiscal year 2020 appropriations. These programs support
Tribes to carry out their natural resource management responsibilities
including the management of Pacific salmon fisheries, which contribute
to a robust natural resource-based economy and the continued exercise
of Tribal treaty rights.
summary of fiscal year 2020 appropriations requests
Bureau of Indian Affairs
--Provide $57.105 million for Rights Protection Implementation
(collective request)
--Provide $17.146 million for Western Washington Fisheries
Management
--Provide $3.423 million for Washington State Timber-Fish-Wildlife
--Provide $5.96 million for U.S./Canada Pacific Salmon Treaty
--Provide $2.4 million for Salmon Marking
--Provide $4.5 million for Evaluation and Research Activities--
Climate
--Provide $15.0 million for Fish, Wildlife & Parks Projects (non-TPA)
--Provide $830,000 for the Salmon and Steelhead Habitat Inventory and
Assessment Program within the Tribal Management/Development
Program Subactivity
--Fully Fund Contract Support Costs
--Provide $2.0 million for Western Washington Treaty Tribes' Wildlife
Management
--Provide $30.355 million for Tribal Climate Resilience
Fish & Wildlife Service
--Provide $8.0 million for Tribal Wildlife Grants
Environmental Protection Agency
--Provide $96.4 million for Tribal General Assistance Program
--Provide $50.0 million for Puget Sound Geographic Program
Multiple Agency Request
--Provide $1.2 million for an Automatic Salmon Fin Clipping and
Tagging Trailer
justification of requests
Bureau of Indian Affairs
--Provide $57.105 million for BIA Rights Protection Implementation
Subactivity
The 41 Tribes in the Great Lakes and Pacific Northwest with
similar treaty-reserved rights have collectively identified that no
less than $52.0 million for Rights Protection Implementation (RPI) is
necessary to support essential Tribal treaty-reserved resource
management. The NWIFC has also identified an additional need of $4.5
million for RPI Climate Change plus increases to meet new Pacific
Salmon Treaty commitments, which brings our total request for RPI to
$57.105 million; $16.832 million above the fiscal year 2019 enacted
level of $40.273 million. A summary of the accounts of interest to us
within RPI are further identified below. However, please note that a
breakdown of these accounts for fiscal year 2019 is not provided in the
Indian Affairs Fiscal Year 2020 Budget Justification.
-- Provide $17.146 million for BIA Western Washington Fisheries
Management
We respectfully request $17.146 million; an increase of
$6.47 million over the fiscal year 2018 enacted level of $10.676
million. Funding for this program supports the Tribes to co-manage
their treaty-reserved resources with the State of Washington, and to
continue to meet court mandates and legal responsibilities. For
example, funding supports harvest planning, population assessments,
data gathering for finfish, shellfish, groundfish, and other natural
resource management needs.
-- Provide $3.423 million for BIA Washington State Timber-Fish-
Wildlife (TFW)
We respectfully request $3.423 million, which would
maintain the fiscal year 2018 enacted level. Funding for this program
is provided to improve forest practices on State and private lands,
while providing protection for fish, wildlife and water quality. This
funding supports the Tribes' participation in the Timber, Fish and
Wildlife Agreement--a collaborative intergovernmental and stakeholder
process between the State, industry and Tribes.
-- Provide $5.96 million for BIA U.S./Canada Pacific Salmon
Treaty
We respectfully request $5.96 million; an increase of
$605,000 over the fiscal year 2018 enacted level of $5.355 million to
implement the newly revised Pacific Salmon Treaty (PST) agreement. The
Pacific Salmon Treaty Act of 1985 charges the Pacific Salmon Commission
(PSC) with the responsibility to implement the bilateral treaty with
Canada. Tribes assist the U.S. Federal Government in meeting its
obligations to implement the treaty by participating in fisheries
management exercises including cooperative research and data gathering
activities. This funding supports Tribes' participation in the PSC and
the bilateral PST process.
-- Provide $2.4 million for BIA Salmon Marking
We respectfully request $2.4 million; an increase of
$1.063 million over the fiscal year 2018 enacted level of $1.337
million. Since 2003, Congress has required that all salmon released
from federally funded hatcheries are marked for conservation management
purposes and has provided funding to do so. This funding allows Tribes
to mark salmon at Tribal hatcheries and to use these marked fish to
scientifically monitor salmon populations in western Washington.
-- Provide $4.5 million for BIA Evaluation and Research
Activities--Climate
We respectfully request $4.5 million for Evaluation and
Research Activities--Climate for our member Tribes. The BIA did not
fund this program in fiscal year 2018, despite many successful Tribal
projects and programs in fiscal year 2016 and 2017. Funding for this
program will provide Tribes the capacity to identify, respond and adapt
to the impacts of our changing climate.
--Provide $15.0 million for BIA Fish, Wildlife & Parks Projects (Non-
TPA) for Hatchery Operations and Maintenance
We respectfully request $15.0 million for Hatchery Operations
and Maintenance within the Fish, Wildlife and Parks Projects account;
an increase of $5.067 million over the $9.933 million provided for
these programs in fiscal year 2018. More specifically, we request $8.0
million for Hatchery Operations and $7.0 million for Hatchery
Maintenance. This funding is provided to Tribal hatcheries to support
the rearing and releasing of salmon and steelhead for harvest by Indian
and non-Indian fisheries in the U.S. and Canada. Without hatcheries,
Tribes would lose their most basic ceremonial and subsistence fisheries
that are central to our Tribal culture. Hatcheries also support
economically significant commercial and recreational fisheries and
assist with recovering Endangered Species Act-listed salmon stocks.
--Provide $830,000 for BIA Salmon and Steelhead Habitat Inventory and
Assessment Program (SSHIAP) within the Tribal Management/
Development Program (TMDP)
We respectfully request $830,000 within the TMDP for SSHIAP;
an increase of $475,000 over the fiscal year 2018 enacted level of
$355,000. SSHIAP is a vital program to the western Washington Tribes
because it provides essential environmental data management, analysis,
sharing and reporting to support Tribal natural resource management. It
also supports our Tribes' ability to participate in watershed resource
assessments and salmon recovery work.
--Fully Fund BIA Contract Support Costs
We respectfully request that Congress fully fund Contract
Support Costs. We also support the reclassification of Contract Support
Costs as mandatory funding. Funding for this function ensures Tribes
and Tribal organizations have the capacity to manage Federal programs
under self-determination contracts and self-governance compacts.
--Provide $2.0 million for Western Washington Treaty Tribes' Wildlife
Management
We respectfully request $2.0 million for western Washington
treaty Tribes' wildlife management programs from an account within the
Bureau of Indian Affairs Trust--Natural Resources Management Activity.
The treaty Tribes, as co-managers of the wildlife resource, work
cooperatively with the State of Washington and others to manage
wildlife. Requested funding will support the development of wildlife
management plans, development and enhancement of Tribal hunting codes,
the design and implementation of applied research projects, and
capacity to participate in State-Tribal co-management forums. These
capabilities are necessary to help protect Tribes' treaty-reserved
rights and resources.
--Provide $30.355 million for BIA Tribal Climate Resilience
We respectfully request $30.355 million; an increase of
$20.399 million over the fiscal year 2019 enacted levels of $9.956
million. Funding for this program will support Tribes to participate in
climate change issues that impact treaty-reserved resources, as well as
promote resiliency to change.
Fish & Wildlife Service
--Provide $8.0 million for FWS Tribal Wildlife Grants
We respectfully request $8.0 million for the nationwide Tribal
Wildlife Grants program; an increase of $3.791 million over the fiscal
year 2019 enacted of $4.209 million. Funding from this competitive
grant program supports the conservation of wildlife and their habitat,
including species that are culturally or traditionally important to
Tribes.
Environmental Protection Agency
--Provide $96.4 million for EPA Tribal General Assistance Program
(GAP)
We respectfully request $96.4 million; an increase of $30.924
million over the fiscal year 2019 enacted level of $65.476 million. We
also respectfully request: (1) accompanying bill or report language
that would improve flexibility in the GAP to ensure individual Tribal
priorities and implementation activities would be eligible; and (2)
$5.0 million for a regional pilot project that would demonstrate how
flexibility to implement individual Tribal priorities through a self-
governance model can benefit Tribes, EPA and the environment. The GAP
builds Tribal program capacity to begin to address environmental
issues, which impact Tribes' health, safety, and treaty-reserved
resources.
--Provide $50.0 million for EPA Puget Sound Geographic Program
We respectfully request $50.0 million; an increase of $22.0
million above the fiscal year 2019 enacted level of $28.0 million. This
Geographic Program provides essential funding that will help protect
and restore Puget Sound--an estuary of national significance. Funding
for this program is essential for Tribes because it supports our
participation in a broad range of Puget Sound recovery work, including,
scientific research, resource recovery planning, and policy discussions
that affect our treaty rights.
Multiple Agency Request
--Provide $1.2 million for an Automatic Salmon Fin Clipping and
Tagging Trailer
We respectfully request $1.2 million for an automatic salmon
fin clipping and tagging trailer. The NWIFC uses automated trailers to
provide effective and efficient centralized services to our 20-member
Tribes. Our services help the Tribes meet Federal salmon marking
requirements and generate essential data to support fisheries
management (coded wire tags). An increasing demand for these important
services exceeds our current capacity. An additional automatic trailer
is needed to ensure we meet the requirements of salmon marking and
tagging at Tribal hatcheries. This request is part of the new Pacific
Salmon Treaty agreement but the details regarding which agency or
account should fund the request is unknown.
conclusion
We respectfully urge the subcommittee to continue to support our
efforts to protect and restore treaty-reserved resources and the
communities and economies dependent upon them. We greatly appreciate
your attention to our requests and we thank you for your continued
commitment to Tribes.
______
Prepared Statement of the Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board
Greetings Chairwoman Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall, and
Members of the subcommittee. My name is Andy Joseph, Jr., and I serve
as Vice Chair on the Colville Business Council, as a Co-Chair of the
IHS National Tribal Budget Formulation Workgroup, and as Chairman of
the Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board (NPAIHB). I thank you
for the opportunity to provide testimony on the fiscal year 2020 Indian
Health Service (IHS) budget.
Established in 1972, the NPAIHB is a Tribal organization
established under the Indian Self-Determination and Education
Assistance Act (ISDEAA), Public Law 93-638, advocating on behalf of the
43 federally-recognized Indian Tribes in Idaho, Oregon, and Washington
on specific healthcare issues. NPAIHB operates the Northwest Tribal
Epidemiology Center (NWTEC) and a variety of important health programs
on behalf of our member Tribes and national programs that serve Indian
Country. For 28 years, NPAIHB has conducted an annual detailed analysis
of the IHS budget.\1\ It is an honor to present you with our
recommendations for fiscal year 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ NPAIHB Resource Library, available at: http://www.npaihb.org/
resource-lib/ (last visited Feb. 26, 2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
fiscal year 2019 enacted level funding for ihs
In fiscal year 2019, IHS received an overall increase of $162
million or 3.4 percent above fiscal year 2018 enacted level for program
and services, not including indefinite appropriation for Contract
Support Costs (CSC) of $104 million. I would like to thank the Senate
for its support of the Community Health Representative program, Health
Education and Tribal Management Grants in fiscal year 2019. In our
annual analysis for fiscal year 2019, we determined that a $268 million
increase was needed above fiscal year 2018 enacted level to cover
population growth and medical inflation for current services (not
including CSC).\2\ The final appropriated amount for fiscal year 2019
fell short by $106 million. The IHS budget has not received adequate
annual increases, with a few exceptions, to maintain the costs of
current services (inflation, population growth, and pay act increases).
The consequence of this is that the IHS budget is diminished and IHS
and Tribal health programs purchasing power has continually been eroded
over the years.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ NPAIHB, Fiscal Year 2019 Indian Health Service Budget: Analysis
and Recommendations--28th Annual Report, http://www.npaihb.org/
resource-lib/ (last visited Feb. 26, 2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
recommendation: maintain current ihs services
The fundamental budget principle for Northwest Tribes is that the
basic healthcare program must be preserved by Congress. Preserving the
IHS base program by funding the current level of health services should
be a basic budget principle by Congress. Otherwise, unmet needs will
never be addressed. We estimate for fiscal year 2020 that in order to
maintain current services a minimum of $195 million over fiscal year
2019 enacted level is needed to cover medical inflation and population
growth. Unfortunately, IHS and Tribal health programs will suffer
consequences if IHS appropriations do not include inflation, population
growth and pay act increases. For fiscal year 2020, NPAIHB recommends
that IHS be funded at least $195 million to cover population growth and
medical inflation to maintain current services with commitment that
appropriate program increases be designated for IHS and Tribal health
programs and not reprogramed for other purposes by IHS.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ RADM Michael D. Weahkee, Letter on decision to reprogram a
portion of fiscal year 2018 funding (Sept. 14, 2018), https://
www.ihs.gov/newsroom/includes/themes/responsive2017/
display_objects/documents/2018_Letters/DTLL_DUIOLL_ISDEAA_09142018.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
recommendation: full funding for ihs phased in over 12 years
Tribal leaders on the National Tribal Budget Formulation Workgroup
(Workgroup), representing all 12 IHS areas, provide recommendations on
the IHS budget annually through the IHS Budget Formulation process. As
I mentioned above, I serve as a co-Chair of the Workgroup and am the
Portland Area representative. The Workgroup provided recommendations
for fiscal year 2020 requesting an end to the growing health
disparities by fully funding IHS phased in over 12 years.\4\ This
recommendation is supported across Indian Country as a recommendation
that honors treaty and trust obligations of the United States to
provide healthcare to Indian people. Consistent with the Workgroup's
recommendation, NPAIHB recommends that IHS be funded at $7 billion for
fiscal year 2020 to implement phased in full funding for IHS.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ National Tribal Budget Formulation Workgroup Recommendation,
Fiscal Year 2020 Summary Recommendations, https://www.nihb.org/
legislative/budget_formulation.php (last visited May 17, 2019).
\5\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
recommendation: advance appropriations
The recent partial government shutdown caused undue hardship to AI/
AN people in the Northwest--from Federal employees not being able to
put food on their tables to reduced patient access to care due to
clinics cutting their hours. Some Northwest Tribes were considering
closing their clinics due to lack of funding. This is unconscionable
treatment of AI/AN people and must not be repeated in the future. For
these reasons and in recognition of the trust and treaty obligations,
NPAIHB requests support for Advance Appropriations.
recommendation: indefinite appropriation for isdeaa section 105(l)
lease costs
Section 105(l) of ISDEAA requires IHS, upon Tribal request, to
enter into a lease for a facility owned or leased by the Tribe or
Tribal organization and used to carry out its ISDEAA agreement. As
established in the Maniilaq case, IHS must compensate the Tribe or
Tribal organization fully for its reasonable facility expenses under
Section 105(l) of ISDEAA.\6\ IHS's reprogramming of inflation increases
to pay the lease costs negatively impacts our IHS and Tribal
facilities. IHS/Tribal facilities rely on inflation increases to
maintain current services. Unless additional funding is provided in the
IHS appropriation, then the additional funds required to fund 105(l)
leases will come at the expense of the health of our people with cuts
in services for both direct service and self-governance Tribes. NPAIHB
recommends that Congress fund ISDEAA Section 105(l) lease costs as an
indefinite appropriation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See Maniilaq Ass'n v. Burwell, 170 F. Supp. 3d 243 (D.D.C.
2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
other recommendations for fiscal year 2020
Oppose Funding Cuts Proposed in President's Fiscal Year 2020 Budget
Request. NPAIHB opposes the President's proposed recommendations for
several critical programs, including: $39 million cut to Community
Health Representatives (CHRs); elimination of Health Education funding
(funded at $20.5 million in fiscal year 2019); elimination of Tribal
Management funding (funded at $2.4 million in fiscal year 2019); $2.5
million cut to Urban Indian Health of $2.5 million; $14 million cut to
the Indian Health Professions (funded at $57.3 million in fiscal year
2019); cut of $1 million to Self-Governance; and cut of $657 thousand
to Environmental and Facilities.
Fund Clinical Services-Electronic Health Record System in the
amount of $25 million. NPAIHB recognizes there will need to be a
substantial investment in information technology (IT) infrastructure
and software in order for IHS to transition to another system. For
fiscal year 2020, NPAIHB supports the President's request for $25
million to fund ``Electronic Health Record System'' planning, phased-in
replacement, and technical assistance of IHS RPMS. NPAIHB also requests
that activities be directed by Tribes through ongoing Tribal
consultation.
Fund Elimination of HIV and HCV in the amount of $25 million. It is
estimated that there are at least 40,000 AI/AN people, served by IHS,
with a current Hepatitis C infection, according to the IHS National
Data Warehouse. For fiscal year 2020, we support the President's
request for funding to Eliminate HIV and Hepatitis C in the amount of
$25 million as an initial step to phased in funding, estimated at over
$300 million to treat all AI/AN people within the IHS system.
Fund Expansion of Community Health Aide Program for a minimum of
$20 million. In the past few years, NPAIHB has been at the forefront,
with Portland Area Tribes, to get Northwest Tribal members trained in
Dental Health Aide Therapy (DHAT) in Alaska and placed in Oregon,
Washington and Idaho (this fall). NPAIHB has also been planning for and
is in the process of establishing a Community Health Aide Program
(CHAP) certification board; creating and implementing an education
program for Behavioral Health Aides (BHAs); and implementing a Dental
Therapy Education Program in partnership with a local community
college, the Swinomish Indian Tribal Community and Seattle Indian
Health Board. An IHS interim CHAP policy is currently out for Tribal
consultation (closes June 7) and is expected to allow Areas the ability
to move forward with CHAP implementation. NPAIHB supports the
President's request of $20 million for CHAP but more funding is needed.
NPAIHB does not support the proposed cut to the CHR program to fund
expansion of the CHAP program. Both programs should be fully funded.
Increase Dental Health by $20 million. AI/AN people have a higher
prevalence of dental caries and untreated tooth decay in all age groups
compared to the general United States population, with many AI/AN
children experience high rates of dental caries between the ages of 2
to 5.\7\ For fiscal year 2020, NPAIHB recommends an increase of $20
million to Dental Services to address the growing oral health needs and
dental professional shortage in Indian Country.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Phipps KR and Ricks TL, The oral health of American Indian and
Alaska Native adult dental patients: results of the 2015 IHS oral
health survey, Indian Health Service data brief, 2016.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Increase Mental Health by $152.5 million. NPAIHB is particularly
concerned about the mental health of our AI/AN children and youth.
Suicide is the second leading cause of death for AI/AN adolescents and
young adults. AI/AN suicide mortality in this age group (10-29) is 2-3
greater than that for non-Hispanic whites. For fiscal year 2020, NPAIHB
recommends $75 million to expand funding for pilot projects for
aftercare services for Native youth discharged from residential
substance use treatment. More Youth Residential Treatment Centers and
Tribes must be funded to develop approaches to aftercare, recovery, and
other support services for Native youth that can be used across other
IHS/Tribal facilities, YRTCs and in Tribal communities. An additional
$75 million is needed to expand the Special Behavioral Health Pilot
Program for Indians, appropriated $10 million in fiscal year 2019.
However, NPAIHB recommends the option for Tribal shares instead of
grant awards. Lastly, $2.5 million is needed to fund Area Health
Boards/Tribal Epidemiology Centers for the provision of technical
assistance to Tribes and to collect and evaluate Special Behavioral
Health Pilot Program.
Increase Alcohol and Substance Abuse by $152.5 million. Alcohol and
substance abuse, particularly among our AI/AN children and young
adults, continues to be one of the highest priorities identified by
Tribal leaders and Health Directors in the Portland Area and across
Indian Country. For fiscal year 2020, NPAIHB recommends $25 million to
expand funding for pilot projects for aftercare services for Native
youth discharged from residential substance use treatment; $75 million
to expand the Special Behavioral Health Pilot Program for Indians, with
an option for Tribal shares; $2.5 million to fund Area Health Boards/
Tribal Epidemiology Centers for the provision of technical assistance
to Tribes and to collect and evaluate Special Behavioral Health Pilot
Program; and $50 million to fund critical detoxification and recovery
services.
Increase Purchased and Referred Care (PRC) by $50 million. Without
IHS/Tribal hospitals in the Portland Area, Northwest Tribes rely on the
PRC program for all specialty and inpatient care. Because of this, the
PRC program makes up over one-third of the Portland Area budget and
when less than adequate inflation and population growth increases are
provided, Portland Area Tribes are forced to cut health services to
absorb these mandatory costs. The level funding of PRC in fiscal year
2016 further diminished the purchasing power of Portland Area Tribes.
Those IHS areas that have inpatient care can absorb PRC funding
shortfalls more easily than PRC dependent areas with their larger size
staffing packages and infrastructure. For fiscal year 2020, NPAIHB
recommends a program increase of $50 million for Purchased and Referred
Care (PRC).
Increase Indian Health Professions by $10 million. Given the
recruitment and retention issues of healthcare providers in many of our
Northwest Tribal communities, NPAIHB passed a resolution supporting an
increase for Indian Health Professions to fully fund scholarships for
all qualified applicants to the IHS Scholarship Program and to support
the Loan Repayment Program to fund all physicians, nurse practitioners,
physician's assistants, nurses and other direct care practitioners
(NPAIHB Resolution 18-03-07). For fiscal year 2020, NPAIHB requests a
program increase of $10 million for Indian Health Professions.
No Increase to New Healthcare Facilities Construction But Increase
Small Ambulatory Program (SAP) by $25 million and Increase Joint
Venture Construction Program (JVCP). The 2016 IHS/Tribal Health Care
Facilities Needs Assessment Report to Congress stated that the current
Priority List will not be complete until 2041 and at the current rate
of construction appropriations and the replacement timeline, a new 2016
facility would not be replaced for 400 years. Many Tribes and Tribal
organizations have had to assume substantial debt to build or renovate
clinics for AI/AN people to receive IHS-funded healthcare. For these
reasons, NPAIHB does not support funding for new Health Care Facilities
Construction until the current funding mechanism is changed. NPAIHB
recommends that the Government Accountability Office (GAO) be
instructed to review and issue a report on the IHS Facilities
Construction Priority System, including historical and current funding
distribution inequities. (NPAIHB/CRIHB Joint Res No. 17-04-12). In
addition, for fiscal year 2020, NPAIHB recommends a program increase of
$25 million for the Small Ambulatory Program (SAP) with funding for
staffing packages; and increased funding for the Joint Venture
Construction Program (JVCP).
Thank you for this opportunity to provide recommendations on the
fiscal year 2020 IHS budget. I invite you to visit our Area and look
forward to working with the subcommittee on our requests.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ For more information, please contact Laura Platero, NPAIHB, at
[email protected]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______
Prepared Statement of OPERA America
Madam Chair and distinguished members of the subcommittee, I am
grateful for the opportunity to submit testimony on behalf of OPERA
America, its Board of Directors and its more than 2,000 organizational
and individual members. We strongly urge the Subcommittee on Interior,
Environment, and Related Agencies in the Committee on Appropriations to
designate a total of $167.5 million to the National Endowment for the
Arts (NEA) for fiscal year 2020. This testimony and the funding
examples described below are intended to highlight the importance of
Federal investment in the arts, so critical to sustaining a vibrant
cultural community throughout the country.
The NEA is a great investment in the economic growth of every
community.
The NEA was established in 1965 with the mission to ``strengthen
the creative capacity of our communities by providing all Americans
with diverse opportunities for arts participation.'' It has continued
to meet this mission for over 50 years, recommending more than 2,300
grants in every Congressional District in the country in fiscal year
2018. Sixty-five percent of direct grants went to small (budgets under
$500,000) and medium sized (budgets between $500,000 and $2 million)
organizations. Additionally, 40 percent of NEA-supported activities
took place in high-poverty neighborhoods and 36 percent of NEA grants
reached underserved populations, such as people with disabilities and
veterans. Between 2012 and 2015, NEA-supported programs reached 24.2
million adults and 3.4 children on average each year through 80,603
live events.
Funding from the NEA continues to support arts organizations and
their communities by providing a high return on investment. The ratio
of private and other public funds matching every NEA grant dollar is
approaching 9:1, generating more than $500 million in matching
supporting.
Before the establishment of the NEA, funding for the arts was
mostly limited to larger cities. The NEA is the only arts funder in
America, public or private, that supports the arts in all 50 States,
the District of Columbia, and U.S. territories. Additionally, 40
percent of the NEA's program funds are distributed through State arts
agencies, reaching tens of thousands throughout the U.S. NEA funding
provides access to the arts in regions with histories of
inaccessibility due to economic or geographic limitations.
At the national level, the arts and cultural sector contributed
$763.6 billion to the U.S. economy in 2015, 4.2 percent of the GDP, and
counted 4.9 million workers who earned $372 billion in total
compensation. The tax-exempt performing arts organizations contributed
$9 billion to the U.S. economy and employed 90,000 workers, who earned
$5.6 billion in total compensation. Consumers spent $31.6 billion on
admissions to performing arts events.
Opera's increasing civic practice supports healthy and vibrant
communities.
Opera companies are finding new and exciting ways to bring the
essence of opera to other local theaters, community centers, and public
spaces outside traditional opera houses, frequently with new and
innovative works that reflect the diverse communities of the cities
they serve. Strong partnerships with local schools extend the civic
reach of opera companies as they introduce children to a multi-media
art form and discover promising young talent.
Founded in 1970, OPERA America is national service organization for
opera and the Nation's leading champion for American opera. OPERA
America's membership includes 157 professional member companies in the
United States, located in 41 States and the District of Columbia.
--Economic Impact: In fiscal year 2016, budgets of OPERA America's
member organizations totaled $1.1 billion, including both
personnel and non-personnel expenses. As 501(c)(3) nonprofit
organizations, opera companies depend on support from private
philanthropy and governmental sources. In fiscal year 2016,
private support totaled $510 million, representing 47 percent
of total operating income; while total city, county, State, and
Federal Government support comprised 7 percent of total
operating income.
According to data compiled by the NEA and the Bureau of
Economic Analysis' U.S. Arts and Culture Production Satellite Account,
revenues from opera companies totaled $955 million, suggesting that
opera companies account for roughly 9 percent of the value added by
tax-exempt performing art companies. OPERA America's members employed a
total of 2,551 full-time, 8,119 part-time, and 18,698 contract staff in
2017.
--Communities Served: Opera audiences are growing more diverse. From
2008-2012, the percentage of African-American attendees
increased by 59 percent; and attendance by Latino audiences
increased by 8.3 percent. During those same years, audience
members in the 18-24 age bracket grew by 43.2 percent and those
in the 25-34 age bracket grew by 33.8 percent.
--Opera Works: Much of the success of opera's increasing audience is
the result of the creation of new works, telling uniquely
American stories. Since 1900, over 1,000 new operatic works
have been produced in North America, with more than 600 operas
premiering between 1995 and 2017. In the 2016-2017 season
alone, 30 North American operas premiered.
The two most frequently produced American operas in 2016-2017 were:
As One, a chamber opera, depicting the experiences of its sole
transgender protagonist as she endeavors to resolve the discord between
herself and the outside world; and Dead Man Walking, based on the book
of the same name by Sister Helen Prejean. In fact, As One is among the
most produced operas in the U.S., in a list that includes Carmen, La
boheme, The Magic Flute, and Rigoletto.
nea grants at work
NEA grants are awarded to opera organizations through its core
programs: Art Works; Challenge America Fast Track Grants; and Federal/
State Partnerships. In fiscal year 2018, the NEA awarded 63 grants to
the opera field through the Art Works category, totaling $1,905,000.
OPERA America received an Art Works Grant to support programs and
services for the entire field of opera in addition to an Our Town grant
to help build opera companies' capacity to increase the scope and
intensity of their civic practice. In the second iteration of this
grant, OPERA America is bringing communities together across the U.S.
to share best practices for developing authentic community
relationships and serving as reliable civic partners.
Below are just a few examples of noteworthy opera initiatives in
the U.S.:
Sarasota Opera
Sarasota, Florida
$20,000
Sarasota Opera received support for the Sarasota Youth Opera's
production of ``The Little Sweep,'' by composer Benjamin Britten. Set
in the early 1800s, the opera tells the story of Sam, a young chimney
sweep who is befriended by the children of an upper-class family.
During the course of the opera, the children help Sam escape from his
life as an indentured servant while learning more about the world
beyond their comfortable surroundings. Originally conceived with a
prologue by the composer, for this production the company will perform
a newly created prologue and will alter the story location from England
to Boston. The opera will be performed with chamber orchestra, fully
staged, and will include full production values including sets,
lighting, wigs, and make-up. Members of the year-round program are part
of the company's mainstage productions, sing in the choral program, and
perform in the annual youth opera.
Opera Theatre of Saint Louis
Saint Louis, Missouri
$90,000
Opera Theatre of Saint Louis received support for the commission,
development, and premiere of ``Fire Shut Up In My Bones,'' by composer
Terence Blanchard and librettist Kasi Lemmons. The full-length opera,
based on the memoir of New York Times columnist Charles Blow, portrays
the author's childhood in Gibsland, Louisiana, where life was a daily
economic struggle. The story addresses issues of loneliness, violence,
sexuality, and making choices. Relating the author's challenges with
abuse at the hand of a family member, the opera is the story of a man
who is struggling to belong and desperate to find another life. The
music of the opera incorporated gospel and blues choruses, Louisiana
blues and jazz, and dance. As many as six performances will occur at
the Loretto-Hilton Center in summer 2019.
Opera Memphis
Memphis, Tennessee
$25,000
Opera Memphis received support for 30 Days of Opera and The
McCleave Project. The 30 Days of Opera program is an outreach
initiative intended to break down barriers that prevent new and
underserved audiences from attending opera. Program activities included
concerts, opera performances at schools, ``pop-up'' opera performances,
and a family day at the opera. The second program, named for African-
American opera singer and educator Florence McCleave, will include a
new set of initiatives with a focus on engaging people of color.
Activities included facilitated ``community connection'' conversations
following performances in underserved neighborhoods, collaborations
with Memphis-based African-American arts groups, and a re-imagining of
the Young Artist Program as a fellowship for singers, directors, and
coaches of color.
Santa Fe Opera
Santa Fe, New Mexico
$80,000
Santa Fe Opera received support for a new production of ``Doctor
Atomic'' by composer and NEA Opera Honoree, John Adams, and librettist
Peter Sellars. The opera tells the story of the final hours leading up
to the detonation of the first atomic bomb at the Trinity Test Site in
Alamogordo, New Mexico in July 1945. The libretto draws on original
source materials, stitching together declassified U.S. Government
documents and communications among scientists, government officials,
and military personnel involved in the project; personal memoirs;
recorded interviews; technical manuals of nuclear physics; borrowed
texts from the Bhagavad Gita and the poetry of Charles Baudelaire,
Muriel Rukeyser, and John Donne; and a traditional Native American Tewa
song.
OPERA America is grateful for the $2 million increase to the NEA in
fiscal year 2019. The continued bipartisan support for the agency has
enriched the lives of artists and audiences, allowing opera and the
arts to address critical issues, making communities healthier and more
vibrant.
We urge you to continue toward restoration and increase the NEA
funding allocation to $167.5 million for fiscal year 2020. On behalf of
OPERA America, thank you for considering this request.
[This statement was submitted by Marc A. Scorca, President and
CEO.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Oregon Water Resources Congress
fiscal year 2020 budget for the u.s. environmental protection agency's
clean water state revolving fund loan program
The Oregon Water Resources Congress (OWRC) is highly supportive of
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) Clean Water State
Revolving Fund Loan Program (CWSRF) and is requesting that
appropriations for this program be increased to at least $2.5 billion
in fiscal year 2020. The CWSRF is an effective loan program that
addresses critical water infrastructure needs while benefitting the
environment, local communities, and the economy.
OWRC was established in 1912 as a trade association to support the
protection of water rights and promote the wise stewardship of water
resources statewide. OWRC members are local governmental entities,
which include irrigation districts, water control districts, drainage
districts, water improvement districts, and other agricultural water
suppliers that deliver water to roughly 1/3 of all irrigated land in
Oregon. These water stewards operate complex water management systems,
including water supply reservoirs, canals, pipelines, and hydropower
production.
fiscal year 2020 appropriations
We recognize our country must make strategic investments with
scarce resources. The CWSRF is a perfect example of the type of program
that should have funding increased because it creates jobs while
benefitting the environment and is an efficient return on taxpayer
investment. CWSRF projects also provide much needed construction and
professional services jobs, particularly in rural areas facing economic
hardship. Moreover, as a loan program, it is a wise investment that
allows local communities to leverage their limited resources and
address critical infrastructure needs that would otherwise be unmet.
In Oregon, the CWSRF is administered by the Oregon Department of
Environmental Quality (DEQ), who responsibly maintains the program
through repaid loans, interest, fees, and available Federal
capitalization grants. According to EPA, for every $1 of Federal
capitalization funding, $3 worth of assistance is provided, leveraging
available funds to maximize benefits for local communities and the
environment we share. Unfortunately, available funding continues be
woefully insufficient to meet the growing water infrastructure funding
needs in Oregon and nationwide.
Nationally, there are large and growing critical water
infrastructure needs. In EPA's most recent survey, The Clean Watersheds
Needs Survey 2012: Report to Congress and Drinking Water Infrastructure
Needs Survey and Assessment: Fifth Report to Congress, the estimated
funding need was $384 billion (in 2011 dollars) for drinking water
infrastructure and $271 billion (in 2012 dollars) for wastewater
infrastructure needs respectively. Funding for water infrastructure,
specifically CWSRF, needs to be incrementally increased in order to
meet these critical needs.
background of cwsrf usage by irrigation districts
Over the course of the program's 30-year history in Oregon, several
OWRC member districts have successfully used CWSRF for projects that
improve water quality and water quantity associated with water delivery
diversions, canals and pipelines throughout the State. OWRC and our
members are highly supportive of the CWSRF, including promoting the
program to our members and annually submitting Federal appropriations
testimony to support increased funding for the CWSRF. We believe it is
an important funding tool that irrigation districts and other water
suppliers are using for innovative piping projects that provide
multiple environmental and economic benefits.
Numerous irrigation districts and other water suppliers need to
pipe currently open canals, which significantly reduces sediment,
improves water temperature, and provides other water quality benefits
to rivers and streams. Piping immediately improves the efficiency of
the water delivery system and helps increase available water supplies
for fish and irrigators alike. These projects also decrease energy
consumption (from reduced pumping) and have opportunities for
generating renewable energy, primarily through in-conduit hydropower.
However, continually reducing the amount of funds available for these
types of worthwhile projects has created increased uncertainty for
potential borrowers about whether adequate funding will be available in
future years. CWSRF is often an integral part of an overall package of
State, Federal and local funding that necessitates a stronger level of
assurance that loan funds will be available for planned water
infrastructure projects. Reductions in CWSRF could lead to loss of
grant funding and delay or derail beneficial projects that irrigation
districts have been developing for years.
We continue to be highly supportive of expanding ``green
infrastructure,'' in fact, irrigation districts and other water
suppliers in Oregon are on the forefront of innovative piping projects
that provide multiple environmental benefits, which is discussed in
greater detail below. In 2009, four Oregon irrigation districts
received over $11 million in funding from the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act (ARRA) through the CWSRF for projects which created
valuable jobs while improving water quality. These four projects were
essential to DEQ not only meeting, but exceeding, the minimum
requirement that 20 percent of the total ARRA funding for the CWSRF be
used for ``green'' projects. Without the irrigation district projects,
it is likely that Oregon's CWSRF would not have qualified for ARRA
funding.
The success Oregon districts have had in using the loan program to
design and implement multi-benefit projects has led to increased
applications to the CWSRF. Now irrigation districts are once again
eligible for a key funding element, principal forgiveness (which was
reinstated with the passage of the WIIN Act in 2016 and related State
rulemaking in 2017), and we expect to see even more interest in the
program. OWRC is hopeful with an increase in money available, there
will be enough funding available to complete projects that will not
only benefit the environment and the patrons served by the water
delivery system, but also benefit the economy.
cwsrf needs in oregon
The appropriations for the CWSRF program over the past few years
has been far short of what is needed to address critical water
infrastructure needs in Oregon and across the Nation. This has led to
fewer water infrastructure projects, and therefore a reduction in
improvements to water quality and water quantity.
We are pleased to see a proposed modest increase in appropriations
after several years of decreased funding and hope to see this trend
continue as addressing infrastructure needs has become more expensive
and even more critical. DEQ's most recent ``Proposed Intended Use Plan
Update #2--State fiscal year 2019,'' lists 31 loan applications in need
of a total of $171,670,456 in Oregon alone.
The following irrigation district projects are currently ranked by
DEQ in the top three by overall score and also meet several categories
of the Green Reserve requirement related to improved water and energy
efficiency. Increased funding will help catalyze many more projects
like the ones below in Oregon and throughout the Nation.
middle fork irrigation district (hood river county) $20,000,000
Sec. 319 Design and Construction, Clear Branch Dam Rehabilitation
and Coe Branch Pipeline. The district will implement multiple projects
to improve water quality and quantity associated with its irrigation
diversions in the Middle Fork Hood River watershed. Specific projects
include: installing a new deep water outlet and improving fish passage
in Laurance Lake; installing new irrigation pipe to alleviate impacts
from current irrigation system and addressing return flows from the
irrigation system; improving the spillway at the Clear Branch Dam; and
improving irrigation efficiency by district patrons. The project meets
the Green Project Reserve category 2.2-8 (water efficiency). The
project is consistent with the 2014 Final Oregon Nonpoint Source
Management Program Plan.
swalley irrigation district (deschutes county) $16,000,000
Sec. 319 Design and Construction, Irrigation Modernization Project.
This irrigation piping project includes the installation of pressurized
pipe to eliminate seepage and evaporative loss from open ditches; flow
regulating and metering devices at service connections; pressurized
delivery to eliminate individual pumps system-wide; active education
and a sprinkler exchange program. The project meets Green Project
Reserve category 2.2-8 for water efficiency and category 3.2-2 for
energy efficiency because piping and pressurizing the irrigation canals
will result in approximately 1.1 million kWh/year in energy
conservation and conserve up to 16 cubic feet per second of water
during the irrigation season. The project is consistent with the 2014
Final Oregon Nonpoint Source Management Program Plan.
lone pine irrigation district (deschutes, jefferson and crook counties)
$2,000,000
Sec. 319, Design and Construction, Irrigation Modernization
Project. This project will modernize district-owned canals and laterals
to conserve water, improve operational efficiency, reduce electrical
and energy costs, reduce O&M for farmers through decreased pumping and
improve habitat in the Deschutes River. It will achieve these goals by
piping all of the district's open canals using HDPE and steel pipe. The
existing suspension bridge over the Crooked River is in disrepair and a
new structure is needed to convey the irrigation water across the
river. The district will replace the bridge with a siphon under the
river. The project meets Green Project Reserve categories 2.2-8 (more
efficient irrigation) and 3.2-2 (20 percent reduction in energy
consumption) will prevent 8.8 cfs of water loss, will leave 5.2 cfs of
saved water in stream and reduce energy use by 2,500,000 kW hours per
year. The project is consistent with the 2014 Final Oregon Nonpoint
Source Management Program Plan.
the importance of strategic partnerships and local watershed planning
Additionally, OWRC is pleased that EPA continues ``strategic
partnerships'' with the USDA's Natural Resources Conservation Services
(NRCS) and other Federal agencies to improve water quality and address
nonpoint source pollution. Oregon had two priority watersheds eligible
for funding through the National Water Quality Initiative in 2014 and
anticipates that additional watersheds will be included in the future.
As Oregon is a delegated State, OWRC also feels strongly that DEQ is
best situated to develop and implement activities to improve these and
other impaired waterways in the State. DEQ's administration of the
CWSRF has been an extremely valuable tool in Oregon for improving water
quality and efficiently addressing infrastructure challenges that are
otherwise cost-prohibitive.
DEQ has recently revised Oregon's CWSRF rules; thus making
conservation easier and maximizing benefits in the State. Oregon's
success in watershed planning illustrates planning efforts work best
when diverse interests develop and implement plans at the local
watershed level with support from State government. As the national
model for watershed planning, Oregon does not need a new Federal agency
or executive branch office to oversee conservation and restoration
efforts. Planning activities are conducted through local watershed
councils, volunteer-driven organizations that work with local, State
and Federal agencies, economic and environmental interests,
agricultural, industrial and municipal water users, local landowners,
tribes, and other members of the community.
There are over 60 individual watershed councils in Oregon already
deeply engaged in watershed planning and restoration activities.
Watershed planning in Oregon formally began in 1995 with the
development of the Oregon Plan for Salmon Recovery and Watershed
Enhancement, a statewide strategy developed in response to the Federal
listing of several fish species. This strategy led to the creation of
the Oregon Watershed Enhancement Board (OWEB) in 1999, a State agency
and policy oversight board that funds and promotes voluntary and
collaborative efforts that ``help create and maintain healthy
watersheds and natural habitats that support thriving communities and
strong economies.'' OWEB projects that can be integrated with eligible
CWSRF projects (and other State and Federal funding programs) are
helping revolutionize how we meet our critical water challenges and
implement multi-benefit water infrastructure projects.
conclusion
In conclusion, we applaud the CWSRF program for allowing Oregon's
DEQ to make targeted loans that address Clean Water Act issues and
improve water quality while incentivizing innovative water management
solutions that benefit local communities, agricultural economies, and
the environment. This voluntary approach creates and promotes
cooperation and collaborative solutions to complex water resources
challenges. We respectfully request the appropriation of at least $2.5
billion for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Clean Water
State Revolving Loan Fund for fiscal year 2020.
[This statement was submitted by April Snell, Executive Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Oregon Water Resources Congress
u.s. fish and wildlife service's fisheries restoration irrigation
mitigation act program
The Oregon Water Resources Congress (OWRC) is writing to express
its strong support for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Fisheries
Restoration Irrigation Mitigation Act (FRIMA) Program and is requesting
that appropriations for this program be $15 million in fiscal year
2020, which is the current authorized amount. The FRIMA program is an
essential cost-share funding program that helps water users and fishery
agencies better protect sensitive, threatened, and endangered fish
species while ensuring water supply delivery to farms and communities.
OWRC was established in 1912 as a trade association to support the
protection of water rights and promote the wise stewardship of water
resources statewide. OWRC members are local governmental entities,
which include irrigation districts, water control districts, drainage
districts, water improvement districts, and other agricultural water
suppliers that deliver water to roughly \1/3\ of all irrigated land in
Oregon. These water stewards operate complex water management systems,
including water supply reservoirs, canals, pipelines, and hydropower
production.
fiscal year 2020 appropriations
The FRIMA program meets a critical need in fishery protection and
restoration, complimenting other programs through the U.S Fish and
Wildlife Services (FWS). Fish passage and fish screen installations are
a vital component to fishery protection with several benefits:
--Keeps sensitive, threatened and endangered fish out of canals and
water delivery systems
--Allows fish to be safely bypassed around reservoirs and other
infrastructure
--Eliminates water quality risks to fish species
There are over 100 irrigation districts and other special districts
in Oregon that provide water supplies to over one million acres of
irrigated cropland in the State. Almost all of these districts are
affected by either State or Federal Endangered Species Act listings of
Salmon and Steelhead, Bull Trout or other sensitive, threatened or
endangered species. The design and installation of fish screens and
fish passage to protect the myriad of fish species is often cost-
prohibitive for individual districts to implement without outside
funding sources.
Oregon irrigation districts anticipate no less than $25 million in
funding to meet current fish passage and fish screen needs in our
State. Limited cost-share funds are available from the Oregon Watershed
Enhanced Board (OWEB) program, but the primary cost-share for fish
screen and fish passage projects has been provided by the districts and
their water users. Projects include construction of new fish screens
and fish passage facilities as well as significant upgrades of existing
facilities to meet new requirements (new species or science) of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Fisheries
Service and the FWS. Upgrades are often needed to modernize facilities
with new technologies that provide better protection for fish species
as well as reduced maintenance and increased lifespan for the operator.
background of the fisheries restoration irrigation mitigation act
(frima) program
FRIMA, originally enacted November 2000, created a Federal
partnership program incentivizing voluntary fish screen and fish
passage improvements for water withdrawal projects in Idaho, Oregon,
Washington and western Montana. The funding goes to local governments
for construction of fish screens and fish passage facilities and is
matched with non-Federal funding. Irrigation districts and other local
governments that divert water for irrigation accessed the funding
directly, while individual irrigators accessed funding through their
local Soil and Water Conservation District (SWCD), which are local
governments affiliated with the Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS).
The original legislation in 2000 (Public Law 106-502) was supported
and requested by the Pacific Northwest Partnership, a coalition of
local governmental entities in the four Northwest States, including
OWRC. The FRIMA legislation authorized $25 million annually, to be
divided equally among the four States from 2001 to 2012, which was when
the original authorization expired. The actual funding appropriated to
the FRIMA program (through congressional write-ins) ranged from $1
million to $8 million, well short of the $25 million it was authorized
for and far short of what is needed to address fish passage and
screening needs across the region. However, that small amount of
funding was used to leverage other funds and assisted the region in
making measurable progress towards installing fish screens and fish
passage needed to protect sensitive, threatened, and endangered fish
species.
FRIMA funding was channeled through FWS to State fishery agencies
in the four States, distributed using an application and approval
process based on a ranking system implemented uniformly among the
States, including the following factors: fish restoration benefits,
cost effectiveness, and feasibility of planned structure. All projects
provided improved fish passage or fish protection at water diversion
structures and benefitted native fish species in the area, including
several State or federally listed species. Projects were also subject
to applicable State and Federal requirements for project construction
and operation.
FRIMA was reauthorized as part of the Water Infrastructure
Improvements for the Nation Act (WIIN) of 2016. However, a fifth State,
California, was also added as an eligible FRIMA cost-share recipient
and the program was only reauthorized for $15 million, well short of
the estimated $500 million in fish screening and passage needs in the
Pacific Northwest alone. Now that the program has been reauthorized, it
is imperative the program receive appropriations so all five States can
better leverage State/local funding to meet their fish passage and
screening needs.
program benefits
FRIMA projects provide immediate protection for fish and fills a
large unmet need in the West for cost-share assistance with fish
screening and fish passage installation and improvements. FWS has
issued a report covering program years fiscal year 2002-2012 that
provides State-by-State break-down of how the congressional provided
funding has been used in the program. Compared to other recovery
strategies, installation of fish screens and fish passage has the
highest assurance for increasing numbers of fish species in the Pacific
Northwest. Furthermore, the installation of these devices have minimal
impacts on water delivery operations and projects are done
cooperatively using methods that are well accepted by landowners and
rural communities.
The return of the FRIMA program will catalyze cooperative
partnerships and innovative projects that provide immediate and long-
term benefits to irrigators, fishery agencies, and local communities
throughout the Pacific Northwest. This program is also a wise
investment, with past projects contributing more than the required
match and leveraging on average over one dollar for each Federal dollar
invested. FRIMA provides for a maximum Federal cost-share of 65
percent, with the applicant's cost-share at 35 percent plus the on-
going maintenance and support of the structure for passage or screening
purposes. Applicants operate the projects and the State agencies
monitor and review the projects.
oregon projects & benefits
Twenty-six fish screens or fish passage projects in Oregon were
previously funded using FRIMA for part of the project financing. These
projects have led to:
--Installation of screens at 17 diversions or irrigation pumps
--Removal or modification of 12 fish passage barriers
--Three-hundred sixty-five miles being re-opened to fish passage
In addition, the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) has
used some of the FRIMA funding to develop an inventory of need for fish
screens and passages in the State. Grants ranged from just under $6,000
to $400,000 in size with a local match averaging 64 percent of the
project costs, well over the amount required under the Act (35
percent). In other words, each Federal dollar invested in the FRIMA
program generates a local investment of just over one dollar for the
protection of fish species in the Pacific Northwest.
The following are examples of how Oregon used some of its FRIMA
money:
Santiam Water Control District: Fish screen project on a large 1050
cubic feet per second (cfs) multipurpose water diversion project on the
Santiam River (Willamette Basin) near Stayton, Oregon. Partners are the
Santiam Water Control District, ODFW, Marion Soil and Water
Conservation District, and the City of Stayton. Approved FRIMA funding
of $400,000 leveraged a $1,200,000 total project cost. Species
benefited included winter steelhead, spring Chinook, rainbow trout, and
cutthroat trout.
South Fork Little Butte Creek: Fish screen and fish passage project
on a 65 cfs irrigation water diversion in the Rogue River Basin near
Medford, Oregon. Partners are the Medford Irrigation District and ODFW.
Approved FRIMA funding of $372,000 leveraged a $580,000 total project
cost. Species benefited included listed summer and winter steelhead,
coho salmon, and cutthroat trout.
Running Y (Geary Diversion): Fish screen project on a 60 cfs
irrigation water diversion in the upper Klamath Basin near Klamath
Falls, Oregon. Partners are the Wocus Drainage District, ODFW, and
Jeld-Wen Ranches. Approved FRIMA funding of $44,727 leveraged a total
project cost of $149,000. Species benefited included listed red-band
trout and short-nosed sucker.
Lakeshore Gardens: Fish screen project on a 2 cfs irrigation water
diversion in the upper Klamath Basin near Klamath Falls, Oregon.
Partners are the Lakeshore Gardens Drainage District and ODFW. Approved
FRIMA funding of $5,691 leveraged a total project cost of $18,970.
Species benefited included red-band trout, short-nosed sucker and Lost
River sucker.
conclusion
Increasing appropriations for FRIMA will fill a vital funding gap
for fish screens and fish passage projects that are needed to better
protect sensitive, threatened, and endangered fish species, which also
benefits the economy, local communities, and the environment we share.
FRIMA funds projects that are ready to be constructed and will provide
immediate improved protections for fish and immediate jobs for the
construction of the projects. Dollar-for-dollar, providing screening
and fish passage at diversions is one of the most cost-effective uses
of restoration dollars, creating fishery protection at low cost, with
low risk and significant benefits.
The return of a robustly funded FRIMA program will catalyze
cooperative partnerships and innovative projects that provide immediate
and long-term benefits to irrigators, fishery agencies, and local
communities throughout the Pacific Northwest. We respectfully request
an appropriation of $15 million for U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's
Fisheries Restoration Irrigation Mitigation Act program for fiscal year
2020.
[This statement was submitted by April Snell, Executive Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of Organizations in Support of the Forest Inventory
and Analysis Program Funded by the USDA Forest Service
May 17, 2019
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski
The Honorable Tom Udall
Chair, Appropriations Subcommittee on
Ranking Member,
Interior, Environment, and Related
Appropriations Subcommittee
Agencies
on Interior, Environment,
U.S. House of Representatives
and Related Agencies
Washington, DC 20515
U.S. House of
Representatives
Washington, DC 20515
Dear Chair Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall,
The undersigned organizations are strong supporters of the Forest
Inventory and Analysis (FIA) program funded by the USDA Forest Service
(Forest Service). We rely on the inventory data and analysis of
America's forests provided by the program, which make up the backbone
of scientific knowledge on the current state of the Nation's forests.
This critical information is needed to support sound policy and forest
management decisions, both public and private, and is increasingly
important for decisions regarding new and expanding markets. We urge
the Congress to support the FIA program and request funding for the
program in fiscal year 2020 of at least $83 million to move the program
toward providing an accurate and timely inventory of America's forests.
We also urge the inclusion of language ensuring that this funding
would, at minimum, maintain historic remeasurement cycles--every 7
years in the east and every 10 years in the west--as referenced by the
administration.
The data and information collected by FIA serves as the basis for:
identifying trends in forest ownership; measuring carbon stocks;
assessing fish and wildlife habitat; evaluating wildfire, insect, and
disease risk; predicting the spread of invasive species; determining
capital investment in existing forest products facilities and selecting
locations for new forest product facilities; and identifying and
responding to priorities identified in State Forest Action Plans.
The FIA program is utilized by a large set of diverse stakeholders
interested in the state of America's forests. These include forest
resource managers at mills, land managers, conservation groups,
university students and faculty, and State and Federal agencies, such
as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
The undersigned organizations would like to work with Congress to
further explore program potential. An annual funding level of $83
million would support a seven-year annualized program in the east, and
a 10-year program in the west as recommended in the Forest Service's
2007 FIA Strategic Plan. In 2015 the Forest Service released an updated
FIA Strategic Plan, which outlines a variety of potential program
deliverables at funding levels. While we are supportive of at least $83
million in funding for fiscal year 2020, the 2015 Strategic Plan calls
for $103 million to implement the 5-year annualized program called for
in the 1998 Farm Bill. This reduction in cycle length would provide
more accurate data to support important forest resource decisions.
As engaged partners, we are interested in working with Congress and
the Forest Service to make program delivery as efficient as possible
and to support additional Federal investment to implement many of the
useful tools outlined in the new FIA Strategic Plan, such as, urban
inventory, increased plot density, and improved carbon and biomass
estimates. Further, the 2018 Farm Bill called for ``finding
efficiencies in the program operations through the use of remote
sensing technologies, where appropriate.'' We look forward to working
with the Agency as this direction is implemented. There is a need to
make FIA data more robust and more useful for emerging uses, such as
accurate information regarding carbon stocks, forest sustainability
monitoring, wildlife habitat assessments, and much more. Given the
increasing pressures facing our forests-from wildfire, insects and
disease, and development-the FIA program is more important now than
ever before. Funding the FIA program at $83 million for fiscal year
2020 would move toward providing for our growing data needs.
Sincerely,
Alabama Forestry Association
American Forest & Paper Association
American Forest Foundation
American Forests
American Wood Council
American Woodcock Society
Arkansas Forestry Association
Association of Consulting Foresters
BB&S Treated Lumber of New England
Boise Cascade Company
Ecological Society of America
Empire State Forest Products Association
Florida Forestry Association
Fontana Wood Preserving
Forest Products Industry National Labor Management Committee
Forest Resources Association
Forestry Association of South Carolina
Gross & Janes Co.
Hancock Natural Resource Group
Idaho Forest Group
IN Chapter of the Ruffed Grouse Society
Indiana Forestry & Woodland Owners Association
Kentucky Forest Industries Association
L&C Carbon
Massachusetts Forest Alliance
McCord Tie and Timber, Inc.
Mississippi Forestry Association
National Alliance of Forest Owners
National Association of Forest Service Retirees
National Association of State Foresters
National Audubon Society
National Wild Turkey Federation
Ohio Forestry Association, Inc.
Pennsylvania Forestry Association
Rayonier
Ruffed Grouse Society
SC Pole and Piling Inc
SFP
Society for Range Management
Society for the Protection of NH Forests
Society of American Foresters
Sustainable Forestry Initiative
Tank Fab Inc
The Hardwood Federation
The Nature Conservancy
The Westervelt Company
Treated Wood Council
Vermont Woodlands Association
Viance LLC
______
Prepared Statement of Organizations in Support of Investments in Key
Federal Programs That Support State and Private Forestry Activities
Throughout the United States
March 15, 2019
The Honorable Betty McCollum
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski
Chairman, Appropriations Subcommittee on
Chairman, Appropriations
Interior, Environment and Related
Subcommittee on Interior,
Agencies
Environment and Related
U.S. House of Representatives
Agencies
50 Independence Avenue SW, Room 2007
U.S. Senate
Washington, DC 20515
100 Constitution Avenue NE,
Room 131
Washington, DC 20510
The Honorable David Joyce
The Honorable Tom Udall
Ranking Member, Appropriations
Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Interior, Environment and
Appropriations Subcommittee
Related Agencies
on Interior, Environment
U.S. House of Representatives
and Related Agencies
15 Independence Avenue SE, Room 1016
U.S. Senate
Washington, DC 20515
The Capitol, Room S-146A
Washington, DC 20510
Dear Chairwomen McCollum and Murkowski and Ranking Members Joyce and
Udall:
As Congress begins the process of drafting the fiscal year 2020
budget, we appreciate that spending choices must be made that coincide
with our Nation's priorities. As the Committee seeks to maximize the
effectiveness of every Federal dollar, we would like to highlight the
role effective partnerships can play in addressing our Nation's forest
challenges. For this reason, the undersigned organizations support
investments in key Federal programs that support State and private
forestry activities throughout the United States. A critically-
important component of the Forest Service's budget, these programs help
tackle some of the most pressing issues in forestry while conserving
and improving America's forestlands; enhancing and protecting our
drinking water; contributing to healthy, livable communities; and
encouraging forest product innovation and utilization. Even further,
these investments help the Nation deliver important economic growth
across the sector, especially in rural communities.
The USDA's Forest Service State and Private Forestry Program area
(S&PF) has a long history as an important part of the Forest Service
and the profession of forestry. Private forests constitute most of the
Nation's forests and over 90 percent of our domestically-produced
forest products. Providing this important technical and financial
assistance to private landowners and the resource managers responsible
for managing more than 60 percent of America's forests helps to
increase the pace of work and on-the- ground results, improve the
resilience of the Nation's forests, and protect communities and the
environment from forest pests, invasive species, and wildland fires.
In fiscal year 2020, funding for the following State and Private
Forestry and related programs that support them will help improve the
health of the Nation's forests and encourage economic growth in a
sector that sustains more than one million jobs in the United States.
Our funding level requests include:
--$29 million for the Forest Stewardship Program: Administered in
cooperation with State forestry agencies, this program plays a
fundamental role in keeping forests as forests. Forest insects,
diseases, and wildfire know no bounds between Federal and non-
Federal forests and assisting some of the 22 million private
forest owners in managing non-Federal forests can help minimize
the impacts to Federal lands, ultimately saving the Federal
taxpayer millions of dollars. A forest landowner with a forest
stewardship plan is almost three times more likely to actively
manage their land than one without a plan, in turn creating
jobs and developing the rural economies on which private forest
lands rely to produce ninety percent of the Nation's wood
supply. Additionally, landowners with stewardship plans are
actively managing their lands, producing even more benefits for
wildlife, clean water, and forest health.
--$51 million for Forest Health Management on Cooperative Lands:
Pests and disease are national problems affecting private and
public lands. Nationally, their impact is in the tens of
billions of dollars. The USFS Forest Health Management Program
supports efforts to prevent, contain, and eradicate these
costly and dangerous pests and pathogens affecting trees and
forests. Since these pests know no bounds, it is critical to
maintain robust funding for forest health management in both
Federal and cooperative lands accounts.
--$87 million for State Fire Assistance and $18 million for Volunteer
Fire Assistance Programs: Ninety percent of the Nation's
wildfires are human-caused and most of these starts are on
State and private lands (which often spread to Federal lands).
Initial attack is the key to reducing large fire costs and
these programs are critical to these suppression efforts. State
and volunteer fire crews provide much of that initial attack
response and are deployed to assist on Federal fires and other
emergency or disaster situations, in compliance with national
safety and training standards.
--$20 million for Landscape Scale Restoration: The USFS works
collaboratively with States and other partners using State
Forest Action Plans to target limited resources to the highest
priority forest needs across ownerships to achieve results with
meaningful local, regional, and national impacts. The 2018 Farm
Bill officially codified the Landscape Scale Restoration
program and authorized $20 million in annual appropriations,
the amount of our request. In an era when our forests are
facing an increasing number of challenges, this program allows
for a small Federal investment to be matched and leveraged by
States and put towards the most pressing threats to the forests
that sustain American communities.
--$83 million for Forest Inventory and Analysis: This is our
country's forest census, which has been ongoing since 1930. The
collection and reporting of this information in a timely manner
is vital for forest industry and others in planning their
future economic investments based on availability of forest raw
materials, as well as for keeping our Nation's forests healthy
by tracking impacts to forests from fire, insects and disease,
urbanization and development, and other threats.
While not specifying suggested budget levels, we want to also call
your attention to the need for funding research, which provides the
basis for policies that improve the health and quality of urban and
rural communities, including helping to expand markets. A combination
of responsible forest management combined with a healthy forest market
will benefit the forest landscape and the communities that live in and
around them.
Thank you for your consideration.
Sincerely,
Alabama Forestry Association
American Forest & Paper Association
American Forest Foundation
American Forests
American Wood Council
American Woodcock Society
Arkansas Forestry Association
Boise Cascade Company
Empire State Forest Products Association
Florida Forestry Association
Fontana Wood Preserving
Forest Products Industry National Labor Management Committee
Forest Resources Association
Forestry Association of South Carolina
Gross & Janes Co.
Hancock Natural Resource Group
Idaho Forest Group
Indiana Chapter of the Ruffed Grouse Society
Indiana Forestry & Woodland Owners Association
Kentucky Forest Industries Association
L&C Carbon
Massachusetts Forest Alliance
McCord Tie and Timber, Inc.
Mississippi Forestry Association
National Alliance of Forest Owners
National Association of Forest Service Retirees
National Association of State Foresters
National Audubon Society
National Wild Turkey Federation
Ohio Forestry Association, Inc.
Pennsylvania Forestry Association
Rayonier
Ruffed Grouse Society
SC Pole and Piling Inc
Society for the Protection of New Hampshire Forests
Society of American Foresters
Spartanburg Forest Products
Sustainable Forestry Initiative
The Hardwood Federation
Tank Fab Inc
The Westervelt Company
The Nature Conservancy
Vermont Woodlands Association
Treated Wood Council
Virginia Forestry Association
Viance LLC
Western Pennsylvania Conservancy
______
Prepared Statement of Organizations in Support of the United States'
Engagement in the World Heritage Program
May 14, 2019
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski
The Honorable Tom Udall
Chairman
Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Interior, Environment and
Subcommittee on Interior,
Related Agencies
Environment and Related
Committee on Appropriations
Agencies
United States Senate
Committee on Appropriations
Washington, D.C. 20510
United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510
Dear Chairman Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall:
As organizations dedicated to the protection and preservation of
the historic and cultural resources of our Nation including but not
limited to World Heritage Sites, we write in support of the United
States' engagement in the World Heritage Program. We urge you to
appropriate $1.926 million for the National Park Service's
International Park Affairs including at least $1.25 million for the
Office of International Affairs (OIA) to ensure our robust involvement
with the program and to support many United States communities and
sites seeking nomination to the World Heritage List. We also urge
Congress to reject the administration's proposal to drastically reduce
overall program funding for International Park Affairs while also
shifting the Southwest Border Resource Protection Program into OIA. For
the past three fiscal years, Congress has consistently appropriated
$1.648 million for International Park Affairs, including $942,000 for
the OIA. We believe that a modest increase to $1.926 million for
International Park Affairs including at least $1.25 million for the
Office of International Affairs is appropriate and merited.
The United States led the creation of the World Heritage Program in
1972 and was the first to ratify the Convention in 1973. Two of our
national parks--Yellowstone National Park and Mesa Verde National
Park--were among the first dozen sites inscribed on the World Heritage
List in 1978. Today, just 23 out of the 1,092 sites inscribed on the
World Heritage List are in the United States, of which 18 are managed
by the National Park Service (NPS). Many more sites of cultural and
natural importance remain on the U.S. World Heritage Tentative List,
and still others are eligible for nomination.
The Office of International Affairs within the NPS works to support
protection and enhancement of parks around the world, responds to
issues relating to existing World Heritage Sites, and selects eligible
sites for the World Heritage Tentative List and shepherds them through
the detailed nomination process. Inadequate funding hinders OIA's
ability to support the increasing numbers of communities in the United
States who seek nominations to the World Heritage List despite the
considerable effort and financial expenditure required. Significant
sites such as the Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks in Ohio; Frank Lloyd
Wright Buildings in Arizona, California, Illinois, New York, Oklahoma,
Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin; and Civil Rights Movement Sites in Alabama
remain on the U.S. World Heritage Tentative List. Inclusion on the
World Heritage List brings communities and sites substantial cultural,
economic, and social benefits. Increased funding for OIA would enable
more American sites with international significance to be added to the
World Heritage List.
The recent tragic fire at the Notre-Dame de Paris, also a World
Heritage Site, reminds all of us of the importance of our collective
history--and the need to safeguard and honor it. The severe damage to
Notre Dame rouses us to protect other irreplaceable places that tell
our human story. We must preserve these sites now so that they may
remain for future generations.
We believe that it is of critical importance for the United States
to remain robustly engaged in and supportive of the World Heritage
Program. We urge you to provide funds to both support nominations of
American sites to the World Heritage List and to demonstrate engagement
in the important work of ensuring global peace through the mutual
respect of heritage of outstanding universal value worldwide.
We greatly appreciate the strong support Congress has shown for the
preservation of our Nation's heritage. We look forward to working with
you through the appropriations process and thank you for your
consideration.
For questions, please contact:
Destry Jarvis, Advocacy Chair, US/ICOMOS
[email protected]
or
Tom Cassidy, Vice President, Government Relations
National Trust for Historic Preservation
[email protected]
Sincerely,
US/ICOMOS (US National Committee for the International Council on
Monuments and Sites)
National Trust for Historic Preservation
National Parks Conservation Association
Coalition to Protect America's National Parks
Archeology Southwest
The Coalition for American Heritage
National Association of Tribal Historic Preservation Officers
Ohio History Connection
______
Prepared Statement of Organizations Supporting Increased Funding in
Investment in USDA Forest Service Research and Development
May 17, 2019
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski
The Honorable Tom Udall
Chair, Appropriations Subcommittee on
Ranking Member,
Interior, Environment, and Related
Appropriations Subcommittee
Agencies
on Interior, Environment,
U.S. Senate
and Related Agencies
Washington, DC 20515
U.S. Senate
Washington, DC 20515
Dear Chair McCollum and Ranking Member Joyce:
Improving the future health and sustainability of the Nation's
forests and grasslands requires a strong investment in USDA Forest
Service Research and Development (R&D), with benefits to forests,
wildlife, and fish. The undersigned organizations and professional
societies urge Congress to increase funding for all Forest Service R&D
to a minimum of $310 million in fiscal year 2020 including all
necessary increases for the Forest Inventory and Analysis program and
at least $227 million for the remaining Forest and Rangeland Research
program areas.
Building on over 100 years of critically important research, Forest
Service R&D programs inform policy and land-management decisions that
improve health and use of the Nation's forests and grasslands,
including aquatic systems. Funding for these important activities is
critical to sustaining the Nation's natural resources. Showing value in
this investment requires R&D leaders and scientists be attuned and
responsive in providing relevant and timely information and support
with an ability to effectively deliver assistance to all users. Notable
recent Forest Service R&D contributions include:
Using Science to Guide Drought Management Response
Forest Service R&D has been a leader in reviewing impacts of
drought on U.S. forests and rangelands to help better manage for
drought resiliency and adaptation going forward. Forest Service R&D
assessments and guidance offers assistance to Federal, State, and
private organizations in implementation strategies to sustain healthy,
resilient ecosystems that continue to produce vital goods and services.
Helping to Identify Pragmatic Solutions for Species at Risk
Through long-term monitoring and collaborative research efforts
with State agencies and other partners, Forest Service R&D informs land
management decisions that benefit wildlife and people by providing an
understanding of wildlife-habitat relationships for multiple species
and communities. This includes informing conservation efforts that have
helped to avoid Endangered Species Act listings for several forest and
rangeland wildlife species.
Improving Smoke and Fire Management Capabilities
The Prescribed Fire Combustion and Atmospheric Dynamics Research
Experiment is a landmark study improving predictions of fire spread and
smoke behavior. This behavior prediction tool with the Blue Sky Smoke
Management Model allows fire managers to better understand where flames
and smoke from wildland fires will go to alert affected communities
sooner and reduce human health effects.
Developing Innovative Solutions to Managing Invasive Species
Forest Service R&D also develops innovative solutions to manage
invasive pathogens and species that can decimate native plant and
animal populations. These investments resulted in a cost-effective way
to quickly identify presence or absence of invasive species in an
aquatic environment; trees with a natural resistance to emerald ash
borers; and the first nonlethal treatment for white-nose syndrome--a
lethal fungal disease that has reduced bat populations by upwards of 80
percent in certain parts of the country.
Expanding and Protecting U.S. Market Opportunities for Forest Resources
The Forest Products Laboratory drives innovation and expansion of
commercial applications for forest products. The work at the Lab on
woody biofuels, advanced composites and wood structures, and value-
added wood products promotes healthy forest ecosystems and economies by
creating, enhancing, and protecting markets for forest products. In
partnership with universities, scientists from Research Stations across
the country, and partners in the private sector, the Lab is exploring
potential of mass timber structures by conducting work on building
codes and wood utilization models to increase use of wood in building
construction and invigorate existing and create new markets for wood
products.
Calculating the Value of Urban Forests and Trees
City leaders can calculate the value of new tree plantings in terms
of property value increases, future energy savings, air pollutant
uptake, and storm water runoff reduction helping cities protect and
restore environmental quality and enhance economic opportunity.
Quantifying the Role of Forests in Providing Clean Air and Water
This research directly linking trees to clean air and water
underscores the economic value and benefits trees and forests provide
to all residents and communities. Recent R&D work shows that forests,
which make up 26 percent of U.S. land area, are the source of 46
percent of the U.S. water supply--generating far better returns than
other land uses. This understanding of how to manage forested
landscapes to enhance production of sustained, low cost clean water
supplies and improved air quality are cost effective and critically
important to human health providing a value of nearly $7 billion every
year.
Advancing forest science is integral to improving the health and
welfare of U.S. forests and citizens, increasing the competitiveness of
U.S. products in the global marketplace, and adapting to unforeseen
future challenges. Continuing the trend of reductions in the R&D budget
will result in significant gaps in the knowledge base and data sets
necessary to address the many threats facing our Nation's forests and
associated wildlife could result in competitive losses in the global
economy. Therefore, our organizations request a funding level of $310
million for USFS R&D with particular emphasis on research projects
uniquely suited to R&D expertise and the furthering of agency and
partner objectives.
Sincerely,
American Forests
American Wood Council
American Woodcock Society
Arkansas Forestry Association
Boise Cascade Company
Ecological Society of America
Empire State Forest Products Association
Florida Forestry Association
Fontana Wood Preserving
Forest Resources Association
Forestry Association of South Carolina
Gross & Janes Co.
Hancock Natural Resource Group
Idaho Forest Group
IN Chapter of the Ruffed Grouse Society
Indiana Forestry & Woodland Owners Association
Kentucky Forest Industries Association
L&C Carbon
McCord Tie and Timber, Inc.
Mississippi Forestry Association
National Alliance of Forest Owners
National Association of Forest Service Retirees
National Audubon Society
National Wild Turkey Federation
Ohio Forestry Association, Inc.
Pennsylvania Forestry Association
Rayonier
Ruffed Grouse Society
SC Pole and Piling Inc
SFP
Society for Range Management
Society for the Protection of NH Forests
Society of American Foresters
Sustainable Forestry Initiative
Tank Fab Inc
The Hardwood Federation
The Nature Conservancy
The Westervelt Company
Treated Wood Council
Vermont Woodlands Association
Viance LLC
______
Prepared Statement of the Partnership for the National Trails System
Madame Chair and Members of the subcommittee:
The Partnership for the National Trails System appreciates your
support over the past 25 years, through operations funding and
dedicated Challenge Cost Share funds, for the national scenic and
historic trails administered by the National Park Service. We also
appreciate your increased allocation of funds to support the trails
administered and managed by the Forest Service and for the trails in
the Bureau of Land Management's National Conservation Lands System.
2018 was the 50th year since Congress established the National
Trails System as a bold experiment in public/private collaboration for
public benefit. While most of the trail making is done by tens of
thousands of citizen stewards increased funding is needed to close gaps
in these trails. To continue the progress that you have fostered and to
begin the next 50 years with an increased investment in the National
Trails System, the Partnership requests that you provide annual
operations funding for each of the 30 national scenic and historic
trails for fiscal year 2020 through these appropriations:
--National Park Service: $16.426 million for administration of 23
trails and for coordination of the long-distance trails program
by the Washington office. Construction and Maintenance:
$357,200 for the Ice Age Trail, $175,000 for the Arizona Trail,
and $200,000 for the Pacific Crest Trail.
--USDA Forest Service: $100 million for trails construction and
maintenance (CMTL) with $8.826 million of it to administer 6
trails and $1.3 million to manage parts of 16 trails
administered by the NPS or BLM. $3 million for Iditarod Trail
construction and maintenance.
--Bureau of Land Management: $2.812 million to administer three
trails and for coordination of the National Trails program and
$7.14 million to manage portions of 13 trails administered by
the Park Service or the Forest Service and for operating five
National Historic Trail interpretive centers. Construction:
$100,000 for the Iditarod Trail. Maintenance: $200,000 for the
Iditarod Trail, $125,000 for the Arizona Trail, and $300,000
for the Pacific Crest Trail.
We ask you to appropriate $900,000,000 from the Land and Water
Conservation Fund and allocate $33,408,000 of it to these agencies to
purchase 41 tracts along six national scenic and six national historic
trails:
--Bureau of Land Management: $2,895,000
--U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service: $5,419,000
--U.S. Forest Service: $7,237,000
--National Park Service: $17,857,000
national park service
The $16.426 million we request for Park Service operations includes
increases for some of the trails to continue the progress and new
initiatives made possible by the additional funding Congress provided
several years ago. We request an increase of $68,000 to $450,000 for
the National Trails System Program account to provide stronger support
for the 23 national trails administered by the Park Service. An
increase of $570,000 for the Old Spanish Trail will enable the Park
Service to begin implementing the Trail's new Comprehensive
Administrative Strategy working with the Old Spanish Trail Association
to increase volunteer participation in signing, interpreting, and
educating the public about the trail. The Park Service will be better
able to collaborate with the Bureau of Land Management in administering
the trail and to consult with other agencies to protect the cultural
and natural resources along it from destruction by energy projects.
We request an increase of $660,000 to expand Park Service efforts
to protect cultural landscapes at more than 200 sites along the Santa
Fe Trail, to develop GIS mapping, and to fund public educational and
community outreach programs of the Santa Fe Trail Association.
Increases of $313,224 for the Oregon Trail and $255,192 for the
California Trail will enable the Park Service to work with the Oregon-
California Trails Association to develop digital and social media to
connect with youth in the cities along these trails providing
information about their many layers of history and to better protect
the historical and cultural heritage sites and landscapes along them
from destruction by energy development in the West. Congress doubled
the length of the Trail of Tears in 2009, but provided no additional
funding to manage the additional trail. An increase of $165,000 to
$656,000 will provide for management of this additional trail and more
support for the work of Trail of Tears Association volunteers.
We request an increase of $173,000 to $300,000 for the New England
Trail to strengthen the outreach and community engagement of the
Connecticut Forests & Parks Association and the Appalachian Mountain
Club along the trail and support trail relocations and reconstruction
work of these organizations' volunteers. We request a modest increase
to $2,050,000 for the Lewis & Clark Trail to administer the Eastern
Legacy extension along the Ohio River authorized by Congress in S. 47.
We request an increase of $300,000 to $833,000 for the Ala Kahakai
Trail to enable the Park Service to work with E Mau Na Ala Hele, the
Ala Kahakai Trail Association, and other community organizations to
care for resources on the land and with the University of Hawaii to
conduct archaeological and cultural landscape studies along this trail.
The $1,020,000 we request for the 4,200 mile North Country Trail
will enable the Park Service to provide greater support for the
regional GIS mapping, trail building, trail management, and training of
volunteers led by the North Country Trail Association. The $1,500,000
we request for the Ice Age Trail includes a $665,000 increase to build
partner and citizen capacity for building new and maintaining existing
trail, protecting the natural and cultural resources on the lands
purchased for the trail, and to provide the Park Service with a planner
to accelerate planning of the land protection corridor for the trail.
Construction and Maintenance: We request that you provide $357,200
for the Ice Age Trail to build 10 miles of new trail and several
trailhead parking lots and repair damage from catastrophic floods;
$175,000 for maintenance of the National Park Service segments of the
Arizona Trail; and $200,000 for trail construction projects on National
Park Service segments of the Pacific Crest Trail.
usda--forest service
We ask you to appropriate $100 million for trails construction and
maintenance (CMTL) to begin to address the considerable maintenance
backlog on the trails in the National Forest System. Within this
appropriation we request that you provide $8.826 million as a separate
budgetary item specifically for the Arizona, Continental Divide,
Florida, Pacific Crest, and Pacific Northwest National Scenic Trails
and the Nez Perce National Historic Trail within the over-all
appropriation for Capital Improvements and Maintenance for Trails.
Recognizing the on-the-ground management responsibility the Forest
Service has for 1024 miles of the Appalachian Trail, more than 650
miles of the North Country Trail, and sections of the Ice Age, Anza,
Caminos Real de Tierra Adentro and de Tejas, Lewis & Clark, California,
Iditarod, Mormon Pioneer, Old Spanish, Oregon, Overmountain Victory,
Pony Express, Trail of Tears and Santa Fe Trails, we ask you to
appropriate $1.3 million specifically for these trails.
We ask that you provide direction to the Forest Service to
specifically allocate the funding appropriated for the administered and
managed national scenic and historic trails directly to those trails.
The Partnership's request of $8.826 million includes $1.5 million
to enable the Forest Service and Florida Trail Association to continue
trail maintenance, to control invasive species, do ecosystem
restoration, and otherwise manage 4,625 acres of new Florida Trail
land. The $8.826 million request also includes $2.5 million for the
Pacific Crest Trail, $2 million for the Continental Divide Trail, $1
million for the Pacific Northwest Trail, $926,000 for the Nez Perce
Trail, and $900,000 for the Arizona Trail. The additional funds
requested will enable the Forest Service to develop Comprehensive
Management Plans for the latter three trails. We also request $3
million of additional funding for construction and for maintenance of
sections of the Iditarod Trail in the Chugach National Forest.
bureau of land management
Although considerably more money is needed to fully administer the
National Conservation Lands System and protect its resources, we
request that you appropriate $84 million in base funding for the
System. We ask that you appropriate as new permanent base funding
$250,000 for National Trails System Program Coordination, $1,000,000
for the Iditarod Trail, $230,000 for El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro
Trail, $1,332,000 for the Old Spanish Trail, and $4,000,000 for the
Bureau to manage 4,645 miles of 13 other national scenic and historic
trails. We request $100,000 to construct new sections of the Iditarod
Trail and to maintain these trails: Iditarod Trail--$200,000, Arizona
Trail--$125,000, and Pacific Crest Trail--$300,000. We also request
$3,140,000 to operate five historic trails interpretive centers.
To promote greater management transparency and accountability for
the National Trails and the whole National Landscape Conservation
System (NLCS), we urge you to request expenditure and accomplishment
reports for each of the NLCS Units for fiscal year 2019 and fiscal year
2020 and to direct the Bureau to include unit-level allocations within
major sub-activities for each of the scenic and historic trails, and
wild and scenic rivers--as the Bureau has done for the national
monuments, wilderness, and conservation areas--within a new activity
account for the National Landscape Conservation System in fiscal year
2020. The Bureau's lack of a unified budget account for National Trails
prevents the agency from efficiently planning, implementing, reporting,
and taking advantage of cost-saving and leveraging partnerships and
volunteer contributions for every activity related to these national
resources.
land and water conservation fund
The Partnership strongly supports full funding of the Land and
Water Conservation Fund at the authorized $900 million for the
component Federal and State programs funded under LWCF. Within this
amount we request that you appropriate $33,408,000 to acquire 41
parcels along these 12 national scenic and historic trails:
Bureau of Land Management: $2,895,000 | 12 parcels | 1,845 acres
Nez Perce National Historic Trail (ID) $2,295,000 to protect
riparian ecosystems and migratory corridors with habitat for sage
grouse, pronghorn antelope, and elk, and historic and cultural
resources.
Pacific Crest National Scenic Trail (OR) $600,000 for trail and
resource protection within the Cascade Siskiyou National Monument in
Southern Oregon.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service: $5,419,000 | 6 parcels | 1,790 acres
California National Historic Trail (ID): $1,570,000 to protect the
largest breeding concentration of Sandhill Cranes and a haven for other
waterfowl near Grays Lake NWR from agricultural development.
Captain John Smith Chesapeake National Historic Trail (VA)
$3,000,000 to preserve and provide access to sites of historic
encounters between John Smith and indigenous peoples and protect major
eagle and migratory bird stopover habitat in the Rappahannock River and
James River NWRs.
Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail (WA) $849,000 to preserve a
wealth of unique ecosystems and enhance ecosystem connectivity between
State-protected lands and the Steigerwald NWR.
U.S. Forest Service: $7,237,000 | 15 parcels | 2,219 acres
Appalachian National Scenic Trail (NC, TN, VA,) $4,582,000 to
protect miles of several trout streams, relocate trail segments,
preserve trail viewsheds, and provide habitat for rare birds and
ecological connectivity and watershed protection near or adjacent to
the Pisgah NF State-protected lands.
Arizona National Scenic Trail (AZ) $200,000 for an easement in
Little Casa Blanca Canyon closing a gap in the trail and removing it
from a dangerous road.
Continental Divide National Scenic Trail (CO) $2,300,000 to acquire
land around Muddy Pass to enable 14 miles of the trail to be relocated
from a busy highway near Steamboat Springs and $65,000 to protect
alpine headwaters of the Rio Grande River in San Juan County, Colorado.
Florida National Scenic Trail (FL) $90,000 to fill trail gaps and
provide connectivity between protected areas along the Withlacoochee
River and adjacent to Suwannee River State Park.
National Park Service: $17,857,000 | 8 parcels | 5,720 acres
Ala Kahakai National Historic Trail (HI): $6,000,000 to protect 444
archaeological sites at an ancient coastal indigenous gathering area
that hosts a wealth of native plants and wildlife both above and below
ground in lava tubes.
Appalachian National Scenic Trail (MA, ME) $3,357,000 to protect
the remaining 8 miles of shoreline and enable public access for Bald
Mountain Pond, to enable multiple trail re-routings, to preserve
delicate habitats for threatened and endangered species, to support
connectivity of riparian and forest habitats, and to preserve iconic
scenic viewsheds.
Ice Age National Scenic Trail (WI) $1,500,000 to help acquire
several parcels within the Cross Plains Unit of the Ice Age National
Scientific Reserve in Dane County.
Captain John Smith Chesapeake National Historic Trail (VA)
$4,000,000 to purchase 1000 acres.
Washington-Rochambeau Revolutionary Route National Historic Trail
(NY) $3,000,000 for preservation of a Revolutionary War-era supply
depot site and cemetery.
private sector support for the national trails system
Public-spirited partnerships between private citizens and public
agencies have been a hallmark of the National Trails System since its
inception. These partnerships create the enduring strength of the
Trails System and the trail communities that sustain it by combining
the local, grass-roots energy and responsiveness of volunteers with the
responsible continuity of public agencies. They also provide private
financial support for public projects, often resulting in a greater
than equal match of funds.
The private trail organizations' commitment to the success of these
trail-sustaining partnerships grows even as Congress' support for the
trails has grown. In 2018 the trail organizations fostered 978,034
hours of documented volunteer labor valued at $24,147,660 to help
sustain the national scenic and historic trails. The organizations also
raised private sector contributions of $14,489,472 for the trails.
[This statement was submitted by Gary Werner, Executive Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of Preservation Action
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall and Members of the
subcommittee, on behalf of Preservation Action's more than 3,000
members and supporters, I appreciate the opportunity to present written
testimony on the Department of Interior's fiscal year 2020 for the
National Park Service and its historic preservation programs. Founded
in 1974, Preservation Action is a 501(c)4 nonprofit organization
created to serve as the national grassroots advocacy organization for
historic preservation. We represent an active and engaged grassroots
constituency from across the country, and we appreciate the opportunity
to provide their perspective.
The U.S. Congress listened to the American people in 1966 when it
enacted the National Historic Preservation Act. Today, the Federal
legislation and programs created through it serve as the backbone for
the historic preservation industry. For over 50 years, the NHPA and the
historic preservation field has demonstrated a proven track record of
saving places Americans value, revitalizing communities, reusing
infrastructure, telling American history for the public benefit of all.
Continued funding to the National Park Service and the programs it
executes is vitally important for America's past to help shape our
future.
Preservation Action's mission is to make historic preservation a
national priority. For 45 years we've advocated for sound preservation
policy, including two of the most important tools for historic
preservation--the Historic Preservation Fund and the Federal Historic
Rehabilitation Tax Credit (HTC).
National Park Service: Historic Preservation Fund
The Historic Preservation Fund (HPF) is the principal source of
funding to implement the Nation's historic preservation programs. Since
1976 the HPF has helped to recognize, save, revitalize and protect
America's historic resources. Preservation Action is extraordinarily
grateful for the strong support Congress and especially this Committee,
have shown for the HPF in recent years, including fiscal year 2019's
$102.66 million, the highest level of HPF funding in history. The HPF
provides funding to States and Tribes to carry out their federally
mandated duties and supports critically important competitive grant
programs that empowers States and local communities to preserve places
that help to tell a more complete American story.
Preservation Action urges this subcommittee to fund the Historic
Preservation Fund in fiscal year 2020's Department of Interior budget
at the following level:
--$60 million for State Historic Preservation Officers (SHPOs) for
heritage preservation and protection programs that create jobs,
economic development, and community revitalization. In
partnership with the Federal Government, SHPOs carry out the
primary functions of the National Historic Preservation Act
including--finding and documenting America's historic places,
making nominations to the National Register, providing
assistance on rehabilitation tax credit projects, reviewing
impacts of Federal projects, working with local governments,
and conducting preservation education and planning.
Additionally, States are required to match at least 40 percent
of the money they receive from the HPF.
--$20 million for Tribal Historic Preservation Officers (THPOs).
THPOs are designated by federally recognized Tribal governments
that have entered into an agreement with the Department of the
Interior to assume the Federal compliance role of the SHPO on
their respective Tribal lands. Tribal historic preservation
plans are based on traditional knowledge and cultural values,
and may involve projects to improve Indian schools, roads,
health clinics and housing. Funding levels have not kept pace
with the growing number of Indian Tribes with THPO programs,
resulting in a lower average grants per Tribe.
--$5 million for competitive grants for SHPOs and THPOs to invest in
geographic information systems-based mapping of historic
resources (New program). 21st century digital maps would allow
project planners to know where cultural resources have already
been located and where they are likely to be identified. It
would encourage early participation in project planning,
enabling SHPOs and THPOs to work with project sponsors to plan,
design, and develop projects that avoid harm to historic
resources, lessen conflict, and expedite project delivery.
--$30 million for Civil Rights Initiative Competitive Grants. A
competitive grant program to preserve the sites and stories of
Civil Rights in America. $20 million of these funds would have
to be used to preserve the sites and stories of the African
American Civil Rights movement.
--$10 million for Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
Funding would provide grants to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to preserve and repair historic buildings
on the campuses of HBCUs.
--$15 million for Save America's Treasures Program. Save America's
Treasures grants program help preserve nationally significant
historic properties and collections that convey our Nation's
rich heritage to future generations of Americans
--$7.5 million for Historic Revitalization Subgrant Program. The
purpose of the program is to rehabilitate and preserve historic
resources, while fostering economic development of rural
communities.
--$1 million for the Under-Represented Communities Grant Program.
These competitive grants support the survey and nomination of
properties to the National Register of Historic Places and as
National Historic Landmarks associated with communities
currently under-represented.
Total Historic Preservation Fund Request: Fiscal year 2020 $148.5
million
Federal Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit
The Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit (HTC), administered by SHPOs
and the NPS, is the most significant Federal investment in historic
preservation. Since its creation more than 35 years ago, the HTC has
been a catalyst for development with the rehabilitation of more than
44,000 buildings across the Nation. Since inception, the HTC has
created over 2.5 million jobs and leveraged over $144 billion in
private investment. In addition to revitalizing communities and
spurring economic growth, the HTC returns more to the Treasury than it
costs. In fact, Treasury receives $1.25 in tax revenue for every dollar
invested. The HTC has helped to rehabilitate historic structures and
revitalize communities in all 50 States, the District of Columbia,
Puerto Rico and the U.S Virgin Islands. From helping to rehabilitate
the Brown and Hawkins building in Seward, AK, the oldest store in
Alaska, to the Mill No. 1 project in Baltimore, Maryland, the Historic
Tax Credit is helping communities rebound and recapture their economic
vitality as well as provide creative uses for old buildings and
stimulate job growth.
In 2017, tax reform legislation preserved the 20 percent HTC, but
changed it so that it is spread over 5 years at 4 percent per year.
While we are incredibly grateful the HTC was retained, the changes made
decreased the overall value of the tax credit. Preservation Action and
its national members urge Congress to protect the Historic Tax Credit,
look for opportunities to improve and enhance the program, and continue
to support the HTC by sufficiently funding SHPOs and the NPS who
administer the program.
Preservation Partnership Program: National Heritage Areas
We'd also like to express our support for the Preservation
Partnership Program which supports National Heritage Areas nationwide.
Designated by Congress, National Heritage Areas (NHAs) are community-
driven sites that weave cultural, natural, and historic resources
together to tell nationally significant stories. NHAs rely on public-
private funding where every Federal dollar allocated is matched with an
average of $5.50 in public and private funds. Preservation Action
greatly appreciates Congress and this Committee's continued support of
NHAs, especially considering the program was proposed for significant
cuts or elimination the last few years.
We'd also like to thank Congress and this committee for their
passage of S.47, John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, Management, and
Recreation Act. This bill included several important pieces of
legislation such permanent reauthorization of the Land and Water
Conservation Fund (LWCF) and authorization of the HBCU preservation
program. Additionally, S.47 established 6 new National Heritage Areas.
While we appreciate the importance shown by recognizing these 6 new
NHAs, funding has not kept pace. Since 2004 the number of NHAs have
doubled while funding for the program has only increased by 33 percent.
To bring funding in line with the increased number of NHAs,
Preservation Action requests, in accordance with the National Alliance
of National Heritage Areas, $32 million for National Heritage Areas
through the Preservation Partnership Program in the fiscal year 2020
Department of Interior's budget.
Conclusion
Preservation Action appreciates the opportunity to provide our
views on the fiscal year 2020 Department of Interior budget. We work
closely with a broad cross-section of preservation professionals from
the State and local level and are pleased to be able to add their
perspective as the Committee considers funding levels.
Preservation Action continues to value the dedicated work of
National Park Service employees, the partnership of the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation as well as the instrumental work of
SHPOs and THPOs in preserving America's cultural heritage.
Thank you for valuing the input of the preservation community as
you consider the fiscal year 2020 Department of Interior budget. We
look forward to working with the committee and are happy to answer any
questions you may have.
[This statement was submitted by Russ Carnahan, President.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Public Employees for Environmental
Responsibility
February 25, 2019
Sen. Lisa Murkowski
Sen. Joe Manchin
Chairman
Ranking Member
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Committee on Energy and
304 Dirksen Senate Building
Natural Resources
Washington, DC 20510
306 Hart Senate Office
Building
Washington D.C. 20510
Sen. Tom Udall
Rep. Raul M. Grijalva
Ranking Member
Chairman
Appropriations Subcommittee on Department
Natural Resources Committee
of the Interior, Environment, and Related
1324 Longworth House Office
Agencies
Building
531 Hart Senate Office Building
Washington, DC 20515
Washington DC, 20510
Rep. Rob Bishop
Rep. Deb Haaland
Ranking Member
Chairman
Natural Resources Committee
Natural Resources
123 Cannon House Office Building
Subcommittee on National
Washington, DC 20515
Parks, Forests, and Public
Lands
1237 Longworth House Office
Building
Washington, DC 20515
Rep. Betty McCollum
Rep. David Joyce
Chair
Ranking Member
Appropriations Subcommittee on Interior,
Appropriations Subcommittee
Environment, and Related Agencies
on Interior, Environment,
2007 Rayburn House Office Building
and Related Agencies
Washington, DC 20515
1337 Longworth House Office
Building
Washington, DC 20515
Dear Members:
I am writing you on behalf of Public Employees for Environmental
Responsibility (PEER) to alert you to unannounced developments within
the National Park Service (NPS) which, we believe, merit your
attention. Numerous sources have informed us that NPS is quietly moving
to reduce the training required of its permanent law enforcement
rangers.
We are attaching a report written by retired agency law enforcement
professionals. It details the steps the NPS is taking steps to abandon
mandatory attendance by its permanent law enforcement rangers in the
academy at the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC). The
agency is instead seeking to principally rely on seasonal law
enforcement training programs independently operated at non-NPS
facilities, such as community colleges, across the country.
Congress' charter for the FLETC declared that its purpose is to
fill ``an urgent need for high-quality, cost-effective training by a
cadre of professional instructors using modern training facilities and
standardized course content.'' PEER believes that this NPS move
undermines this express intent of Congress.
Significantly, this shift would reverse a nearly 50-year trend
towards steadily upgrading the training and professionalism in the NPS
law enforcement ranger corps. As we understand it, the purpose of the
NPS plan is to reduce training costs by--
--Compressing a 16-week training regimen into 12 weeks;
--Forcing rangers to pay for their own basic training. Seasonal
academy tuitions range from four to seven thousand dollars,
which not all can afford; and
--Skimping on facilities and equipment. FLETC has a world-class
laboratory, driving range, and structures for realistic
simulations that seasonal facilities lack. For example, at one
school trainees must use their personal vehicles for traffic
stops. Others simulate stops with classroom chairs.
Apart from reduced levels of training, the report raises questions
about the quality of training offered by these seasonal academies which
claim to be accredited but--
--Accreditation addresses standardization of curriculum and does not
assure equivalency of training or the student's actual learning
experience; and
--Many instructors are recruited ``ad hoc'' from nearby law
enforcement agencies and are frequently unfamiliar with Federal
law and/or NPS policies and manual requirements.
Under this plan, the Park Service would be the only Federal land
management agency not using FLTEC. Moreover, the U.S. Forest Service,
Fish & Wildlife Service, and the Bureau of Land Management all train
their permanent law enforcement personnel at FLETC, typically in
classes including NPS ranger cadets. Removal of the NPS contingent
would constrain the training schedules for these other agencies.
It should be noted that national park rangers have one of the most
dangerous jobs in Federal service. The challenges facing today's law
enforcement rangers are increasingly varied and complex, demanding more
and better training, not less.
In addition, park ranger ranks have steadily fallen over the past
decade even as the number of park units and visitation keeps rising.
Thus, today's rangers are required to handle more cases and cover more
ground with ever falling force levels.
This sea-change is taking place behind closed doors without
consulting affected staff. Nor do we believe that the NPS has informed
Congress about this move--hence this letter.
PEER requests that you contact the NPS about this subject and
request a full briefing on its plans. In addition, we believe that a
public airing of this plan would be beneficial. Your oversight would be
most timely if initiated before this stealth downgrade is completed. As
you know, the National Park Service still lacks a confirmed director.
PEER maintains that major changes like these should await the arrival
of permanent leadership.
Thank you for your attention to this matter. Should you desire any
additional information please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,
Jeff Ruch
Executive Director
______
Prepared Statement of the Puyallup Tribe of Indians
Thank you for the opportunity to provide written testimony
concerning the fiscal year 2020 appropriations for American Indian and
Alaskan Native programs. My name is David Z. Bean, Vice Chairman of the
Tribal Council for the Puyallup Tribe of Indians. The Puyallup Tribe is
an independent sovereign nation having historically negotiated with
several foreign nations, including the United States in the Medicine
Creek Treaty of 1854. This relationship is rooted in Article I, Section
8, of the United States Constitution, Federal laws and numerous
Executive Orders. The governing body of the Puyallup Tribe of Indians
is the Puyallup Tribal Council which upholds the Tribe's sovereign
responsibility of self-determination and self-governance for the
benefit of the 5,427 Puyallup Tribal members and the 25,000 plus
members from approximately 355 federally recognized Tribes who utilize
our services. The Puyallup Reservation is located in the urbanized
Seattle-Tacoma area of the State of Washington. The 18,061-acre
reservation is a ``checkerboard'' of Tribal lands, Indian-owned fee
land and non-Indian owned fee land. Our reservation land includes parts
of six different municipalities (Tacoma, Fife, Milton, Puyallup,
Edgewood and Federal Way).
The Puyallup Tribe operates healthcare, social services, law
enforcement and corrections, education, and myriad other programs and
services for its Tribal citizens and individuals within its program and
service areas. These programs depend on continued resources and support
through Federal appropriations--which reflect the Federal trust and
treaty obligations with American Indian and Alaska Native people and
our Tribes. This subcommittee is well aware of how years of
chronically-inadequate funding for Indian program and the effects of
inflation have impacted Tribes' ability to fully exercise self-
determination and self-governance. We are certainly feeling those
effects at the Puyallup Tribe. We therefore appreciate this
subcommittee's continued rejection of worrying statements and budget
requests from the administration to reduce or zero-out critical Indian
programs. We also urge the subcommittee to build on the increases
included in the recent Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2019 to help
close the gap between available funding and Tribes' actual needs.
We also applaud Congress' use of indefinite appropriations for
contract support costs and support the continued use of this practice.
specific concerns
Department of Interior--Bureau of Indian Affairs
Public Safety & Justice: Tribal and BIA detention and corrections
funding is of critical importance to the Puyallup Tribe. In fiscal year
2009, the Puyallup Tribe received a $7.9 million Department of Justice
ARRA grant to construct a 28-bed adult corrections facility.
Construction on the facility was completed in February 2014 and came
online in May 2014. Since then, the Puyallup Tribe has worked closely
with the BIA-Office of Justice Services National and Regional staff to
identify the operating and staffing costs associated with the Puyallup
Tribe's new adult corrections facility. When the Tribe submitted its
initial Public Law 93-638 contract request to the BIA, the agreed upon
estimated cost of operating the facility (including Pre-Award, Start-
up, Transitional funding, Staffing, and O&M) was set at $2.6 million
annually. However, the BIA only offered approximately $715,136 to the
Tribe in fiscal year 2018 base funding. This represents only 27 percent
of the Tribe's actual need for running the facility. The Tribe is
currently in the process of submitting an updated contract request to
continue with the program, and we expect that the BIA will still only
pay a small fraction of our actual need.
In this context, we are concerned with the administration's
repeated requests to reduce appropriations for BIA Public Safety &
Justice, including Detention & Corrections--this funding already is not
sufficient to allow the BIA to fund programs at true need. We
appreciate the subcommittee's increase of $2.5 million above the fiscal
year 2018 enacted level for fiscal year 2019, rather than accepting the
administration's requested cuts, and urge the subcommittee to build on
this increase in fiscal year 2020. Public safety is especially critical
in Indian Country, but we also have a duty to provide a safe
environment for corrections personnel and individuals serving a period
of incarceration.
In addition, we operate a Tribal Court program through a Public Law
93-638 contract with the BIA. Our base BIA funding for this program has
remained at $194,996 since fiscal year 2015. Like the Detention &
Corrections funding, this amount represents only a small amount of the
Tribe's needs to fully operate the Tribal Court program. For fiscal
year 2019, the Tribe has allocated $1.923 million of Tribal funds for
the Tribal Court budget. We therefore commend the subcommittee on its
effort to reject the administration's request to reduce appropriations
for this important program by $8 million and instead increase it by
$1.6 million for the fiscal year 2019 appropriations, and suggest that
the subcommittee continue to support increased appropriations for
Tribal Courts.
Natural Resources Management: The Puyallup Tribe is the steward for
the land and marine waters of our homeland, including our usual and
accustomed fishing places and shellfish and wildlife areas. The United
States has treaty, trust, and governmental obligations and
responsibilities to manage natural resources for uses that are
beneficial to the Tribal membership and the regional communities. Our
resource management responsibilities cover thousands of square miles in
the Puget Sound region of the State of Washington with an obligation to
manage production of anadromous, non-anadromous fish, shellfish and
wildlife resources. Unfortunately, despite our diligent program
efforts, the fisheries resource is degrading, causing economic losses
on Native and Non-native fishermen, as well as the surrounding
communities.
Existing levels of appropriations are simply inadequate to reverse
the trend of resource/habitat degradation in Puget Sound and in other
areas. A minimum funding level of $17.146 million is necessary for BIA
Western Washington (Bolt) Fisheries Management program, and we urge the
subcommittee to meet or exceed this amount for fiscal year 2020
appropriations. Any increase in funding would provide new monies for
shellfish, groundfish, enforcement, habitat, wildlife and other natural
resource management needs. As the aboriginal owners and guardians of
our lands and waters it is essential that adequate funding is provided
to allow Tribes to carry out our inherent stewardship of these
resources.
The Puyallup Tribe also continues to operate a several salmon
hatcheries in the Pacific Northwest/Puget Sound. These hatcheries
benefit both Indian and non-Indian commercial and sport fisheries. We
work cooperatively with the Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission,
neighboring Tribes, Federal agencies and State fishery managers to
insure the success and sustainability of our hatchery programs. We are
confident that the subcommittee will continue to reject the
administration's requests for cuts to the Fish Hatcheries Operations
and Fish Hatchery Maintenance budgets, and urge the subcommittee to
fund these programs at or above $10.3 million for fiscal year 2020.
And finally, the Timber, Fish and Wildlife (TFW) Supplemental and
U.S./Canada Pacific Salmon Treaty programs have allowed for the
expansion of Tribal participation in the State forest practice rules
and regulations, as well as allowed Tribes to participate in inter-
Tribal organizations to address specific treaties and legal cases which
relate to multi-national fishing rights, harvest allocations, and
resource management practices. We appreciate the $65 million fiscal
year 2019 appropriation for Pacific Salmon recovery programs, and
support continued and additional appropriations to implement the TFW
Supplemental and Pacifica Salmon Treaty programs.
Education: The Puyallup Tribe operates the pre-K to 12 Chief Leschi
Schools which included a verified 2018-2019 School student enrollment
of 640 + students, including the ECEAP and FACE programs. With an
increasing number of pre-kindergarten enrollment, Chief Leschi Schools
will exceed design capacity in the near future and additional education
facility space will be necessary to provide quality educational
services to the students and Tribal community. And in the meantime, the
costs of operation and maintenance--including supplies, energy,
structural, and student transportation--continue to increase. In fiscal
year 2018, the Puyallup Tribe provided a $2.6 million subsidy for the
operations and maintenance of Chief Leschi Schools.
We are pleased that the subcommittee rejected the administration's
proposed fiscal year 2019 $741 million budget request for the Bureau of
Indian Education (BIE), which would have represented a decrease of $173
million from the fiscal year 2018 enacted level. However, the fiscal
year 2019 enacted level of $904.5 million will not meet the actual
operational needs of Tribal education programs.
The Puyallup Tribe strongly supports additional funding for the
BIE, including at least $78 million for Tribal Grant Support Costs for
Tribally Operated Schools; $109 million in facilities operations and
$76 million in facilities maintenance for the School Facilities
Account; $73 million for Student Transportation; and $431 million for
Indian School Equalization Program formula funds.
The BIA's great failing over the years, to our children's
detriment, has been its recurring failure to request sufficient funds
from Congress to maintain Tribally- and BIA-operated school facilities.
Operations of Indian Programs & Tribal Priority Allocations: We are
pleased that the subcommittee did not accept the administration's
request to cut the BIA Operation of Indian Programs budget by $26.5
million and instead increased the appropriation to $2.414 billion, an
increase of $3.3 million above the fiscal year 2018 enacted level. This
funding is critical to the Puyallup Tribe and Tribes across the
country. Tribal Priority Allocations (TPA) within the Operations of
Indian Programs include the majority of funding used to support ongoing
services at the ``local Tribal'' level, including; natural resources
management, child welfare, other education, housing, and other Tribal
government services. These functions have not received adequate and
consistent funding to allow Tribes the resources to fully exercise
self-determination and self-governance. Further, the small increases
TPA has received over the past few years have not been adequate to keep
pace with inflation. The Puyallup Tribe requests that the subcommittee
increase funding for the Operation of Indian Programs and TPA at levels
that reflect the increasing fixed costs, as well as inflation, and
reject any requests to make cuts to the BIA budget.
Department of Health and Human Services--Indian Health Service:
Inadequate funding of the Indian Health Service is the most substantial
impediment to the current Indian Health system. The Puyallup Tribe has
been operating healthcare programs since 1976 through the Indian Self-
determination Act, Public Law 93-638. The Puyallup Tribal Health
Authority (PTHA) operates a comprehensive ambulatory care program to
the Native American population in Pierce County, Washington. The
current patient load exceeds 9,000, of which approximately 1,700 are
Tribal members. There are no Indian Health Service hospitals in the
Portland Area, so all specialties and hospital care have been paid for
out of our contract care allocation. The Purchased/Referred Care (PRC)
allocation to PTHA remains inadequate to meet the actual need. In
fiscal year 2018, the Puyallup Tribe subsidized PRC with a $6.2 million
contribution. In fiscal year 2019, the Tribal subsidy has grown to
$10.9 million. Given that the PTHA service population is only comprised
of 17 percent Puyallup Tribal members, Tribal budget priorities in
fiscal year 2011 through 2018 has made continued subsidies to the PTHA
financially difficult for the Puyallup Tribe.
Given the importance of the PRC allocation, we urge the
subcommittee to continue providing increased funding above and beyond
the $2.1 million increase included in the recent fiscal year 2019
appropriations measure. IHS funding, both PRC and otherwise, continues
to lag far behind actual need; according to the National Indian Health
Board (NIHB), IHS funding provides only about 1/5 of the total Tribal
needs budget of $30 billion.
As with the BIA and BIE, the IHS also continues to request too few
funds to operate and maintain Tribally-operated and IHS-operated health
facilities. In Indian Country, facility space is precious and must be
maintained if Tribes are to provide essential government services to
their members and other eligible American Indian and Alaska Native
beneficiaries.
The enacted fiscal year 2019 budget of $5.804 billion for the IHS
is a step in the right direction, and we urge the subcommittee to
continue on that path.
[This statement was submitted by David Z. Bean, Vice-Chairman.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Ramah Navajo School Board, Inc.
Honorable Chairwoman and subcommittee Members, Ya'aht'eeh. I am
Beverly J. Coho, President of the Ramah Navajo School Board, Inc., On
behalf of the Ramah Navajo people I would like to thank you for the
opportunity to provide our oral testimony.
The People comprising the Ramah Band of Navajos--Tl' ohchini Dine'e
the People of the Place of Wild Onions--have arrived in the 21st
century intact, proud and independent. Having overcome a century of
traumatic history that began with our ancestors perched on the
precipice of extinction, followed by expropriation by foreign settlers
of our ancestral lands and then decades of neglect by the institutions
of Federal and Tribal governments, the Ramah Navajos made their mark in
the last four decades of the 20th century by taking control of their
own destiny--beginning with the establishment of the first Indian
community school governed by an all-Indian, locally-controlled school
board. The Federal Government recognizes the Ramah Navajo Community as
a separate group, the Ramah Band of Navajo Indians, which has allowed
the Community's institutions to apply directly for funding from various
Federal sources, such as Workforce Development Services and Title IV
programs. With over 40 years of institutional history, the Ramah Navajo
School Board, Inc. has developed a unique capacity to administer its
own programs and--true to its founding vision--to educate its own
people. The Ramah Navajo School Board, Inc., has become a vital
organization in providing education, medical, mental and a myriad of
social and community services needed in western portion of New Mexico
and by helping us, we help all at less cost and better services.
In order to continue to provide these vital services we ask
Congress for the following:
1.
The Government Shutdown has had a disruptive impact on our
organization. In order to prevent future harm, we ask that Congress
provide advance appropriations for the Indian Health Service and Bureau
of Indian Affairs. There was little impact on our school, because most
BIE accounts are forwarded funded (on a school year schedule).
2.
Part of providing these services means having safe, adequate
and usable facilities. Ours are not. We immediately need temporary
portables to address the fact that both our kindergarten and library
had to be closed because of black mold and also to address
overcrowding--our middle school and high school are currently crammed
into one building. In addition, dramatically and consistently increased
funding under the BIA's Education Construction Budget is needed for
Facilities Improvement and Repair; Replacement School Construction; and
Replacement Facility Construction. The fiscal year 2019 Indian Affairs
Budget Justification says there is a $634 million deferred maintenance
backlog. With regard to school replacement, we understand that the BIA
is just now finishing construction on the 2004 replacement priority
list and has made some headway on the 2016 list. This progress is
possible only because this subcommittee increased Education
Construction appropriations. More is needed, however. Despite the fact
that our school and supporting infrastructure are in desperate need of
substantial repairs, most buildings need outright replacement, and our
schools drinking water system is long past the end of its useful (and
safe) lifespan, we did not make it onto either replacement list. Our
school is unfortunately, like many others in the BIE system that have
noncompliant access, safety and health issues.
3.
With the trend of multiple school shootings, we are very
concerned for the safety of our students and staff. Our campus is
readily accessible without a security fence. We need to have control of
who enters our campus.
how we serve our community
Ramah Navajo School Board, Inc., being located in the western
county of Cibola, has grown to not only provide services to its people,
but to other non-Native people residing in neighboring counties of
McKinley and Catron on the western portion of New Mexico. Our lands are
``checker boarded'' composed of private, State, Tribal, Federal, and
Individual Indian Allotments. People have been moving into the area and
require educational and health services. For instance, our Emergency
Medical Services covers a 100-mile radius and has even responded to
emergencies in the eastern State line of Arizona. We have worked hard
in improving our EMS and we currently partnered with the University of
New Mexico EMS Consortium to provide training and Emergency management
oversite. This partnership has produced one of our own to become a
paramedic and we are planning on having our paramedic be certified to
become a trainer and have an UNM-EMS training center on-site in our
community to assist five volunteer fire departments and other first
responders. Our EMS is operating out of our federally qualified health
center, Pine Hill Health Center (PHHC) which is the only ambulatory
health center in the western portion of Cibola County. The closest IHS
hospitals are in the Pueblo of Zuni, 90-mile round trip and in the town
of Gallup, 120-mile round trip. In our area we have two national parks,
three tribes, five to six villages and 5-6 volunteer fire departments.
our history
These feisty, determined and independent accomplishments will come
as no surprise to any serious student of the historical and political
circumstances confronted by the Ramah Navajo People. Dating from the
time of the return to their ancestral homelands by the survivors of
Hweeldi, the Long Walk of the 1860s that had removed hundreds of Navajo
families from their homes and incarcerated them in the inhospitable
plains of Bosque Redondo near Ft. Sumner in eastern New Mexico, the
customary lands of the Ramah Navajos--Tl' ohchini--were never included
in the lands established for the Navajo Reservation in the Treaty of
1868 between the United States and the Navajo Tribe. Navajo occupancy
of the lands to the north and in the vicinity of the current Village of
Ramah was not legally recognized for many decades, and these lands were
thus made available as ``open range'' for homesteading by non-Indian
settlers. Mormon settlers began moving into the valley in 1876, and a
series of land acquisitions by the settlers--legally recognized under
American law--effectively pushed the Ramah Navajos onto the less
fertile lands to the southeast.
conclusion
The Ramah Navajo People have come a long way on the road to self-
determination and to establishing the capacity to govern and educate
its own people and provide services to three counties in New Mexico.
There is still a way to go on that road, and the best way to stay the
course and to continue to make progress is to maintain the current
institutional relationships that the community has forged with its
Tribal, Federal and State partners.
We look forward to your favorable consideration and plan to follow
up on our testimony that we provided today. With your help, Ramah
Navajo School Board, Inc., will continue to help all in our area.
Thank you.
To illustrate how a very modest Federal investment in our critical
infrastructure could make a tremendous difference in the health and
well-being of our students, our Priority Projects and Cost Estimates
follow. These projects are essential and reflect our immediate needs.
Project, Description and Estimated Cost
1.
School Library Building
a.
Leaking roof
b.
Mold abatement
Estimated Cost of Repair--$850,000
2.
Kindergarten Building
a.
Leaking roof
b.
Mold Remediation
c.
Asbestos Abatement
d.
Window replacements
e.
Bathrooms
f.
Carpet replacement
g.
HVAC
Estimated Cost of Repair--$300,000
3.
School Gymnasium
a.
Leaking roof
b.
Mold abatement
c.
Insulation replacement
d.
Floor Damage
e.
Locker rooms renovation/replacement
Estimated Cost of Repairs--$1,300,000
4.
Campus Security
a.
Perimeter Security Fence
b.
Interior Security fence
c.
Entrance Control
d.
Security Cameras
e.
Computers
f.
Telephone
Estimated Cost--$500,000
5.
Water System Upgrade
a.
Preliminary Engineer Report
b.
Architecture and Engineer Design
c.
Construction
Estimated Cost--$4,450,000
TOTAL PRIORITY PROJECT BUDGET--$7,400,000
______
Prepared Statement of the Recording Academy
My name is Neil Portnow, I am the President/CEO of the Recording
Academy, an organization that represents thousands of individual music
creators and professionals--songwriters, performers, studio
professionals, and others creatively involved in making music. I
appreciate the opportunity to submit this testimony to the Senate
Committee on Appropriations Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and
Related Agencies. For fiscal year 2020, I urge the subcommittee to fund
the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) at $167.5 million. For fiscal
year 2020, I urge the subcommittee to concur with the recently marked-
up House Appropriations bill and fund the National Endowment for the
Arts (NEA) at $167.5 million.
Throughout my tenure at the Recording Academy, it has been a
privilege to support the NEA and its mission to provide all Americans
with access to the arts. Every day the NEA enriches our culture and
empowers our communities through music and art. As appropriators you
have the power to ensure that the NEA can continue to strengthen the
creative capacity of our towns, counties and cities--all for less than
$1 per American per year.
At a funding level of $167.5 million, the NEA will be able to
spread diverse opportunities for arts participation across all 50
States, while expanding its grant-making capacity that has proven to be
a sound investment. In 2016, NEA funds yielded more than $500 million
in matching support--leveraging outside funds at a ratio of 9:1. The
agency is a lynchpin in America's arts economy that now accounts for
more than $700 billion in economic activity.
When it comes to music, the NEA is responsible for preserving
America's rich musical legacy and remains invaluable in the development
and education of our future music creators. Over the last decade, the
NEA has supported more than $53 million in music related grants across
all 50 States. From the Sitka Summer Music Festival in Alaska ($15,000,
2018) to the Tallahassee Youth Orchestra ($10,000, 2017) in Florida;
and from the Outpost Performance Space in New Mexico ($25,000, 2018) to
the Yellow Barn ($10,000, 2018) in Vermont, the NEA has brought music
to your back yard. It must be funded to ensure that Americans in all
walks of life can continue to enjoy and participate in the American
musical experience.
I urge the subcommittee, and your colleagues in the Senate, to
fully fund the NEA at $167.5 million, so that the agency can execute
its mission and enshrine America's commitment to the arts and to music.
______
Prepared Statement of the Regional Air Pollution Control Agency
April 23, 2019
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski, Chair
Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies
U.S. Senate
Dirksen Office Building, SD-131
Washington, DC 20510
Senator Murkowski:
This letter is written to express this agency's concern with the
administration's fiscal year 2020 budget request to Congress which
calls for steep cuts in funding to EPA, including a 33-percent
reduction in Federal grants to State and local air pollution control
agencies under Sections 103 and 105 of the Clean Air Act (CAA), for a
total of $152 million. Such cuts would be devastating for many
programs, including to the Regional Air Pollution Control Agency
(RAPCA) in Dayton, Ohio.
RAPCA appreciates the work by Congress to avoid budget cuts to
State and local clean air agencies in fiscal year 2019, however RAPCA
urges Congress to approve additional funding in fiscal year 2020 to
carry out our important public health responsibilities.
Federal grants to State and local air quality agencies are the same
now as they were 15 years ago in fiscal year 2004--$228 million. If
adjusted for inflation, level funding would translate to approximately
$310 million in today's dollars. Therefore, we ask Congress to increase
State and local air grants by $82 million above fiscal year 2019 levels
(i.e., approximately $158 million above the administration's request),
for a total of$310 million.
RAPCA is part of the Public Health--Dayton and Montgomery County
organization and is the local air pollution control agency serving
Clark, Darke, Greene, Miami, Montgomery and Preble counties in
southwest Ohio. RAPCA is directly funded by U.S. EPA to implement the
Clean Air Act and we work closely with Ohio EPA to accomplish the
functions of issuing required air permits, conducting facility
inspections and monitoring air quality, among other Clean Air Act
requirements.
While great strides have been made in cleaning up the environment,
air pollution remains a serious threat to public health. It causes tens
of thousands of premature deaths in our country every year, as well as
tens of millions of cases of adverse health impacts, such as cancer and
damage to respiratory, cardiovascular, neurological and reproductive
systems. Under the Clean Air Act, State and local air pollution control
agencies have the ``primary responsibility'' for preparing
implementation strategies to address air pollution problems. These
tasks include, among others, air quality monitoring, planning and
modeling, compiling air emission inventories, adopting regulations,
analyzing data, and inspecting facilities. In southwest Ohio, for
example, we are particularly concerned about ozone pollution and
assuring compliance of high-profile facilities such as the Stony Hollow
Landfill and the Fairborn Cement Plant in addition to being responsive
to industry business needs with regards to assisting facilities with
obtaining requisite construction air permits. Accordingly, we work with
the local Multi-Jurisdictional Planning Organization (MPO), the Miami
Valley Regional Planning Commission to alert the public by issuing
ozone air pollution advisories when air quality levels are concerning.
We also perform enhanced inspections and ambient air monitoring of
high-profile facilities, while continuing to meet ``routine'' Clean Air
Act requirements.
There are many challenges facing our agency in meeting the Clean
Air Act requirements. Reductions in staffing levels and training, as
well as staff retirements and retention are major obstacles to
accomplishing our mission to protect public health. Since 2012, RAPCA
has reduced staff by over 35 percent and additional cuts of the
magnitude proposed by the administration would devastate our program
and our ability to protect vulnerable populations from the harmful
effects of air pollution as well as provide timely services to the
regulated communities.
Maintaining the air pollution control program locally provides
stakeholders in our region with oppmiunities for input to a local
entity responsible for the air program. RAPCA staff is committed to
serving the community in which we live and dedicated to being more
responsive to the requests from the public, the media, the business
community, and to providing timelier service than the State. RAPCA is
part of the Dayton region and we seek to improve the quality of life
for all residents.
RAPCA is doing its best to improve air quality and provide quality
services to the regulated community but adequate Federal funding is
critical. Please help promote public health by ensuring Federal grants
to State and local air quality agencies are increased to keep pace with
inflation. RAPCA recommends Congress provide fiscal year 2020 grants in
the amount of $310 million ($158 million above the administration's
request) to maintain level funding from fiscal year 2004 levels,
adjusted to inflation. Thank you for any assistance you can offer in
this matter.
______
Prepared Statement of Riverside-San Bernardino County Indian Health,
Inc.
I am Teresa Sanchez and I am the Board Vice-President for
Riverside-San Bernardino County Indian Health, Inc., located in
Southern California. I am also a member of the California Area Tribal
Advisory Council and a member of the Morongo Band of Mission Indians.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit written testimony concerning
the health needs of Native Americans funded through appropriations to
the Indian Health Service (IHS). The Riverside-San Bernardino County
Indian Health, Inc., is a Tribal organization that provides health
services to our member Tribes, including behavioral health, dental,
diabetes programs, eye care, general medicine, nutrition, outreach and
pediatrics.
increased funding for tribal clinics
There is a desperate need for increased funding for Tribal clinics
to keep pace with inflation and population growth. Despite the large
increases in the overall IHS budget in fiscal year 2018, our Tribal
organization received no increase above our fiscal year 2017
allocation. We had anticipated a $1.5 million to $2 million increase
based on the national IHS budget receiving an overall 9.9 percent
increase that year, but instead we were flat funded. Even worse, we did
not find out the final amount we would receive until the last day of
the fiscal year--after services had been provided and costs had been
incurred. This situation is untenable if we are going to continue
providing the same level of services to the over 15,000 patients we
serve each year. For this reason, we support advance appropriations.
This problem has been exacerbated by agency decisions to reallocate
funds that were appropriated to ensure Tribal clinics can keep up with
the rising costs of medical care. For instance, in fiscal year 2018,
the Acting IHS Director reallocated $25 million of inflation funding to
pay for the unfunded costs of new section 105(l) leases. These funds
should have come to the clinics for base direct services funding.
Instead, IHS issued a consultation request with only 12 working days to
respond after the July 4th holiday. That is not meaningful
consultation. And, to compound matters, IHS did not inform the Tribes
of its final funding decision until mid-September. Moreover, IHS had
$33 million of unspent funding in the discretionary CHEF account (more
on that below), which they could have used to cover this shortfall, but
instead chose to roll that over into the next fiscal year, leaving
Tribal clinics coming up short. We raised the lack of transparency at
the national IHS level with the Acting Director and have received
unsatisfactory responses.
We ask that funds be appropriated for general base increases for
population growth and inflation rather than specific targeted increases
that the agency considers ``non-recurring'' or that only benefit
special projects.
increased purchased/referred care (prc) funding for ``prc dependent''
areas
Four of the 12 Indian Health Services (IHS) Areas are designated
``PRC dependent,'' meaning they have little or no access to an IHS or
tribally-operated hospital, and therefore must purchase all or a large
portion of inpatient and specialty healthcare from non-Tribal providers
at significantly higher cost.
Our region, the California Area, has no Tribal hospitals and since
we receive only limited PRC funding, we often run out of funds well
before the end of each fiscal year. This leads to the outright denial
or rationing of critically-needed inpatient and other specialty health
services. However, the formula used to allocate PRC funding to
different IHS Areas tends to treat our clinics just like those in the
remaining eight IHS areas, where PRC dollars are used to supplement
care provided at nearby IHS hospitals.
The current IHS PRC allocation formula places the ``PRC Dependent''
designation and ability to access care factor in the lowest-priority
Program Increases category. Since the Base Funding category gets funded
first, followed by the Annual Adjustment category, and then the Program
Increases category, the Program Increases category hardly ever receives
an increase.
The large appropriations for the Indian Health Care Improvement
Fund in recent years has failed to change this situation, even though
eliminating inequities in funding for PRC is a key goal of that Fund.
See 25 U.S.C Sec. 1621(a)(4). We ask that IHS be directed to address
access to care issues and prioritize this factor in the PRC formula so
we no longer have to deny necessary care to our patients due to funding
shortfalls.
changing the threshold for chef funding
For years, Tribal advocates have pushed for lowering the threshold
to access the Catastrophic Health Emergency Fund (CHEF). This fund pays
for catastrophic medical costs that rise above $25,000; any bills that
do not reach that limit are the sole responsibility of Tribal clinics
using their limited PRC funding. The IHS Acting Director has not moved
forward on the recommendation to reduce the threshold from $25,000 to
$19,000, which would provide some relief to Tribal PRC budgets, even
though the issue has gone out for comments twice in the Federal
Register.
The Acting IHS Director justified his actions by stating that in
order to change the threshold, the agency must consider an inflation
factor and with the inflation factor they were using, it would take 10
years to catch up to the existing threshold of $25,000, leaving access
to the funds limited by Tribal clinics in the meantime. However, Tribal
representatives pointed out that a great deal could change over the
next 10 years and the program had a $33,000,000 surplus for fiscal year
2018, so there is no reason to starve Tribal programs that in turn have
to cut services or deny care entirely due to a lack of funding. We ask
that you instruct the agency to lower the CHEF threshold.
We thank you for your time and consideration.
[This statement was submitted by Teresa Sanchez, Board Vice-
President.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Sac and Fox Nation
On behalf of the Sac and Fox Nation, thank you for the opportunity
to present our requests for the fiscal year 2020 Budgets for the Bureau
of Indian Affairs (BIA), the Indian Health Service (IHS), and for the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The Sac and Fox Nation has
participated in Self-Governance within the Department of the Interior
since 1991, and in 1993, became the very first Tribe to enter into a
Self-Governance compact with Indian Health Service. Historically, the
Indian Affairs budget requests have given very little consideration to
the funding needs of Self-Governance Tribes. Although efforts had been
underway to change that, the current administration removed Tribal
unmet needs from budget consideration. Self-Governance Tribes are
operating Federal programs; we request that the BIA be required to
include documentation of Tribal unmet needs with all budget requests.
We further request the removal of appropriations language that
prohibits Tribal access to shares of the BIA Central Office as provided
for in the Indian Self-Determination Education Assistance Act. The Sac
and Fox Nation requests advance, mandatory appropriations for Tribal
programs, especially BIA and IHS line items. The recent extended
shutdown of the Federal Government placed an unnecessary financial
burden on Tribes at the local level where services are actually
provided and most needed. At a minimum, BIA and IHS funding for Tribal
programs should be exempt from any budget rescissions, sequestrations
and unilateral budget reductions that are not equally assessed to all
other funding beneficiaries.
Tribal Specific Requests:
A.
+$35,000 increase to our Tribal General Assistance Program
(GAP)--EPA--The GAP program the Sac and Fox Nation is currently
administering is $115,000.
B.
+$20,000 increase to our solid waste and recycling funding
C.
+$35,000--EPA--The country's largest system of pipeline
infrastructure (the ``Pipeline Crossroads of the World'' in Cushing OK)
is in Sac and Fox jurisdiction and we need funding to monitor our
natural resources and ensure the safety of our citizens.
D.
$4.95 million to Fully Fund Operations and Maintenance of the
Sac and Fox Nation Juvenile Detention Center (SFNJDC)--Public Safety
and Justice--Office of Justice Services--Detention/Corrections Facility
Operations and Maintenance Account--BIA
E.
+$120,000 recurring funding increase specifically for Tribal
Court to fund one (1) additional FTE and additional court dates to
cover the increased caseload from expansion of VAWA and TLOA
authorities.
F.
+$180,000 recurring funding increase for Indian Child Welfare
to fund additional licensed social workers due to dramatically
increased caseload.
Tribal Specific Requests
A.
+$35,000 to our Tribal General Assistance Program (GAP)--EPA
We request a $35,000 increase to support sufficient staff
(1.5-2 FTEs) and to meet the needs of the community. The demand for our
Office of Environmental Services has dramatically escalated and created
a shortage of available resources to meet the demand. Base should be at
least $175,000. The program's purpose is to assist Tribes in building
capacity to assume EPA responsibilities. The funding needs to be
provided as stable base funding, complete with CSC, through the
Nation's funding agreement instead of as a grant.
B.
+$20,000 increase to fund solid waste and recycling--EPA
In May of 2013, the EPA released the GAP Guidance, to help
set a national framework for how GAP funding may be used. Included was
the directive that GAP funds could no longer be spent on the operation
and maintenance of solid waste implementation activities. EPA required
that Tribes build self-sustaining solid waste programs supported by
other funding sources by 2017. Tribal leaders expressed concern that
the 2017 deadline would be too quick to transition to an alternative
model to fund solid waste management. No other funding sources were set
in place of GAP to cover the services that Tribes had been providing
for their communities since 2002. In the fiscal year 2016 Consolidated
Appropriations Act, an extension was granted, giving Tribes until 2020
to transition to different funding sources for their solid waste
operations and backhaul. Beginning in fiscal year 2021, Tribal solid
waste programs will no longer be able to use GAP funds for these
specific efforts. Sac and Fox Nation supported the lifting of the 2020
moratorium, so we would no longer be prohibited from using GAP funding
to support solid waste programs. However, after the moratorium was
lifted, the budget was then cut by $10,000.00. There still remains a
lack of adequate funding for our solid waste and recycling program.
C.
$35,000--Pipeline Crossroads of the World--Located in the Sac
and Fox jurisdiction--funding needed to ensure that we can monitor our
natural resources and ensure the safety of our citizens.
The environmental impacts to our community can be significant
and life threatening. We have been collaborating with the private
pipeline entities in the area; we are the best party to monitor our
natural resources. Adequate funding will allow us to do this and remove
barriers to economic development while ensuring safety of our citizens
and preservation of our land.
D.
$4.95 million to Fully Fund Operations and Maintenance of the
Sac and Fox Nation Juvenile Detention Center (SFNJDC)--Bureau of Indian
Affairs--Public Safety and Justice--Office of Justice Services--
Detention/Corrections Facility Operations and Maintenance Account
In 1996, the Sac and Fox Nation Juvenile Detention Center
(SFNJDC) opened its doors as the first regional juvenile facility
specifically designed for American Indians/Alaska Natives (AI/AN), as
well as the first juvenile facility developed under Public Law 100-472,
the Self-Governance Demonstration Project Act. At that time, the BIA
made a commitment to fully fund the SFNJDC operations; however, this
commitment was never fulfilled. Even though the Nation continues to
receive and use Federal dollars to address the issue of juvenile
delinquency and detention for Tribes in the Southern Plains Region and
Eastern Oklahoma Region, it has never received sufficient funds to
operate the facility at its fullest potential, including funds for
proper facility maintenance. We do not understand the Federal
Government's desire to fund the construction of more detention
facilities while our beds remain empty.
The SFNJDC is a 50,000+ square foot, full service, 24 hour,
60 bed (expandable to 120 beds) juvenile detention facility that
provides basic detention services, utilizing a classification system
based on behavioral needs to include special management, medium and
minimal security. Through a partnership with the local high school,
students are afforded an education. Additionally, the Sac and Fox
Nation has an on-site Justice Center providing Law Enforcement and
Tribal Court services and the Nation also operates an on-site health
clinic which provides outstanding medical services that include
contract service capabilities for optometry, dental and other health-
related services.
Full funding would allow the Nation to provide full
operations including (but not limited to):
-- Juvenile placement and detention services at no cost to the
46 Tribes in Oklahoma, Kansas, Texas, Louisiana, Missouri and
Arkansas.
-- Re-establish and fully fund programs we have lost such as:
On-site Mental Health Counseling; Transitional Living,
Vocational Training, Horticulture, Life Skills, Arts and
Crafts, Cultural Education and Activities, Spiritual Growth and
Learning;
-- Maintain and expand staff training to improve retention and
allow for continuity in operations and service delivery.
Inadequate funding and decreases in base funding have
resulted in underutilization and erosion of the programs our facility
was built to offer. The current funding level represents only
approximately 10 percent of what is needed to fully fund the SFNJDC
operations and maintenance. Additional funding in the amount of $4.6
million, over what Sac and Fox already receives in base funding
($354,622), would fully fund the facility at a level sufficient to
address the juvenile placement and detention needs in the six-State
area.
E.
$120,000 recurring funding increase for Tribal Court Expanded
authorities under VAWA and TLOA have dramatically increased the
Nation's Court case workload. The Nation requests a recurring funding
increase to cover the expense of one (1) new FTE at the Tribal Court
and the expense of additional monthly court dates to meet demand.
F.
$180,000 recurring funding increase for Indian Child Welfare
The Nation's current caseload involves over 100 children for
two (2) social workers. The recommended number of cases per social
worker is 17, whereas ours is 50+. The requested funding increase would
allow the hiring of additional social workers at competitive pay and
also decrease the individual workload, thereby increasing the quality
of services.
2. NATIONAL REQUESTS--BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
A.
Concern: lack of access to administrative law judges for
probate.
B.
Fully fund all provisions of the TLOA that authorizes
additional funding for law and order programs that affect Tribal
Nations.
C.
Allocate $83 million in additional funding to the BIA to
increase base funding for Tribal courts, including courts in Public Law
280 jurisdictions, and to incrementally move towards fully meeting the
need for Tribal court funding.
D.
Increase funding for Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) law
enforcement and detention by at least $200 million over the fiscal year
2017 funding level of $353 million, including an increase in funds for
officer recruitment and training and for Tribal detention facilities
operations and maintenance.
E.
Increase Tribal Base Funding (instead of through grants).
Provide increases via Tribal base funding instead of through grants to
Tribal governments. Grant funding, particularly inside the BIA, is not
consistent with the intent of Tribal self-determination.
3. NATIONAL REQUESTS--INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE
A.
$6.4 billion Mandatory Funding (maintain current services) a 26
percent increase over the fiscal year 2017 enacted amount. IHS should
be considered an essential function, and be exempt from government
shutdowns.
B.
Opioid Funding--Increase funding and include Tribal set asides
in any funding decisions to states. Addressing the opioid epidemic is a
nationwide priority. American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/AN) face
opioid related fatalities three times the rate for Blacks and Hispanic
Whites.
C.
Oppose moving Special Diabetes Program for Indians (SDPI) into
the discretionary spending from the mandatory account.
The Sac and Fox Nation supports the National Requests of the
National Congress of American Indians, the National Indian Health Board
and the National Indian Education Association. Thank you for allowing
me to submit these requests on the fiscal year 2020 Budgets.
[This statement was submitted by the Honorable Kay Rhoads,
Principal Chief.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Shenandoah Valley Battlefields Foundation
Madam Chair Murkowski & Ranking Member Udall:
The attached statement is respectfully submitted on behalf of the
Shenandoah Valley Battlefields Foundation urging the subcommittee to
include fiscal year 2020 report language advising the National Park
Service that the agency has mistakenly classified the National Historic
District as a ``National Heritage Area'' contrary to the clear
congressional intent.
Title VI of Public Law 104-333 established the Shenandoah Valley
Battlefields National Historic District with the explicit intent of
creating a first-of-its kind public-private partnership for protection
and management of nationally significant cultural heritage landscapes,
referred to in the statute as a new ``management entity'', instead of
authorizing the National Park Service to acquire and manage the lands
in all of the Valley battlefields, as would have been the traditional
approach.
This new management entity is the Shenandoah Valley Battlefields
Foundation (SVBF).
Section 606 (j) of Public Law 104-333 includes authorization of 3
separate line-items of funding for the programs and activities of the
``management entity''--the Foundation:
--Not more than $2 million annually for grants and technical
assistance,
--not more than $2 million annually for land acquisition, and
--to the management entity not more than $500,000 annually.
As stated in the 2019 House Department of Interior, Environment &
Related Agencies Appropriations Bill at https://www.congress.gov/115/
crpt/hrpt765/CRPT-115hrpt765.pdf.
``Shenandoah Valley Battlefields National Historic District.--The
Committee recognizes the Shenandoah Valley Battlefields National
Historic District covering eight counties in the Commonwealth of
Virginia, and the Shenandoah Valley Battlefields Foundation that
manages and protects it, as a unique model for the protection and
preservation of nationally significant sites. The Committee urges the
National Park Service to work with the District and the authorizing
committees of jurisdiction to ensure that authorities provided under
the District's enabling legislation are fully utilized to maximize the
effectiveness of this unique and proven public-private partnership.''
The National Park Service, in our view, has mistakenly classified
SVBF, both our programs and funding, as a national heritage area (NHA)
and has only sought funding in the President's budget for SVBF as a
discretionary allocation from the lump-sum line-item appropriated to
support all of the NHA programs.
54 USC Ch. 3201 clearly classifies the Shenandoah Valley
Battlefields National Historic District as a National Battlefield Site
and NOT as a National Heritage Area. http://uscode.house.gov/
view.xhtml?req=granuleid%3AUSC-prelim-title54-
chapter3201&edition=prelim
We believe SVBF should have a distinct line-item appropriation as
do the other listed National Battlefield Sites and be increased towards
the level of funding that Congress intended to provide. We hope that
both Congress and the administration would recognize that for this
unique model to be successful and to affirm the authorization of this
``better way'' to conserve and manage nationally significant heritage
landscapes for the future through public-private partnerships, the
funding levels that Congress intended are essential.
By every measure the Foundation has been a success. Over 8,000
acres have been preserved throughout the Shenandoah Valley. The
Foundation manages over 5,000 of those acres; has developed and manages
battlefield parks; is constructing a visitor's center in Winchester and
operates the Shenandoah Valley Civil War Museum. The Foundation
provides renowned conferences tours and interpretive programs;
routinely engages community and youth groups; generate hundreds of
thousands of dollars in private donations and has increased tourism in
a measurably significant way throughout the historic district.
What is important about the programs of SVBF?
Preserving Our Battlefields Preserves Our Nation's Story.--The
preservation and interpretation of our Nation's Civil War Battlefields
is increasingly more important. These protected lands serve as outdoor
classrooms where generations can gather together and draw meaning,
strength, and inspiration from our past. Continual national reflection
and introspection is essential for the future of our country. Our
battlefields provide us with a tangible link to our history of
sacrifice and struggle and give us the forum to discuss ideas and
ideals. The preservation of our Civil War battlefields is more about
our future than our past--ensuring that the memory of that conflict is
never forgotten, and the lessons never lost.
These preservation efforts also result in many environmental
outdoor recreation benefits. Improvement of water quality, protection
of rural agricultural landscapes, and development of historic walking
trails all benefit the American citizens.
What is unique about SVBF?
The Shenandoah Valley Battlefields National Historic District was
established by Congress in 1996 as an idea ahead of its time--an idea
whose time has come. The District was established as a public private
partnership--a Federal entity to be managed in perpetuity by a private
non-profit organization, the Shenandoah Valley Battlefields Foundation.
The genius of this model is that it combined the mission and
operational directives of traditional units of the National Park System
with the efficiency and effectiveness of the private sector. This
allowed for the building of more robust partnerships; the generation of
millions of dollars in private funding; quick reaction to preservation
opportunities; and business systems that allow for lean and cost-
effective operation. Unlike National Heritage Areas, the Shenandoah
Valley Battlefields National Historic District was tasked with
purchasing and protecting in perpetuity large swaths of open space and
historic sites. In addition to promoting and generating heritage
tourism like traditional National Heritage Areas, the District was
created to provide directly for the experience of visitors--more like a
National Park. Trails, interpretive signage, and visitor centers along
with original educational programing and partner support were all
envisioned as part of District's unique model.
It's a model that's worked at a fraction of the cost to the Federal
Government when compared to more traditional NPS approaches to
battlefield management and interpretation.
Accomplishments on behalf of the American people:
The Shenandoah Valley Battlefields Foundation has facilitated the
preservation of over 8,000 acres of Civil War Battlefields and today
manages over 5,200 acres. The SVBF has installed and maintained over 10
miles of interpretive and recreational trails; designed and installed a
district-wide system of historic markers; produced visitor's guides;
driving tours and wayfinding aids; published original histories and
interpretive booklets; and provided educational programing to youth and
adults alike. The lands managed by the SVBF have provided outdoor
recreation opportunities for visitors and local residents and have been
maintained with as much concern for the natural resources that they
contain as the historic resources they protect.
The SVBF has opened six visitor orientation centers, one
battlefield visitor center, and a museum; preserved collections of
artifacts, rare books, letters, documents and furnishings; and opened
Battlefield parks, restoring much of their 19th century appearance with
historic fencing, cannon and vegetation. The SVBF interprets and
provides visitor services at 20 Civil War battlefields and hundreds of
related historic sites throughout the Valley, including major sites at
McDowell, Cross Keys, Fisher's Hill, Cedar Creek, and Second
Winchester, the 600-acre Third Winchester Battlefield Park and Third
Winchester Visitor Center, five interpretive trails, and the Shenandoah
Valley Civil War Museum.
Interpretive programs include conferences, tours, major events,
interpretive markers, driving tours, booklets, films, panels, signage,
and exhibits. SVBF education and outreach programs serve pre-K through
college age youths with on-site, interactive, and in-school
initiatives, printed and web-based resources, and support for home
school programs and school systems throughout the District.
What is the economic impact of the National Historic District?
The Valley's numerous battlefields and related historic sites are
major heritage tourism attractions. The consulting firm of Tripp Umbach
was recently retained by the Heritage Development Partnership to
measure the economic, employment, and government revenue impacts of
operations and research of 5 national heritage areas including the
Shenandoah Valley Battlefields National Historic District. Tripp Umbach
stated our historic district generates $293.2 million in economic
impact, supports 3,930 jobs and generates $20.4 million in tax revenue.
These numbers will only go up with the projects planned for the future.
Our outstanding work on behalf of the Congress of the United States
has resulted in achieving the aims of the Congress at reduced cost from
NPS sites and even more can be accomplished such as:
Preservation.--Preserving additional battlefield property through
fee simple acquisition or donated easements. Any Federal money expended
through the American Battlefield Protection Program is leveraged by
State matching funds and private donations.
Stewardship.--Employing the highest and best standards for the
treatment of historic and natural landscapes; protecting resources
while providing for the enjoyment thereof through greater public
access.
Heritage Tourism.--Enhancement of existing or creation of
additional battlefield parks throughout the valley. These battlefield
parks are beacons for tourism and history education; often used heavily
by the local population for outdoor recreation.
Interpretation.--Meaningful upgrades to the District's
interpretation including new exhibits that highlight not only military
history but also the war-time experience of women, children and free
and enslaved African-Americans; and new virtual and augmented reality
programs, an electric map and hands-on exhibits.
[This statement was submitted by Keven Walker, CEO.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Shoalwater Bay Indian Tribe
The requests of the Shoalwater Bay Indian Tribe (Tribe) for the
fiscal year 2020 Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies budget are
as follows:
--Support appropriation of funds through the Tribe's self-government
agreement with the BIA to address additional planning efforts
for a necessary Tribal relocation.
--Continue full funding for Contract Support Costs (CSC).
--Maintain adequate funding for Section 105(l) Clinic Leases
--Fund IHS in advance in parity with the Veterans Administration
--Maintain mandatory funding for the Special Diabetes Program for
Indians (SDPI)
background
Thank you for inviting the Shoalwater Bay Indian Tribe to provide
testimony today. My name is Charlene Nelson, and I am the Chairwoman of
the Shoalwater Bay Indian Tribe which is located 2,800 miles west by
northwest of where we are meeting today on the beautiful north shore of
Willapa Bay, facing out to the Pacific Ocean. As the Chairwoman of the
Tribe, and in my former career as an educator and commercial fisherman,
I have learned firsthand that vibrant and successful Indian communities
are not possible without first attending to human health of the
community members and also ensuring the health of the environment. I
appreciate that this Committee is also responsible for those same
priorities, and it is in that shared spirit of community responsibility
that I speak to you today.
relocation assistance
My first priority today is to ask you to ensure that BIA planning
and assistance funds are available for our critical and ongoing fight
to protect our Tribe against the imminent danger of coastal erosion and
tsunami inundation, which could wipe out our entire reservation. Our
reservation, with one small exception, is no higher than 6 feet above
the ordinary high water mark of the Willapa Bay tides, and this low
elevation places the entire reservation squarely within a tsunami zone.
Think about that for a moment-an entire Tribe wiped out in an instant.
This danger is aggravated by climate change which is increasing sea
levels and the intensity of extreme weather events that, in addition to
tsunami danger, threaten our coastal community.
One way that we are addressing this immediate threat is through the
construction of a 50-foot tsunami evacuation tower using funds from
FEMA and the Tribe that is designed to allow our Tribal members and
other local residents to survive a tsunami event. However, this project
will only protect the lives of those that are able to reach it in time,
and will not prevent the flooding of our homes, schools, roads and
infrastructure.
That is why the Tribe is continuing its efforts to permanently
relocate to higher elevation land that the Tribe already owns. The
Tribe seeks funds to continue the engineering, planning and
construction of a road to an upland elevation, out of the tsunami zone,
and to begin the relocation process of the Tribe. The costs to carry
out this next phase of work are very high, and the Tribe seeks this
subcommittee's support in ensuring funds are available to support these
efforts through the Tribe's existing BIA self-governance compact. The
new road will provide access to a higher elevation land base that is
safe from the threats of coastal erosion and tsunami. This relocation
project will require a number of partners that have a stake in ensuring
the safety of the Tribe: the Tribe, Washington State, Department of
Interior and the Army Corps of Engineers.
While our request today is for planning and implementation funds
for the Tribe from the BIA, other temporary efforts are under serious
consideration. For instance, realizing how dire she situation is, the
State and Corps of Engineers are working together to define a joint
project for a dynamic revetment to help protect the berm to prevent
further erosion and encroachment of water on our reservation lands.
However, the Tribe also needs its own resources to be actively involved
in what ultimately is our own relocation.
We appreciate that the 2019 House Interior Appropriations report
specifically highlights the needs of coastal Tribes and gave the
following direction: ``The Committee supports the Bureau of Indian
Affairs' efforts to address the needs of coastal Tribal communities by
working to address threats to public safety, natural resources, and
sacred sites. Consistent with the Federal Government's treaty and trust
obligations, the Committee directs the Bureau of Indian Affairs to work
with at-risk Tribes to identify and expedite the necessary resources.''
We ask the subcommittee to follow-up with the BIA on this directive.
contract supports costs
We greatly appreciate the House and Senate Interior appropriations
subcommittees work over the past several years in making a reality the
full payment of Contract Support Costs (CSC) by both the IHS and the
BIA. We are also very pleased that the administration has continued to
request that CSC be maintained as a separate appropriations account in
IHS and in BIA, and with an indefinite funding of ``such sums as may be
necessary''. This action has been crucial to the strengthening of
Tribal governments' ability to successfully exercise their rights and
responsibilities as sovereign governments.
section 105(l) clinic leases
We are gratified that IHS has been funding Section 105(l) leases
for tribal health clinics under its responsibility as confirmed by the
2016 Federal court decision in Maniilaq v. Burwell, which held that
section 105(l) of the ISDEAA provides an entitlement to full
compensation for leases of Tribal facilities used to carry out ISDEAA
agreements. We appreciate your supplemental appropriations in fiscal
year 2019 to cover these costs, and we ask that funding continue to be
made available for these important leases. This Committee has invited
IHS to submit a report on the budget impact of meeting its
responsibility. We oppose any appropriations rider, such as those
included in the administration's budget proposals for fiscal year 2018
and fiscal year 2019, which would allow IHS to avoid its responsibility
to fully compensate Tribes. Tribes and Tribal organizations
increasingly rely on section 105(l) leases to address chronically
underfunded facilities operation, maintenance, and replacement costs.
Congress declined to include such a provision in the fiscal year 2019
IHS appropriation and we ask that you treat this year's upcoming
proposal the same way.
ihs advance appropriations
We thank Ranking Member Udall. Representative Don Young, and House
Interior Appropriations Chair McCollum and Ranking Member Joyce for
introducing legislation to authorize advance appropriations for IHS and
programs in the BIA and BIE. Under advance appropriations we would know
a year in advance what the budget would be and importantly, would not
be continue to be constrained by the start and stop level funding of
Continuing Resolutions, each of which requires the same processing and
manpower for each partial payment as one full apportionment. When IHS
funding is subject to a Continuing Resolution, we receive only a
portion of annual funding at a time, making it particularly difficult
to implement long-range planning and staffing. Even if CRs had not
become the norm, having advance notice of funding levels would aid
greatly in our health programs planning, recruitment, retention, and
leveraging of funds. Finally, we note again that the Veterans
Administration health accounts have been receiving advance
appropriations since fiscal year 2010. Both the VA and the IHS provide
direct medical care and both are the result of Federal policies. The
IHS budget should be afforded the same status as the VA.
special diabetes program for indians (sdpi)
Last year, the administration proposed, with no real explanation of
why, that a number of health programs funding be changed from a
mandatory to a discretionary status. Among them was the SDPI program.
Congress rejected this proposal and we thank you for that. We are
relieved that the fiscal year 2020 budget does not repeat this request.
We were concerned that discretionary funding could lead to a reduction
in funding for this critical program which has demonstrated good
results in Indian Country. The current SDPI authorization extends
through fiscal year 2019 and we hope that the authorization can be made
permanent and at an increased funding level of $200 million or higher.
A permanent reauthorization with mandatory annual funding of $200
million would allow us to recruit and retain personnel to deliver
badly-needed services to more of our members.
conclusion
Thank you for your consideration of the concerns and requests of
the Shoalwater Bay Indian Tribe. I would be happy to provide any other
additional information as requested by the subcommittee.
[This statement was submitted by Charlene Nelson, Tribal
Chairwoman.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Shoshone-Paiute Tribes of the Duck Valley
Indian Reservation
The Shoshone-Paiute Tribes of the Duck Valley Indian Reservation
appreciate the opportunity to submit written testimony concerning the
fiscal year 2020 budget for the BLM, BIA, and IHS. The Shoshone-Paiute
Tribes are grateful for this subcommittee's long standing support of
Indian Tribes and for sharing its understanding of Indian Country with
your Senate colleagues.
As Congress has done for fiscal year 2019, and for each year of the
current administration, we ask that the subcommittee reject the
administration's ill-conceived fiscal year 2020 budget, which calls for
unwarranted reductions of 14 percent for the Department of the Interior
and the programs critical to Tribes in the Office of Indian Programs
(OIP). If enacted the budget would cause great harm to the Duck Valley
Indian Reservation and to most Native Americans who, more than most
Americans, rely heavily on Federal appropriations across multiple
Federal agencies, not just Interior and DHHS. We encourage this
subcommittee to build on the increases in the fiscal year 2019
appropriation for these essential Tribal programs.
The Duck Valley Reservation is a large, rural and very remote
reservation comprising 450 square miles located on the Nevada and Idaho
border. The Reservation is 140 miles south of Boise, Idaho, and 100
miles north of Elko, Nevada. Many of our 2,500 Tribal members make
their living as farmers and ranchers, though a number of them are
employed by the Tribes. We assume most duties of the BIA and IHS under
self-governance compacts, although the BIA continues to provide law
enforcement, detention and road maintenance services on our
Reservation.
In too many instances, however, our success in program delivery is
largely dependent on Federal appropriations which, in turn, determine
whether economic and social conditions on the Duck Valley Indian
Reservation improve or worsen. While we contribute Tribal resources to
these endeavors as best we can, we look to our Federal partner for
support. If we fall short in available funding, our Tribal citizens
suffer. For that reason, I write to express our Tribes' strong
opposition to the President's fiscal year 2020 budget for BIA, IHS, BLM
and the other programs funded under the Interior, Environment and
Related Agencies appropriations that face deep cuts. Our priorities for
fiscal year 2020 include:
1. Increase funding for the BIA Public Safety and Special
Initiatives Program.--The BIA struggles to provide adequate law
enforcement on our 450 square mile Reservation. For that reason, we
applaud the fiscal year 2019 enacted appropriations levels for Public
Safety and Justice totaling $411 million, and urge the Committee to
support sensible increases next year. We reject the administration's
unwise proposed cuts to BIA Public Safety funding. We have seen in
increase in alcohol and substance abuse and resulting juvenile
delinquency on our Reservation. The BIA Western Region has reduced the
BIA Law Enforcement Officers serving Duck Valley from eight to three
full-time officers. This leaves us short staffed, especially after
hours. We request an increase of funding to BIA Criminal Investigations
and Police Services to restore our police department to appropriate
levels. The BIA Construction budget for fiscal year 2020 is also
insufficient to address the pressing need for modern detention
facilities and housing for law enforcement and detention personnel.
We are also witnessing an increase in alcohol and substance abuse
on our reservation, and resulting juvenile delinquency.
We renew our request for statutory language in the fiscal year 2020
appropriation to make clear that ``Law Enforcement Special
Initiatives'' funds may be used for the purchase or lease temporary
trailers or modular units to house personnel associated with law
enforcement, corrections, probation, Tribal courts and other
professionals serving Tribal communities. For rural communities like
Duck Valley, housing is often the linchpin to program success. This
request will give us the flexibility we need to use Special Initiatives
funding for housing law enforcement and corrections personnel.
2. Increase BIA Road Maintenance Program funds (Eastern Nevada BIA
Roads Program of the Western Regional Office).--We respectfully ask for
at least a $10 million increase in the BIA Road Maintenance Program for
fiscal year 2020 so that the BIA Eastern Nevada Agency Roads Department
can purchase a road grader, backhoe, a front-end loader, a D7
Caterpillar dozer, ten-wheel dump truck and other heavy equipment. We
appreciate the fiscal year 2019 increase, but it alone will not provide
sufficient funds to replace obsolete heavy equipment required for
maintenance. It has been over 25 years since BIA sought supplemental
funds for one-time heavy equipment purchases for road maintenance. The
1980's blade road grader and backhoe are broken down and parts are
difficult to find. The dozer is a 1960's model, and the front-end
loader and backhoe are from the 1970's.
Our Region, the BIA Western Region, has the largest percentage of
BIA-owned roads at 21 percent. The BIA Eastern Nevada Agency covers the
roads maintenance need for the 600 miles of public roads on the Duck
Valley Reservation and the road maintenance needs on five other
reservations which are hundreds of mile apart throughout northeastern
Nevada. The requested increase we request will help our Region
tremendously. Road maintenance allows fire trucks and equipment to
access fires that occur in the mountains and desert areas of the Duck
Valley Reservation, thereby protecting reservation lands and property.
3. Telecommunications (fiber optics).--The Tribes continue to need
fiber infrastructure over 5 miles for connectivity among Fish, Wildlife
& Parks, Tribal Headquarters, Detention Center, Fire Station and the
Owyhee Community Health Facility. The health center serves as the Wide
Area Network (WAN) hub for the Tribes' and health center's computer
network. Connectivity among these facilities and programs would
alleviate the long-term monthly recurring cost we pay to an Ethernet
Circuit provider ($96,000 annually). We require $500,000 in Federal
funding to construct new fiber networks and cover construction
inspection fees. We urge the subcommittee to increase appropriations
within the BIA and IHS budgets so that Duck Valley can improve our
telecommunications networks. Education IT is not the only program in
need of an upgrade.
4. IHS.--The Tribes appreciate the $266 million increase Congress
provided for fiscal year 2019 for the Indian Health Service (IHS),
above the fiscal year 2018 level. We seek fiscal year 2020 increases,
especially in the area of clinical services, including Purchased/
Referred Care and facilities construction. The Tribes continue to
support full funding of Contract Support Costs (CSCs) for IHS and BIA,
and thank the subcommittee for its work to fully fund these costs
without jeopardizing program funding for health services. Our members,
like other Native Americans, continue to have a disproportionate
disease burden greater than other Americans. We encourage the
Subcommittee to continue its bipartisan efforts to raise the health
status of Native Americans.
5. Fund the Owyhee Initiative within the Bureau of Land Management
(BLM).--The Owyhee Initiative is a joint effort by ranchers,
recreationalists, county and State officials, and the Shoshone-Paiute
Tribes to protect known Tribal sacred sites, and to manage and
appropriately use public lands in southwestern Idaho. In 2009, Congress
passed the Omnibus Public Land Management Act, Public Law 111-11. Since
2010, we have worked jointly with BLM to protect cultural resources and
increase public understanding and appreciation of these resources as a
part of the Cultural Resources Protection Plan authorized by the Owyhee
Initiative. Recreational use and encroachment by visitors within the
Owyhee River Wilderness Area and other Federal lands continues to
increase and threatens important cultural resources.
The BLM's Boise District manages 3 million acres of land in this
rough remote area and they have 3-4 Rangers in their entire district.
Over the last few years, BLM funding to the Tribes for Tribal Cultural
programs have dwindled and ceased. We have had to eliminate the Tribal
Chief Ranger position that was critical to protecting culturally
significant sites in Owyhee County. For this reason, we oppose the
administration's plan to reduce BLM funding for fiscal year 2020 by
more than $150 million below the fiscal year 2019 level.
One-time BLM funding a number of years ago allowed us to purchase
two Cessna planes, ATV equipment, a truck, and hire a Chief Ranger to
patrol public lands and report violations of cultural and religious
sites to BLM officials. One of the two planes is a trainer (Cessna 150)
and its engine is beyond its service life per FAA requirements. We work
closely with BLM and County officials to coordinate compatible
recreation use within BLM lands in Owyhee County, especially within the
wilderness areas where we seek to protect cultural resource sites
important to our Tribes. The Ranger, Cultural Resources Director, and
Tribal Chairman, while on patrols occasionally report wildfires to BLM
officials before they cause greater damage to sensitive, remote public
lands. These resources are no longer available to us, our program
outreach is limited, and the equipment we purchased is now aging and
requires replacement.
We seek recurring BLM funds to continue this important work to
protect cultural sites and establish a Reserve Ranger Program to engage
Tribal youth in cultural and related activities during the summer. It
is essential that we hire and train replacement staff, including a
pilot, to continue this important work. We need funds to hire an
Assistant Director, one adult Tribal Ranger and two part-time Youth
Rangers, train a qualified applicant as an additional pilot, purchase
ATVs and camp trailers to permit Tribal personnel to remain in the
field, and repair the planes to meet FAA regulations. For several
years, we requested $500,000 to construct a hangar at the Owyhee
Airport to centralize our operation and increase surveillance flights.
We contribute 100 percent of the required budget for our Cultural
Resources Director but cannot sustain important cultural resources
programs without Federal support. Please increase available BLM and BIA
programs to help pay for this important work which helps build self-
esteem in our members, especially Tribal youth. It is a wise investment
in people.
We support additional funding for BLM Cultural Resources Management
and other BLM accounts used to manage and protect archaeological and
historic properties on public lands. BLM lands contain the remnants of
campsites, villages, hunting blinds and rock inscriptions that tell the
story of the Shoshone-Paiute and other Tribes. After speaking with
Shoshone-Bannock Tribal officials, together with northern tier Nevada
Tribes (including the Te-Moak Bands, Battle Mountain, South Fork, Elko,
and Wells) and the Goshute Tribes, we seek BLM funds to form a Tribal
work group to spread best practices for cultural resources management
and protection that we have learned over decades of experience. Please
fund the multi-Tribal task force which can develop strategies for on
the ground protection of Native American cultural resources for the
Upper Great Basin and High Plateau of the tri-State area of Nevada,
Oregon and Idaho.
6. Native Plant Program/Greenhouse.--In cooperation with BLM, the
Tribes gather, propagate and make available seed and other native plant
materials that are indigenous to the region. Through a series of
assistance agreements with BLM, we built three greenhouses and are
growing seedlings (including sagebrush and bitterbrush seedlings) for
planting on adjacent public lands. This program assists BLM and other
agencies in their efforts to restore lands damaged by wildfires with
native species and helps employ Tribal members. In prior years, we set
as our goal 80,000 containerized grasses and shrub seedlings, together
with willow and other riparian plant cuttings and local vegetables for
sale and distribution through our ``Honor Our Elders'' program.
We seek Interior Department appropriations of $450,000 in fiscal
year 2020 to build additional greenhouses and a facility to house
equipment to dry, clean and store seed and to hire part-time greenhouse
staff for marketing and finances. The Tribes request $200,000 in each
of fiscal year 2020 and fiscal year 2021 for staff and operations to
expand our program and be a reliable supplier of native plants and
seedlings on BLM-managed public lands.
We thank the subcommittee for its work on behalf of American
Indians and Alaska Natives. We urge the subcommittee to build on its
fiscal year 2019 budget for Interior, Environment and Related Agencies
to meet Tribal health and safety needs that strengthen our community in
fiscal year 2020 and beyond.
The Shoshone-Paiute Tribes of Duck Valley Indian Reservation thank
you for the opportunity to submit written testimony regarding our
funding needs.
______
Prepared Statement of the Skokomish Tribe of Washington State
The Skokomish Tribe would like to thank the subcommittee for the
opportunity to present written testimony on the fiscal year 2020
appropriations for the Interior Department, Indian Health Service (IHS)
and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The Skokomish Indian Tribe
is responsible for providing essential governmental services to the
residents of the Skokomish Indian Reservation. We are a rural community
located at the base of the Olympic Peninsula with a population of over
2,000 people, including approximately 740 Tribal members.
The Tribe provides Education, Healthcare services, Housing, Public
Safety, and Social Services. We also have one of the premier Tribal
Natural Resources programs in the country. Thus, adequate Federal funds
are critical to the Tribe's ability to address the extensive unmet
needs of our community. An area of overall concern is that the Tribe's
Self-Governance compact has not received a programmatic increase in
years. Consequently, while we are expected to do more with these
programs, we are not provided any increases in funding to do this work.
I. BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
Law Enforcement.--The Skokomish Department of Public Safety (SDPS)
provides 24/7 law enforcement services for the Tribe. SDPS is
responsible for patrolling and enforcing justice both within the
Tribe's 5,300-acre Reservation, and throughout the Tribe's 2.2 million-
acre Treaty area where the Tribe has Treaty-protected hunting, fishing
and gathering rights.
There are 700 plus square miles of ocean and 7 plus miles of river
to patrol. During harvest season, Tribal fishermen are often confronted
by non-Tribal individuals. There are active attempts to interfere with
fishing. Many times, with the resources available, SDPS can only be
reactive. Today, 7 full-time officers and 1 part-time officer are
available for day-to-day patrol duties. Consequently, individual
officers are spread far too thin over 10 hour shifts and often work
alone over this vast area.
This staffing level exposes both community members in need of
assistance and SDPS officers to increased risk. Constant adjustments to
the duty roster create coverage gaps where no officers are on duty.
These gaps range from as little as 2 hours to as many as 12 hours.
Unfortunately, this is reality for SDPS. To meet mandated
responsibilities, staffing must be increased for the SDPS.
Like other communities, narcotics and its related issues are a
priority. The impact on our community has been devastating. However,
staffing limitations make it very difficult to conduct proactive drug
operations and investigations. As a result, SDPS have had to rely on
the Sheriff's Office Narcotics Team which is now disbanded due to
budget cuts at the county level.
With the limited amount we receive as a self-governance Tribe, we
have to use Tribal funds to hire the 5 officers who we use for regular
patrol and 2 who are responsible for natural resource enforcement. The
Tribe urges the Committee to appropriate additional funding for
criminal investigations and police services. The BIA has requested
essentially level funding in this program when the need throughout
Indian country is far greater.
Tribal Courts.--For too long the BIA failed to provide funding to
Tribes in Public Law 280 States. Recently, Congress recognized this
deficiency and provided for the first time to address our need. We
would urge Congress to maintain this funding level in fiscal year 2020.
The Skokomish Tribal Court handles Civil, Criminal, Indian Child
Welfare, and School Attendance cases. The Skokomish Tribal Court
appoints attorneys for all people charged with criminal offenses in
Tribal Court.
One of our critical judicial dockets is our child welfare cases. As
of February 27, 2019, the Tribal Court has 32 (thirty-two) active Child
in Need of Care cases and 46 (forty-six) active Guardianship cases.
Eight (8) Child in Need of Care cases and 6 (six) Guardianship cases
were filed in fiscal year 2018. The Skokomish Tribe set a goal to
provide attorneys to low income Tribal Members who are involved in
Indian Child Welfare cases. We need increased BIA Tribal court funding
to support this effort.
Natural Resources.--The Skokomish Tribe strongly supports
increased, Natural Resources funding, which is necessary to foster
sustainable stewardship and development of natural resources and
support our fishing, hunting and gathering rights on and off-
Reservation. These resources are essential to our people, who depend on
natural resources for their livelihood, not to mention their identity
as Indians.
One area of critical concern is fish hatchery cyclical maintenance
and fish hatchery operations. This funding is invaluable for supporting
the Federal Government's investment in Tribal hatcheries. Most Tribal
hatcheries are underfunded and each year brings more decay to the
facilities. Adequate funding for hatchery maintenance is imperative to
prevent these important pieces of the salmon restoration puzzle from
crumbling away. Because of habitat destruction, the only reason we
continue to have salmon for Treaty-harvest activities is through the
operation of salmon hatcheries. Congress cannot allow the main pillar
of this all important Treaty right to take a reduction in funding. We
urge Congress to increase funding for this critical program which
provides jobs as well as a critical food source--and mainstay of our
diet--to our members.
In recent decades, the Tribe has noticed a precipitous drop in the
elk populations upon which the Tribe depends for subsistence and
ceremonial needs. In 2008, the Tribe was able to cobble together a
wildlife program to remedy this problem thanks to a U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Tribal grant that the Tribe has been successful in obtaining
only twice. Unfairly, once a Tribe has received the funding they are
automatically placed further down the grant priority list and are less
likely to receive the money again. The wildlife program is now
partially funded by Timber, Fish, and Wildlife funds with the Tribe
scrounging to find the remaining money internally necessary to complete
this work, let alone take on new tasks such as the reintroduction of
fishers into the Olympia National Forest.
The Tribe needs wildlife program funds not only to support
biologists, but additional funding is required to dedicated wildlife
enforcement officers who will not only enforce the Tribes' regulations,
but ensure that poaching of the wildlife resources does not occur from
outside entities who sometimes fail to recognize Tribal Treaty rights.
We request additional funds in the amount of $240,000 so we will have
stable funding for a complete wildlife program including a biologist,
technician and three wildlife officers. Without a more robust program,
the wildlife populations will continue to decline at the current
alarming rate.
The Tribe has also been under attack by shellfish growers who
blatantly steal the Treaty-protected geoduck, oyster and clam resources
in Hood Canal. It is imperative that the Federal Government increase
funding so the Tribe may increase its enforcement presence and seek
reparations though the courts. As with wildlife, shellfish issues are
often overlooked because of the popularity of salmon, but the
availability of this equally-important resource to the Tribe is
dwindling and action must be taken now to prevent a further decline. We
suggest an additional $250,000 for shellfish management and rights
protection in fiscal year 2020. This would allow for additional
population surveyors, harvest monitors, and enforcement officers.
Shellfish companies and private citizens are gobbling up this limited
resource, blocking the Tribe from obtaining its fair share of
shellfish. Only by securing these lands will they be preserved in
perpetuity for generations to come.
The Skokomish Tribe wants to express support for continued climate
change funding. We see its impact on every aspect of our life. For
example, due to ocean acidification, shellfish cannot produce a shell,
leaving them deformed and non-viable, and in the Hood Canal we have had
to close all but ceremonial crab fisheries due to low oxygen levels. It
is imperative that funding be provided to focus on the impact of
climate change on trust resources.
II. INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE
We operate a small ambulatory health program with a staff of 27. As
a Tribally run clinic, we provide direct care services as well as
purchased/referred care. Our health program integrates medical, dental,
and behavioral health services (mental health and substance use
disorder), and we continue to support the integration of these
services.
We continue to use the Indian Health Service's Tele-Behavioral
Health Center of Excellence for mental health services with limited
success. Our data reports show that we have increased patient case-
loads for our on-site mental health personnel. We do not have the money
available in our limited compact funding to hire additional staff even
though there continues to be an increase in need.
We continue to see the effects of heroin use and opioid abuse in
all ages at an alarming rate. The Skokomish Tribe struggles to find the
resources to adequately address the treatment and long term needs of
those members struggling with addiction. We see the need for more long
term treatment facilities to address the needs of individuals who can
benefit from such treatment programs so that they may continue their
journey of wellness far beyond the current 30 to 45-day in-patient
treatment process. A short-term stay is often not adequate time to be
healed from addiction and our Tribal members, who have no alternate
housing, often return to the community only to re-establish their old
habits and slip back into addiction.
The Skokomish Tribe is a grantee of the 5-year SAMSHA Native
Connections project and its focus on improving mental health services
and addressing substance use disorder as a way to prevent suicide has
the promise to raise the overall health status of our Tribal members.
Our program has been effective through outreach to provide suicide
prevention information to the grant required identified group of 10-24
year olds. Based on feedback from this group, we see the increased need
for outreach to assist with bullying, ``vaping,'' ``cutting,'' and
other harmful and dangerous habits.
We support an increase in the small ambulatory facility program for
fiscal year 2020 since this is the only IHS funding that Northwest
Tribes have been able to access for construction projects due to the
current facilities' priority system that favors larger health programs.
III. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
The environment has always been a point of emphasis for Tribes and
the Skokomish Tribe is no different. The President's proposed cut to
the EPA would be devastating to the progress already made in keeping
the tradition of fishing alive for Skokomish Tribal members. Fishing
has been a mainstay for the generations of Tribal members who rely on
it as a means to put food on the table. Fish and shellfish are a part
of the regular diet for Tribal members and their families. It has been
cited in various literature that Coastal indigenous communities eat
about 15 times more seafood than the rest of the population. In order
to maintain this healthy diet, the fish need to be able to swim in
clean water. This large consumption of fish and shellfish has been a
reason that the Skokomish Tribe has had one of the lowest rates of
diabetes among the Northwest Tribes.
Thank you for the opportunity for the Skokomish Tribe to submit
testimony.
______
Prepared Statement of the Southcentral Foundation
My name is Donna Galbreath and I am the Medical Director of Quality
Assurance for the Southcentral Foundation (SCF). SCF is the Alaska
Native Tribal health organization designated by Cook Inlet Region, Inc.
and 11 federally-recognized Tribes--the Aleut Community of St. Paul
Island, Igiugig, Iliamna, Kokhanok, McGrath, Newhalen, Nikolai,
Nondalton, Pedro Bay, Telida, and Takotna--to provide healthcare
services to beneficiaries of the Indian Health Service (IHS) pursuant
to a government-to-government contract with the United States under
authority of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act
(ISDEAA), Public Law 93-638. SCF is a two-time recipient of the Malcolm
Baldridge National Quality Award for health (2011 and 2017).
SCF, through our 2,300 employees, provides critical health
services, including pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecology, Native men's
wellness, dental, behavioral health and substance abuse treatment to
over 65,000 Alaska Native and American Indian patients. This includes
52,000 people living in the Municipality of Anchorage, the Matanuska-
Susitna Borough to the north, and 13,000 residents of 55 rural Alaska
Native villages. Our service area encompasses over 100,000 square
miles, an area the size of Wyoming. More so than any other affiliation
of Tribes, Alaska Native people have assumed the broadest
responsibilities under the ISDEAA to own and manage healthcare systems
which, together with the Alaska Public Health System, serve 150,000
Alaska Native and American Indian people and thousands of non-Native
residents in rural Alaska.
I want to thank this subcommittee for its continued leadership in
securing significant increases in Federal appropriations for the Indian
Health Service. The recent Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2019's
increase of total appropriations for IHS to $5.804 billion, a $266.4
million increase over the fiscal year 2018 enacted level represents
continued movement in the right direction. My remarks today are simple:
continue to increase Federal appropriations for IHS programs and
services until health disparities between Alaska Native and American
Indian people and other Americans are extinguished. At present, IHS per
capita spending on healthcare for Alaska Native and American Indian
people is about one-third of the average national per capita healthcare
spending level. Today, we are also fighting an opioid epidemic which is
taking a disproportionate toll on Alaska Native people. As Congress has
noted, the opioid epidemic has devastated communities and torn apart
families across our country. This is just as true in our communities in
Alaska. With a service population of 65,000, our resources are wholly
insufficient in comparison to the crisis.
We are extremely troubled by the current administration's continued
comments and actions that seek to undermine the sovereign status of
Alaska Native and American Indian Tribes. We therefore ask that the
subcommittee reject any efforts by the administration to eliminate or
cut appropriations to Indian healthcare programs. Investing in Native
healthcare will only improve the health of the Nation's first peoples,
and we applaud this subcommittee's commitment to that goal.
1.
Reduce the Disparity in Federal Healthcare Expenditures for Alaska
Native and American Indian People
We recommend that subcommittee prioritize general program increases
which are shared equally by all Tribal programs. We are pleased to see
that in fiscal year 2019 appropriations for the IHS, Congress included
significant increases shared by all Tribal programs, such as a $102
million increase for Hospitals and Health Clinics, an $8 million
increase for Indian health professions, a $2 million increase for Urban
Indian Health, and a $4.1 million increase for Public Health Nursing.
We do note, however, that Congress only moderately increased the
appropriations for Purchased/Referred Care by $2.1 million and did not
increase the amounts available for Facilities Maintenance and
Improvement, which are critical budget items in need of increased
resources. By the estimate of the National Indian Health Board (NIHB),
IHS funding is only about 1/5 of the total Tribal needs budget of $30
billion. So long as appropriations for the Indian Health Service reside
within the Interior, Environment and Related Agencies, this
subcommittee will always be challenged to appropriate sufficient funds
to address the healthcare disparities that exist between Alaska Native
and American Indian people and the rest of the population. We
appreciate the subcommittee's efforts to help tackle this ongoing
challenge.
2.
Continue to Support Increases for Section 105(l) Lease Payments
We recommend that the subcommittee create within the Direct
Operations account a new subaccount to pay required Section 105(l)
lease payments to Tribes and Tribal organizations that make tribally-
owned or leased facilities available for IHS-financed health programs.
Even in the face of two Federal court decisions addressing IHS's legal
obligation to fund Section 105(l) leases, and the unrelenting challenge
we face to deliver health services with insufficient facility space,
the administration has repeatedly asked Congress for statutory text,
included in the Administrative Provisions concerning the IHS, to
legislatively override Section 105(l), and Federal court decisions in
favor of Tribes, and insert a ``notwithstanding'' clause which would
make all lease payments by the Secretary entirely discretionary on the
part of the IHS. In short, the IHS would secure the right to use Tribal
facilities to operate IHS-funded programs without paying us for them.
The IHS seeks to memorialize in statutory text its unjustified
practice, which they had been doing for years, and to short-fund the
Village Built Clinic lease program. The administration's action is so
short-sighted and contrary to best practices to well maintain limited
health facility space.
We urge the subcommittee to again reject IHS's efforts to repeal a
key provision of the ISDEAA through the appropriations process. This
subcommittee fully appreciates the challenges we face to build and
maintain hospitals and clinics in unforgiving climates. Too often, lack
of funds shortens the useful life of these vitally important
structures. The cost to replace a hospital or clinic in Alaska is
staggering. If Tribes and Tribal organizations are to extend the useful
life of hospitals and clinics, retain key healthcare professionals, and
improve the quality of health to our Tribal citizens, we must be given
the resources to properly operate and maintain existing facilities.
Facilities worth having are worth maintaining and worth paying for. If
these lease payments cease, the delivery of healthcare in Alaska will
suffer another setback.
Also, despite the obligation of the IHS to fully fund 105(l)
leases, we have found the IHS to be slow to finalize these leases
because they are not given enough money to fund all of the leases they
are now clearly required to pay for. We urge you to increase
appropriations for Section 105(l) leases.
3.
Provide Advance Appropriations for the Indian Health Service
Calls from Tribes and Tribal organizations for advance
appropriations for Indian programs, including the Indian Health Service
are not new, but the recent 35-day government shutdown has underscored
the need for this change. The delays in funding had deeply-felt impacts
in Alaska Native and American Indian communities across the country. As
Ranking Member Udall has said: ``Because of the unique government-to-
government relationship between Tribes and the United States, Native
communities . . . across the country are among those hit hardest when
the appropriations process'' breaks down. We completely agree that
``The Indian Programs Advance Appropriations Act will offer certainty
to Tribes and Federal law enforcement, healthcare, and child welfare
services employees working in Indian country . . . [and] . . . make
sure the budget process meets [the] Federal trust and treaty
obligations going forward.''
Much has been said in this subcommittee, year after year, about how
the programs and departments subject to this appropriations process are
reflections of the trust relationship the Federal Government has with
American Indian and Alaska Native people. The problems that arise from
shutdowns and other delays in the context of a lack of advance
appropriations exacerbate the problems caused by the funding shortfalls
and disparities discussed above.
We therefore applaud Ranking Member Udall and other Senators and
House Members for their sponsorship of measures in the current Congress
to provide advance appropriations for the IHS.
4.
Continue to Provide Increases for Behavioral Health Programs
We cannot state strenuously enough how important it is to increase
available funds for behavioral health. Alaska Native and American
Indian people are disproportionately represented in substance abuse,
especially opioid addiction, and suicide statistics. According to the
Centers for Disease Control (CDC), and confirmed by IHS Chief Medical
Officer, Rear Admiral Michael E. Toedt, Alaska Native and American
Indian people ``had the highest drug overdose death rates in 2015 and
the largest percentage increase in the number of deaths over time from
1999-2015 compared to other racial and ethnic groups.'' During that
time, deaths rose more than 500 percent among Alaska Native and
American Indian people. The CDC also found that the suicide rate among
Alaska Native people is almost four times the U.S. general population
rate and at least six times the national average in some parts of the
State.
The recent Consolidated Appropriations Act contained a combined
$17.7 million increase in fiscal year 2019 for the Mental Health and
Alcohol and Substance Abuse program (to $245.5 million), a 5 percent
increase over the fiscal year 2018 enacted level. In addition, the
measure also includes an increase of $10 million to combat the opioid
epidemic with direction to use the additional funds to create a
``Special Behavioral Health Pilot Program modeled after the Special
Diabetes Program for Indians.'' These are steps in the right direction,
and we urge the subcommittee to build on this effort and increase these
programs by at least 15 percent above the fiscal year 2019 enacted
level. Behavioral health funds are critical to our most vulnerable
population--our youth. SCF runs several programs that provide mental
healthcare for Alaska Native youth which focus on building academic,
vocational and leadership skills through culturally-appropriate
methods. It is our firm conviction that only by addressing the root
causes that drive individuals to drug misuse and addiction--domestic
and child abuse, poverty and unemployment--can we heal them.
We also support specific appropriations for an Opioid Prevention,
Treatment and Recovery program for Alaska Native and American Indian
people. We recommend that these funds be distributed among Tribes and
Tribal organizations as additions to our self-governance compacts and
contracts. Alaska Native healthcare providers, like SCF, recognize that
the size of the opioid and substance abuse problem in Alaska demands
resources. However, with insufficient funds to address behavioral
health challenges, we cannot reach those who suffer from substance
abuse, our military veterans struggling with PTSD, or victims of
violent crime. Prevention, education, and timely medication-assisted
treatment (MAT) programs remain our most potent tools to raise a new
generation of Alaska Native people who practice positive, life-
affirming behavioral traits and who will, in turn, pass on these life
skills to their children and grandchildren.
With our available funds, we established The Pathway Home, a
voluntary, comprehensive, and individualized mental health program for
adolescents aged 13 to 18 years. The Pathway Home teaches life skills
to these Alaska Native youths so that they discontinue harmful
behavior. Many of these youths have already experienced childhood
trauma or seen family members struggle with drug and alcohol
dependency, which puts them at greater risk of turning to drugs and
alcohol. The Pathway Home creates a loving and supportive community
environment and it is heartwarming to see how proud the graduates of
this program are to go back out into the world with these new skills
and new hope.
5.
Contract Support Costs
With regards to Contract Support Costs, we appreciate Congress' use
of an indefinite appropriation. In recent years, we have witnessed the
IHS making unilateral policy changes concerning its CSC policy, already
an overly complicated process. It requires Tribes to submit additional
documentation to IHS and engage in two separate CSC negotiations each
year. We urge the subcommittee to direct the agency to simplify its CSC
policy and not attempt to reduce the award of CSC funds to Tribes
through an unnecessarily complex methodology which diverts our
administrative personnel from their primary focus--the efficient and
professional delivery of health services.
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide testimony on behalf
of Southcentral Foundation and the people we serve.
______
Prepared Statement of the Southeast Alaska Regional Health Consortium
My name is Charles Clement and I serve as the President/CEO for the
Southeast Alaska Regional Health Consortium (SEARHC). I am honored for
the opportunity to provide written testimony about SEARHC's priorities
for the fiscal year 2020 appropriations for the Indian Health Service,
and I thank the subcommittee for the opportunity to do so.
SEARHC is an inter-Tribal consortium of 15 federally-recognized
Tribes situated along the southeast panhandle of Alaska. Our service
area stretches over 35,000 square miles, and with no roads connecting
many of the rural communities we serve, we work hard to provide quality
health services to our communities. These services include medical,
dental, mental health, physical therapy, radiology, pharmacy,
laboratory, nutritional, audiology, optometry and respiratory therapy
services. We also provide supplemental social services, substance abuse
treatment, health promotion services, emergency medical services,
environmental health services and traditional Native healing. We
provide these services through a network of community clinics and the
Mt. Edgecumbe Hospital located in Sitka, Alaska.
The urgent healthcare needs across Indian Country are well known
and the challenges in meeting those needs are heightened in areas like
Southeast Alaska where communities are isolated and transportation and
facilities costs are high. SEARHC applauds the administration for
recognizing these needs by increasing the IHS budget. It is vital that
these increases be preserved. But even these increases will not be
enough to allow SEARHC and other Tribal organizations to meet the
healthcare needs of the people we serve. We will meet these challenges,
but to do so we will need your help.
facilities funding
Our greatest need is for increased facilities funding. We have
repeatedly reported to this Committee on this topic, and another year
of use has only increased those needs. At nearly 70 years old, the Mt.
Edgecumbe Hospital is the oldest facility in Alaska and one of the
oldest in the Nation. It was constructed toward the end of World War II
by the War Department and focused largely on tuberculosis treatment
through the 1950s. The hospital is in poor condition and ill-suited to
a 21st century model of healthcare dominated by primary and ambulatory
care facilities. Replacing or repairing Mt. Edgecumbe should be a
priority, together with developing a critical access hospital to serve
the Prince of Wales Island communities (including Craig and Klawock).
According to the report the IHS produced as required by this
Committee in Report language for the Department of the Interior,
Environment, and Related Agencies Appropriations Bill, 2017, the cost
to update SEARHC's facilities alone is $34 million. The estimated cost
to address the inventoried code deficiencies and backlog of maintenance
and repairs over the next 10 years is nearly $80 million. And we are
not unique. Estimates place IHS facilities funding needs at well over
$8 billion, a number that keeps rising because IHS lacks sufficient
funding to maintain these facilities. In the Report language for the
recent Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2019, the Committee directed
the IHS to work with Tribes and Tribal organizations to assess the
updated facilities needs in Alaska as well as provide recommendations
for alternative financing options which could help address this crisis.
We urge the Committee to continue to push IHS to find solutions that
will help us provide care to our patients in appropriate facilities
both now and in the future. We do our best to patch the problem, but
the bottom line is that without adequate facilities, SEARHC cannot
provide adequate health services.
We request the Committee do four things.
--Replace Aging IHS Facilities.--We need a commitment from Congress
to start replacing aging IHS facilities. This will require
reordering the current facilities priority list, which was
created on a first come, first served basis. All rankings
should be based on true need.
--Increase Facilities Funding in the Current Budget Proposal.--The
President's budget proposes to cut funding for facilities
programs funding, including a proposed cut of $77 million for
the Health Care Facilities Construction Program. In the context
of the massive backlog of facilities needs for SEARHC and the
IHS, these proposed cuts are unwise and would only serve to
further the facilities construction, replacement, and deferred
maintenance crisis. We strongly encourage the Committee to
increase the facilities funding in the IHS budget and share
Chairwoman Murkowski's concern with the administration's
proposed reduction.
--The Indian Health Care Improvement Act (IHCIA) Renovation
Program.--We recommend the Committee provide funding for
tribally renovated IHS buildings, pursuant to section 1634 of
the IHCIA. The IHCIA allows Tribes to renovate IHS facilities
and authorizes IHS to provide staffing and equipment for the
newly renovated structure. However, Congress has never funded
this program. We strongly urge the Committee to realize the
promise of this program by providing $10 million to fund it. We
would be delighted to do an Alaska demonstration project for
this new initiative.
--Joint Venture Projects.--The JV project provides IHS funds to staff
facilities built with Tribal funds. SEARHC submitted a proposal
in the most recent Joint Venture project funding round. Despite
receiving a very high score, our proposal to build a facility
on Prince of Wales Island was not selected. And in fact, of the
37 applications submitted, only 13 were put on a list to
eventually receive funding. The fact that qualified projects
were not selected is evidence that the need for such facilities
far outstrips IHS's ability to enter into these agreements.
Our situation is a good example. Currently, our hospital in Sitka
serves people living as far away as Klawock. Travel to Sitka requires a
lengthy combination of automobile, ferry, and airplanes and takes at
least a day and often is an overnight trip. If weather is bad, as it
often is in Southeast Alaska, it can take even longer. The only
alternative are costly air ambulance flights. We proposed to construct
a Critical Access Hospital in Klawock. This would have strengthened the
primary care service in the area, while for the first time also
offering complex diagnostic services and acute and emergency care to
one of the remotest, most rural areas of the Nation. Despite this
substantial need for these services, our project was rejected.
In order to provide funding for this project, as well as the other
JV projects that were not selected in the last round, we urge this
Committee to support IHS's effort to enter into more Joint Venture
Agreements.
advance appropriations
The 35-day government shutdown has provided yet another example of
why Indian and Alaska Native programs must be held outside of regular
appropriations processes that are subject to the whims yearly political
processes. SEARHC strongly supports advance appropriations for the IHS.
The delays in funding, and the lack of Federal personnel and support,
during the shutdown had deeply-felt impacts in Alaska Native and
American Indian communities across the country. As Subcommittee Vice
Chairman Udall has said, ``Because of the unique government-to-
government relationship between Tribes and the United States, Native
communities in New Mexico and across the country are among those hit
the hardest'' during a shutdown, disrupting the delivery of essential
government services to Tribal members. These sorts of impacts come each
shutdown, CR, or other funding issue, but the recent shutdown should be
a wake-up call for Congress regarding the need to act on this issue.
SEARHC therefore strongly supports efforts by Vice Chairman Udall
and other Members of the Senate to provide advance appropriations for
IHS.
105(l) leases
Two recent Federal court decisions have addressed IHS's legal
obligation to fund Section 105(l) leases. Even so, the administration
has repeatedly asked Congress for statutory text to legislatively
override Section 105(l), and the courts, and insert a
``notwithstanding'' clause which would make all lease payments by the
Secretary entirely discretionary on the part of the IHS. In short, the
IHS would secure the right to use Tribal facilities to operate IHS-
funded programs without paying for them. IHS had been doing for years
by short-funding Village Built Clinic leases, and Congress should not
let them continue. We urge the Committee to again reject IHS's efforts
to repeal a key provision of the ISDEAA through the appropriations
process.
In addition, and just as important, we urge the Committee to
provide additional funding for the 105(l) lease program so that there
are sufficient appropriations to fund the all of the leases IHS is now
required to fully pay for.
contract support costs
In recent years, much progress has been made on the issue of
contract support costs, thanks in large part to this Committee. We
appreciate the Committee's use of an indefinite appropriation for IHS
contract support costs in the Consolidated Appropriations Act for
Fiscal Year 2019, and we urge the Committee to do so again for fiscal
year 2020. However, the IHS has repeatedly over-complicated the process
for contract support costs, adding burdens on SEARHC and other
providers which distract, delay, and otherwise hinder our ability to
spend our time and resources where they belong--on patient care. We ask
that you direct the IHS to simplify its CSC policy, rather than
attempting to reduce the award of CSC funds through overly-complex
methodologies.
Thank you for the opportunity to present to the Committee on
SEARHC's priorities.
______
Prepared Statement of the Squaxin Island Tribe
On behalf of the Squaxin Island Tribal Leadership and citizens, it
is an honor to provide our funding priorities and recommendations for
the fiscal year 2020 Budgets for the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and
Indian Health Service (IHS). We ask that this Committee supports our
historical trust and treaty relationship with the United States and
honor the fiduciary obligations that were a part of the negotiations
with our Tribal Leaders. We ask that this Committee:
1.
Exempts Tribal program funding throughout the Federal
Government from future sequestrations, rescissions and disproportionate
cuts;
2.
Ensures stable Federal funding for essential Tribal services by
supporting the Indian Programs Advanced Appropriations Act for the
Bureau of Indian Affairs, Bureau of Indian Education and the Indian
Health Service; and,
3.
Supports the Special Diabetes Program for Indians
reauthorization at $200 million annually for 5 years. Efforts by the
administration to change the funding from mandatory to discretionary
spending must require Tribal consultation before any changes occur.
SQUAXIN ISLAND TRIBE Specific Requests
1.
$500,000 Shellfish Management Program--BIA
2.
$3.0 Million Increase for Northwest Indian Treatment Center
(NWITC) Residential Program in IHS
REGIONAL Requests and Recommendations
1.
$110 million for Pacific Coastal Salmon Recovery Fund
2.
Supports the Regional Budget Requests of the Affiliated Tribes
of Northwest Indians (ATNI), the Northwest Portland Area Indian Health
Board (NPAIHB) and the Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission (NWIFC)
NATIONAL Requests and Recommendations--Bureau of Indian Affairs
1.
BIA Rights Protection--Increase funding to $52 million for the
BIA Rights Protection Implementation
2.
Fully Fund Fixed Costs and Tribal Pay Costs
3.
Increase Tribal Base Funding (instead of through grants
NATIONAL Requests and Recommendations--Indian Health Service
1.
IHS mandatory funding (maintaining current services).--Provide
a total of $6.4 billion for the Indian Health Service in fiscal year
2020, a 33 percent increase over the fiscal year 2016 planning base
2.
$150 million for Opioid Funding.--Increase funding and include
Tribal set asides in any funding decisions to States
3.
Purchased and Referred Care (PRC).--Provide an increase of
$474.4 million
4.
$158 Million for Mental Health.--For behavioral health services
to increase the ability of Tribes to further develop innovative and
culturally appropriate prevention and treatment programs that are so
greatly needed in Tribal communities.
Squaxin Island Tribe Background
We are native people of South Puget Sound and descendants of the
maritime people who lived and prospered along these shores for untold
centuries. We are known as the People of the Water because of our
strong cultural connection to the natural beauty and bounty of Puget
Sound going back hundreds of years. The Squaxin Island Indian
Reservation is located in southeastern Mason County, Washington and the
Tribe is a signatory to the 1854 Medicine Creek Treaty. We were one of
the first 30 federally-recognized Tribes to enter into a Compact of
Self-Governance with the United States.
Our treaty-designated reservation, Squaxin Island, is approximately
2.2 square miles of uninhabited forested land, surrounded by the bays
and inlets of southern Puget Sound. Because the Island lacks fresh
water, the Tribe has built its community on roughly 26 acres at
Kamilche, Washington purchased and placed into trust. The Tribe also
owns 6 acres across Pickering Passage from Squaxin Island and a plot of
36 acres on Harstine Island, across Peale Passage. The total land area
including off-reservation trust lands is 1,715.46 acres. In addition,
the Tribe manages roughly 500 acres of Puget Sound tidelands.
The Tribal government and our economic enterprises constitute the
largest employer in Mason County with over 1,250 employees. The Tribe
has a current enrollment of 1,040 and an on-reservation population of
426 living in 141 homes. Squaxin has an estimated service area
population of 2,747; a growth rate of about 10 percent, and an
unemployment rate of about 30 percent (according to the BIA Labor Force
Report).
Squaxin Island Tribe Specific Requests/Justifications
1.
$500,000--Shellfish Management--BIA
The Squaxin Island Tribe faces an ongoing budget deficit to
maintain and operate the shellfish program at its current level of
operation-a level that leaves 20 percent of treaty-designated State
lands and 80-90 percent of private tidelands unharvested due to lack of
funding. To address this shortfall and enable effective growth and
development of the program, an annual minimum increase of $500,000 is
requested. Shellfish have been a mainstay for the Squaxin Island people
for thousands of years and are important today for subsistence,
economic and ceremonial purposes. The Tribe's right to harvest
shellfish is guaranteed by the 1854 Medicine Creek Treaty. Today, we
are unable to fully exercise our treaty rights due to lack of Federal
support for our shellfish management program.
2.
$3 Million Increase to the Base Funding for the Northwest
Indian Treatment Center (NWITC) Residential Program--IHS
``D3WXbi Palil'' meaning ``Returning from the Dark, Deep Waters
to the Light"
The Squaxin Island Tribe has been operating the Northwest
Indian Treatment Center (NWITC) since 1994. The Center, given the
spiritual name ``D3WXbi Palil'' meaning ``Returning from the Dark, Deep
Waters to the Light'', is a residential chemical dependency treatment
facility designed to serve Native Americans who have chronic relapse
patterns related to unresolved grief and trauma. NWITC serves adult
clients from Tribes located in Oregon, Washington, Idaho and Alaska. We
facilitate Medication Assisted Treatment (MAT)--suboxone and vivitrol
injections which are cutting edge components of opioid addictions.
Since the original congressional set-aside in the IHS budget for
alcohol and substance abuse treatment for residential facilities and
placement contracts with third-party agencies in 1993, NWITC has not
received an adequate increase in the base IHS budget. With the well-
documented nation-wide rise in prescription opioid and heroin abuse, it
is more critical than ever to increase the NWITC's annual base in order
to sustain the current services to the Tribes of the Northwest. AI/AN
face opioid related fatalities three times the rate of non-Natives.
An increase of $3.0 million would restore lost purchasing
power, ensure adequate baseline operating funds and allow NWITC to
continue to meet the needs of those who are struggling to recovery and
return to their families and Native communities.
NATIONAL Requests and Recommendations--Bureau of Indian Affairs
1.
BIA Rights Protection--Increase funding to $52 million.--This
Subactivity Account has a clear and direct relationship with the
Federal trust obligation to Tribes. This program ensures compliance
with Federal court orders by implementing effective Tribal self-
regulatory and co-management systems. The benefits of these programs
accrue not only to Tribes, but to the larger communities as well. In
addition, this program supports implementation of the United States/
Canada Pacific Salmon Treaty.
2.
Fully Fund Fixed Costs and Tribal Pay Costs.--Partial funding
or failing to fund Pay Costs for Tribes has devastated Tribal
communities by causing critical job losses. Over 900 Tribal jobs have
been lost and an estimated 300 more jobs will be permanently lost on an
annual basis if 100 percent Pay Costs are not provided. The Tribal
losses are being further exacerbated by recent projections of costs
that have been significantly underestimated. We strongly urge full
funding of fixed costs and Tribal pay costs.
3.
Increase Tribal Base Funding (instead of through grants).--
Grant funding, particularly inside the BIA, is not consistent with the
intent of Tribal self-determination. Tribal leaders have grown
increasingly frustrated by the increase in Indian Affairs funding offer
through grants. Allocating new funds via grants marginalizes and
impedes Tribal Self-Determination and Self-Governance. Provide
increases via Tribal base funding instead of through grants to Tribal
governments
NATIONAL Requests and Recommendations--Indian Health Service
1.
IHS mandatory funding (maintaining current services)--Provide a
total of $6.4 billion for fiscal year 2020, a 33 percent increase over
2016 planning phase.--If these mandatory requirements are not funded,
Tribes have no choice but to cut health services, which further reduces
the quantity and quality of healthcare services available to AI/AN
citizens.
2.
$150 million for Opioid Funding.--Increase funding and include
Tribal set asides in any funding decisions to States. Addressing the
opioid epidemic is a nationwide priority. American Indians and Alaska
Natives face opioid related fatalities three times the rate on non-
Indians. Tribal governments must be included in major agency-wide
funding decisions, including to States, to treat and prevent opioid
misuse.
3.
Purchased and Referred Care (PRC)--Provide an increase of
$474.4 million.--The Purchased/Referred Care program pays for urgent
and emergent and other critical services that are not directly
available through IHS and Tribally-operated health programs when no IHS
direct care facility exists, or the direct care facility cannot provide
the required emergency or specialty care, or the facility has more
demand for services than it can currently meet.
NATIONAL Requests and Recommendations
Squaxin Island Tribe supports the National Budget Requests of the
National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) and the National Indian
Health Board (NIHB).
Thank you for accepting the fiscal year 2020 budget requests and
recommendations for the Squaxin Island Tribe.
[This statement was submitted by Ray Peters, Intergovernmental
Affairs Liaison.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe
I am Ira Taken Alive, Vice-Chairman of the Standing Rock Sioux
Tribe. The Tribe appreciates the opportunity to submit written
testimony to the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Interior,
Environment and Related Agencies concerning the Tribe's fiscal year
2020 funding needs financed through appropriations to the Bureau of
Indian Affairs (BIA), Bureau of Indian Education (BIE), and Indian
Health Service (IHS).
I want to begin by telling you a little bit about the Standing Rock
Sioux Tribe and our relationship with the United States which is based
on the Treaties that we signed in 1851 and 1868. These Treaties
underscore the ongoing promises and obligations of the United States to
the Tribe, and our testimony is submitted with those promises and
obligations in mind. To that end, the Tribe wishes to express its
support for Ranking Member Udall's legislation to provide advance
funding for the BIA and IHS. Tribal programs should not suffer because
of the political challenges in Washington, D.C. All too often, the
success or failure of Tribal programs are dependent on Federal
appropriations.
Despite the Tribe's best efforts, our unemployment rate remains
above 50 percent. In fact, over 40 percent of Indian families on our
Reservation live in poverty--more than triple the average U.S. poverty
rate. The disparity is worse for children, as 52 percent of the
Reservation population under age 18 lives below poverty, compared to 16
percent and 19 percent in North and South Dakota, respectively.
These statistics are daunting. They can leave our people,
especially our children without hope, so I want to share with you, just
one story of a person who did something to give our children hope. It
is my story. I am telling you this story not because I want praise or
thanks, but because I want you to know that the programs that you fund
in the budgets of the BIA and the IHS make a difference and your work
in deciding which programs of the BIA, BIE and IHS to increase and
expand is critical to the future success of Indian communities and must
continue.
In the fall of 2014, I started a cheer team at my former high
school in McLaughlin, SD. I had to struggle to find five girls who
wanted to participate and who could commit to the work that it took to
actively participate on a school cheer team.
With the support of another rural small school, the Newall School,
the girls worked hard and learned the routines. They kept their grades
up and they committed themselves to the daily practices. Our goal at
the start of the year was that if our girls' high school basketball
team went to the State tournament, we would be in position to the win
the coveted South Dakota Spirit of Six Award. This award is in memory
of a cheer team who tragically died in a plane crash on their way to
State.
Well, like a Hollywood movie, my girls made it to the State
championship tournament. To win the Spirit of Six Award, the team was
judged at all times, whether they were cheering or not.
Just to remind you, these young women had rarely left the
Reservation, let alone competed on a State-wide stage with crowds as
large as 2,000 people and live TV coverage. To be in the running, they
had to be poised, respectful and joyful at all times. I am still so
proud to say that bucking the odds, the first year cheer team from
McLaughlin, SD won the award.
I cannot tell you the importance to these young women and to the
community of McLaughlin, SD to have this high caliber positive
recognition of the hard work and dedication the girls from Standing
Rock exhibited.
This story demonstrates that it is community based programs like
this that can make such an important difference in children's lives and
positively affect their future development.
This story also demonstrates that these programs must be developed
in close consultation with the Tribal governments and the communities
that they are intended to serve. Moreover, these programs must be
intertwined with one another. A person needs help at school, after
school, in her home, and when she wants to leave home for higher
education and other opportunities.
This is why creating a new initiative like the mental health/
substance abuse pilot program, based on the Special Diabetes for
Indians Program, is such a good idea. A pilot program of dedicated,
targeted funds for Tribes to develop culturally appropriate tools to
address substance abuse and mental health needs in their communities
will put Tribes in the driver seat to combat these challenges and
create positive futures for Native children.
Community based programs make a real difference in the lives of
children and play an important role in helping them success in future.
Programs that build self-esteem in Tribal youth, and which provide them
with important coping skills, are programs that will have a lasting
impact on them throughout their lives. As a Tribal leader, school board
member, and cheer team coach, I can tell you that this is the best way
for governments to deliver services to their citizens.
Thank you for the opportunity to present this testimony.
______
Prepared Statement of Support of the Underrepresented Communities Civil
Rights Grant deg.
Prepared Statement in Support of the Underrepresented Communities Civil
Rights Grant
May 28, 2019
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski
The Honorable Tom Udall
Chairman
Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Interior, Environment and
Subcommittee on Interior,
Related Agencies
Environment and Related
Senate Committee on Appropriations
Agencies
131 Dirksen Senate Office Building
Senate Committee on
Washington, DC 20510
Appropriations
131 Dirksen Senate Office
Building
Washington, DC 20510
Chairman Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall,
Asian and Pacific Islander Americans in Historic Preservation,
Hispanic Access Foundation, Latinos in Heritage Conservation, and the
undersigned 43 groups and 66 individuals encourage the Committee on
Appropriations to support the Underrepresented Communities Civil Rights
Grant with a $30 million appropriation for fiscal year 2020.
Funded through the National Park System's Historic Preservation
Fund (HPF), the Underrepresented Communities Civil Rights Grant program
would use non-tax payer dollars to partner with States and Tribes to
help save important places in our communities. The HPF provides
matching grants to State and Tribal historic preservation offices to
support surveys of historic resources, training, nominations to the
National Register of Historic Places, and grants to local
jurisdictions. HPF was established in 1977, is currently authorized at
$150 million per year, and is funded by Outer Continental Shelf oil
lease revenues, not tax dollars. These funds are spent locally on
preservation projects, with selection decisions made at the State
level. In short, it makes preservation possible.
Historic preservation projects assisted by grants like the existing
African American Civil Rights Grant Program generate billions of
dollars in heritage tourism annually, while helping public and private
partners tell unique and powerful stories of the African American
struggle for equality in the 20th Century.
The expansion of the program to the Underrepresented Communities
Civil Rights Grants will increase the program's impact by not only
documenting, interpreting, and preserving the sites and stories related
to a more inclusive story of American history, but also increasing the
audience appeal for such projects. This proposed program expansion is
an opportunity to multiply the economic impact of the existing program
across the United States.
A review by the National Historic Landmarks Committee found that
less than 8 percent (8 percent) of designated landmarks specifically
represented the stories of Native Americans, African Americans,
American Latinos, Asian Americans, Pacific Islanders, women, LGBTQ, and
other underrepresented groups. There are few sites associated with
these groups despite their long histories in the United States from the
earliest settlement of the country to the economic development of the
West to the desegregation of public schools in the 20th century and
political influence in the 21st.
Including women, these groups make up more than 50 percent of the
U.S. population. Representation matters; this Federal grant will allow
us to narrate our stories, which may be misrepresented or otherwise
ignored within a larger society, with accuracy and dignity. This
promotes understanding and compassion and has the power to lessen
social inequalities.
All Americans should be able to see themselves, their history, and
their potential in both our collective story and our national
landscape. As you consider fiscal year 2020 funding levels, we hope
that you will continue the broad bi-partisan support for this National
Park Service grant program that is vitally important to preserving so
many more of our great American stories.
Sincerely,
Asian and Pacific Islander Americans in Historic Preservation
Hispanic Access Foundation
Latinos in Heritage Conservation
Co-Signed by:
ORGANIZATIONS
2021
African American Community, Cultural, and Educational Society
Alamo City Democracy Project
American Anthropological Association
American Association for State and Local History
American Cultural Resources Association
Asian American Studies Department and Center, UCLA
Coalition for American Heritage
Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation
Curba
Chispa, League of Conservation Voters
Documents of Resistance
Esperanza Peace and Justice Center
Filipino American National Historical Society--Metro New York City
Chapter
Filipino American National Historical Society
GLBT Historical Society
Hispanic Federation
Indiana Landmarks
Landmarks Illinois
Latino Outdoors
National LGBTQ Center for the Arts
National Parks Conservation Association
National Trust for Historic Preservation
Native American Land Conservancy
Native Womens Wilderness
Nature For All
OCA Greater Chicago
Pratt Institute
Preservation Chicago
Preservation Texas
Society for American Archaeology
Society for Historical Archaeology
Spanish Heritage Foundation of Riverside
St. Mary's University
Tataviam Land Conservancy
The National Council of Asian Pacific Americans (NCAPA)
Turning Wheel--University of San Diego
UC Davis Library/Bulosan Center for Filipino Studies
University of California, Riverside Public History Program
University of Houston
University of Maryland, College Park
UT Austin
Westside Preservation Alliance
INDIVIDUALS
Stuart Berman
Cathie Bond
Tanya Bowers
Caroline Calderon
Antonia Castaneda, PhD
Marsh Davis
Rachel Delgado
Lisa DiChiera
John Dichtl
xenia diente
Doreen Duran
Maria Espinosa
Henry Flores
Moises Garcia
John Gonzalez
Jaylyn Gough
Sarah Zenaida Gould, PhD
Catherine Gudis, PhD
Estella Habal, PhD
Lawana Holland-Moore
Celeste Hong
Judy Jauregui
Rita Jirasek
Nicole Johnson
Lewis Kasner
Alvina Lai
Kristi Lin
Kelly Lizarraga
Mary Losh
Jose Madrid
Michelle Magalong, PhD
Magda Mankel
Nancy Melendez
Mabel Menard
Ward Miller
Jane Montanaro
Helen Mora
Beatrice Moreno
Sehila Mota Casper
Ron Muriera
Adam Natenshon
Kim Orbe
Gregg Orton
Alberto Pulido
Ray Rast, PhD
Paul ruiz
RoxanneRyce-Paul
Graciela Isabel Sanchez
Allan Jason Sarmiento
Erica Schultz
Mary Lu Seidel
Antonio Serna
Carol Shull
Monica Sosa
Alan Spears
Roberto Tejada
Evan Thompson
Edward Torrez
Joseph Trujillo
Sharon Trujillo-Kasner
Karen Umemoto, PhD
Luis Villa
Bill Watanabe
Shayne Watson
Lily Anne Welty Tamai
______
Prepared Statement of the Sustainable Urban Forests Coalition
May 17, 2019
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski
The Honorable Tom Udall
Chairman
Ranking Member
House Committee on Appropriations
House Committee on
Interior, Environment, and Related
Appropriations
Agencies
Interior, Environment and
Related Agencies
Dear Chairman McCollum, Ranking Member Joyce, and Honorable Committee
Members:
The Sustainable Urban Forests Coalition (SUFC) is comprised of more
than 35 national organizations and corporations representing hundreds
of thousands of professionals--and millions of supporters--who care for
and support sustainable trees and green infrastructure in our Nation's
communities. We thank you for the fiscal year 2019 funding levels,
especially the increased funding for the USDA Forest Service Urban and
Community Forestry program. Collectively, we urge support for several
programs across various agencies under the Interior Subcommittee's
jurisdiction that support urban and community forests and green
infrastructure.
Our Nation's urban and community forests impact over 190 million
Americans and are vital to creating and maintaining healthy, livable
communities of all sizes by providing many scientifically proven
social, economic, and environmental benefits to people. The ability to
reduce air pollution and stormwater runoff, decrease energy
consumption, mitigate the heat island effect, improve human health have
directly or indirectly reduced costs in communities by millions of
dollars. The collective value and benefits of community trees equals
over $10 billion nationwide. With a projected 394 million Americans
living in urbanized areas by 2050, investing in trees and better ways
to grow trees to create livable communities needs to happen now.
The Federal support and leadership through the USDA Forest Service
and overarching Urban and Community Forestry program leverages funds
ranging from two to five times for each dollar invested in projects and
grants. The Federal ``seed'' money is often the key to implementing
these programs at the State and local level. Most smaller communities
do not have the resources to practice urban tree management. The
Federal funds utilized by the States provides the resources to initiate
their programs to manage the trees in their communities. These same
funds set the bar for urban tree management in larger communities and
at the State level, reducing redundancy and allowing consistency of
care across the Nation. The cumulative benefit to the country from each
community achieves a national improvement to be recognized at the
Federal level.
USDA Forest Service: State and Private Forestry
--Urban and Community Forestry Program (U&CF)
U&CF directly assists State government, nonprofit
organizations, and partners that manage and steward our
Nation's urban and community forests. Working with the State
forestry agencies, the program provides technical, financial,
research, and educational support and services to local
government, nonprofit organizations, community groups,
educational institutions, and Tribal governments.
In fiscal year 2018, U&CF assisted 7,951 urban and rural
communities and nearly 206 million people in all 50 States, the
District of Columbia, U.S. Territories, and affiliated Pacific
Island Nations. U&CF is a high-impact program and a smart
investment, as Federal support is often leveraged 2:1 (or in
many cases significantly more) by States and partner
organizations. There are 9,121 communities that have adopted
and can present documentation of local/Statewide ordinances or
policies that focus on community trees. In fiscal year 2017, 33
percent of the communities served were rural. U&CF engages
citizens in cities and towns, brings together diverse partners
with public and private resources, and demonstrates that
Federal investment can have huge and lasting impacts on
communities of all sizes.
SUFC is deeply concerned by past proposals to defund the U&CF
program. Zeroing out this important program would completely
erode the capacity that has been developed in cities and towns
of all sizes and jeopardize many local public and private
partnerships and collaborative projects where Federal
assistance is essential. SUFC recommends the Urban and
Community Forestry Program be funded at $35 million in fiscal
year 2020.
--Landscape Scale Restoration (LSR)
National priority Landscape Scale Restoration (LSR) projects
are a key way that States, in collaboration with the USDA
Forest Service and other partners, address critical forest
priorities across the landscape. LSR projects focus on the most
critical priorities identified in each State's Forest Action
Plan and on achieving national goals as laid out in the State
and Private Forestry national themes. The competitive grant
process ensures innovative approaches to restoration work are
proposed and priority is given to projects that further the
advancement of State Forest Action Plans. As a result, LSR
contributes to achieving results across the landscape and
making meaningful local, regional, and national impacts. SUFC
recommends funding the Landscape Scale Restoration program at
$20 million in fiscal year 2020.
--Community Forests and Open Space Conservation Program (CFP)
CFP has made substantial progress in preserving forests by
increasing opportunities for Americans to connect with forests
in their own communities and fostering new public-private
partnerships. Since its first grant round in fiscal year 2012,
CFP has supported 51 community forest projects across 21 States
and territories and leveraged more than twice the Federal
investment. Thanks to these partnerships, more than 12,300
acres of private forestlands--much of it in rural areas--have
been, or soon will be, acquired to create new--or expand
existing--community forests. SUFC recommends an increase in
funds to $5 million in fiscal year 2020.
--Forest Health Management
Forests across the country are threatened by increasing
numbers of insects and disease pathogens introduced from abroad
and entering this country through urban ports. As a result,
municipal governments across the U.S. are spending an estimated
$2.4 billion each year to remove trees on city property killed
by non-native pests. Homeowners are spending an additional $1
billion to remove and replace trees on their properties and are
absorbing an additional $1.5 billion in reduced property
values. The pests often spread from the cities to rural and
wildland forests, where the full spectrum of forest values is
at risk. This program provides essential expertise and
assistance to State and municipal agencies and private
landowners working to prevent these pests' spread and minimize
the damage they cause. We recommend $48 million for cooperative
lands programs under the Forest Health Management program in
fiscal year 2020.
USDA Forest Service: Forest and Rangeland Research
SUFC urges the subcommittee to provide $315 million for the overall
R&D program for fiscal year 2020.
--Urban and Community Forestry Research
The Forest Service Research and Development (R&D) program
provides critical financial support for urban forestry research
activities to develop information and tools for understanding
conditions and trends in our Nation's urban and community
forests. USDA Forest Service researchers have made huge strides
in recent years through collaborative efforts to develop new
tools, such as i-Tree, for mapping current tree cover,
assessing trends, developing local strategies, and building
greater understanding of the environmental, economic, and
social services that trees and forests provide to communities.
We urge the subcommittee to continue including language in
Interior Appropriations reports encouraging the USDA Forest
Service to maintain a strong and vibrant urban forest research
program.
--Non-Native Insects and Diseases Research
Among the major research challenges facing R&D is the
destruction of our Nation's urban forests caused by non-native
insects and diseases. People who value urban forests join
supporters of rural and wildland forests in depending on USDA
Forest Service R&D to develop better tools for pest detection
and protective strategies, including chemical and biological
controls and breeding of trees resistant to pests. The most
recent data available to us indicate that USDA Forest Service
research stations allocate only about $3 million for research
on non-native insects and diseases--less than 1 percent of its
total budget. In the absence of a budget line item for invasive
species research, we urge the subcommittee to include language
in its Interior Appropriations report encouraging the USDA
Forest Service to increase funding for research targeting non-
native insects and pathogens.
--Urban Forests in Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA)
The collaborative efforts between SUFC and the USDA Forest
Service brought urban forest data into the mainstream of the
agency's national data-collection program. FIA has long
provided the Nation's forest census, but it had not
historically included urban areas because of its definition of
forests. We ask the subcommittee to encourage the USDA Forest
Service to continue and strengthen its efforts to integrate
urban forest data into FIA so that its critical data-collection
efforts address all of our Nation's forests, including our
current and expanding 138 million acres of urban forest land.
Environmental Protection Agency
--Clean Water State Revolving Funds (CWSRF)
Green infrastructure, including urban forests, can be a cost-
effective and resilient approach to managing stormwater. The
use of green infrastructure for stormwater control also
provides many community co-benefits enumerated above. SUFC is
pleased that EPA supports the use of green infrastructure for
stormwater management and that green infrastructure is an
eligible use under the CWSRF--a critical financing program for
local communities investing in water infrastructure. SUFC
supports robust funding for CWSRF, along with efforts to expand
the use of green infrastructure to 20 percent to meet Clean
Water Act goals.
The National Park Service
--Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership Program (ORLPP)
The State and Local Assistance Program provides matching
grants to States and localities for protection and development
of parks and recreation resources. It is the primary Federal
investment tool to ensure that families have easy access to
urban forests in parks and open space, as well as neighborhood
recreation resources. This nationally competitive program
complements the existing State and local assistance program by
creating opportunities for outdoor play while developing or
enhancing outdoor recreation partnerships in cities. SUFC
requests robust funding for the State and local assistance
program, which includes $20 million for ORLPP in fiscal year
2020.
Supporting SUFC Members
Alliance for Community Trees
American Forests
American Planning Association (APA)
American Society of Consulting Arborists
American Society of Landscape Architects (ASLA)
Arbor Day Foundation (ADF)
Bartlett Tree Foundation
Center for Invasive Species Prevention
Corazon Latino
Green Infrastructure Center
International Society of Arboriculture (ISA)
Keep America Beautiful (KAB)
National Association of Clean Water Agencies (NACWA)
National Association of Counties (NACo)
National Association of Conservation Districts (NACD)
National Association of Landscape Professionals (NALP)
National Association of State Foresters (NASF)
National Recreation and Park Association (NRPA)
OPEI Foundation
Professional Grounds Maintenance Society
The Davey Foundation
The Nature Conservancy
Society of American Foresters (SAF)
Society of Municipal Arborists (SMA)
Student Conservation Association (SCA)
Tree Care Industry Association (TCIA)
TREE Fund
Trees Forever
The Trust for Public Land
Water Environment Federation (WEF)
Wildlife Habitat Council
______
Prepared Statement of the Tanana Chiefs Conference
The Tanana Chiefs Conference (TCC) appreciates the opportunity to
submit written testimony to the subcommittee regarding our priorities
for fiscal year 2020 concerning appropriations for the Bureau of Indian
Affairs (BIA) and Indian Health Service (IHS). We are grateful for this
subcommittee's bipartisanship reflected in the Consolidated
Appropriations Act of 2019's rejection of previous calls from the
administration for deep cuts to Alaska Native and American Indian
programs and services. We appreciate the positive results the
subcommittee has made possible in Alaska, and we ask the subcommittee
to build on its successes realized in the fiscal year 2019 budget when
deciding on funding for BIA and IHS programs for fiscal year 2020.
TCC is a non-profit intertribal consortium of 37 federally-
recognized Indian Tribes and 41 communities located across Alaska's
interior. TCC serves approximately 18,000 Alaska Natives in Fairbanks
where TCC headquarters is located, and in the rural villages in
Alaska's vast interior, located along the 1,400 mile Yukon River and
its tributaries.
To give you an idea of that great distance, Washington, D.C. is
only around 1,000 miles from Kansas City, Missouri, which Senator Blunt
represents. There's a lot of country between Washington, D.C. and
Kansas City--and TCC's region is much larger than that area. Imagine
how our 41 Alaska Native communities feel in Alaska's vast Interior.
These villages are remote, often inaccessible by car. Alaska Native
residents must overcome many challenges to sustain healthy communities,
educate their children, ensure their health and safety, and care for
their elders and themselves. This subcommittee, better than most,
understands the great unmet needs in healthcare, public safety,
education and job training faced by Alaska Native communities which
struggle to provide essential services to maintain their members and
culture.
Not too long ago, Congressman Cole of Oklahoma laid out the stark
truth; 2016 Federal per capita healthcare spending on Alaska Natives
and American Indians, compared to Federal spending on Medicare,
Veterans, and Medicaid recipients was ``at the absolute bottom, and not
by a little bit, but by a lot.'' The figures don't lie: $2,834 in per
capita spending for IHS medical care expenditures per person versus
$12,744 in Medicare spending for 2016. That is about four and-a-half
times the per capita expenditure level by the IHS. Federal
appropriations for the IHS would need to more than triple just to match
the per capita national health spending level of $9,990 per person. The
Congressman could not understand the basis for the administration
proposed cuts to IHS funding the administration proposed that year and
neither could we. He stated that a $300 million cut in IHS funding was
``not defensible or acceptable.''
Recent increases have helped stop the healthcare gap from widening
into even more of a chasm, but the underlying concerns remain.
For this reason, TCC supports the administration's proposed
increase of $140 million above the fiscal year 2019 enacted amount for
IHS, but more is needed. TCC supports the recommendation of the
National Indian Health Board (NIHB) to fully fund the IHS through the
enactment of a true ``needs based budget,'' phased in over 12 years,
with at least a 36 percent increase (to $7 billion) in IHS funding for
fiscal year 2020, as well as providing advance appropriations for the
IHS. So long as the IHS budget is part of the Interior appropriation,
such increases will remain our great collective challenge. In addition,
the subcommittee should continue to reject the administration's calls
to eliminate funding for the Health Education program and cut $39
million from the Community Health Representative program.
Nonetheless, we urge the Committee to continue its bipartisan work
and increase fiscal year 2020 appropriations above the fiscal year 2019
enacted level to reduce continued healthcare disparities between Alaska
Native and American Indians and non-Natives. According to the IHS:
--Alaska Natives and American Indians born today have a life
expectancy that is 4.4 years less than the U.S. all races
population (73.7 years to 78.1 years);
--Alaska Natives and American Indians continue to die at higher rates
than other Americans in many categories, including chronic
liver disease and cirrhosis (nearly 5 times the rate), diabetes
mellitus (3 times), unintentional injuries (2.5 times),
assault/homicide (2 times), suicide (2 times), and alcohol-
induced death (7 times);
--According to a 2016 study examining behavioral health programs and
Medicaid in Alaska: ``Statewide gaps in the continuum of care
combined with gaps in healthcare coverage perpetuate a cycle of
crisis response and create costly inefficiencies.''
--According to the CDC, the suicide rate among Alaska Natives is
almost four times the U.S. general population rate and at least
six times the national average in some parts of the State.
--According to the Alaska Department of Health and Social Services,
in 2011, over 50 percent of some 4,500 reports of maltreatment
substantiated by Alaska's child protective services, and over
60 percent of nearly 800 children removed from their homes were
Alaska Native children.
We must stop this cycle of abuse and destruction. Alaska Native
villages require the resources to build healthy families and
communities. They do so by ensuring Alaska Native families have such
basic necessities as housing, healthcare and public safety services.
This Subcommittee has worked in a bipartisan manner to increase funds
for Alaska Native villages and Tribes in such areas in recognition of
the great unmet needs faced by Alaska Native communities. For rural
interior Alaska Native communities facing a State budget crisis for
fiscal year 2020, Federal appropriations make the difference between
the success and failure of our efforts and, in turn, the wellness of
our Tribal members. We have faith that this Committee will defend and
increase fiscal year 2020 Federal funding levels for Indian Country.
1. Improve Tribal Health Care Quality and Access (IHS)
Build on the Fiscal Year 2019 Enacted Budget for IHS.--TCC greatly
appreciates the $266.4 million increase over the fiscal year 2018
enacted level for the IHS included in the Consolidated Appropriations
Act of 2019, and full payment of Contract Support Costs. However, more
is needed to address the critical health needs in our Alaska Native
communities, and reduce the health disparities they experience. Major
increases are needed especially for purchased and referred care and for
small ambulatory clinics construction and staffing. TCC remains one of
the only Tribal health entities in Alaska that does not have a regional
hospital, so our members are more dependent on village clinics to
provide routine and emergency healthcare. We also rely heavily on P/RC
funds. We also appreciate your acknowledgment that housing shortages in
Alaska contribute to the high vacancy rates for medical personnel,
especially in rural areas.
TCC cannot understand why the administration proposes in fiscal
year 2020 to eliminate funding for the Health Education Program, or
reduce funding for the Community Health Representatives program. Nor
can we understand the administration cutting IHS Facilities program
funding some $77 million when our needs are so great. We are confident
that the subcommittee with reject these cuts, but such reversals must
be met with increased appropriation based on the continued unmet needs
for clinical facilities and hospitals in Alaska and throughout Indian
country.
TCC greatly appreciates the administration including $150 million
in the fiscal year 2020 budget for the Special Diabetes Program for
Indians (SDPI). We recommend that Congress move this appropriation to
``mandatory'' and increase the program to at least $200 million for
fiscal year 2020.
With respect to the payment of full Contract Support Costs, we are
appreciative of the Committee's use of an indefinite appropriations.
Unfortunately, however, the IHS has made its CSC policy unduly
complicated and we urge the subcommittee to continue to monitor that
the agency faithfully implements direction from the subcommittee on
this subject as well as Supreme Court holdings. Full payment of CSCs
means just that and the IHS should not be permitted, by its policies,
to undermine that essential goal.
2. Expand Public Safety and Tribal Court in Interior Alaska
As our Chief and President, Victor Joseph, testified last year, we
cannot stress enough the importance village leaders place protecting
our children, and all Tribal members from sexual abuse, domestic
violence and substance abuse. TCC is on record with numerous
resolutions to express our members' exasperation over insufficient
public safety services in our remote Alaska Native Villages. We cannot
state it any clearer: Interior Alaska's rates of sexual abuse, domestic
violence, and child rape are among the highest in the Nation. We have a
crisis.
For that reason, we oppose the proposed cuts to the BIA budget
included in the administration's fiscal year 2020 budget. These
proposed cuts are unwise, and reflect an abandonment of the Federal
trust responsibility to Indian Tribes and American Indian and Alaska
Native people. TCC appreciates the fiscal year 2019 enacted increase of
$2.5 million for Public Safety and Justice funds and cannot understand
how the administration can justify its proposal to cut $10 million from
this funding for fiscal year 2020.
We also appreciate the Committee's continued appropriations for
Public Law 280 courts and Report language that expresses the
Committee's ``concern'' about Tribal courts' needs identified in the
Indian Law and Order Commission's November 2013 report, which
highlighted the fact that ``Federal investment in Tribal justice in
'Public Law 280' States [like Alaska,] has been more limited than
elsewhere in Indian Country.'' The Committee directed the BIA to work
with Tribes and Tribal organizations in Public Law 280 States to
consider options that promote, design, or pilot Tribal court systems
for Tribal communities that are subject to full or partial State
jurisdiction under Public Law 280.
TCC has limited recurring funds to pay for our Village Public
Safety Officer (VPSO) program which works in conjunction with Alaska
State Troopers. Our VPSOs are the ``First Responders in the Last
Frontier'' and they respond to emergency calls, fire, EMS and search
and rescue. With limited funds for public safety, the role of Tribal
Courts in Alaska Native villages is critical. It allows our villages to
address public safety concerns at the community level and break the
cycle of arrest, prosecution and incarceration.
We urge the Committee to provide increased funds for Public Law 280
courts so that we may better address public safety issues in our remote
Interior Alaska Tribal communities.
3. Expand Tribal Opportunities for Job Training and Economic
Development
TCC continues its mission to assist hundreds of Tribal members in
Fairbanks and in our Native villages with CDL classes, employment
training in such areas as facility maintenance, flooring and cabinet
installation, plumbing, plastic and cooper pipe fitting, wildland
firefighting training, and cooking. With unemployment rates among
Alaska Natives and American Indians multiple times the current national
unemployment rate of 3.6 percent, we cannot understand the continued
lack of funding within the BIA's Community and Economic Development
Programs. Nor can we expect that, under the administration's proposal
to massively cut the BIA budget, sufficient funding will be available
for Job Placement and Training programs. We are confident that the
subcommittee will continue to improve appropriations for these critical
areas; there is great dignity in learning a trade and providing for
your family.
Please provide meaningful increases to the BIA budget for these and
related programs in the Interior Department's fiscal year 2020
appropriations to help promote job creation in our rural Native
villages where work is seasonal and unemployment remains high. Our
current resources are simply inadequate to the task at hand.
Thank you for permitting the Tanana Chiefs Conference the
opportunity to submit written testimony.
______
Prepared Statement of the Theatre Communications Group
Madame Chairman and distinguished members of the subcommittee,
Theatre Communications Group--the national service organization for the
American theatre--is grateful for this opportunity to submit testimony
on behalf of our over 500 not-for-profit member theatres across the
country and the approximately 44 million audience members that the
theatre community serves. We urge you to support funding at $167.5
million for the National Endowment for the Arts for fiscal year 2020.
The entire not-for-profit arts industry stimulates the economy,
creates jobs, and attracts tourism dollars. The not-for-profit arts
generate $166.3 billion annually in economic activity, support 4.6
million jobs, and return $27.5 billion in government revenue. Art
museums, exhibits, and festivals combine with performances of theatre,
dance, opera, and music to draw tourists and their consumer dollars to
communities nationwide. Federal funding for the arts creates a
significant return, generating nine dollars in matching funds for each
Federal dollar awarded, and is clearly an investment in the economic
health of America. In an economy where corporate donations and
foundation grants to the arts are diminished and increased ticket
prices would undermine efforts to broaden and diversify audiences,
these Federal funds simply cannot be replaced. Maintaining the strength
of the not-for-profit sector, along with the commercial sector, is
vital to supporting the economic health of our Nation.
Our country's not-for-profit theatres present new works and serve
as catalysts for economic growth in their local communities. These
theatres also nurture and provide artistic homes for the development of
the current and future generations of acclaimed writers, actors,
directors, and designers working in regional theatre, on Broadway, and
in the film and television industries. Our theatres develop innovative
educational activities and outreach programs, providing millions of
young people, including ``at-risk'' youth, with important skills for
the future by expanding their creativity and developing problem-
solving, reasoning, and communication abilities--preparing today's
students to become tomorrow's citizens. At the same time, theatres have
become increasingly responsive to their communities, serving as healing
forces in difficult times and producing work that reflects and
celebrates the strength of our Nation's diversity.
Here are some recent examples of NEA grants and their community impact:
Cleveland Public Theatre in Ohio has received a $10,000 ArtWorks
grant from the NEA to support the development and premiere of The Mask
of Flight. The play is inspired by the ways we cover and uncover
ourselves. The ensemble will investigate the theme of masking through
various examples of veiling--for instance, how we veil racism, how
politically correct language can be a veil, how women cover for modesty
and religious reasons vs. being forced to veil, how someone may veil
their gender identity--and how these situations relate and intersect.
The Mask of Flight will be a collage of short pieces springing from
various works created for Cleveland Public Theatre's annual community
events including Station Hope, a celebration of Cleveland's role in the
Underground Railroad and an exploration of contemporary social justice
issues. Annually, Cleveland Public Theatre engages over 800 children
and families in public housing, teens from families defined as low-
income, and formerly homeless men in recovery. These participants
create original productions that are attended by 4,000 community
members.
Park Square Theatre in Minnesota has received a $10,000 Challenge
America grant from the NEA to support the residency of Theatre Mu and
their world premiere commission of The Korean Drama Addict's Guide to
Losing Your Virginity by May Lee-Yang and to support community outreach
programming. Theatre Mu engaged the local audience with talk-back
discussions after performances and other engagement activities related
to contemporary Korean and Hmong culture. Pay As You Are and other
discounted tickets were offered for the entire three week run in order
to make the performances as accessible as possible.
Perseverance Theatre in Alaska has received a $15,000 ArtWorks
grant from the NEA for the world premiere of Whale Song, by Cathy
Tagnak Rexford (Inupiaq). The play explores the love of Inupiaq people
for the bowhead whale, examining myth, gender roles, and the balance of
duty to oneself versus duty to others. Featuring a primarily Alaska
Native cast, Whale Song is part of Perseverance Theatre's 40th
anniversary season. The theatre will offer Pay-As-You-Can previews and
performances, student matinees, and a post-show discussion. Cathy
Tagnak Rexford (Inupiaq) is a member of The Playwright's Circle, a
group of 15 playwrights with the goal of developing diverse, new
Alaskan plays and representing voices that were previously unheard.
Perseverance Theatre serves over 17,000 artists, students, and
audiences annually.
Portland Stage Company in Maine has received a $15,000 ArtWorks
grant from the NEA to support the world premiere of Babette's Feast,
conceived and developed by Abbie Killeen, written by Rose Courtney, and
adapted from the short story by Isak Dinesen. Babette's Feast tells the
story of a refugee who transforms a closed religious community by
sacrificing all she has in order to throw a lavish dinner party. The
three-week run included 3 Pay-What-You-Can performances. Portland Stage
also offered student matinees followed by talk back discussions; the
theatre serves more than 7,000 students annually through its Student
Matinee Program. Portland Stage Literacy and Education departments
created Babette's Feast Playnotes--an extensive resource guide for
students, teachers, and other audience members who wished to delve more
deeply into the play. Babette's Feast was also a part of the Curtain
Call Discussion Series, in which audience members had the opportunity
to talk about the production with the performers. Throughout the run of
the play, Portland Stage partnered with Wayside Food Program to run a
food drive, with the goal of reaching 500 pounds of food.
These are only a few examples of the kinds of extraordinary
programs supported by the National Endowment for the Arts. Indeed, the
Endowment's Theatre Program is able to fund only 60 percent of the
applications it receives, so 40 percent of applying theatres are turned
away--in part because available funds are insufficient. Theatre
Communications Group urges you to support a funding level of $167.5
million for fiscal year 2020 for the NEA; to maintain citizen access to
the cultural, educational, and economic benefits of the arts; and to
advance creativity and innovation in communities across the United
States.
The arts infrastructure of the United States is critical to the
Nation's well-being and economic vitality. It is supported by a
remarkable combination of government, business, foundation, and
individual donors and represents a striking example of Federal/State/
private partnership. Federal support for the arts provides a measure of
stability for arts programs nationwide and is critical at a time when
other sources of funding are diminished. Further, the American public
favors spending Federal tax dollars in support of the arts.
Despite the President's proposal to eliminate the agency, the
subcommittee and Congress approved a $2 million increase in fiscal year
2019, which accounts for the NEA's current funding at $155 million in
the fiscal year 2019 budget. We thank the subcommittee for its
leadership in supporting the work of the NEA. Please stand firm against
the President's second proposal to eliminate the NEA. We urge the
subcommittee to fund the NEA at a level of $167.5 million to preserve
the important cultural programs reaching Americans across the country.
Thank you for considering this request.
[This statement was submitted by Laurie Baskin, Director of
Research, Policy & Collective Action.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Tribal Law and Policy Institute
A recent assessment from the U.S. Civil Rights Commission has found
that ``Federal funding for Native American programs across the
government remains grossly inadequate to meet the most basic needs the
Federal Government is obligated to provide.'' \1\ Tribal leaders and
citizens have known this for decades, and we urge Congress to fully
fund the U.S. Government's treaty and statutory obligations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Comm'n on Civil Rights, Broken Promises: Continuing
Federal Funding Shortfall for Native Americans, (2018) https://
www.usccr.gov/pubs/2018/12-20-Broken-
Promises.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While Congress has dealt with a spending environment hampered by an
austerity fiscal policy, including sequestration and tight limits on
discretionary accounts, the Federal trust and treaty obligations to
Indian country are no less imperative. The fact that these solemn
agreements that are funded in the Federal budget have been subject to
political impasses, including a recent 35-day Federal Government
shutdown, highlights the need for solutions to protect vital Tribal
governmental services from interruptions.
The Tribal Law and Policy Institute (TLPI) is a 100 percent Native
American operated non-profit corporation organized to design and
deliver education, research, training, and technical assistance
programs which promote the enhancement of justice in Indian country and
the health, well-being, and culture of Native peoples. Our mission is
to enhance and strengthen Tribal sovereignty and justice while honoring
community values, protecting rights, and promoting well-being.
The Indian Health Service (IHS) and Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA)
provide core governmental services for Tribal nations, including
hospitals, schools, law enforcement, child welfare programs, social
services, and more. For many Tribal nations, most Tribal governmental
services are funded by Federal sources as part of the treaty and trust
responsibility. This is particularly important because Tribal nations
lack the tax base and parity in tax authority under Federal law to
raise governmental revenue to deliver services. Federal funding remains
critical to ensure essential government services are delivered to
Tribal citizens. In addition to the appropriations requests below, TLPI
urges Congress to fund BIA and IHS through advance appropriations to
protect Tribal governments and citizens from future shutdowns as well
as cash flow problems that regularly occur at the start of the fiscal
year.
bureau of indian affairs
Along with the IHS, the BIA is one of the primary agencies
responsible for providing services throughout Indian Country, either
directly or through compacts or contracts with Tribal governments. As
part of the fiscal year 2020 budget formulation process, Tribes from
each BIA region completed a survey to outline which ten budget lines
they would prefer to provide increased funding to and why. The
formulation process provides a window into which program areas Tribes
would prefer to see increases designated. The results of this process
show that BIA Social Services, Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA), Tribal
Courts, Aid to Tribal Government, Scholarships and Adult Education,
Criminal Investigations/Policing, Road Maintenance, Housing, Johnson
O'Malley, Detentions and Corrections, and Welfare Assistance made up
the top 11.
For Public Safety and Justice Programs, one of the most fundamental
aspects of the Federal Government's trust responsibility is the
obligation to protect public safety on Tribal lands. Congress and the
United States Supreme Court have long acknowledged this obligation,
which Congress most recently reaffirmed in the Tribal Law and Order Act
expressly ``acknowledging the Federal nexus and distinct Federal
responsibility to address and prevent crime in Indian Country.'' In
2018 the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights found that there continues to
be ``systematic underfunding of Tribal law enforcement and criminal
justice systems, as well as structural barriers in the funding and
operation of criminal justice systems in Indian Country'' that
undermine public safety.\2\ Tribal justice systems simply need the
resources to put their tools to work so they can protect women,
children and families, address substance abuse, rehabilitate first-time
offenders, and put serious criminals behind bars.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Id. at 32.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The underfunding of Tribal law enforcement and justice systems is
well-documented. Most recently, the BIA submitted a report to Congress
in 2017 estimating that to provide a minimum base level of service to
all federally-recognized Tribes $1 billion is needed for Tribal law
enforcement, $1 billion is needed for Tribal courts, and $222.8 million
is needed to adequately fund existing detention centers.\3\ Based on
recent appropriation levels, BIA is generally funding Tribal law
enforcement at about 20 percent of estimated need, Tribal detention at
about 40 percent of estimated need, and Tribal courts at a dismal 3
percent of estimated need.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Bureau of Indian Affairs, Office of Justice Services. ``Report
to Congress on Spending, Staffing, and Estimated Funding Costs for
Public Safety and Justice Programs in Indian Country,'' (Aug, 16,
2016), https://www.bia.gov/cs/groups/xojs/documents/document/idc2-
051817.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TLPI recommends an increase in base funding for Tribal courts, for
a total of $83 million, which would must include courts in PL 280
jurisdictions. The BIA estimates that full funding for Tribal courts
would cost $1 billion. fiscal year 2018 funding for Tribal courts was
$30.6 million, or 3 percent of the estimated need. TLPI also recommends
an increase to BIA Law Enforcement of $200 million, for a total of $573
million, which also must include Public Law 280 Tribes.
BIA Social Services help to address the underlying conditions such
as drug addiction, poverty, and violence that tend to create and
perpetuate the circumstances that produce victims. Sub-activities
include services in the areas of family and domestic violence, child
abuse and neglect, and protective services. However, many Tribes'
Social Services departments are understaffed and experience high
turnover rates. A lack of increased yearly funding tends to hinder
these protective services. TLPI recommends $55 million for BIA Social
Services in fiscal year 2020.
indian health service
The Federal responsibility for healthcare is rooted in the treaty
and trust promises.\4\ Yet, the Federal Government has never fully
lived up to this responsibility. Appropriations for the IHS have never
been adequate to meet basic patient needs, and healthcare is delivered
in mostly third world conditions. The Indian healthcare delivery system
faces significant funding disparities, notably in per capita spending
between the IHS and other Federal healthcare programs. The IHS has been
and continues to be a critical institution in securing the health and
wellness of Tribal communities. In fiscal year 2017, the IHS per capita
expenditures were just $4,078, compared to $8,109 for Medicaid, $10,692
for the Veterans Health Administration (VHA), and $13,185 for
Medicare.\5\ New healthcare insurance opportunities and expanded
Medicaid in some States may expand healthcare resources available to
AI/ANs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See e.g. Geoffrey D. Strommer, Starla K. Roels, and Caroline P.
Mayhew, Tribal Soverign Authority and Self-Regulation of Health Care
Services: The Legal Framework and the Swinomish Tribe's Dental Health
Program, 21:2 J. of Health Care Law and Policy 115 (2018).
\5\ U.S. Gov't Accountability Office, Indian Health Service:
Spending Levels and Characteristics of IHS and Three Other Federal
Health Care Programs, GAO-19-74R, 5 (Dec. 10, 2018), https://
www.gao.gov/assets/700/695871.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TLPI recommends the amount requested by the IHS Tribal Budget
Formulation Workgroup for fiscal year 2020, a total of $7.03 billion
for the Indian Health Service in fiscal year 2020. This amount would
include an increase to maintain current services and other binding
obligations and allow for program expansions, as listed in the
Workgroup's fiscal year 2020 report. Further, IHS should be provided
advance appropriations, and be exempted from Federal Government
shutdowns and sequestrations, much like the comparably situated VHA.
conclusion
We look forward to working with this subcommittee on a nonpartisan
basis to protect the Federal trust and treaty obligations in the
budget. Thank you for your consideration of this testimony.
Tribal Law and Policy Institute Staff
Executive Director
Jerry Gardner (Cherokee)
Deputy Director
Heather Valdez Freedman
Operations Director
Jessica Harjo (San Carlos Apache)
Tribal Courts Specialist
Chia Halpern Beetso (Spirit Lake Dakota)
Tribal Law Specialist
Lauren van Schilfgaarde (Cochiti Pueblo)
Victim Advocacy Specialist
Bonnie Clairmont (Ho-Chunk)
Tribal Justice Specialist
Kori Cordero (White Mountain Apache)
Victim Advocacy Legal Specialist
Kelly Stoner (Cherokee)
Tribal Youth Specialist
Stephanie Autumn (Hopi/Irish)
Tribal Victim Resource Specialist
Lonna Hunter (Tlingit, Sisseton Wahpeton Dakota)
Tribal Wellness Specialist
Kristina Pacheco (Laguna Pueblo)
Tribal Youth Legal Specialist
Precious Benally (Dine)
Tribal Youth Legal Specialist
Anna Clough (Muscogee, Creek/Yuchi)
Tribal Research Specialist
Jeremy Braithwaite
Tribal Law and Policy Specialist
Jordan Martinson (La Courte Oreilles)
Administrative Coordinator
Marlon Footracer (Dine)
Administrative Assistant
Chad Jackson (Cocopah)
Program Assistant
Cindy Wlasowich (Sincagu/Oglala)
Program Assistant
Ashley Sarracino (Laguna Pueblo)
Program Assistant
April Russel (Ho--Chunk/Rosebud Lakota)
Program Assistant
Laura Smith
Graphics Specialist
Cheyenne Cordero (White Mountain Apache)
Computer Tech/Webmaster
Lou Sgroi
Staff Accountant
Jan Langer
Bookkeeper
Uno Lawthong
Board of Directors
President: Abby Abinanti (Yurok)
Vice President: David Raasch (Stockbridge-Munsee)
Secretary-Treasurer: Margrett Oberly Kelley (Osage/Comanche)
Ed Reina (Pima/Maricopa)
Patricia Sekaquaptewa (Hopi)
Michael Jackson (Tlingit/Haida)
Lucille Echohawk (Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma)
______
Prepared Statement of The Trust for Public Land
Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee:
Thank you very much for the opportunity to submit testimony on
behalf of The Trust for Public Land in support of programs under your
jurisdiction for the fiscal year 2020 appropriations process. The Trust
for Public Land (TPL) is a national nonprofit land conservation
organization working to protect land for people in communities across
the Nation. We are extremely grateful for the steadfast support members
of this subcommittee have shown for Federal conservation programs
during these challenging fiscal times.
We recognize that the subcommittee will face enormous challenges in
meeting the broad range of priority needs in the Interior and
Environment bill this year. The President's budget request for fiscal
year 2020 once again proposes drastic program reductions and
elimination of core Federal conservation programs that have long had an
impact in communities across the country. Our work in many of your
districts and elsewhere shows that there is tremendous support for
conservation and access to recreation at the local, State and Federal
level, and the programs under your jurisdiction play a critical role in
bringing those community visions to reality while supporting a robust
outdoor recreation economy. We urge you to once again reject the
President's budget and make investments in programs that support
conservation and outdoor recreation on our public lands, from local
parks to national parks.
The major programs under your jurisdiction that we count on year in
and year out are the entire suite of Land and Water Conservation Fund
(LWCF) programs: BLM, FWS, NPS, and USFS acquisitions, NPS State and
local grants--especially the competitive grants program for city
parks--Forest Legacy Program, Cooperative Endangered Species
Conservation Fund, Highlands Conservation Act grants, and American
Battlefield Protection Program. Other programs include the North
American Wetlands Conservation Act, Community Forest Program, National
Endowment for the Arts, and Brownfields grants.
Land and Water Conservation Fund.--We are thrilled that Congress
voted overwhelmingly to permanently reauthorize the Land and Water
Conservation Fund, after two unfortunate expirations of this effective
and popular program. We urge the subcommittee to work towards fully
funding LWCF so that the original promise of LWCF investments in
conservation and outdoor recreation needs across the country can
finally be met. In the recent fiscal year 2019 omnibus appropriations
bill, Congress furnished the program with $435 million, and we thank
you for the $10 million increase over the previous year. For fiscal
year 2020, we respectfully ask that you increase LWCF in total to $600
million, with that plus-up shared among all programs. At two-thirds of
LWCF's authorized funding level and still less than is deposited each
year into the LWCF account, we believe this increase represents a sound
investment that spreads limited resources wisely across urgent and
diverse priorities. It also makes real progress toward the goal of
fully funding this critical program. Recent conference agreements have
done an excellent job of fairly allocating LWCF funds between Federal
and State needs, and we encourage you to maintain that split.
The appropriations committees also included important conference
report language in fiscal year 2018 and 2019 that instructed the four
Federal land management agencies and Forest Legacy Program to continue
ranking projects annually, and to make those lists available to the
committee by March 1. These ranked project priorities reflect needs
across the country and we urge you to request agency project lists that
total greater than the enacted level for each land management account,
if necessary. The fact that the President's budget does not include
project lists has complicated the process, but we are confident that
you will be attentive to this matter and look forward to working with
you to ensure that you have the best information possible on which to
base your funding decisions. The agencies should not be allowed to
limit their lists, as that imposes an artificial limit on the work of
the subcommittee to review project needs and allocate LWCF dollars
accordingly. We greatly appreciate the key role your subcommittee plays
in ensuring that LWCF is used for high-priority strategic investments
and appreciate that in challenging budgetary times you have maintained
a commitment to this bipartisan program.
Within the LWCF total, individual programs bring specific and
complementary conservation benefits to the American public. These key
programs are:
BLM/FWS/NPS/USFS: Land Acquisitions.--Every year tens of millions
of Americans, as well as visitors to our country, enjoy our Federal
public lands--national parks, forests, wildlife refuges and BLM
conservation lands. Strategic inholding and other acquisitions in these
Federal areas through LWCF ensure recreation access and nature
education; foster vital economic growth; protect clean water and other
community resources; enhance the incomparable natural and scenic
treasures that belong to all Americans; and frequently resolve complex
land-use conflicts and produce management savings. Without adequate
funding, the unfortunate alternative often is an irretrievable loss of
public use and enjoyment of these areas and irreversible damage to the
resources we all care about. We strenuously oppose the budget proposal
eliminating all funds for land protection projects and urge you to
increase allocations to each land acquisition account using the
comprehensive agency project priority lists discussed above.
We applaud the inclusion of recreational access line items in
recent appropriations bills for each of the four land management
agencies--with particular emphasis on BLM and USFS--and support
similarly focused funding in the fiscal year 2020 bill to address
opening up and improving public access to the outdoors. The President's
budget reduced recreational access funding for all four land management
agencies by 95 percent. We urge you to restore it.
USFS: Forest Legacy Program.--For almost 30 years, the Forest
Legacy Program has been an extraordinarily effective program, providing
assistance to States and localities seeking to preserve important
working forests. It has protected over 2.5 million acres of forestland
and has leveraged above and beyond the required 25 percent match.
Forest Legacy projects provide multiple public benefits through forest
protection--clean water, wildlife protection, climate change adaptation
and mitigation, public access to recreation, economic development and
sustainable forestry. Working with States, landowners and other
partners, we have worked to submit a number of projects to protect
recreation access for snowmobilers and hikers, ensure jobs in the
woods, buffer important Federal and State conservation areas and
provide strategic land conservation that fits a larger goal. Among
these are projects to protect the recreational access and critical
wildlife habitat in Montana and working forests along Hood Canal and
Puget Sound in Washington. We strongly oppose the administration's
elimination of this program and instead urge your continued support for
sustained investment in this strategic and successful program by
increasing FLP funding to $100 million, which reflects demand from the
States.
USFWS: Cooperative Endangered Species Conservation Fund.--We are
grateful for the subcommittee's support for the Cooperative Endangered
Species Conservation Fund (CESCF), which leverages State and private
funds to protect threatened and endangered species habitat across the
Nation. Two components of this program are funded via LWCF: the Habitat
Conservation Plan (HCP) Land Acquisition program and the Recovery Land
Acquisition (RLA) program. The CESCF has been critical to communities
in California, Montana and other States where landowners and public
wildlife managers are working together through integrated planning to
foster species recovery and appropriate economic development. The land
acquisition portion of this program was eliminated in the President's
Budget. We support at least the House-proposed level of $40 million for
the HCP and RLA land acquisition programs in fiscal year 2020.
NPS: State and Local Assistance grants.--Since 1965, the State and
local assistance grant program has provided over $4 billion in Federal
funds for more than 42,000 projects in States and local communities for
park protection and development of recreation facilities. This program
reaches deep into communities across our Nation, supporting citizen-led
efforts to conserve places of local importance and opportunities for
close-to-home recreation. The Trust for Public Land works with local
communities to create, build, design, fund and care for parks, trails
and playgrounds. As we our work with many of these communities to meet
these needs, we hope the subcommittee will continue to provide funding
to this important program. We are also very grateful for the
subcommittee's continued support for allocating a portion of LWCF State
and local assistance funds to the nationwide competitive program, the
Outdoor Recreation Legacy Program. In fiscal year 2019, you once again
demonstrated your commitment to this program by funding competitive
grants at $20 million. We support increasing that allocation to at
least $30 million in fiscal year 2020, given the demand from
communities all across the country for funds that will help bring
people in underserved areas closer to the outdoors--often within a ten
minute walk from home.
NPS: American Battlefield Protection Program.--We applaud the
subcommittee for its longstanding commitment to this important program,
which complements acquisitions of threatened Civil War, Revolutionary
War, and War of 1812 properties in national park units with non-Federal
land protection of key battlefield sites. We hope that Congress can
provide an increase to the program to the $20 million level in fiscal
year 2020.
USFWS: Highlands Conservation Act.--We greatly appreciate the
increase provided in fiscal year 2019 to the Highlands Conservation Act
grant program and urge the subcommittee to maintain the $20 million
level of funding in fiscal year 2020, in order to address important
outdoor recreation and water protection needs in the four-State area
authorized by Congress.
Beyond LWCF, we urge the subcommittee to provide adequate funding
to other conservation programs including:
USFWS: North American Wetlands Conservation Act.--We respectfully
request your support for program funding at the enacted level of $42
million in fiscal year 2020. The North American Wetlands Conservation
Act (NAWCA) provides much-needed matching grants to carry out wetlands
conservation, restoration and enhancement projects. NAWCA is a highly-
leveraged program with a substantial record of success and is an
important Federal tool to protect critical wetland habitat.
USFS: Community Forest Program.--Contrary to the President's
Budget, which eliminates the program, we urge your continued support
for the Community Forest Program (CFP), which complements existing
conservation programs by helping communities and Tribes identify,
purchase, and manage locally important forestlands that are threatened
with development. These community forests can be tailored to local
needs, from timber revenue for municipal or county budgets to
recreation access and outdoor education. Every Federal dollar from CFP
is at least evenly matched by funding from State, local, and private
sources. The Forest Service has now approved 35 grants in 17 States and
territories--including the North Falmouth Community Forest in
Cumberland County, Maine and the Chimacum Community Forest in Jefferson
County, Washington--for innovative local and Tribal projects, and the
program has generated significant interest from local entities
concerned about the future of their close-to-home forests. Given the
strong interest in community forests from coast to coast, we urge you
to include at least $5 million in the fiscal year 2020 bill for this
innovative conservation tool.
National Endowment for the Arts.--Since its establishment by
Congress in 1965, the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) has
provided strategic leadership and investment in the arts. Through
partnerships with State arts agencies, local leaders, other Federal
agencies, and the philanthropic sector, the NEA supports arts learning,
affirms and celebrates America's rich and diverse cultural heritage,
and extends its work to promote equal access to the arts in every
community. NEA provides not only critical funding and resources to the
arts community but also significant investments in parks and community
development through its Art Works and Our Town grants. According to
analysis by Americans for the Arts, every $1 of NEA funding leverages
$9 in private and public dollars and fuels a dynamic cultural economy
and generates millions of American jobs. We strongly urge the inclusion
of $167.5 million for the agency in fiscal year 2020 in order to
preserve access to the cultural, educational, and economic benefits of
the arts.
EPA: Brownfields.--The EPA's Brownfields Program is a results-
oriented program that has changed the way contaminated property is
perceived, addressed, and managed. This Program is designed to empower
States, communities, and other stakeholders to work collaboratively to
prevent, assess, clean up, and sustainably reuse brownfields--often
converting the sites into parks and vital open space. The Trust for
Public Land supports at least the enacted level of funding for these
programs in fiscal year 2020.
The programs highlighted here are critical to the future of
conservation at the local, State and Federal levels; reflect the
continued demand on the part of the American people for access to
outdoor recreation; and help sustain our economy and reflect the true
partnership that exists in Federal conservation efforts. As ever, we
are deeply thankful for the subcommittee's recognition of the
importance of these programs and urge you to maintain robust funding
for them in the fiscal year 2020 Interior, Environment and Related
Agencies bill. Thank you for your help and support, and for your
consideration of our requests.
[This statement was submitted by Kathy DeCoster, Vice President and
Director of Federal Affairs.]
______
Prepared Statement of the United States Section of the Pacific Salmon
Commission
Madam Chair, and Honorable Members of the Committee, I am Ron
Allen, the Alternate Tribal Commissioner and Chair of the Finance and
Administration Committee for the U.S. Section of the Pacific Salmon
Commission (PSC). The U.S. Section prepares an annual budget for
implementation of the Pacific Salmon Treaty (PST). The United States
and Canada recently completed the revision of five of the Annex
Chapters to the PST. The Annex Chapters contain the details for
operations of fisheries under the Treaty and will be in operation for
the next 10 years.
Funding to implement the PST comes from the Departments of
Interior, Commerce, and State. The integrated budget details program
needs and costs for Tribal, Federal, and State agencies involved in the
Treaty. Tribal participation in the Treaty process is funded within the
Bureau of Indian Affairs budget as a line item within Rights Protection
Implementation.
In order to meet the increased obligations under the Pacific
Salmon Treaty Agreement, the 25 affected Tribes identified
costs at $5,200,000 for Tribal research projects and
participation in the U.S.-Canada Pacific Salmon Treaty process.
This represents an increase of $857,278 from fiscal year 2017
levels. The funding for Tribal participation in the Pacific
Salmon Treaty is a line item in the BIA's budget under Rights
Protection Implementation.
Under U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service programs, the U.S. Section
identified funding needs as follows:
USFWS participation in the Treaty process was funded at
$372,362 for fiscal year 2017. The Pacific States Marine
Fisheries Commission's Regional Mark Center (PSMFC) receives
support from the USFWS to provide data services to the PSC
process at $236,189 for fiscal year 2017. The U.S. Section
recommends increasing the funding for PSMFC by $150,000. The
recommended total for the two programs for fiscal year 2020 is
$758,551.
The base funding for the USFWS supports critically important on-
going work and participation in the process. The funding for Pacific
States Marine Fisheries Commission's Regional Mark Processing Center is
utilized to meet Treaty requirements concerning data exchange with
Canada. These program recommendations are integrated with those of
participating State and Federal agencies to avoid duplication of effort
and provide for the most efficient expenditure of limited funds.
The U.S. Section of the PSC is recommending an adjustment in
funding to support the work carried out by the 25 treaty Tribes'
participating in implementation of the Treaty. Programs carried out by
the Tribes are closely coordinated with those of participating State
and Federal agencies. Tribal programs are essential for the United
States to meet its international obligations. Tribal programs have
taken on additional management responsibilities over time. The revised
Chinook Chapter includes a new metric for evaluating terminal area
fisheries. The CYER (Calendar Year Exploitation Rate) metric requires
additional data collection and data management by the affected Tribes.
All participating agencies need to be adequately supported to achieve a
comprehensive U.S. effort to implement the Treaty.
The USFWS activities are essential, so the U.S. can maintain the
coded wire tag database necessary to implement the Treaty. The work of
the Regional Mark Processing Center includes maintaining and updating a
coastwide computerized information management system for salmon harvest
data as required by the Treaty. This work has become even more
important to monitor the success of management actions aimed at
reducing impacts on ESA-listed salmon populations. Canada has a
counterpart database. The U.S. database will continue to be housed at
the Pacific States Marine Fisheries Commission.
Funding to support activities under the Pacific Salmon Commission
comes from the Departments of Interior, State, and Commerce. The U.S.
Section can provide a cross-cut budget summary to the Committee.
Adequate funding from all three Departments is necessary for the U.S.
to meet its Treaty obligations. All the funds are needed for critical
data collection and research activities directly related to the
implementation and are used in cooperative programs involving Federal,
State, and Tribal fishery agencies and the Department of Fisheries and
Oceans in Canada. The commitment of the United States is matched by the
commitment of the Government of Canada.
Madam Chair, the United States and Canada established the Pacific
Salmon Commission, under the Pacific Salmon Treaty of 1985, to conserve
salmon stocks, provide for optimum production of salmon, and to control
salmon interceptions. After 35 years, the work of the Pacific Salmon
Commission continues to be essential for the wise management of salmon
in the Pacific Northwest, British Columbia, and Alaska. For example,
upriver bright fall Chinook salmon from the Hanford Reach of the
Columbia River are caught in large numbers in Alaskan and Canadian
waters. Tribal and non-Tribal fishermen harvest sockeye salmon from
Canada's Fraser River in the Strait of Juan de Fuca and in Puget Sound.
Canadian trollers off the west coast of Vancouver Island catch
Washington coastal Coho salmon and Puget Sound Chinook salmon. In the
Northern Boundary area between Canada and Alaska, fish from both
countries are intercepted by the other country in large numbers. The
Pacific Salmon Commission provides a forum to ensure cooperative
management of salmon populations. The United States and Canada reached
agreements for revised Annex Chapters for management of Chinook, Coho,
Chum and transboundary salmon populations for the next 10 years. The
Annex Chapter for management of Fraser River Sockeye and Pink salmon
expires at the end of 2019 and an update is expected to be completed
soon. It is critically important to have adequate resources for U.S.
participants to implement the revised agreements and protect our Tribal
Treaty resources.
Before the Treaty, fish wars often erupted with one or both
countries overharvesting fish that were returning to the other country,
to the detriment of the resource. At the time the Treaty was signed,
Chinook salmon were in a severely depressed State because of
overharvest in the ocean as well as environmental degradation in the
spawning rivers. Under the Treaty, both countries committed to rebuild
the depressed runs of Chinook stocks and recommitted to that goal in
1999 when adopting a coastwide abundance-based approach to harvest
management. Under this approach, harvest management has complemented
habitat conservation and restoration activities undertaken by the
States, Tribes, and other stakeholders in the Pacific Northwest to
address the needs of salmon listed for protection under the Endangered
Species Act. The updated Annex Chapters continue these commitments. The
combination of these efforts is integral to achieving success in
rebuilding and restoring healthy, sustainable salmon populations.
Finally, you should consider that the value of the commercial
harvest of salmon subject to the Treaty, managed at productive levels
under the Treaty, supports the infrastructure of many coastal and
inland communities. The value of the commercial, recreational
fisheries, and the economic diversity they provide for local economies
throughout the Pacific Northwest and Alaska, is immense. The Commission
funded an economic study of the fisheries and determined that this
resource creates thousands of jobs and is a multi-billion dollar
industry. The value of these fish to the 24 treaty Tribes in
Washington, Oregon, and Idaho goes far beyond their monetary value, to
the cultural and religious lives of Indian people. A significant
monetary investment is focused on salmon due to the listings of Pacific
Northwest salmon populations under the Endangered Species Act. Given
these resources, we continue to utilize the Pacific Salmon Commission
to develop recommendations that help with the development and
implementation of solutions to minimizing impacts on listed stocks. We
continue to work towards the true intent of the Treaty, and with your
support, we will manage this shared resource for mutual enhancements
and benefits.
Madam Chair, that concludes my written testimony submitted for
consideration by your Committee. I want to thank the Committee for the
support that it has given the U.S. Section in the past. Please feel
free to contact me, or other members of the U.S. Section to answer any
questions you or Committee members may have regarding the U.S. Section
of the Pacific Salmon Commission budget.
______
Prepared Statement of the USGS Coalition
The USGS Coalition appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony
about fiscal year 2020 appropriations for the United States Geological
Survey (USGS). The USGS Coalition requests that Congress fund the USGS
at $1.2 billion in fiscal year 2020. The requested funding would allow
the agency to sustain current efforts in scientific discovery and
innovation and to make strategic investments that will produce the
impartial knowledge and decision support tools needed by decision-
makers across the country. The President's budget request represents a
more than a 15 percent cut to the fiscal year 2019 enacted budget.
The USGS is uniquely positioned to provide information and inform
responses to many of the Nation's greatest challenges. The USGS is an
agency that has a distinctive capacity to deploy truly
interdisciplinary teams of experts to gather data, conduct research,
and develop integrated decision support tools that improve ecosystem
management, ensure accurate assessments of our water quality and
quantity, reduce risks from natural and human-induced hazards, deliver
timely assessments of mineral and energy resources, and provide
emergency responders with accurate geospatial data and maps.
The USGS Coalition is an alliance of more than 85 organizations united
by a commitment to the continued vitality of the United States
Geological Survey to provide critical data and services. Coalition
members include scientific organizations, universities, businesses, and
natural resource managers.
essential services for the nation
Established by Congress as a branch of the Department of the
Interior in 1879, the USGS has a national mission that extends beyond
the boundaries of the Nation's public lands to positively impact the
lives of all Americans. The USGS plays a unique role within the
Department of the Interior, conducting research across a broad array of
scientific disciplines and providing data that informs responses to
many of the Nation's greatest challenges. To highlight just a few
examples, USGS scientists:
--Reduce risks from natural hazards--including earthquakes, tsunamis,
landslides, volcanic eruptions, flooding, drought, and
wildfires--that jeopardize human lives and result in billions
of dollars in damages annually. USGS not only works to improve
the scientific understanding of these hazards, but also works
to relay these findings to Federal, state, and local decision
makers in order to better adapt response protocols in the event
of an emergency. Recent disasters, such as the Camp, Carr and
Woolsey wildfires and Hurricanes Michael and Florence,
highlight the Nation's continued vulnerability to natural
disasters and their catastrophic economic losses.
--Inform management of freshwater resources--both above and below the
land surface--for drinking water, agriculture, and commercial,
industrial, recreational, and ecological purposes.
--Inform sound management of natural resources on Federal and State
lands, including control of invasive species and wildlife
diseases that cause billions of dollars in economic losses.
This information is shared with other Interior bureaus and
State agencies to allow for adequate monitoring and management.
--Provide vital geospatial and mapping data used in economic
development, environmental management, infrastructure projects,
and scientific applications by States, Federal agencies, and
the private sector.
--Help predict the impacts of land use and climatic conditions on the
availability of water resources and the frequency of wildfires.
The Landsat satellites have collected the largest archive of
remotely sensed land data in the world, which informs
agriculture production and our Nation's response to and
mitigation of natural hazards.
--Help make decisions about the Nation's economic and energy future
by assessing mineral and energy resources--including rare earth
elements, coal, oil, unconventional natural gas, and
geothermal. The USGS is the sole Federal source of information
on mineral potential, production, and consumption.
funding
Over the years, Congress has worked in a bipartisan fashion to
provide essential funding to the USGS. These efforts have paid
dividends and helped the USGS provide answers to the challenging
questions facing decision-makers across the country. As a science
agency, much of the USGS budget is dedicated to salaries and equipment
that must be maintained and updated to ensure the continuity of data
acquisition and that the data gathered are reliable and available for
future scientific investigations. We believe that the leadership of the
USGS is doing all they can to contain costs while continuing to deliver
high quality science. Any cuts in fiscal year 2020 or beyond would come
at the expense of scientific programs.
One strength of the USGS is its partnerships with many other
Federal agencies, States, local governments, educational institutions
and private entities. These relationships, however, should not be
mistaken as a means to transfer Federal activities to other entities.
The work of the USGS is uniquely tied to the agency, as shown in the
following examples:
--Expected losses from natural hazards in the U.S. have averaged more
than $20 billion per year over the past 2 decades. These losses
can be significantly reduced through informed decisions guided
by the most current and thoroughly-researched understanding of
the hazards, risks, and cost of mitigation. The USGS Science
Application for Risk Reduction Project was created to innovate
the application of hazard science for the safety, security, and
economic well-being of the Nation by directing new and existing
scientific research toward addressing gaps in vulnerability to
help communities build resilience to natural hazards.
--Precise elevation data is needed for a variety of applications,
including farming, infrastructure construction, flood
mitigation, and aviation safety. The U.S., however, does not
yet have national coverage of high-quality topographic data.
Given its expertise in mapping, the USGS is the lead entity for
the 3D Elevation Program, which will acquire precise national
elevation data coverage within 8 years. The program is
estimated to provide benefits worth $1.1 billion a year to
government and private entities.
--Nearly half of America's drinking water comes from underground
aquifers. The large size of some aquifers, which can span the
boundaries of multiple States, puts them beyond the scope of
local water authorities. The USGS is evaluating water quality
in 20 principal aquifers as part of the National Water-Quality
Assessment Project. The program is testing for contaminants,
such as pesticides, pharmaceuticals, and other pollutants that
threaten human health.
--The Landsat satellites have accumulated the largest archive of
remotely sensed land data in the world, providing an important
resource of land use planning, agriculture, assessing water
resources and addressing the impacts from natural hazards.
--According to analysis completed by USGS, State fish and wildlife
agencies have identified more than 16,000 species as at risk or
in need of additional monitoring. USGS Cooperative Research
Unit scientists work to bring State agency and U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service scientists and decision makers together on
cooperative research projects, trainings, and workshops before
these species reach the point of Endangered Species Act
listing.
--Recent research by the USGS identified the potential for avian flu
to move between Europe and North America when migratory birds
congregate in Iceland during their migration. Wildlife diseases
threaten not only the ecosystem and economic values of wild
animals, but can also jeopardize human health. The USGS has
unique technical expertise for surveillance and diagnosis of
wildlife disease, such as identifying a potential transmission
route of a deadly disease.
conclusion
We recognize the financial challenges facing the Nation, but losing
irreplaceable data can increase costs to society today and in the
future. Data not collected and analyzed today is data lost forever.
This is particularly significant for environmental monitoring systems,
where the loss of a year's data can limit the scope and reliability of
long-term dataset analysis--resulting in a cascading effect for private
and public partners that rely on this information to make regulatory
and financial decisions. Moreover, the United States Geological Survey
has a national mission that extends beyond the boundaries of the
Nation's public lands to positively impact the lives of all Americans.
For these reasons, the USGS Coalition requests that Congress provide
$1.2 billion for USGS in fiscal year 2020.
The USGS Coalition appreciates the subcommittee's past leadership
in strengthening the United States Geological Survey. Thank you for
your thoughtful consideration of this request.
[This statement was submitted by Elizabeth Duffy, Chair.]
______
Prepared Statement of the WateReuse Association
Thank you for the opportunity to present our fiscal year 2020
funding requests. The WateReuse Association (WRA) is a not-for-profit
trade association for water utilities, businesses, industrial and
commercial enterprises, non-profit organizations, and research entities
that engage in and on water reuse. WRA and its State and regional
sections represent more than 200 water utilities serving over 60
million customers, and over 300 businesses and organizations across the
country. WRA's mission is to engage its members in a movement for safe
and sustainable water supplies, to promote acceptance and support of
recycled water, and to advocate for policies and funding that increase
water reuse. As you begin the fiscal year 2020 appropriations cycle, we
submit the following requests for your consideration:
america's water infrastructure act (awia) of 2018 provisions
Agency: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Account: State and Tribal Assistance Grants (STAG)
We request following amounts for fiscal year 2020 for three
programs newly authorized in AWIA:
--$4 million for SEC. 2005--Drinking Water Infrastructure Resilience
and Sustainability Program;
--$10 million for SEC. 2007--Innovative Water Technology Grant
Program
--$25 million for SEC. 2013--Community Water System Risk and
Resilience Program
--$225 million for SEC. 4106--Sewer Overflow Control Grants
These four programs were created in the America's Water
Infrastructure Act of 2018. fiscal year 2020 will be the first
opportunity to provide a Federal investment under the new
authorizations. These programs will provide tools and resources to
support innovation in addressing unique local challenges in water
supply and water quality, including practices involving the use of
recycled wastewater effluent, captured stormwater, and other
alternative water sources in all States.
clean water state revolving fund
Agency: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Account: State and Tribal Assistance Grants (STAG)
The successful Clean Water State Revolving Fund (CWSRF) program is
the primary source of Federal financing assistance for clean water
infrastructure. The CWSRF is an important tool used across all 50
States and in communities of all sizes to help communities make
investments more affordably. Our Nation's water infrastructure faces
significant infrastructure investment challenges with utilities
challenged to maintain and upgrade aging infrastructure, comply with
Federal obligations, protect public health and serve as environmental
stewards in their community--all while maintaining affordable rates for
critical services. A significant increase in funding for the CWSRF
would provide tools and resources to help meet these growing needs. We
therefore request a doubling of funding for the CWSRF to $3.388 billion
in fiscal year 2020.
water infrastructure finance and innovation program
Agency: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Account: Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Fund
The Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Program accelerates
investment in our Nation's water infrastructure by providing long-term,
low-cost supplemental loans for regionally and nationally significant
projects. EPA estimates that a $50 million Water Infrastructure Finance
& Innovation Act (WIFIA) appropriation can be leveraged into $5 billion
in low-interest Federal loans and $10 billion in new water
infrastructure projects. A small increase in appropriated dollars for
this program can go a very long way toward advancing water reuse and
recycling across the country. Already, WIFIA has made major investments
in innovative water recycling projects, and we expect to see this trend
continue into the future. We therefore request $70 million in fiscal
year 2020 for the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Program.
drinking water state revolving fund
Agency: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Account: State and Tribal Assistance Grants (STAG)
Following the 1996 Amendments to the Safe Drinking Water Act,
Congress demonstrated its commitment to safe drinking water and
economic growth by providing more than $19 billion to the Drinking
Water SRF program, resulting in $35.4 billion in assistance to water
systems that have supported roughly 13,800 drinking water improvement
projects nationwide, and been an almost 2:1 return on investment for
American taxpayers. Despite the large investment, the need for drinking
water infrastructure improvements far exceeds available dollars. An
increase in fiscal year 2020 would help address that need. We therefore
request $1.3 billion in fiscal year 2020 for the Drinking Water State
Revolving Fund.
national priorities water research grant program
Agency: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Account: Science & Technology
The water sector in the United States is vital for supporting
healthy families and thriving communities. Today, the water sector is
facing unprecedented challenges, including extreme drought,
catastrophic flooding, failing infrastructure, emerging contaminants,
and dramatic changes in population. Water research will play a critical
role in developing cost-effective solutions to these challenges to
ensure thriving, resilient communities, create jobs, and support
healthy families. In the past 2 years, Congress has appropriated
between $600-$700 million for EPA research, but less than 15 percent of
EPA's Science and Technology Account funding is dedicated to water
related research. Less than 1 percent of these funds supports applied
research for water utilities. We therefore request an increase in
funding to $20 million for the National Priorities Water Research grant
program in order to better reflect the urgent research needs of the
water sector.
______
Prepared Statement of the Western Governors' Association
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee, the Western Governors' Association (WGA) appreciates the
opportunity to provide written testimony on the appropriations and
activities of the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service (FWS), National Park Service (NPS), U.S. Forest
Service (USFS) and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). WGA is an
independent organization representing the Governors of 19 western
States and 3 U.S territories in the Pacific. The Association is an
instrument of the Governors for bipartisan policy development,
information-sharing and collective action on issues of critical
importance to the western United States.
The agencies within the subcommittee's jurisdiction wield
significant influence over vast areas of the American West. Ninety-four
percent of all Federal lands are located in the western States, and the
Federal Government owns over 46 percent of the land within active WGA
States. The work of this subcommittee is of vital importance to Western
Governors, as it establishes how these lands are managed and how
Federal agencies interact with other levels of government and the
public.
There is a tension between State and Federal Government, one that
is embedded in the fabric of our Constitution. These sovereign
governments must have a close and productive working relationship to
increase efficiencies and maximize returns on taxpayer investments. The
promotion of a greater partnership between States and the Federal
Government is central to the mission of WGA and is reflected in WGA
Policy Resolution 2017-01, Building a Stronger State-Federal
Relationship, which I commend to your attention.
In last year's House Committee report accompanying the Interior,
Environment, and Related Agencies fiscal year 2019 appropriations bill
(H. Rpt. 115-765), the Federal agencies funded by the Interior bill
were directed to provide appropriate feedback on Tribal input received
by agencies through meaningful consultation in their decisionmaking
processes. Similar direction to Federal agencies for consultation with
States, which is required pursuant to Executive Order 13132, would
improve the co-sovereign relationship between States and the Federal
Government. The Governors have also urged the Department of the
Interior (DOI) to engage in meaningful, substantive consultation with
States on departmental reorganization and appreciate the direction to
DOI regarding the necessity of this consultation. Reorganization offers
an excellent opportunity to improve State and Federal consultation,
coordination, and communication.
The promotion of greater partnership between States and the Federal
Government is central to the mission of WGA and a key theme of several
WGA projects, including the Species Conservation and Endangered Species
Act Initiative, the National Forest and Rangeland Management
Initiative, and the current Biosecurity and Invasive Species Intiative.
Responsible land management can only occur when Federal, State and
local stakeholders work collaboratively to improve the health and
resilience of our lands. Likewise, fish and wildlife conservation is
only possible through the cooperative efforts of State and Federal
officials across multiple disciplines.
Western Governors believe that States should be full partners in
the implementation of the Endangered Species Act (ESA) and have the
opportunity to participate in listing decisions, critical habitat
designations, recovery planning and delisting decisions. The Act is
premised on a strong State-Federal partnership. Section 6(a) of the ESA
States that: ``In carrying out the program authorized by the Act, the
Secretary shall cooperate to the maximum extent practicable with the
States.'' WGA submits that such cooperation should involve meaningful
opportunities for States to comment, participate, or undertake
proactive measures before the Federal Government takes action under the
ESA.
States possess primary authority to manage most fish and wildlife
within their borders, and they are the principal recipients of economic
benefits associated with healthy species and ecosystems. At the same
time, species listings and their associated prohibitions and
consultations can affect the efforts of western States to promote
economic development, accommodate population growth, and maintain and
expand infrastructure. Consequently, States should have the right to
intervene in judicial and administrative proceedings regarding the ESA.
Western Governors urge the subcommittee to support the legal standing
of States to participate in administrative and judicial actions
involving ESA that, by their nature, implicate State authority and
resources.
For the past several years, the subcommittee has adopted report
language directing Federal land managers to use State fish and wildlife
data and analyses as principal sources to inform land use, land
planning and related natural resource decisions. Western Governors are
deeply appreciative of your commitment to promote a positive
relationship between the States and the Federal Government in the use
of wildlife data while respecting the limitations of State data privacy
laws. Federal managers need data-driven science, mapping and analyses
to effectively manage wildlife species and habitat, and in many cases
States generate the best available wildlife science. Western Governors
encourage continued coordination between Federal and State agencies on
wildlife data collection to avoid spending scarce resources on
duplicative data collection efforts.
WGA recommends the enactment and full funding of a permanent and
stable funding mechanism for the Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILT)
program administered by DOI. PILT funding does not represent a gift to
local jurisdictions; rather it provides important compensation for the
disproportionate acreage of non-taxable Federal lands in the West.
Similarly, payments under the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-
Determination Act (SRS) compensate communities whose timber industries
have been negatively impacted by actions and acquisitions of the
Federal Government. Western Governors request that you appropriate full
funding for both PILT and SRS payments in fiscal year 2020.
Data for water management and drought response planning is critical
to western States. Western Governors request adequate funding levels
for the Cooperative Water Program and National Streamflow Information
Program, both administered by the U.S. Geological Survey. This data is
integral to the water supply management decisions of States, utilities,
reservoir operators and farmers. They are also used for flood forecasts
and are, accordingly, essential for risk assessment and water
management. These programs are important elements of a robust water
data management framework in western States and provide needed support
for drought mitigation efforts throughout the West.
Infrastructure management is another crucial element of drought
response. The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) Clean Water and
Drinking Water State Revolving Funds (SRFs) provide necessary support
for communities to maintain and enhance their water infrastructure.
Western Governors' Policy Resolution 2018-12, Water Quality in the
West, encourages adequate funding for SRFs.
Western Governors continue to be concerned about the number of wild
horses and burros on BLM lands. This number is presently estimated to
be more than triple the current Appropriate Management Level (AML).
Overpopulation can degrade rangeland, negatively affecting wildlife and
domestic livestock, as well as the habitat of threatened and endangered
species. WGA supports a process to establish, monitor and adjust AMLs
for wild horses and burros that is transparent to stakeholders,
supported by scientific information (including State data), and
amenable to adaptation with new information and environmental and
social change.
WGA remains concerned about the spread of invasive mussels in the
West and have chosen to highlight this issue through the Western
Governors' Biosecurity and Invasive Species Initiative. Of particular
concern are invasive quagga and zebra mussels, which continue to be a
major threat to western water resources. To combat this threat, Western
Governors request that the BLM, FWS, and NPS be provided with the
resources and statutory authority required to implement mandatory
inspection of all high-risk watercraft and decontamination of
watercraft infested with quagga and zebra mussels leaving waterbodies
under their jurisdiction.
Western Governors applaud NPS for its efforts to preserve iconic
landscapes, habitats and cultural resources. WGA is concerned, however,
that the significant maintenance backlog across all National Parks will
impede responsible natural and cultural resources management. WGA
encourages adequate funding to support ongoing NPS operations and
address critical infrastructure needs.
Western Governors had previously expressed concern regarding the
development of the 2015 Clean Water Rule by the EPA and U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers' (USACE), as States were not adequately consulted by the
agencies during the rulemaking process. EPA and USACE have promulgated
new language to clarify the jurisdictional boundaries of the Clean
Water Act and have taken positive steps to engage WGA and individual
States with respect to this issue. WGA looks forward to working with
the agencies to further develop and implement a new rule that takes
into account the viewpoints of Western Governors and adequately
protects States' primary authority over the management and allocation
of water resources.
States have exclusive authority over the allocation and
administration of rights to groundwater located within their borders
and are primarily responsible for protecting, managing, and otherwise
controlling the resource. The regulatory reach of the Federal
Government was not intended to, and should not, be applied to the
management and control of groundwater resources. WGA encourages
Congress to include express and unambiguous language protecting States'
authority over groundwater resources in any water-related legislation,
as well as clear direction to administrative agencies to respect such
authority. WGA appreciates the language included by the subcommittee in
prior Appropriations Acts addressing existing statutory authorities for
groundwater protection. Federal agencies should work through existing
State authorities to address their groundwater-related needs and
concerns. Such collaboration will help ensure that Federal efforts
involving groundwater recognize and respect State primacy and comply
with all statutory authorities.
States also possess delegated authority from EPA to manage air
quality within their borders. Congress and EPA should recognize State
authority under the Clean Air Act (CAA) and accord States sufficient
flexibility to create air quality and emissions programs tailored to
individual State needs, industries, and economies. State CAA programs
require financial support from Congress, yet funding has declined since
the CAA's enactment. In addition, given the unique character of the
West and the region's attainment challenges, funding should be
appropriated for EPA to assist western States in research on
background, interstate and transported ozone. More frequent and intense
wildfires are steadily reducing the West's gains in air quality
improvement. Smoke from wildfires causes exceedances under National
Ambient Air Quality Standards for particulate matter and ozone,
negatively affecting public health, safety and transportation.
Prescribed fire can reduce these effects but is currently underused in
many areas.
Western States depend on a safe, reliable and resilient network of
infrastructure to move goods, people, energy, and agricultural products
to meet growing demands across our Nation and world. Because a
significant portion of the West is federally-owned, Federal processes
impact the region's infrastructure. Congress should clarify that State,
local and Tribal governments, as well as their political subdivisions,
have unique and critical duties to serve their citizens and are not
stakeholders or members of the public for purposes of the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) process. In addition, existing State
environmental review processes can supplement and inform Federal NEPA
reviews; Federal agencies should work directly with States to obtain
and use up-to-date State data and analyses as critical sources of
information in the NEPA process.
Western Governors and Federal land management agencies deal with a
complex web of interrelated natural resource issues. It is an enormous
challenge to judiciously balance competing needs in this environment,
and Western Governors appreciate the difficulty of the decisions this
subcommittee must make. The foregoing recommendations are offered in a
spirit of cooperation and respect, and WGA is prepared to assist you in
discharging these critical and challenging responsibilities.
[This statement was submitted by James D. Ogsbury, Executive
Director.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Wildlife Conservation Society
The Wildlife Conservation Society would like to thank Chairman
Murkowski and Ranking Member Udall for providing this opportunity to
offer testimony in support of funding in the fiscal year 2020 Interior,
Environment and Related Agencies Appropriations Act for the
Multinational Species Conservation Fund (MSCF), Office of International
Affairs (IA), Office of Law Enforcement (OLE), and Cooperative
Landscape Conservation Program (CLCP) accounts at the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service (FWS), and the International Forestry program at the
U.S. Forest Service (FS-IP).
WCS was founded with the help of Theodore Roosevelt in 1895 with
the mission of saving wildlife and wild places worldwide. Today, WCS
manages the largest network of urban wildlife parks in the United
States, led by our flagship, the Bronx Zoo. Globally, our goal is to
conserve the world's largest wild places, focusing on 16 priority
regions that are home to more than 50 percent of the world's
biodiversity. We work in almost 60 countries and manage more than 200
million acres of protected areas around the world.
The American conservation tradition is based on promoting
sustainable use of our natural resources in order to preserve the
world's species and environment for future generations. In recognition
of the current fiscal constraints, it is important to note that
effective natural resources management and conservation has indirect
but significant economic benefits, including contributing to local
economies through tourism and other means. Internationally, by
supporting conservation, the U.S. is increasing the capacity of other
nations to respond to extreme weather, drought, and wildfires, thus
strengthening governance in these developing nations, which improves
U.S. national security. That is why WCS and partners have launched the
Natural Security Campaign (www.naturalsecurity.us) to demonstrate that
investments in international conservation can help prevent global
conflicts, reduce international crime, guard against natural disaster,
and promote legal and fair trade.
FWS--Multinational Species Conservation Fund--$15 Million: Global
priority species, such as tigers, rhinos, African and Asian elephants,
great apes, and marine and freshwater turtles and tortoises, face
constant danger from poaching, habitat loss, and other serious
concerns. MSCF programs have helped to sustain wildlife populations by
controlling poaching, reducing human-wildlife conflict, and protecting
essential habitat--all while promoting U.S. economic and security
interests in far reaching parts of the world. These programs are highly
efficient, granting them an outsized impact because they consistently
leverage two to four times as much in matching funds from organizations
like WCS, foreign governments, local NGOs, and private foundations.
WCS has had great success on projects using funds from the MSCF.
One Great Ape award to WCS in fiscal year 2017 is supporting a 5-year
project to secure the Cross River gorilla population in Nigeria and
Cameroon. WCS is protecting the intact, old growth forest that is home
to the less than 300 gorillas that remain and a number of forest
dependent communities by establishing an effective network of core
protected areas and corridors linking habitat between the two countries
despite pressures from Chinese developers and the provincial
government's interest in building a ``Super Highway'' through this
critical habitat.
WCS is grateful that the Committee appropriated $11.6 million for
the program in fiscal year 2019, an increase of $500,000 from the
previous year and the first increase of any kind for the program in 3
years. Regrettably, the President's budget proposes to roll back this
gain by cutting funding for the MSCF by more than 40 percent. Poaching
and wildlife trafficking remain a serious threat to all of the species
covered by the Species funds. The illegal killing of rhinos for horns
and African elephants for ivory continues, and there is growing concern
that endangered Asian elephants are being poached for their skin, which
is used in jewelry and for specious medicinal purposes in rural areas
in Southeast Asia. It is also important to mention that with the
passage of the Chairman's lands bill, the John D. Dingell, Jr.
Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act, the MSCF has been
expanded to include tortoises and freshwater turtles. About 60 percent
of all of the 330 modern species of tortoises and freshwater turtles
are listed as threatened, endangered, or are already extinct in the
wild according to the International Union for the Conservation of
Nature. Ten species are known to have wild populations of less than 100
individuals. The statutory language in the Dingell Act ensures that no
cuts would occur to grants to marine turtle projects, meaning that
additional funding is necessary to ensure that grant funding is
available for the newly added species. WCS hopes that the subcommittee
will consider these points and allocate $15 million for the MSCF to
match the amount proposed in the House draft bill.
FWS--International Affairs--$18 Million: The FWS IA program
supports efforts to conserve our planet's rich wildlife diversity by
protecting habitat and species, combating illegal wildlife trade, and
building capacity for landscape-level wildlife conservation. The
program provides oversight of domestic laws and international treaties
that promote the long-term conservation of plant and animal species by
ensuring that international trade and other activities do not threaten
their survival in the wild. Within IA, the FWS Regional Programs for
Africa, Eurasia, and the Western Hemisphere seek to address grassroots
wildlife conservation problems from a broad, landscape perspective,
building regional expertise and capacity while strengthening local
institutions.
The IA program works hand-in-glove with the MSCF, supporting the
conservation of species that are not specifically addressed by the
species funds and providing support for conservation of entire
habitats, even in cases where they happen to cross political
boundaries. Big cats like jaguars and snow leopards are examples of why
this program is important. These species need large territories to
provide the prey they need to survive and thrive, and protection from
poachers and others that infringe upon protected areas to conduct
illegal activities. The IA program supports WCS projects that are
striving to help these species through scientific study, habitat
conservation, and working with local communities to conserve these
animals.
The final fiscal year 2019 bill contained level funding for the
International Affairs program. WCS asks that the subcommittee increase
funding for the program to $18 million so that this program can better
support efforts to conserve landscapes and vulnerable species.
FWS--Office of Law Enforcement--$85 Million: The U.S. remains one
of the world's largest markets for wildlife and wildlife products, both
legal and illegal. A small group of dedicated officers at OLE are
tasked with protecting fish, wildlife, and plant resources by
investigating wildlife crimes--including commercial exploitation,
habitat destruction, and industrial hazards--and monitoring
international trade to intercept illegal wildlife and timber products.
As the U.S. developed and implemented a comprehensive strategy to
combat the growing crisis of wildlife trafficking over the last several
years, many of the new responsibilities placed on FWS are enforced by
OLE, and WCS supports increasing funding for the agency to $85 million.
Additional funding for the program will support its efforts to maximize
the scope and effectiveness of FWS' response to the international
wildlife trafficking crisis. It will ensure OLE has an adequate number
of law enforcement agents deployed to enforce laws against wildlife
trafficking in the U.S. effectively and allow the agency to continue to
support coordinated enforcement actions against wildlife trafficking
overseas through the deployment of 11 FWS attaches in U.S. embassies in
countries where substantial trafficking in wildlife occurs. Additional
funding will allow at least 2 additional personnel to be stationed in
embassies and missions that serve as key transit points for illegal
wildlife and enable stronger enforcement against illegal timber and
wildlife products entering the United States.
FWS--Cooperative Landscape Conservation--$13 Million: Many of the
domestic conservation programs in this bill provide funding to States
to implement their conservation goals. But wildlife does not recognize
political boundaries, and scarce conservation dollars can best be spent
when effective planning and coordination takes place across entire
ecosystems. The CLCP funds a network of 22 Landscape Conservation
Cooperatives in the U.S. and Canada, which use a collaborative approach
between Federal, State, Tribal, and local partners to identify
landscape scale conservation solutions and work collaboratively to meet
unfilled conservation needs, develop decision support tools, share data
and knowledge, and facilitate and foster conservation partnerships. The
landscape-based conservation strategy is particularly valuable in large
States like Alaska, which participates in 4 LCCs, and New Mexico, which
works with 3, because of the significant variations in the ecosystems
in different parts of the States. The final fiscal year 2019
appropriations bill cut funding for this program by approximately
$500,000. WCS encourages the Committee to return funding to the fiscal
year 2018 level of $13 million.
WCS is working to compliment the efforts of the CLCP through our
Climate Adaptation Fund. Established by a generous grant from the Doris
Duke Charitable Foundation, the Climate Adaptation Fund supports ground
breaking, science-based projects, using traditional and new
conservation tools applied in strategic ways to help wildlife and
ecosystems adapt to a range of climate impacts in the United States.
USFS--International Forestry--$10 Million: The U.S. economy has
lost approximately $1 billion per year and over 200,000 jobs due to
illegal logging, which is responsible for 15-30 percent of all timber
by volume. FS-IP works to level the playing field by reducing illegal
logging and improving the sustainability and legality of timber
management overseas, translating to less underpriced timber
undercutting U.S. producers. Through partnerships with USAID and the
Department of State, FS-IP helps to improve the resource management in
countries of strategic importance to U.S. economic and national
security. WCS supports an appropriation of $10 million for fiscal year
2020, a small but important increase in funding for this program.
With technical and financial support from FS-IP, WCS has been
working to conserve a biologically rich temperate forest zone called
the Primorye in the Russian Far East for over a decade, focusing on the
Amur tiger and Far Eastern leopard and their habitat, species with
approximately 400 and 40 individuals remaining the wild, respectively.
Human encroachment, illegal logging, and widespread use of agricultural
burning fracture and threaten the habitat of these endangered animals
and increase human wildlife conflicts. Since the Amur tiger and Far
Eastern leopard are dependent on large tracts of intact, functional
forest ecosystems, WCS has been focusing on these two species as a
means to address larger biodiversity conservation and scientific-
technological capacity building goals throughout the region.
Building on its strong international partnerships, the FS-IP also
supports collaborative research aimed to control and prevent invasive
species that significantly threaten the health of U.S. forests and
inflict massive economic costs. In the forest products industry alone,
approximately $4.2 billion is lost each year to invasive insect pests
and pathogens. In one project, FS-IP is working with partners in Europe
to prevent the spread of the European wood wasp, which has already been
documented in pine forests in New York and now threatens to spread into
the Southeast U.S., where drier and warmer temperatures could allow the
species to devastate pines in the region.
In conclusion, WCS believes that the conservation of public lands
is an American tradition. As far back as 1909, Theodore Roosevelt
recognized that the management of our natural resources requires
coordination between all nations. Continued investment in conservation
will reaffirm our global position as a conservation leader, while
improving our national security and building capacity and good
governance in developing countries.
______
Prepared Statement of The Wildlife Society
The Wildlife Society (TWS) appreciates the opportunity to provide
testimony concerning the fiscal year 2020 budgets for the U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), Bureau
of Land Management (BLM), and U.S. Forest Service (USFS). Founded in
1937, TWS represents approximately 15,000 wildlife professions with a
mission to inspire, empower, and enable wildlife professionals to
sustain wildlife populations and habitat through science-based
management and conservation. Appropriations for the following programs
within the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on Interior, Environment,
and Related Agencies will affect the current and future status of
wildlife and wildlife professionals in North America. To enable the
appropriate use of science within these programs and beyond, TWS
respectfully requests the following programmatic funding in fiscal year
2020.
FISCAL YEAR 2020 INTERIOR APPROPRIATION REQUESTS--THE WILDLIFE SOCIETY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fiscal Year
Fiscal Year
Agency
Program
2019 Enacted
2020 TWS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ecosystems Mission Area
156.9 M
174 M
USGS
Cooperative Research
18.4 M
25 M
Units.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
State & Tribal Wildlife
64.6 M
90 M
Grants.
National Wildlife
488.3 M
586 M
Refuge System.
Ecological Services....
251.8 M
257 M
FWS
NAWCA..................
42 M
44 M
NMBCA..................
3.9 M
6.5 M
Partners for Fish and
51.6 M
54.4 M
Wildlife.
Migratory Bird
46.4 M
50 M
Management.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wildlife & Aquatic
126 M
128 M
Management.
BLM
Wild Horse & Burro
80.5 M
\1\ 80.5 M
Management.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
USFS
Research & Development.
300 M
311 M
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ BLM Wild Horse & Burro Management funding request accompanies
request to remove an associated policy rider
u.s. geological survey
The Wildlife Society supports the critical and unique mission of
USGS to provide objective scientific research and data collection on
the complex environmental and associated societal issues facing our
Nation. TWS specifically requests at least $174 million for the
Ecosystems Mission Area, which contains programmatic resources for
fisheries, wildlife, invasive species, and the Cooperative Research
Units (CRU).
Within the Ecosystems Mission Area, TWS supports at least $25
million for the CRU program. This program fosters Federal, State, NGO,
and academic partnerships to provide actionable science tailored to the
needs of natural resource managers on the front lines. The support of
many State agencies, universities, and NGOs has allowed the program to
leverage more than three dollars in outside funds for every Federal
dollar invested. By housing USGS scientists in Land Grant universities,
this program also develops the next generation of wildlife
professionals and provides them with an understanding of actionable
science responsive to stakeholder needs. An increase of funding to $25
million would allow the CRUs to fill a record 38 CRU scientist
vacancies (32 percent). If inflation-adjusted funding is once again
neglected by Congress, this problem may continue to increase in scope.
The increase of $1 million in the final fiscal year 2019 language
failed to provide the funds needed to make a sizable impact in filling
these vacancies.
Within the Land Resources Mission Area, the Climate Adaptation
Science Centers program responds to regional wildlife, ecosystems, and
community-based stakeholder needs in the face of a changing climate.
TWS encourages Congress to retain this program within the Land
Resources Mission Area, where its existing framework has effectively
leveraged millions in funding from nonFederal partners to provide
stakeholders with a better understanding of how resources will react
and respond to climate change.
The Wildlife Society is encouraged by discussions surrounding the
public lands maintenance backlog by the administration and Congress.
However, TWS is concerned that USGS, which provides added scientific
capacity for Federal public lands agencies, is not being considered
within these conversations. With a maintenance backlog of over $400
million, the facilities needs of USGS have to be addressed for them to
remain responsive to Federal public lands agencies and partners. TWS
encourages inclusion of USGS in funding conversations on the
maintenance backlog.
u.s. fish and wildlife service
The State and Tribal Wildlife Grants Program (STWG) is the Nation's
only program that encourages developing and implementing State Wildlife
Action Plans, thereby directly supporting States in preventing wildlife
from being listed under the Endangered Species Act (ESA). Collectively,
STWG funds support strong partnerships among Federal, State, Tribal,
private, and nonprofit entities that enable wildlife professionals to
implement on-the-ground conservation activities that benefit over
12,000 at-risk species. In fiscal year 2010, appropriations were at $90
million for the program--allowing States to complete more of the
projects deemed necessary for monitoring and recovery of at-risk
species. Subsequent budget reductions in STWG, however, have not
allowed this highly successful program to reach its full potential. The
Wildlife Society requests Congress once again reach prior funding
levels for this highly effective program by providing at least $90
million in fiscal year 2020. TWS also requests the competitive funding
portion be open to all States and Tribes working on at-risk species
recovery, and not be funded exclusively for implementing Interior
Secretarial Order 3362.
The Wildlife Society requests at least $586 million for the
National Wildlife Refuge System's (NWRS) operations and maintenance
accounts in fiscal year 2020. The NWRS has long been an economic
driver, generating approximately $4.87 in economic activity for every
$1 appropriated by Congress. However, the Cooperative Alliance for
Refuge Enhancement, to which TWS is a member, estimates NWRS needs at
least $900 million in annual operations and maintenance funding to
properly administer its 567 units, 38 wetland management districts, and
5 marine national monuments spanning over 850 million acres of land and
water. Without adequate funding, ecosystems are not restored; invasive
species are left unchecked; infrastructure for multiple use
opportunities such as hunting, fishing, and hiking are not realized;
and illegal activities such as poaching are not addressed.
Through the Ecological Services Program (ESP), the USFWS works with
diverse public and private partners to help identify species facing
extinction and reduce threats to their populations so that the
requirement of Federal protection can be removed. Wildlife
professionals in FWS are working on new strategies to increase efficacy
of ESP and reduce regulatory burdens on private partners. To
efficaciously move species through all components of the ESA listing
and delisting process, TWS requests at least $23 million for Listing,
$108 million for Planning and Consultation, $35 million for
Conservation and Restoration, and $96 million for Recovery.
Further promoting FWS' partnership with private landowners is the
Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program. This program allows voluntary
habitat restoration goals, aligned with identified strategic
priorities, on private lands to be achieved through cost-efficient
financial and technical assistance. For the role this program plays in
improving private lands wildlife stewardship while working to preempt
ESA listings, TWS supports the administration's request of $54.4
million for PFW in fiscal year 2020.
The North American Wetlands Conservation Act (NAWCA) is a non-
regulatory, incentive-based program that has demonstrated success in
maintaining and restoring wetlands, waterfowl, and other migratory bird
populations by conserving more than 33.4 million acres since 1989. This
program has remained chronically underfunded despite its demonstrated
effectiveness. TWS greatly appreciates the $2 million increase in
fiscal year 2019 and asks that Congress provide a similar increase in
fiscal year 2020 with an appropriation of $44 million.
Since 2002, the Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Act (NMBCA)
has provided more than $66 million in grants to support 570 projects in
36 countries that enable wildlife professionals to conserve
approximately 400 migratory bird species on 4.5 million acres in the
U.S., Mexico, Central America, South America, and the Caribbean.
Moreover, NMBCA has achieved a partner match ratio of nearly 4:1
despite requiring only a 3:1 match. The needs of U.S. migratory bird
species and conservation efforts to keep these species common extends
to landscapes far beyond U.S. borders. As a result, TWS recommends
Congress increase funding to at least $6.5 million in fiscal year 2020
to achieve greater proactive conservation results under the program.
The Migratory Bird Joint Ventures (MBJV), part of FWS' Migratory
Bird Management program, are locally-directed partnerships that develop
and implement science-based habitat conservation strategies for all
species of birds across North America. These partnerships have
leveraged Federal funds at 31:1 to enhance and conserve over 27 million
acres of avian habitat. TWS supports $50 million for Migratory Bird
Management, including $19.9 million for enhancing and promoting MBJV.
bureau of land management
The Wildlife and Aquatic Management program maintains and restores
fish, wildlife, and their habitat across a large portion of America's
western landscapes. This includes projects to balance effects of
multiple public land uses, such as energy development and livestock
grazing, with needs of native species. With the continued expansion of
energy development on BLM lands--and the associated mitigation
challenges--TWS recommends Congress support the Wildlife and Aquatic
Management program with at least $128 million in fiscal year 2020.
The Wildlife Society would also like to stress the importance of
the threatened and endangered species work of the BLM, and urges
Congress to maintain this work as a separately funded line item.
Approximately 480 ESA listed species and at least 31 species that are
candidates for ESA listing occur on BLM-managed lands. TWS encourages
Congress to increase overall funding for Threatened and Endangered
Species Management and reject efforts by the administration to absorb
this program into other line items.
The Wildlife Society recognizes free-ranging horses and burros in
the U.S. as ecologically invasive, feral species. Free-ranging horse
and burro populations on the range reached >82,000 individuals in March
2018, exceeding BLM's estimated threshold for ecological sustainability
by over 50,000 animals. To achieve ecologically sustainable levels of
horses and burros on BLM rangelands without substantial budget
increases, the current policy rider limiting sale and/or destruction of
unwanted or unadoptable wild horses and burros must be removed from the
Interior Appropriations bill. Until Congress enables BLM to responsibly
manage free-ranging horses and burros by removing this text from the
appropriations bill, Federal funds will continue to be wasted
warehousing over 50,000 animals, rather than spent on productive
rangeland management activities. Given the current management direction
Congress has provided to the BLM, TWS recommends flat funding at $80.5
million in fiscal year 2020. TWS recognizes that removal of this
appropriations rider will ultimately allow this program's budget to be
reduced as requested by the administration.
u.s. forest service
The Wildlife Society thanks congressional conferees for their
interest in the research priorities of USFS Research and Development
(R&D). TWS encourages an acknowledgement of wildlife science and
management within R&D priorities and hopes the administration will
better reflect this work in future budget requests. Improving the
future health and sustainability of the Nation's forests and grasslands
through collaboration with States and other partners requires a strong
investment in R&D. TWS encourages Congress to increase funding for all
Forest Service R&D to a minimum of $305 million in fiscal year 2020,
including at least $227 million directed to Forest and Rangeland
Research program areas exclusive of Forest Inventory and Analysis.
[This statement was submitted by Darren Miller, President.]
______
Prepared Statement of the Yakutat Tlingit Tribe
The Yakutat Tlingit Tribe (hereinafter ``YTT'' or ``Tribe'') makes
the following requests for the fiscal year 2020 Indian Health Service
(IHS) and Indian Affairs appropriations:
--Continue funding for the IHS Joint Venture Program and ensure that
funds for staffing packages for completed programs are timely
made available.
--Appropriate funds to fully cover Section 105(l) leases for
healthcare facilities.
--Put in place a plan to achieve full funding for the IHS, including
increases for the Indian Health Care Improvement fund and the
Purchased/Referred Care program.
--Continue support for the Special Diabetes Program for Indians via
mandatory appropriations and a multi-year authorization.
--Continue to fully fund Contract Support Costs.
--Allow BIE to provide education funding in Alaska.
--Ensure BIA has adequate funds for tribal courts and public safety
programs.
--Remove `Trust Land Restrictions' for Department of Energy, Office
of Indian Energy grant opportunities.
--Removal of legislative language that has been put in place in
Transportation, Housing and Urban Development and Related
Agencies Appropriations Acts since fiscal year 2005, which
prevents Tribes in Alaska to be direct recipients to NAHASDA
funding.
The Yakutat Tlingit Tribe appreciates the opportunity to submit
testimony on the fiscal year 2020 appropriations for several important
programs. The Tribe is a federally recognized Indian Tribe located on
the eastern shores of the Gulf of Alaska in the City and Borough of
Yakutat, Alaska. We are in a very remote area 225 miles northwest of
Juneau and 220 miles southeast of Cordova, Alaska, and can be accessed
only by boat or air travel. Because of our geographic isolation, it is
absolutely critical that we are able to provide high quality health
services in Yakutat. We currently operate the Yakutat Community Health
Center (YCHC), at which we provide a substantial and increasing number
of community healthcare, counseling and prevention services.
The YCHC is funded in part through a community health center grant
with the Health Resources and Services Administration, and we are a co-
signer to the Alaska Tribal Health Compact under which we receive
funding from the IHS under the Indian Self-Determination and Education
Assistance Act (ISDEAA) self-governance program. Other funding comes to
us through the State of Alaska and third-party collections such as
Medicaid and private health insurance. Also, we have for many years
received funding from the Universal Service Administration Company to
support our information technology needs to provide health services and
maintain critical connectivity, including our tele-health services and
coordination with Tribal health programs throughout Alaska. The City
and Borough of Yakutat operates a volunteer Emergency Medical Services
squad, but the YCHC is the only healthcare provider in the community.
The Yakutat Borough is in a Medically Underserved Area and is
designated as a Health Professional Shortage Area for medical, dental
and mental health.
Fund the IHS Joint Venture Program.--As you know, YTT is currently
working toward building a new healthcare facility using its own Tribal
funds. We really appreciate Chairman Murkowski's exchange with the
Indian Health Service at your May 1, 2019, hearing regarding the
importance of determining the proper funding level for a staffing
package for our facility.
Our facility is under the IHS Joint Venture Construction Program
(JVCP), authorized by Section 818(e) of the Indian Health Care
Improvement Act. The program involves a competitive pool of Tribes and
Tribal organizations who agree to construct, acquire or renovate a
Tribal healthcare facility while IHS commits to funding the initial
equipment and a staffing package for the operation and maintenance of
the new facility. We were selected for the program among a competitive
pool of applicants, and IHS has not only committed to staffing the new
facility, but also to providing equipment funding. The IHS will thus be
responsible under the program for providing recurring funding for
staffing on completion of the construction project.
The new 20,000 square foot facility will be built on land owned by
the Tribe in Yakutat. The facility will allow the Tribe to provide
improved and increased health service delivery in our remote area, and
we intend to expand our primary care services and dental care. We will
also have space available for visiting specialty providers to use, as
well as space for our health aides, behavioral healthcare providers,
preventive care and our administrative staff.
The Tribe has secured multi-tiered financing through a combination
of a USDA direct loan and guaranty loan. We have additionally leveraged
in private financing to serve as interim construction finance and to
fund the USDA guaranty loan. We have the process identified to control
construction costs, and are looking to begin construction this building
season in Yakutat.
The Tribe asks the subcommittees to support the continued funding
for the IHS JVCP, and in particular asks that staffing funds be
appropriated and made available to the IHS on a timely basis, so the
Tribe can afford to open and staff the new facility on completion of
construction without delay. Tribes like YTT have to commit far in
advance to the construction costs and rely heavily on the funding for
staffing to be available to them as quickly as possible on completion
of the facility. Otherwise, it would be impossible for YTT to plan for
and operate the new healthcare facility once it is complete. We need
the security of knowing that the funding for staffing will be made
available to us on a timely basis, so that we can advertise for and
select new healthcare professionals and other staff needed for the
expanded services, and to allow them time to relocate to Yakutat,
Alaska.
Fund Section 105(l) Health Facility Leases.--In 2018, YTT submitted
requests for two Section 105(l) leases with the IHS. We believe that
being able to exercise that authority under the ISDEAA is imperative to
our and other Tribe's ability to carry out health programs in a safe
and effective environment. Tribes and Tribal organizations are
increasingly relying on Section 105(l) leases to address chronically
underfunded facilities operation, maintenance, and replacement costs.
This is not just an issue in Alaska, as there are Tribes outside of
Alaska who also desperately need funding for their healthcare
facilities. We greatly appreciate your recognition of the Maniilaq v.
Burwell decision as evidenced by the $36 million fiscal year 2019
appropriation for clinic leases.
However, we are concerned that the administration will again ask
that Congress amend the ISDEAA so that the IHS does not have to fully
fund such leases. In Maniilaq Association v. Burwell, 170 F. Supp. 3d
243 (D.D.C. 2016), the court confirmed Section 105(l) of the ISDEAA
requires full compensation for leases of tribal facilities used to
carry out ISDEAA agreements. Funding such leases should not be placed
wholly in IHS's discretion as it proposes. And we ask that the Congress
again reject the proposal.
Support Funding for the Indian Health Service IHCIF and PRC.--YTT
is one of the most disparately funded Tribes within the Indian Health
Service. Our per capita IHS base funding for basic medical care
services is under $700 per active user; if you add medical services
provided through our regional hospital, this amount is estimated at
$1,500, well below the national 2017 spending for all other Americans
of $9,207 per person and the IHS average of $3,332 per active user for
medical care. We strongly support full funding for the IHS as requested
within the National Tribal Budget Formulation fiscal year 2020 request.
Until that full funding is realized, we support continuing funding for
the Indian Health Care Improvement Fund, which is intended to help
reduce these IHS funding disparities within Indian Country for the
neediest Tribes. It is unrealistic to expect our Tribe to fund our
primary care services with a recurring medical services base funding
from the IHS of only $309,000; while we have been successful in
supplementing these funds with grant and other resources, unlike our
IHS dollars these are not guaranteed to be sustainable from year to
year.
We also support increases to the Purchased/Referred Care budget. We
are currently negotiating with the Alaska IHS Area Office to receive
our share of PRC funding; the estimated amount we likely will receive
annually is under $300,000/year. We are concerned that this amount will
not cover our annual costs for medevacs and routine referrals to the
nearest Tribal hospital in Anchorage. Increasing the PRC funding will
be critical to ensuring that we have funds to cover costs for these
emergency and routine transports without bankrupting our budgets which
provide resources needed to cover our primary care operating and
facilities expenses.
Mandatory Funding For the Special Diabetes Program For Indians
(SDPI).--The Tribe very much appreciates that Congress has reauthorized
the SDPI through fiscal years 2018 and 2019 at the mandatory funding
level of $150 million each year. The SDPI continues to provide critical
funding for diabetes treatment and prevention programs for the Tribe's
AI/AN patients. We continue to see significant outcomes in our
community in terms of increased access to treatment and prevention
services and decreased incidence of new diabetes diagnoses. We strongly
recommend that the subcommittees support maintenance of the SDPI as
mandatory-funded program and were glad to learn that the administration
did not propose in its fiscal year 2020 budget to change the program's
funding to a discretionary basis.
Continue Full Funding of Contract Support Costs (CSC).--Again, we
extend our sincere gratitude to Congress for fully funding CSC in the
past four fiscal years, and for making it an indefinite amount that is
in a separate account in the IHS and Bureau of Indian Affairs' budgets.
The full funding of CSC has made a significant different in our ability
to successfully carry out our ISDEAA agreements and realize our rights
and responsibilities under self-governance.
Support BIE Funding for Education in Alaska.--In the 1980's,
Congress passed a rider to an appropriations bill that returned Tribal
schools to the State of Alaska. And since then, BIE has not provided
funding, other than Johnson O'Malley, to schools in Alaska. Given the
State's current budget crisis, we ask Congress to reconsider this
limitation and allow Tribes to get these funds.
Support BIA Funding for Tribal Courts and for Public Safety.--The
federally-appointed Alaska Rural Justice and Law Enforcement Commission
examined various aspects of rural justice services, and found serious
deficiencies. With reduced State funding, YTT asks Congress to increase
funding to various grant programs, including BIA and DOJ grants, to
ensure our communities are safe. This funding can also support Tribal
courts. There is a significant disparity when comparing the lower 48
Tribes and Alaskan Tribes. 20-30 percent of lower 48 Tribes' base
funding is funneled into Tribal Court sustainability for operations and
maintenance. In Alaska there is no parity with the treatment in
comparison to lower 48 Tribes. According to the fiscal year 2019 BIA
Green Book for Alaskan 638 Tribes, TPA base funding allocated to Tribal
Courts and Public Safety is .0001 percent or $2,364. For Alaskan Self-
Governance Tribes there is a slight improvement but not much with these
respective Tribes' base funding at .0027 percent or $109,610. We ask
that Alaskan Tribes be treated with parity.
Support Telecommunications Connectivity Funding From USAC In Rural
Areas.--As you know, Internet connectivity is critical to providing
healthcare services to our remote villages. Last year you heard from us
and other organizations throughout Alaska regarding the cap on
Universal Service rural healthcare funds. We appreciate the work that
was done to eliminate the cap. We remain concerned about the quality of
Internet. We ask Congress to work towards increasing broadband for
rural communities.
Request Support for Removal of Legislative Language That Has Been
Put in Place in Transportation, Housing and Urban Development Acts
(THUDS) Since Fiscal Year 2005, Which Prevents Tribes in Alaska To Be
Direct Recipients of NAHASDA Funding.--The current funding distribution
for Alaska Tribes to receive their Native American Housing Block Grant
funding is from the Alaska Regional Housing Authorities, whose funding
comes from the U.S. Department of Housing and Development (HUD). Prior
to fiscal year 2005, Tribes in Alaska had the option to either to
receive their Native American Housing Block Grant funding from Regional
Housing Authorities or directly from HUD. The fiscal year 2005
Appropriation legislative language prohibits federally recognized
Tribes in Alaska to be direct recipients. The language is included in
fiscal year 2006--H.R. 2577--Transportation, Housing and Urban
Development Appropriations Act, Section 214, ``The funds made available
for Native Alaskans under the heading ``Native American Housing Block
Grants'' in title II of this Act shall be allocated to the same Native
Alaskan housing block grant recipients that received funds in fiscal
year 2005.''
Thank you very much for your time and consideration of the concerns
and requests made by the Yakutat Tlingit Tribe.
[This statement was submitted by John Buller, Chairman.]
______