- EFFECTS OF VACANCIES AT THE MERIT SYSTEMS PROTECTION BOARD
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
EFFECTS OF VACANCIES AT THE MERIT
SYSTEMS PROTECTION BOARD
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 28, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-04
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available on: http://www.govinfo.gov
http://www.oversight.house.gov or
http://www.docs.house.gov
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-618 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland, Chairman
Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Jim Jordan, Ohio, Ranking Minority
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Member
Columbia
Justin Amash, Michigan
Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Mark Meadows, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Harley Rouda, California
James Comer, Kentucky
Katie Hill, California
Michael Cloud, Texas
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida
Bob Gibbs, Ohio
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Peter Welch, Vermont
Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Jackie Speier, California
Chip Roy, Texas
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Carol D. Miller, West Virginia
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Mark E. Green, Tennessee
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
W. Gregory Steube, Florida
Ro Khanna, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
David Rapallo, Staff Director
Wendy Ginsberg, Subcommittee Staff Director
Amy Stratton, Clerk
Christopher Hixon, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------
Subcommittee on Government Operations
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia, Chairman
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Mark Meadows, North Carolina,
Columbia,
Ranking Minority Member
John Sarbanes, Maryland
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Jackie Speier, California
Jody Hice, Georgia
Brenda Lawrence, Michigan
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Stacey Plaskett, Virgin Islands
James Comer, Kentucky
Ro Khanna, California
Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Stephen Lynch, Massachusetts
W. Steube, Florida
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
C
O
N
T
E
N
T
S
----------
Page
Hearing held on February 28, 2019................................
1
Witnesses
Mark Robbins, Acting Chairman, Merit Systems Protection Board
Oral Statement...............................................
4
Thomas Devine, Legal Director, Government Accountability Project
Oral Statement...............................................
5
John Palguta, Director of Policy and Evaluation, Merit Systems
Protection Board
Oral Statement...............................................
7
Valerie Brannon, Legislative Attorney
Oral Statement...............................................
8
John York, Policy Analyst, Heritage Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................
10
* The opening statement and the prepared statements for the above
witnesses are available in the U.S. House of Representatives
Repository at:
https://docs.house.gov.
INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
----------
No additional documents were submitted during this hearing.
EFFECTS OF VACANCIES AT THE MERIT SYSTEMS PROTECTION BOARD
----------
Thursday, February 28, 2019
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Government Operations,
Committee on Oversight and Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Gerald E.
Connolly (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Connolly, Sarbanes, Lawrence,
Khanna, Lynch, Raskin, Meadows, Hice, Grothman, Comer, and
Steube.
Mr. Connolly. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Without objection, members of the full committee not on
this subcommittee are authorized to participate in today's
hearing.
The hearing is entitled ``Effects of Vacancies at the Merit
Systems Protection Board.''
Now I'm going to give my opening statement, and then I will
recognize the ranking member for his opening statement.
Two years into the Trump administration, the President has
still not filled half of the top posts of the Federal
Government.
According to the Partnership for Public Service, of the 705
key executive branch positions requiring Senate confirmation,
only 431 are currently filled. More than 40 percent of Senate-
confirmed positions at the Departments of the Interior,
Justice, and Labor remain unfilled. President Trump has not
even nominated individuals for 149 top posts in the Federal
Government, and the Republican Senate has not acted on 126
nominations awaiting confirmation.
Keeping vacancies open at the top of the key Federal
agencies could be exploited as an expedient way to circumvent
Congress' advice and consent role. In fact, President Trump
recently said he's not in a rush to name permanent members to
his Cabinet, stating, and I quote, ``Well, I'm in no hurry. I
have `actings' and my actings are doing really great. I sort of
like `acting.' It gives me more flexibility.''
However, a failure to adequately staff the Federal
Government can cause real harm.
One example of an agency where vacancies impair the mission
of the agency is before us today, the Merit Systems Protection
Board. It's a small agency, but a critical one that was
established by Congress to protect merit principles in the
civil service and to help ensure nonpartisan Federal work force
compliance.
Since January 7, 2017, the agency has been hobbled by two
vacancies on its three-member Board, leaving it without a
quorum. This is the longest absence of a quorum in the history
of the agency. And unlike other agencies, the vacant seats at
the MSPB cannot simply be filled by an individual in an acting
capacity.
The sole remaining member of MSPB, like the last of the
Mohicans, is with us today, Mr. Robbins. He was confirmed by
the Senate in 2012 for a term to expire in 2018. He continues
to serve in a one-year carryover term which will expire at the
end of today--today.
Once his term expires--today--the MSPB will be left without
any Board members. If that agency is left without any principal
officers, it's unclear which functions employees of the agency
can continue and which would need to be suspended.
It is clear, however, that whistleblowers will lose,
because the Office of Special Counsel will no longer be able to
obtain a stay of retaliatory actions against them, which falls
under the rubric of the MSPB.
There are two ways to avert a memberless Board. Either the
Senate could confirm nominees, which Mr. Hice and I would
certainly call on them to do, or Congress could pass a
temporary extension of Mr. Robbins' term, which is what we did
the other day on the floor.
Unfortunately, the Senate leadership opted not to allow the
full Senate to confirm the Republican and Democratic nominees
who have cleared the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental
Affairs Committee until the President nominates a third
individual.
But earlier this week, as I said, the House passed H.R.
1235, a bill offered by Chairman Cummings and myself, to
temporarily extend Mr. Robbins' term for one more year.
Unfortunately, the Senate failed to act on that bill and has
not even allowed debate.
As a result, at 5 p.m. today we will enter uncharted
territory. The Board will be memberless for the first time in
its 40-year history.
The last two years of vacancies at the MSPB have also been
unprecedented, and they've impaired the agency's mission. The
absence of a quorum has prevented the Board from hearing final
appeals of adverse agency actions, such as terminations,
suspensions in excess of 14 days, reductions in grade or pay,
reductions in force actions, denials of restoration of
reemployment rights, OPM determination in retirement cases, and
Hatch Act violations, among many others.
The MSPB has also been unable to hear appeals of wrongful
terminations and retaliations against whistleblowers, a prime
concern of this committee. That means that MSPB is unable to
enforce the law that this committee, and Congress, passed to
protect the brave individuals who alert us to waste, fraud, and
abuse.
According to Tom Devine, the legal director of the
nonprofit Government Accountability Project and one of our
witnesses today, the current situation, quote, ``is disastrous
for whistleblowers.''
The lack of a quorum has also resulted in a backlog of
1,975 cases, according to the documents provided to the
subcommittee. Acting Chairman Robbins has reportedly said that
eliminating that backlog will take, at a minimum, three years
to process. That is a clear example of justice delayed being
justice denied.
The vacancies of principal officers at the agency are
untenable. Federal employees deserve better. They deserve to
have their appeals heard by the Board. Employees of the MSPB
deserve to work at a fully functioning agency with leadership
in place. And taxpayers deserve to have their government
capable of carrying out the Nation's laws. President Trump's
vacancies stand in the way of these missions.
I look forward to hearing a careful look at the issues
today and drawing attention to the importance of a fully
operational Merit Systems Protection Board.
With that, I call upon the ranking member for his opening
statement.
Mr. Hice. I thank my friend, Chairman Connolly. And the
real ranking member, Mr. Meadows, just walked in. He was
running late with another commitment and asked if I would
provide opening remarks, which I'm more than happy to do. And I
want to thank each of the witnesses for being here as well
today.
This is an issue that the chairman and I, and many up here,
are deeply concerned about. In fact, we just had a productive
debate on this issue on the floor this week. And we're
concerned about the future of the Merit Systems Protection
Board. I know, Chairman, you know that I am very committed to
ensuring that we have a successful operation at MSPB.
In fact, during the 115th Congress, the Oversight Committee
conducted numerous hearings and even passed the MSPB
reauthorization bill, which would have made some critical
reforms to MSPB. The responsibilities there primarily include:
to adjudicate appeals of Federal personnel actions and to also
provide protection for whistleblowers.
Congress has a duty, I believe, to ensure that MSPB
functions effectively and administers their rulings fairly. To
be effective and to be able to make decisions properly, MSPB
needs at least two members to make a quorum. As we are all
aware of today, that has not been the case now for two years.
And without a quorum, the backlog has gotten quite dramatic to
now nearly 2,000 cases, and that's very disturbing.
The only remaining member, again, as the chairman
highlighted a moment ago, Mark Robbins, is term limited.
We want to welcome you and thank you for your service and
for being here today.
But starting tomorrow, MSPB will be without a single Board
member.
Currently there are two MSPB nominees awaiting
consideration in the Senate. Looking ahead, I hope the
President will go ahead and nominate the third Board member.
And as we were talking about a few moments ago, we desperately
need the Senate to quickly confirm these nominations. We need
the third one as quickly as possible.
In December the President asked Mr. Robbins to serve as the
general counsel at the Office of Personnel Management. Over the
past 10 weeks, he has been serving in both roles at OPM and
MSPB.
Mr. Robbins, you have worked tirelessly, and we deeply
appreciate the work that you have given. But we know that it's
time that you're now moving on. But your sense of duty to the
MSPB is greatly appreciated, and we do want to express that
publicly to you. Your commitment to Federal workers and the
Federal workforce is greatly appreciated. Your willingness now
to serve the President and our country in another capacity also
is appreciated.
But in closing, I hope that we can work together to provide
certainty to Federal workers and whistleblowers by making the
MSPB operational once again.
Again, Chairman, I thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the ranking member.
Are there any other members who wish to make an opening
statement for one minute?
Hearing and seeing none, today we welcome our panelists. We
have with us Mark Robbins, the acting chairman of the Merit
Systems Protection Board; Thomas Devine, the legal director of
the Government Accountability Project; John Palguta, former
director of policy and evaluation at the agency, MSPB; Valerie
Brannon, legislative attorney for the American Law Division at
the congressional Research Service; and John York, policy
analyst for the Heritage Foundation.
Welcome, all of you.
If you would rise. We generally swear in our witnesses. And
if you'd raise your right hand.
Do you swear to affirm that the testimony you're about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
Let the record show that all of our witnesses answered in
the affirmative.
Thank you.
Witnesses have five minutes if they want it. We are running
against the clock, and we want to try to get this in, because
once we take votes, coming back is problematic. Some of you
know that. Although Mr. Meadows will be, I know, here no matter
what.
So if you don't need the full five minutes to summarize
your testimony, which we have in full, that would be great. But
you do have five minutes if you want it.
Mr. Robbins.
STATEMENT OF MARK A. ROBBINS, ACTING CHAIRMAN, MERIT SYSTEMS
PROTECTION BOARD
Mr. Robbins. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Meadows, and
members of the committee, thank you for inviting me here to
testify today. It's always an honor for me to publicly
represent the men and women of the U.S. Merit Systems
Protection Board. And sadly, as you've noted, this will be the
last time I have that honor. My term ends at midnight tonight.
On a personal note, I'd like to thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Congressman Hice, for your kind comments both today and on the
floor Monday. It's greatly appreciated, and you've made my
father proud. So thank you for that.
I also want to acknowledge the longstanding interest of
Ranking Member Meadows. My staff fondly recalls your visit back
in April 2016, I believe it was.
And I'd like to invite you, Mr. Chairman, or any other
member to visit the MSPB at your convenience. We can do a
pretty good dog and pony show.
I also want to acknowledge my longstanding association with
fellow panelists John Palguta and Tom Devine. I greatly respect
their career-long dedication to the professional, efficient,
and well-managed civil service. And I'd like to add I'm proud
of my seven-year tenure at the Board and its ability to
continue functioning at almost full capacity since we lost our
quorum two years ago.
I'm fond of quoting Theodore Roosevelt, and there's one
quote in particular that's very appropriate to the Board and
its operations of late, and it is: ``Do what you can, with what
you have, where you are.'' That's what we've done.
With that, I look forward to addressing any issues of
interest or concern by the committee.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Robbins, you're an exemplar. Thank you so
much.
Mr. Devine.
STATEMENT OF THOMAS M. DEVINE, LEGAL DIRECTOR, GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY PROJECT
Mr. Devine. Thank you. I serve as legal director of the
Government Accountability Project, but this testimony is also
for six leading members of the nonpartisan, trans-ideological
Make It Safe Coalition dedicated to whistleblower protection.
No institution is more important for accountable government
than the MSPB. But since January 2017, the Board has been
dysfunctional. At a minimum, it's in danger of its
administrative appeals function becoming dormant.
Board vacancies already have created a crisis. While
Chairman Robbins has performed beyond the call of duty as a
public servant under impossible circumstances, they remain
impossible.
The first consequence has been delays. Without a quorum for
two years, the Board has been unable to issue any final
decisions, and the resulting current nearly 2,000-case backlog
exacerbates already inexcusable delays before January 2017.
Whistleblower Kim Farrington's nine-year nightmare is
summarized in written testimony. We can't allow this to get
worse.
Second, Board vacancies have created a crisis of
accountability for administrative judges. AJs are the soul of
the merit system because they preside over administrative due
process hearings that are Federal employees' only day in court
and a major duty of the Board is to provide guidance on proper
interpretation of employee rights to them. The prior Board was
effective at providing that support.
But since the vacuum of appellant review, the track record
for whistleblower rights has dropped sharply. The Board
reported that for Fiscal Year 2016 whistleblowers won about 7
percent of decisions on the merits.
To compare, since we haven't had appellant review, I
researched four months of Board decisions by AJs, the last four
months and December 2017. The track record was one in 45, 2.2
percent, over three times lower than with active Board
oversight.
The decisions also have become more hostile to the
Whistleblower Protection Act's statutory boundaries. They've
been echoing Federal Circuit Court of Appeals rulings that
forced Congress to pass the All Circuits Review Act.
My written testimony provides seven examples of hostile
judicial activism in those four months.
Most disturbing is the clear and convincing evidence
standard to independently justify acts of partial retaliation.
Despite repeated congressional and Federal Circuit strong
mandates that this is an extremely high bar that should be
respected, AJs ruled against whistleblowers on the clear and
convincing evidence standard in 15 out of 16 cases. In the
absence of normal appellate review, they have not been
respecting the legislative mandate.
Like the partial government shutdown, an MSPB shutdown
would have destructive consequences. Even continued AJ opinions
without Board members would make a currently dysfunctional
system disastrous.
First, there's questions whether members of the Board could
operate under the Constitution's Appointments Clause. If they
can't, that would end enforcement of the Civil Service Reform
Act and the Whistleblower Protection Act, period.
At a minimum, justice will be further delayed and
settlements reduced. Currently, agencies and whistleblowers
settle about 10 to 25 percent of appeals. A shutdown would
eliminate all agency incentive to settle cases because they'd
be winning until the Board was there to stop them again.
Third, even if AJs can continue to make decisions
appealable to the Circuit Courts, the quality of the appellate
review will deteriorate because those courts inherently can't
have the accumulated expertise that the Board has from doing
this work constantly full-time.
And most significant, a Board shutdown would erase
enforcement capacity for the Office of Special Counsel.
Immediately it would cancel emergency legislation to seek stays
from one Board member, because there wouldn't be any.
Stays are indispensable. They freeze retaliation that
otherwise would be long-term faits accompli and they provide
leverage to enforce corrective action settlements in disputes
that agencies otherwise would drag out indefinitely. The Board
would be unavailable to enforce OSC corrective action
recommendations when an agency balks.
We are confident that Special Counsel Kerner will
creatively seek to minimize the damage. But scrambling is no
substitute for statutory authority. Depriving the OSC of Board
backup for enforcement would dilute the Merit System's most
effective resource to an advisory body.
Mr. Chairman, we are just talking today about crisis
response. My testimony has long-term structural suggestions.
Mr. Connolly. Wonderful. Thank you so much.
Mr. Palguta.
Am I pronouncing your name correctly?
STATEMENT OF JOHN M. PALGUTA, FORMER DIRECTOR OF POLICY AND
EVALUATION, MERIT SYSTEMS PROTECTION BOARD
Mr. Palguta. You are. Thank you very much.
Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Meadows, members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you today.
Mr. Connolly. And, Mr. Palguta, you are a constituent of
mine, are you not? Did you say you were a constituent of mine?
Mr. Palguta. I am, indeed.
Mr. Connolly. In Vienna? One of the most brilliant people
ever to come before this subcommittee.
Mr. Palguta. Thank you very much, and let the record show.
So I am John Palguta, and from 1979 to 2001 I had the
privilege of working for the Merit Systems Protection Board.
For the last 4-1/2 years of that tenure I was the director of
the Office of Policy and Evaluation and a career member of the
Federal Senior Executive Service.
First of all, I want to commend the subcommittee for
calling this hearing to focus on a relatively small and
somewhat obscure Federal agency but one with a
disproportionately large role to play in ensuring the presence
of a strong, vibrant Federal work force.
I chose to spend 22 years of my career at MSPB because I
believe in the importance of its mission. Congress created the
Board under the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 as part of a
carefully thought out and hotly debated set of checks and
balances within the executive branch.
There was concern at the time of that 1978 act that the
replacement of the bipartisan U.S. Civil Service Commission
with a politically responsive Office of Personnel Management,
that it posed an existential threat to a merit-based,
politically neutral career Federal work force.
Congress' answer to that concern was the creation of MSPB
with statutory oversight over OPM, a charter to review and
report on the health of the Federal merit system, and the
responsibility to hear and adjudicate appeals from Federal
employees who believed they were being disciplined or removed
for non-meritorious or partisan political reasons. For the last
38 of 40 years, that has worked very well.
I've been asked by the subcommittee to share my views on
three issues. I'll do that very quickly.
One, what is the impact of the MSPB given that two of the
three Board members have been vacant for two years. We've
already heard about the devastating impact on the backlog of
petition for reviews that remain undecided.
In addition, no reports from the Board's Merit System
studies and OPM oversight function have been issued in the last
two years. In the event there are no Board members at the end
of today--or after today--it will not be possible, as Mr.
Devine has already said, to stay an adverse personnel action
being taken as reprisal for a whistleblower.
Then one other thing. Over the last two years the Board has
been unable to amend formally its own operating procedures to
address changes in the law, such as those for appeals from
employees at Veterans Affairs.
There was also the question about the independence of the
MSPB given that Mr. Robbins is dual-hatted. Suffice it to say,
and I'm confident that Mark Robbins has fully recused himself
from any decisions that would create a conflict of interest,
but certainly there is an appearance of a conflict.
So going forward, I am also confident that, in their
wildest dreams, the writers of the Civil Service Reform Act
never contemplated that the chairman of MSPB would serve as the
general counsel of the very agency for which they have
oversight.
Then the last question had to do with the continuing of
operations of MSPB as of midnight tonight. We have other
experts who will address that. But I will just say that without
any Board members, the dire situation at MSPB will simply
become more dire.
So in conclusion, it's clearly possible that it is clearly
in the public interest to have a fully functional MSPB. Best
possible course of action is for the Senate to confirm three
qualified nominees. Absent a third nominee right now, I fully
agree that the two nominees who are awaiting confirmation
should be forwarded to the full Senate without delay.
And if tomorrow dawns with all Board positions vacant, then
every effort needs to be made to determine how best to enable
this vitally important agency to continue operating at whatever
level is possible under the law.
So thank you, and I will be happy to answer any questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Palguta, for your
perspicacious and brilliant testimony.
Ms. Brannon.
STATEMENT OF VALERIE BRANNON, LEGISLATIVE ATTORNEY, AMERICAN
LAW DIVISION, CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE
Ms. Brannon. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Meadows, and
members of the subcommittee, my name is Valerie Brannon. I'm a
legislative attorney with the American Law Division of the
congressional Research Service. Thank you for inviting me to
testify today on behalf of CRS regarding the continuing
operations of the MSPB if it has no sitting Board members.
In brief, the ability of the MSPB to function with a vacant
Board will likely turn on whether it has delegated authority to
agency employees and whether those delegations are legally
permissible.
There are at least three types of possible legal
limitations on these delegations--common law, statutory, and
constitutional--and I'll be speaking somewhat broadly about
these legal limits.
So, first, any agency delegations of authority may be
tested again common law principles of agency law. So, for
example, one general rule is that any person who makes a
delegation must have the authority themselves to take the
action that they're delegating.
But when we talk about Federal agencies, a lot of these
common law principles have been replaced by statutory and
regulatory regimes. So when you evaluate Federal agency
delegations, it's important to look to those statutes and
regulations.
So Congress delegates regulatory authority to agencies in
statute, and agencies may then further delegate that authority
to subordinates. Courts will generally assume that agencies are
authorized to make these sorts of subdelegation. But Congress
can pass statutes that limit subdelegation.
So turning to the MSPB, there is a statutory provision that
broadly authorizes the Board to delegate the performance of any
of its administrative functions to any MSPB employee. Other
statutes grant certain adjudicative powers to specific MSPB
officials, which may mean that these adjudicative functions may
be delegated only to the named officials. The MSPB has, in
fact, made a number of delegations pursuant to these statutory
authorizations.
So assuming that these delegations were valid at the time
they were made, if the Board becomes completely vacant, then a
court would likely conclude that these delegations continue in
effect.
Outside the context of multi-member boards, courts have
generally held the delegations of authority do survive the
resignation of the official who made the delegations. And in
the context of multi-member commissions, at least one Federal
court of appeals has held that the commission's delegation of
specific authority to the agency's executive director remained
valid even after the commission became completely vacant want.
However, the cases do suggest that courts will probably
look to the scope of any specific delegation and may be more
likely to uphold more limited delegations.
The third and final legal limitation on agency delegations
that I'll discuss comes from the Appointments Clause of the
Constitution.
So the Appointments Clause generally divides government
officers into three categories: principal officers, inferior
officers, and employees. The Constitution says that officers
have to be appointed through constitutionally prescribed
procedures. Generally, this is the advice and consent process.
But Congress may vest the appointment of inferior officers as
opposed to principal officers in the President or in agency
heads.
The Constitution doesn't define who is an officer as
opposed to an employee, but the Supreme Court has said that an
officer is any official who exercises significant authority in
the form of continuing and permanent duties.
So if an MSPB official is responsible for continuing duties
that represent significant authority, then that official has to
be appointed in accordance with those constitutional
procedures. Conversely, if an employee was not appointed in
accordance with those procedures, then they may not exercise
significant authority.
These Appointments Clause requirements apply to MSPB
officials regardless of whether or not the Board is vacant. But
as a factual matter, it's possible that Board vacancies would
cause more significant duties to be delegated down, which may
raise more significant Appointments Clause questions.
But ultimately the constitutionality of the authority
that's exercised by any MSPB official will depend really
heavily on the precise scope of their duties. So it's difficult
to say in the abstract whether there are any constitutional
violations.
Thank you. And I'll be happy to answer any questions at the
appropriate time.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much, Ms. Brannon.
Mr. York.
STATEMENT OF JOHN YORK, (MINORITY WITNESS), POLICY ANALYST,
HERITAGE FOUNDATION
Mr. York. I appreciate the invitation to be here today. My
name is John York, and I'm a policy analyst at the Heritage
Foundation. I also have experience managing civil service
employees. As a Coast Guard officer, I was the direct
supervisor for 20 truly exceptional civil servants.
Before I begin, the views I express in this testimony are
my own. They should not be construed as representing the
official position of the Heritage Foundation.
I think I'm going to sound like a little bit of a broken
record today, because I agree with almost everything that's
been said. But I think in repeating what we've already heard,
sort of get a sense that this isn't a liberal or conservative
issue. The good functioning of the MSPB is a good government
issue.
For anyone interested, as I am, in the just and effective
functioning of our Federal Government, the vacancies at the
MSPB should be very troubling. The vacancies have left the
Board without a quorum since January 2017, as we've heard
multiple times.
The Board, as a result, has been unable to issue final
decisions in adverse action appeals or review OPM regulations.
It can issue no official reports. It can order stays only as
requested by the Office of Special Counsel. The backlog of
appeals waiting for the Board's review is now nearly 2,000.
For some, this is justice denied. For most, it is
punishment delayed. After all, the MSPB finds in favor of
agencies a great majority of the time. If this pattern holds,
many employees who will eventually be drummed out of the civil
service are today receiving interim relief while they either to
work or languish on administrative leave. All the while their
agencies cannot advertise an opening nor begin the long process
of hiring a replacement.
A smaller but still sizable number of Federal employees who
cannot afford a legal battle wait for their names to be
cleared, their pay to be restored, and their careers to resume.
Responsibility for the MSPB's incapacity rests primarily on
the Senate. President Trump has nominated two qualified
attorneys who await confirmation. The Senate's unwillingness to
fulfill its constitutional obligation to provide advice and
consent regarding the President's nominees is an endemic and
governmentwide issue. There are currently 130 vacancies in the
judiciary and 300 executive branch nominees awaiting
confirmation.
Had the Senate honored its obligation to provide advice and
consent, we would not be here today discussing the potential
conflicts of interest that result from the only remaining Board
member concurrently serving as the general counsel of the
Office of Personnel Management.
But regardless who is to blame, one individual
simultaneously fulfilling both these roles does present several
potential conflicts of interest, which I note in my written
testimony.
Troubling as these potential conflicts of interest are, and
none of them have been realized, the entire time Mark Robbins
has both at MSPB and OPM the MSPB has been without quorum. Thus
Robbins has been unable to discharge those duties that would
bring these conflicts of interest to a head.
Robbins' very imminent departure from the MSPB creates
additional concerns, however. Not only will Mark Robbins' good
work over the last several years be voided, but the complete
vacancy of the Board raises constitutional questions, which
you've just heard about.
Can the MSPB continue to function with an acting agency
head who has received no confirmation from the Senate? While
I'm not a lawyer, and I might be getting out of my skis a
little bit here, you can correct me if I'm wrong, I think the
answer is yes. An acting MSPB agency head fulfilling only those
very limited duties outlined in the continuity of operations
plan that MSPB has published arguably does not possess
significant authority. In fact, if the largely administrative
functions the acting head will wield constitute significant
authority, there should be a significantly higher number of PAS
positions in the Plum Book, I'd argue.
Similarly, a caretaker agency head who is obligated or
expected to step down immediately upon appointment of a Senate-
confirmed Board member does not hold a continuing position.
To conclude, the crisis at the MSPB should occasion a
broader conversation about the status of our civil service and
the adverse action process. According to the most recent
Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey, just 32 percent of Federal
employees said they believe their agencies take steps to deal
with a poor performer who cannot or will not improve.
Not only does the American public deserve better from its
government, but good civil servants deserve better from their
managers.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. York. Particularly, I thank
your observation. This is not a Republican or Democratic issue.
This is a good government issue. And hopefully all of us can
try to rally around that and figure out a solution.
The chair now recognizes for five minutes of questioning
the gentleman from California, Mr. Khanna.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Representative Connolly, for your
leadership and bringing this attention to the American people.
I want to focus my questioning on whistleblowers. I know,
Mr. Devine, you've done tremendous work on representing many
whistleblowers and also helping craft many laws about
whistleblowers.
Mr. Devine, how does a fully functioning Board, when all
three members are appointed, protect whistleblowers?
Mr. Devine. Well, sir, it's the enforcement authority,
monopoly enforcement authority, for nearly all the Merit System
rights in the Civil Service Reform Act, whether it's temporary
relief, final relief, sanctions or accountability for
violations of the act. All we've got is the Merit Systems
Protection Board. And we think that's unfortunate.
Federal employees are the only whistleblowers, significant
portion of the labor force in our country, where whistleblowers
can't go to court and enforce their rights to jury trials if
they can't get timely administrative relief. That's been the
case in every corporate whistleblower law since 2002.
The Board is indispensable, but it shouldn't be monopoly
indispensable. We should have the kind of balance that
corporate whistleblowers are entitled to.
Mr. Khanna. How many Board members are needed to constitute
a quorum?
Mr. Devine. I'm sorry, sir?
Mr. Khanna. On the Merit--how many Board members are
needed?
Mr. Devine. Oh, two.
Mr. Khanna. Two. And we obviously haven't had that since
the Trump administration.
Is it normal for a President to come in and wait a year
when there's such openings and not appoint someone?
Mr. Devine. Sir, from every perspective, this has been
unprecedented. I've been following these rights for 40 years,
and nothing like this has happened before, either in the Senate
or with the Presidency.
Mr. Khanna. Is there any panelist who thinks this is
normal? I mean, for example, would Nixon or Reagan or Bush just
say, ``Oh, I don't know what the Merit Board System is. Who
cares? Let's not appoint someone.''
Mr. York. I don't think it's normal. But I also think we
shouldn't ignore the Senate's role in this. While it's true
that Trump has been making appointments slower than normal,
it's also true that the Senate has a longer backlog than
normal. So both of things are unusual.
Mr. Khanna. Sure. But the Senate can't appoint them. I
mean, my understanding is the President didn't send a name over
for over a year. Has any other President waited that long?
Mr. Robbins. Congressman, if I could address that question.
Mr. Khanna. Yes.
Mr. Robbins. I have said in public many times that the
situation the Board is presently in is the old Lemony Snicket's
Series of Unfortunate Events. We lost the vice chairman about
four years ago. And the President, President Obama's nominee,
was not passed by the Senate. So we started this administration
with the term of the then chair, Susan Grundmann, getting ready
to expire.
The Board was teed up along with the other Title 5
agencies, the Office of Special Counsel, the Office of
Personnel Management, the Federal Labor Relations Authority,
and the Office of Government Ethics. And we had, the
administration had nominees identified. A couple fell out
during the process for reasons I'm not familiar with. But I am
familiar with the process itself, because the Board itself has
a role in clearing candidates before they're formally nominated
to the Senate.
So if you look at the FLRA and the Office of Special
Counsel and the Office of Government Ethics, their people moved
almost as a group and were confirmed relatively quickly, but it
still took six to eight to nine months into the administration.
I think any administration would have focused naturally on
the bigger departments and agencies, the Cabinet level. Smaller
agencies usually come second tier when the focus of nominations
comes up.
So as I was sitting there at the Board at the beginning of
this administration, I didn't anticipate we would have a quorum
likely until the summer of 2017. That probably would have been
the case had earlier-identified potential candidates not fallen
out.
There are a lot of reasons we are where we are now. I agree
that, at this point, the Senate could solve this problem
immediately and hasn't.
Mr. Khanna. I appreciate that.
I see my time is about to expire.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the gentleman.
Just an observation. I think Mr. York is right and Mr.
Robbins is right. Yes, the President could do a better job in
getting these nominations to the Senate. But the Senate has
decided on its own, as Mr. Hice and I were talking, God knoweth
why, that it's not going to act until there's a third nominee.
Well, right now we've got a crisis. They need to act. They've
got several choices in front of them and have chosen to ignore
all of them.
I think it was Sam Rayburn who once said, looking at
politics, he said the Republicans are the opposition, but the
U.S. Senate is the enemy.
At any rate, I call upon the distinguished gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Hice, for his five minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And while we're talking about the Senate, I would totally
agree with that. Quite frankly, I'm not sure at this point if
the Senate could even pass a kidney stone. Perhaps they could,
but we'd need to get something out of the Senate for sure.
This is a good government issue, and sometimes I think we
legislators are guilty of assuming we have all the answers,
which we absolutely do not. I think there's great wisdom in
trying to get information from those who have boots on the
ground, so to speak.
And, Mr. Robbins, you have a lot of experience over the
last several years, probably more than you care to have over
the last couple of years. But from your perspective, I would be
interested to know what kind of improvements or modifications
do you think need to take place on our end of things that would
help MSPB function more efficiently.
Mr. Robbins. Thank you, Congressman.
This committee in the last Congress actually held a hearing
on our reauthorization. The Board has not been reauthorized
since 2002. And included in that effort were a series of
legislative fixes to a number of issues that I believed could
bring efficiency to the process. I would refer back to them, I
don't have my notes with me, on what those were.
Our process, the process for the Merit Systems Protection
Board, is the most efficient of the Title 5 processes. If you
take a look at organizations like the EEOC or the grievance
process, if you could do a schematic chart of the various
options, you've got EEOC, MSPB, collective bargaining
agreements, the new individual rights of action for
whistleblowers.
To date, the process of the MSPB going through our regional
level where the administrative judges hear cases and issue
initial decisions and then up to the full Board for the
petitions for review, the appeals of those individual
decisions, were good. We process those cases.
I would--and I know this is controversial--I would like to
see an effort to give our judges summary judgment authority
similar to what EEOC AJs have. I would like to see a very
small, nominal fee for filing with the Board, because I believe
that would separate out meritless cases from real cases that
deserve attention.
I use as an example the 33,000 furlough cases we had in the
summer of 2013. We usually get about 6,000 or 7,000 cases a
year, and in the course of two months we received 33,000
appeals because of the sequestration furloughs back then.
Those cases had to be processed. And I believe that had
there been even a $25 filing fee, most of those--you know,
someone would have said, ``Do I''--they were angry. The
employees were angry. And the easiest thing to do was file a
grievance with us.
But had there been a nominal fee, I think many people would
have found another avenue to express their frustration. It took
us the better part of three years to process those 33,000 cases
and other priorities had to take a back seat.
Mr. Hice. Well, I thank you for that. It affirms to me that
we're kind of barking up the same tree on some of the things
we're trying to accomplish.
Mr. York, you brought up something in the past that I found
interesting with the jurisdictional overlap between some of
these. Could you kind of explain how that is problematic and
what needs to take place to smooth out that whole thing?
Mr. York. Yes. I've said multiple times, and I believe
another panelist has agreed, at some time that we should have a
single forum for appeals.
There are jurisdictional overlaps between the FLRA and MSPB
on some occasions. EEOC and MSPB more commonly. And that does
slow down the process. It's not the way ordinary adjudicative
processes go, I mean.
Mr. Hice. So it slows it down because it goes through all
three?
Mr. York. In some cases. One can appeal an EEOC decision to
the MSPB or even an FLRA adjudication to the MSPB on occasion.
Then, of course, the Office of Special Counsel has a role in
whistleblower cases.
But having a single forum would, I think, expedite without
changing the substantive defense.
Mr. Hice. What would that look like? I mean, what would be
the single----
Mr. York. It would look very much like what we had before
the Civil Service Reform Act. Before the Civil Service Reform
Act there was one adjudicative body that would hear all
appeals, no matter what the subject matter, from Federal
employees.
Mr. Hice. Okay. And when did that change?
Mr. York. 1978, I think.
Mr. Hice. Okay. All right.
Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Hice.
Let me just also say, I would hope that out of this
hearing, and maybe there will be subsequent hearings, we will
produce some legislation--it's got to be bipartisan--to
reauthorize the Board, but also to fix the immediate problem.
That may be two bills. That may be one. But we've got to work
together to find this problem.
I don't know that we can solve the problem of kidney stones
passing in the other body, but we can do our job.
I call upon the distinguished gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Raskin, for his five minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Robbins, I want to thank you for your service on the
Merit Systems Protection Board. It's not been easy being the
only member on the Board for I think it's more than two years
now.
In your testimony, you say: ``Tomorrow the Board may face a
condition unprecedented in its 40-year history. All three Board
seats will become vacant when my term expires.'' Now we're
waiting for the Senate to act either by confirming nominees or
taking up legislation that we passed in the House to extend
your term for another year.
If the Senate fails to act and your term expires Friday,
what happens to MSPB? Would the agency have to shut down all of
its operations?
Mr. Robbins. Thank you, Congressman.
I don't believe so. I have given my staff instructions that
as of midnight tonight, they are to, in the words of that old
English war poster, ``keep calm and carry on,'' until an
authority of competent jurisdiction tells them otherwise.
I think the analysis of my fellow panelists is correct. We
have delegations in place that will allow at least the
administrative judges at the regional level--which, by the way,
is where 80 percent of our caseload is resolved--to continue to
operate.
Like all other Federal agencies, we have a continuity of
operations plan that is required by a Bush 43 era executive
order, which was to anticipate literally decapitation. What if
an agency loses all of its Article II officers? What happens in
order to keeps the lights on?
Mr. Raskin. Who becomes the head when you leave, when
you're decapitated?
Mr. Robbins. So under our COOP plan, the primary, the first
two people to take over the administrative functions--now, they
couldn't exercise the adjudication or studies functions of the
Board, but they could administer the agency--would be first the
executive director and then the general counsel, both of whom
are noncareer senior executives.
But an acting individual in either of those positions can't
assume responsibility under COOP. And right now our executive
director is in an acting capacity. So as of tomorrow, our
general counsel will be the administrative and executive head
of the agency.
Mr. Raskin. All right. So you view the executive and
administrative functions of the Board as safe during this
period?
Mr. Robbins. Yes, sir.
Mr. Raskin. Okay.
Let's see. Would the administrative judges and contract
administrative law judges still be able to try cases and issue
initial decisions?
Mr. Robbins. Yes, sir, I believe so.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. Then they are appealable where?
Mr. Robbins. Well, so once either an administrative judge
or an administrative law judge has rendered an initial
decision, either the agencies or the employee has an
opportunity to appeal either to the full Board, the three
members, or they can skip us and go directly to--usually it's
the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit
Court.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. So they would simply lose the possibility
of going to the Board. They would have to go directly to the
court of appeals?
Mr. Robbins. That's correct.
Mr. Raskin. Okay.
Mr. Robbins. Which, by the way, has been the case for the
last two years.
Mr. Raskin. Okay.
Ms. Brannon, committee staff asked for your analysis of
whether the Board could keep functioning as a vacant Board. Do
you believe that the Board can keep functioning without
members? Why?
Ms. Brannon. So I believe that the agency and agency
officials could likely continue to exercise any delegated
functions assuming those delegations were permissible prior to
the Board becoming vacant.
Mr. Raskin. Gotcha.
Mr. Robbins, back to you. You say in your testimony that
one significant function which cannot continue without the
presence of a Board member is the issuance or extension of
personnel action stays requested by the Office of Special
Counsel. Is that correct? If so, can you explain why a general
counsel or another MSPB employee cannot take over this function
from you?
Mr. Robbins. I do believe that is correct. There are two
reasons. I think, legally, the Board traditionally has not
believed that certain functions can be delegated, that they
need to be exercised under Title 5 by the Board; that is, three
members.
Stays are a little different because Title 5 provides that
any one member can grant an initial stay of 45 days, and then
it takes the Board to extend those stays.
Congress, two years ago, once the Board became a quorum,
was pass legislation which allowed any single member to extend
the initial stays. So that problem was solved.
But even if legally stays could be delegated down, they
haven't been. And I can't do that lacking a quorum. Even if
there was a legal argument that you could delegate stays to the
general counsel, there's no mechanism to do that without a
quorum.
Mr. Raskin. Gotcha.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Raskin.
The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. Yes. I guess anybody--how many cases--maybe
start with this. How many cases do you deal with per year? And
what are the nature, if you could break them down by the nature
of the cases you deal with?
Mr. Robbins. Congressman, we get between 6,000 and 8,000
cases a year. Again, those are appeals from agency actions that
go initially to one of our regional or field offices, and the
case is worked up by an administrative judge.
Eighty percent, as I said earlier, of those decisions are
final, because the parties don't----
Mr. Grothman. Okay. But, I mean, are they like somebody got
fired? Somebody wasn't promoted? What is the nature of the----
Mr. Robbins. So the two big areas that we have are adverse
actions, that is someone is fired, someone is put on leave,
they're demoted, they lose their pay. We also adjudicate
retirement and disability claims from OPM.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. And if you break them down by category,
how much are the adverse actions and how much, if you've got
8,000 a year, how many of each?
Mr. Robbins. The vast majority are adverse actions. I don't
have the materials in front of me now. We're getting ready to
issue our 2018 annual report which has a pie chart.
Mr. Grothman. You think it's five to one, four to one?
Mr. Robbins. I would think probably 60 percent are adverse
actions. Maybe 5, 10 percent are disability claims and
retirement claims. We also hear certain veterans----
Mr. Grothman. It adds up to 65 percent.
Mr. Robbins. Right. Then we also hear, you know, we've got
veterans preference issues. We have we have Hatch Act, which is
the political restrictions of Federal employees.
Mr. Grothman. How many times do you overturn the decision
that was made, at whatever the local level, percentage-wise,
about?
Mr. Robbins. Less than 90 probably. Or, no, I'm sorry. We
affirm usually between 90 and 94, 95 percent of the time.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Do you, in your own mind, think that,
since you're almost always affirming them, that a high number
of these appeals, if that's what I can call them, are frivolous
or not much to them?
Mr. Robbins. You know, I believe that the vast majority of
employees who file an appeal with us believe that they've been
wronged. I don't think there's bad faith.
Mr. Grothman. One other question. Do you sometimes, when a
filing is made, is sometimes a settlement reached, or is it
always yes or no?
Mr. Robbins. No, the cases do settle. They settle if the
agency and the employee agree on terms of a settlement, and
then the case is withdrawn.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Do you think some of the claims are
made--I can think of other areas of the world where people make
claims figuring that I'll give you $10,000 to go away or I'll
give you $20,000 to go away, it's not worth the bother. Do you
feel that is going on in your system?
Mr. Robbins. Oh, I'm sure it is, certainly. I couldn't put
a percentage on it.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
Mr. Robbins. You know, again, pointing to frivolity in
filing, I would just go to the poster child, which was the
sequestration for those 33,000 cases, and none of them had
merit.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. It's tough. They always just give us
five minutes. So when I'm being rude, it's just because that's
all they give me.
Therefore, to come back for this fee, I sometimes think a
fee would be a good thing, because it kind of separates the
wheat from the chaff.
How much of a fee--you mentioned $25, but I think it would
be more than that to really get the junk out of there--how much
of a fee do you think would be appropriate, or maybe the fee
should vary with the nature of the claim, to kind of reduce all
the paperwork you guys have got to deal with?
Mr. Robbins. A sliding scale would probably be hard to
administer. I believe the House, when it reauthorized us last
year, authorized a fee of up to whatever a U.S. District Court
filing fee is, which I think is $250.
Mr. York. It was $175. It was the half a district court
filing.
That's me.
Mr. Robbins. Okay. Yes.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. How many staff do you guys have?
Mr. Robbins. The Board has about 235.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Is it one of those things where the
staff does the work and the--they do most the work, right?
Mr. Robbins. Well, I would like to disagree with that, sir.
Mr. Grothman. I know you'd like to, but if you're being
honest.
Mr. Robbins. So, you know, yes.
Mr. Connolly. Unlike the U.S. Congress.
Mr. Robbins. What's that?
Mr. Connolly. I said unlike the U.S. Congress.
Mr. Robbins. Exactly.
Yes, of course, the staff does the first level work out in
the field in regional offices. Then we've got attorneys in
headquarters which do the first review of the appeals when they
come in.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
One final question, Mr. York, because the immediate problem
is the Senate won't take these people up. Is there an
individual group that really is fighting behind the scenes,
fighting confirmation of these nominees?
Mr. York. Sorry. I was----
Mr. Grothman. You know, the real problem here is the Senate
is not----
Mr. York. Sure. Right.
Mr. Grothman. Is there an individual group who is behind
the scenes fighting confirmation of these employees?
Mr. York. Boy, I don't--I'm not privy to any of the
backroom dealings that may or may not be occurring.
Mr. Connolly. The gentleman's time has expired.
Unfortunately, because they've called votes, Mr. Lynch.
Mr. Comer, are you okay if we adjourn this hearing? I'm so
sorry you didn't get a chance and Mr. Meadows didn't get a
chance and I didn't get a chance. But we've just, I think,
running out of time. If we try to come back, I'm afraid we'll
be sparse.
Mr. Lynch, you get the final word.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your work
on this as well as our bipartisan effort by the ranking member,
Mr. Meadows, and Mr. Hice as well.
I want to, first of all, thank the witnesses for your help
on this. It's a tough issue. I don't see any easy solution
without the cooperation of the White House.
But I did want to say that oftentimes, Ms. Brannon, this
committee especially relies on CRS for its work. And very
seldom do you get recognition or appreciation for the work that
you do.
But in our case, this is a committee of unlimited
jurisdiction, and we often face one-off situations and rely
heavily on CRS to provide very concise, well-written analyses
of the problems that we're dealing with. So I just want to ask
you to take back to your superiors the appreciation of this
committee on both sides of the aisle for the work that CRS
does.
The congressional Research Service is probably below the
radar screen of most of the people in the United States, and
you certainly are not given the due respect and appreciation
that you deserve. So thank you.
On the substantive matter before us, the professional
analysts and attorneys who work at MSPB have been working hard,
but their reports can't see the light of day because the MSPB
lacks a quorum and cannot vote on whether to make them public.
So in preparation for this hearing the subcommittee asked
the Merit Systems Protection Board for a number of major
reports that are typically generated with respect to the
government's compliance with civil service laws that have been
held back from publication for years.
So, Chairman Robbins, your staff informed us that MSPB has
a report ready to go on the incidence of sexual harassment in
executive agencies, but the absence of a quorum means that MSPB
cannot release it to Congress and the President. Is that
correct?
Mr. Robbins. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lynch. In fact, there's actually eight studies that we
rely upon, and some of these are keenly important to the work
that we do and that the government can benefit from.
I'll just go down a list here. Sexual harassment.
Prohibited personnel practices. Employee engagement.
Whistleblowing. That's especially important to this committee
with the work that we're doing. Supervisory probation. And
employee performance.
So some of these are disciplinary in terms of making sure
that employees are held accountable. Some of them, like in the
whistleblower case, is to make sure that employees have their
full spectrum of rights in the work force.
Chairman Robbins, the MSPB also has a report on
whistleblowing and the implementation and impact of the
Whistleblower Protection Act of 2012. That would be, again,
enormously significant to this committee since we passed that
bill out of this committee. That is our bill. That's Mr.
Cummings' bill. Is it correct that you can't share that with
us?
Mr. Robbins. That's correct.
Mr. Lynch. So it's just the issuance of the report. The
work's been done, but you can't issue the--we can't get the
benefit of the report because there's not a quorum to
promulgate that.
Mr. Robbins. The reports can't be issued without a quorum,
that's correct.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. Here are some other important topics that
I'm told from your staff you can't share with us due to the
absence of a quorum:
Employee perceptions on prohibited personnel of practices,
such as retaliation against whistleblowers.
Examination of burnout in high stress occupations, such as
law enforcement. That's very, very important, the mental stress
that some of our law enforcement are dealing with.
Discussions of best practices, of improving employee
performance.
Mr. Palguta, you headed the Office of Special Studies while
you worked at MSPB. Is that correct?
Mr. Palguta. I did.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. Did the topics that I have gone through
here, are those especially important to the operation of civil
service?
Mr. Palguta. Absolutely. The very first study we issued was
in 1981 on sexual harassment. There have been several
followups. The reports on whistleblowing, prohibited personnel
practices.
I think the studies function--I'm a little biased, I headed
the function for a number of years--is quite important. The
information has been acted upon by Congress over the years. It
also, within the executive branch, has caused some positive
movement over the years. Not being able to issue the reports, I
think, is a real shame.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired, and I know there's a
vote on, so I'll yield back.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the gentleman.
Yes, we do have a vote, 360 have not yet voted, but there
are only, like, 3-1/2 minutes left. So we are going to have to
wrap up the hearing.
I thank everybody for participating. As I said, we look
forward to working on a bipartisan basis to try to fix this.
And we are committed to doing that. We need counterparts in the
other body, as Mr. York rightfully pointed out.
I also want to put in the record, without objection, a list
of studies that have been underway on eight different topics,
following up Mr. Lynch's querying, but no report issued,
frankly, because of lack of a quorum. Without objection, that
will be entered into the record.
Mr. Connolly. I want to thank our witnesses for coming
today.
Without objection, all members will have five legislative
days within which to submit additional written questions for
the witnesses through the chair, which will be forwarded to the
witnesses for their response.
I also want to ask our witnesses to please respond as
promptly as you're able.
Without objection, all members will also have five
legislative days within which to submit extraneous materials to
the chair for inclusion in the record.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:01 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[all]