- JOINT HEARING TO RECEIVE TESTIMONY ON THE CYBER OPERATIONAL READINESS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (OPEN SESSION)
[Senate Hearing 115-837]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-837
JOINT HEARING TO RECEIVE TESTIMONY
ON THE CYBER OPERATIONAL READINESS
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (OPEN SESSION)
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY
and the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
PERSONNEL
of the
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
SEPTEMBER 26, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Armed Services
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via http://www.govinfo.gov/
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
40-883 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma,
JACK REED, Rhode Island
Chairman
BILL NELSON, Florida
ROGER F. WICKER, Mississippi
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
KIRSTEN E. GILLIBRAND, New York
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
JONI ERNST, Iowa
JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
TIM KAINE, Virginia
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
TED CRUZ, Texas
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
LINDSEY GRAHAM, South Carolina
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
JON KYL, Arizona
Christian D. Brose, Staff Director
Elizabeth L. King, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota,
BILL NELSON, Florida
Chairman
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
KIRSTEN E. GILLIBRAND, New York
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
LINDSEY GRAHAM, South Carolina
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
Subcommittee on Personnel
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina,
KIRSTEN E. GILLIBRAND, New York
Chairman
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
JONI ERNST, Iowa
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
LINDSEY GRAHAM, South Carolina
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
September 26, 2018
Page
Joint Hearing to Receive Testimony on the Cyber Operational
1
Readiness of the Department of Defense (Open Session).
Crall, Brigadier General Dennis A., USMC, Principal Deputy Cyber
4
Advisor and Senior Military Advisor for Cyber Policy.
Miller, Essye B., Principal Deputy, Department of Defense Chief
7
Information Officer.
Stewart, Lieutenant General Vincent R., USMC, Deputy Commander,
9
United States Cyber Command.
Fogarty, Lieutenant General Stephen G., USA, Commander, U.S. Army
11
Cyber Command.
Questions for the Record.........................................
25
(iii)
JOINT HEARING TO RECEIVE TESTIMONY
ON THE CYBER OPERATIONAL READINESS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (OPEN
SESSION)
----------
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 26, 2018
United States Senate,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity
and Subcommittee on Personnel,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 2:43 p.m. in
Room SD-106, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Senator Mike
Rounds (Chairman of the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity) and
Senator Thom Tillis (Chairman of the Subcommittee on
Personnel).
Members present: Senators Rounds and Tillis, presiding,
Wicker, Fischer, Nelson, Gillibrand, McCaskill, and Warren.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MIKE ROUNDS
Senator Rounds. The Cybersecurity and Personnel
Subcommittees meet this afternoon to receive testimony on the
cyber operational readiness of the Department of Defense.
Our witnesses are Brigadier General Dennis Crall, Principal
Deputy Cyber Advisor and Senior Military Advisor for Cyber
Policy; Ms. Essye Miller, Principal Deputy, Department of
Defense Chief Information Officer; Lieutenant General Stephen
Fogarty, Commander, U.S. Army Cyber Command; and Lieutenant
General Vincent Stewart, Deputy Commander, United States Cyber
Command.
Welcome.
This hearing will commence in open session in which
Senators Tillis, Nelson, and Gillibrand will all make a few
opening remarks. At the conclusion of Senator Gillibrand's
comments, we will ask our witnesses to make their opening
remarks. After that, we will all have our round of questions
and answers. We will then transition to SVC-217, the Office of
Senate Security, and recommence in closed session. Each of the
witnesses may provide additional context and testimony that
they were not able to provide in an open setting, and we will
then close with another round of Q&A. I encourage members and
staff to stay through the closed session, given the gravity of
the topic at hand.
The administration recently issued a new policy document,
known as National Security Presidential Memorandum 13. The new
policy entailed by NSPM-13 replaces that of PPD, or
Presidential Policy Directive, 20, which virtually paralyzed
the conduct of offensive operations by U.S. Cyber Command
outside of armed conflict. I look forward to a Department of
Defense briefing on the new policy in the near future. I am
hopeful this new policy will enable the Department of Defense
to act more nimbly and effectively to counter and deter our
adversaries' ongoing cyberattacks on the United States, attacks
conducted with virtual impunity.
However, no such policy, however well crafted, will succeed
unless U.S. Cyber Command develops and maintains the high level
of cyber operational readiness required to implement it.
With the elevation of Cyber Command to status as fully
unified command and the Cyber Missions Force's achieving full
operational capability in May, the Department's cyber forces
appear to have moved beyond adolescence. It is now vital that
the current capability and operational readiness of the Command
fulfill the requirements entailed by these designations. I
invited Senator Tillis and Senator Gillibrand, along with the
remainder of the Personnel Subcommittee, because these
shortfalls are not limited to traditional readiness measures of
equipment and training. Indeed, a great deal of the
Department's cyber readiness issues resolve around the shortage
of skilled cyber-capable personnel. These shortfalls will only
be aggravated if the Cyber Mission Force needs to be expanded
in the future. I am concerned that the current recruitment,
pay, retention, and career pathway structures in place are not
equipped to manage this problem. I am, thus, eager to hear the
service or tactical-level perspective from General Fogarty, the
operational Cyber Command's perspective from General Steward,
the more strategic and governance perspective from General
Crall in OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense], and the CIO
[Chief Information Officer] and civilian personnel perspective
from Ms. Miller. I am also eager to explore the Department's
plans to correct these shortfalls with the Senators of the
Personnel Subcommittee today. I am grateful to have their
expertise at this table.
An ongoing concern of the subcommittee, which I am sure the
Department shares, is that we preempt a hollow cyber force and
that we have a cyber force that is adequately staffed and
equipped and has the necessary tools, targeting capability, and
development capability to respond to operational needs. In
particular, Cyber Command needs the indigenous capability,
without over-reliance on NSA [National Security Agency], to
surveil adversary networks for zero-day vulnerabilities,
produce malware to exploit these vulnerabilities, and implant
this malware within a reasonable and realistic timeline. Such
capabilities are necessary, not only for its own DODIN
[Department of Defense Information Network] defense and
national missions, but also for those conducted in support of
the combatant commands. I am eager to hear about CYBERCOM's
[Cyber Command] current capability and activity to assist
EUCOM's [European Command], PACOM's [Pacific Command], and
CENTCOM's [Central Command] operations.
Each of our witnesses have an important role to play in
this space. General Stewart, as Deputy Commander of the Cyber
Command, is most directly responsible for the readiness of
Cyber Mission Force. General Crall's role in defining DOD
[Department of Defense] cyber policy shapes, and is shaped by,
the capabilities offered by the Cyber Mission Force. General
Fogarty, as Commander of the Army Cyber Command, is the
executive agent for the persistent cyber training environment
and must man, train, and equip the Army's cyber teams. Ms.
Miller and the CIO's office generally retain responsibility for
the cyber infrastructure, including that on which the Cyber
Mission Force will fight and test their malware across the
Department.
I will close by thanking our witnesses for their service
and for their willingness to appear today before the
subcommittee.
Senator Tillis.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR THOM TILLIS
Senator Tillis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'm glad our two committees were able to put together this
joint hearing. I think it represents an opportunity to examine
an important topic, but also to share information that's
instructive to our independent roles on committees. We should
do more of them.
Success in the cyber domain is uniquely reliant on highly
qualified personnel. Where aircraft carriers, stealth
technology, and smart weapons have given the United States a
discernible advantage in traditional warfighting domains, the
U.S. military doesn't have similar technological edges when it
comes to cyberspace. Rather, we must rely on intelligence,
creativity, and cunning of our people if we are to be
successful in this rapidly changing environment. Since
operating in cyberspace is so heavily dependent on access to
talented people, we look forward to asking questions on the
proper cyber workforce mix, the status of Cyber-Excepted
Service, and the larger personnel management issues within the
Cyber Mission Force.
I thank all of the witness for your willingness to be here
today, and I look forward to the following questions.
Senator Rounds. Senator Nelson.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR BILL NELSON
Senator Nelson. In the interest of time, the questions I'll
be asking are: ``Are the forces the right size? Are they
getting the right training? Are they a good match for their
mission? Do they have the tools and infrastructure they need?
Are we recruiting the right people? How are we retaining them
and managing their careers?''
Thanks.
Senator Rounds. Senator Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you. I look forward to your
statements.
Senator Rounds. At this time, I would ask--Ms. Miller,
would you like to begin, or did you have planned sequence that
you would like to deliver these remarks today?
Ms. Miller. Mr. Chairman, if you don't mind, we do have a
planned sequence.
Senator Rounds. Okay.
Ms. Miller. We'll start with General Crall.
Senator Rounds. Very good.
General Crall, begin.
Thank you.
STATEMENT OF BRIGADIER GENERAL DENNIS A. CRALL, USMC, PRINCIPAL
DEPUTY CYBER ADVISOR AND SENIOR MILITARY ADVISOR FOR CYBER
POLICY
Brigadier General Crall. I think the sequence should start
with the junior person, so I'll certainly oblige, sir.
First, I'd like to thank the committee members for a couple
of things. One, for my invite to talk about a matter that's
clearly important to the Department and the Nation, but also
your continued interest and investment in improving these
things that we're about to discuss today. So, I certainly thank
you for that.
In your openings, it's very clear that we all understand
the challenges we have. We keep talking about competitive
spaces in cyberspace, particularly in how we're going to see
information contested in our current and future wars that we
fight. But, we also have an interesting dynamic, as you've
pointed out. We have competition in the recruitment, retention,
the training aspect, and development of the cyber workforce. We
understand that, in our competition, if you look at it that
way--these are really partnerships, but, when it comes down to
resources, each of these communities handles these differently,
and they all have their own unique allures. For private
industry, we know that it's difficult to match some of the
compensation packages. It's also difficult to match the speed
with which they hire and onboard and start individuals and
clear them for some very sensitive projects. On the military or
the civilian side for the Department of Defense, we have our
own allures, as well: service to the Nation, the ability to
perform very unique mission sets you can't do anywhere else,
and also the exposure to a wide array of technology that really
pulls individuals in. So, we need to understand that, and
understand it well.
So, what I'd like to do is cover a couple items very
briefly in my opening, and that is to really set the stage for
how we--enhancements that we're looking at on how we recruit,
how we keep the folks that we recruit, and how we develop or
train them. On the closed session, I'd like to use some of that
time to talk about the governance structure, as it is
classified, tied to our recently published Cybersecurity
Strategy, and going into some of those details require that
setting.
So, to really get to the meat of what I will present today
is in the Cyber-Excepted Service. These are authorities and
funding that Congress gave the Department back in fiscal year
2016, and the rollout of that started in 2017. A couple of
these incentives are already in place. I'll cover a couple of
them, with a few that are being onboarded here really starting
in the next 30 days, the first of which is this idea of moving
between competitive service and noncompetitive service. The
idea of how we take title 5 and title 10, blend them together,
and move individuals and attract them to the Cyber-Excepted
Service without penalty or loss of grade or seniority.
Certainly an attractant. The other is the idea of building
qualifications and advancements based on competencies, where
you can be rewarded, compensated, and advanced because of the
unique training that you have. Finally, increased pay scale. We
know that the general service or competitive pay scales stop at
the pay band of 10, where the Cyber-Excepted Service, we've
expanded that to include pay bands 11 and 12, which offers a
little more flexibility for that professional worker who would
have no other place to go or no other incentive to offer. Those
are in place today, albeit in a modest fashion. I'll explain
the numbers in a minute. But, they are in play.
What we're proposing are a few other items that will,
again, start, here, hopefully in the next few months. One of
them is the idea of a targeted market compensation. We know
that it's difficult to recruit competent quality that we're
looking for in every part of the country. In some cases, it's
due to high-demand, low-density assets. There's just really a
strict competition. In other place, they just don't exist, writ
large, where we need them. So, that targeted compensation
package will allow us to apply that particular solution to that
target set.
We also are looking at the idea of retention bonuses.
Current pay caps prevented us from applying these, meaning they
were available, but they couldn't be used in other
combinations. You've given us the authority to move out, where
it makes sense, to apply them, again, to our most gifted
workforce.
Finally, the piece the Department has to solve is its long
security clearance process. We certainly don't want to
compromise the end result. We want to ensure that we understand
who we're employing. But, we certainly recognize that we've got
to cut down the timeframe. You've asked us to do that. We're--
certainly have ways and means in front of us to do just that.
From the total-force side that we're looking at, we're
looking at the development and training aspects of this,
enterprise and joint training standards. We're just finishing a
coding initiative so that we can understand what a Military
Occupational Specialty means in language to a civilian hire
that we have. Right now, we--every service uses different
descriptions. It's difficult to understand how to move an
individual from one spot to another. When you're trading spaces
and looking at benefits of training, manpower reallocation, and
rightsizing the force, you have to start with a common lexicon.
That coding effort is largely complete. Goes a long way to
making sure that we can develop.
Also, finally, I would say, putting on a career path. What
right looks like in a workforce management to ensure that we
don't pyramid out; where we have a lot of competent people that
are stuck in certain places, but we have either the rotation
that they need to go to to continue those skillsets or the
advancement opportunities there in front of them. More work to
do on that front. Definitely not there yet, but certainly
putting brainpower to that.
On the military side, I'd let the generals on the panel
discuss the efficiency of some of the things that they're
working on, but direct commissioning, we've been given the
authority to increase both our rates and the levels in which we
do that, very similar to the way that we onboard doctors,
lawyers, and chaplains, bringing in those specialists at higher
grades initially. Also, the constructive credit, how we can
take people who are coming from the workforce and actually give
them the credit due for the job skills they've had previously,
whether that be in the service or in private industry. So,
those two are available for our military side, as well.
Looking at how we phase these, phase 1 was a very modest
rollout. We had roughly 363, I believe, slots that we created
in Cyber-Excepted Service, and we targeted U.S. Cyber Command
with that initiative to begin with. Almost 70 percent of those
billets were filled in relatively short order, which means I
think we've got part of the cocktail correct, that the recipe
may be right. That's only with half the enhancement packages
onboard. But, given the size of our workforce, that's a very
small number. Starting this year, we've--we're going to expand
that to about 8300 slots, and we're going to target a few
others--DISA [Defense Information Systems Agency] and the
service cyber components--again, rolling out the full package
to see if we can get that mix right.
Some areas that I would tell the committee that I believe
we need to improve, and in full transparency, we need to
understand our market better. I think we use too much anecdotal
evidence and experience to describe what attracts people and
why people leave. While I would say that most of it sounds
right, and we do have a few studies that look at it, from, you
know, doing a couple of recruiting tours, market analysis is
key, and we've got to make sure we're dialed in and we're not
focusing on a goal that's maybe a year or two old.
We may need to take a look at how we recruit. I think our
message is slow to get out. Not everyone knows what our message
is. On the military side, I would say the campaign is a little
easier, far stronger, and we find that our audiences are more
informed. Very few understand what we offer in the Federal
Government side that would be an attractant, as well. We've got
to do better there.
I attended a ribbon-cutting ceremony with Senator Nelson a
few years back at the Cyber Center in Tampa, sir. In both your
public remarks and remarks to me privately, you stressed the
importance of internships and making sure that we stay
connected to academia, that we can build the kind of force we
need if they come out of the schoolhouse equipped and right-set
for us to put them to work. Neat environment in Tampa, with
U.S. Central Command and Special Ops Command right there. I'll
tell you, I think our efforts are still too modest. I don't
think we've come close to leveraging that requirement and that
opportunity. Our intelligence community does that well. They
groom very early. They have recruiters at the universities.
They teach classes, they stay very connected to that workforce,
and we could learn something from that. So, we have the means.
They're in front of us. We've got to execute better to get
after that. We're a bit slow.
Lastly, I would say we need to ensure that we have a solid
baseline and assessment mechanism so, when we come back here
and talk to you about what's working and what's not working and
how we've spent money, we can do so with the right kind of
accountability. We've got to be careful with all these
incentives--and you've charged us to be careful with those--to
ensure we just don't simply throw money at a problem without
making sure that these are targeted, and they're targeted very
specifically, and the outcomes are examined so we can keep that
machine refined and moving in the right direction.
So, hopefully, with an opener, I'll leave it at that, and
either take questions or pass it on for opening.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Crall follows:]
[Deleted.]
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Who would you like to have move next?
Ms. Miller. Well, Mr. Chairman, had I known General Crall
would cover the world----
[Laughter.]
Senator Rounds. Okay.
Well, that's okay, because what we're going to do is, we'll
take all of your full remarks for the record, but then I'd ask
that each of you limit your opening remarks to about 5 minutes,
and we'll kind of move from there.
STATEMENT OF ESSYE B. MILLER, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY, DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER
Ms. Miller. So----
Senator Rounds. Ms. Miller, would you like to go next?
Ms. Miller. So, given that General Crall----
Senator Rounds. Very good.
Ms. Miller.--has done a great job of laying out where we
are with policy and governance and how we are looking at the
environment, writ large--and I'd like to just add that the
Department does face workforce challenges that we need to
address--most of the job losses that we've seen here over the
last year or so total about 4,000 civilian cyber-related
personnel losses. We're going to have to, to his point, work
the recruiting piece of this such that we are postured and we
know what that industry should look like, what the objectives
and the outcomes of those hiring positions should be, and how
we manage the force, in terms of career paths. But, keep in
mind, too, this is--encompasses more than your traditional IT
[information technology] intel role. It also includes some our
health occupations, criminal investigation, and other
occupational series that we need to keep in mind such that we
take a holistic approach to how we execute the mission with our
cyber forces and drive effect and outcome.
So, with that, sir, I look forward to your questions. I
really appreciate the opportunity to have this discussion with
you today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Miller follows:]
Prepared Statement by Essye B. Miller
introduction
Good afternoon Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and distinguished
Members of both Subcommittees. Thank you for this opportunity to
testify before the Subcommittees today on the cyber operational
readiness of the Department of Defense. I am Essye B. Miller,
Department of Defense (DOD) Principal Deputy Chief Information Officer
(PDCIO). I am the principal deputy advisor to the Secretary of Defense
for information management, Information Technology (IT), cybersecurity,
communications, positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT), spectrum
management, and senior leadership and nuclear command, control, and
communications (NC3) matters. These latter responsibilities are clearly
unique to the DOD, and my imperative, on behalf of the DOD CIO in
managing this broad and diverse set of functions, is to ensure that the
Department has the information and communications technology
capabilities needed to support the broad set of Department missions.
This includes supporting our deployed forces, cyber mission forces, as
well as those providing mission and business support functions. I would
like to provide you with an overview of the current state of the
Department's cyber workforce policies and programs, as well as provide
you with an update on the Department's implementation of the Cyber
Excepted Service (CES) Personnel System.
department of defense cyber workforce overview
The DOD cyber workforce is currently comprised of four workforce
categories. The Office of the DOD CIO is responsible for the policy
oversight of two categories, Cyber (IT) and Cybersecurity. The
Principal Cyber Advisor (PCA) leads the Cyber Effects category, while
the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)) is responsible
for the Intelligence (Cyber) category. Together, the DOD CIO, PCA, and
the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R))
tri-chair a Cyber Workforce Management Board that works with
USCYBERCOM, the Military Departments, Joint Staff, OUSD(I), and other
select DOD Components to provide oversight over the management of the
DOD civilian and military cyber workforce. Additionally, the Office of
the DOD CIO also acts as the Functional Community Manager for 18
civilian occupational series, composed of approximately 52,000
individuals, working with USD (P&R) and the DOD Components to sustain
the health and capabilities of each occupation.
Over the past several months, DOD Components have been coding
civilian cyber positions, per the Federal Cybersecurity Workforce
Assessment Act. In addition to the typical or traditional cyber
occupations, DOD also has some individuals performing cyber
responsibilities in acquisition and engineering, financial management,
health care occupations, as well as criminal investigation and physical
security.
The Department does face some cyber workforce challenges. DOD has
seen over 4,000 civilian cyber-related personnel losses across our
enterprise each year that we seek to replace due to normal job
turnover. Most of these job losses fall within the IT Management and
Computer Science occupations, but we also have cyber professionals
within key engineering occupations such as Electronics Engineering and
Computer Engineering. We need individuals across a wide variety of
cyber work roles, including: software developers and secure software
assessors, system administrators and network operations specialists,
data analysts, systems security analysts, and system test and
evaluators. Specific to the Cyber Mission Forces, their personnel needs
center on planning, coding, forensics, malware, data science,
linguists, and cybersecurity professionals.
Congress has been a strong partner in this area. Specifically,
through a number of key pieces of legislation, Congress has enabled:
the startup of a new personnel management system for cyber, the Cyber
Excepted Service; Direct Hire Authority and Advanced-In-Hire Authority
for Cyber Workforce positions; other compensation flexibilities; new
term appointment authority; and funding for the DOD Cyber Scholarship
Program. Each has aided the Department in establishing and maintaining
the readiness of our cyber warriors.
We also work closely with other federal stakeholders, through the
Federal CIO Council and the National Initiative for Cybersecurity
Education (NICE). We share the same concerns on the challenges to find
highly qualified job candidates and retain cyber professionals in a
hyper competitive job market. Enhanced management practices, such as
the implementation of the National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework,
will provide greater capabilities to identify personnel requirements
and target effective solutions.
cyber excepted service (ces) personnel system
The Cyber Excepted Service is an enterprise-wide approach for
managing civilian cyber professionals across the Department. By
fostering a culture based upon mission requirements and employee
capabilities, Cyber Excepted Service will enhance the effectiveness of
the Department's cyber defensive and offensive mission. This personnel
system will provide DOD with the needed agility and flexibility for the
recruitment, retention and development of high quality cyber
professionals. Specifically, the CES will help DOD to streamline its
hiring procedures to quickly fill vacant mission-critical cyber
positions across the Enterprise. CES lets DOD Hiring Managers recruit
candidates from any source and offer more competitive market-based
compensation packages.
The Office of the DOD CIO has successfully designed, developed, and
implemented the new personnel system for U.S. Cyber Command, Joint
Force Headquarters DOD Information Networks, and the Deputy CIO for
Cybersecurity. To date, 403 positions have been converted to the CES.
We are currently partnering with the DOD Components to begin
implementing CES for 8,305 positions across the Defense Information
Systems Agency and the Service Cyber Components.
conclusion
DOD recognizes the importance of growing and maintaining the cyber
workforce. The recent authorities provided by Congress have allowed the
Department to adjust existing personnel policies and to implement new
policies that account for this dynamic need in an increasingly
important mission area. The Department appreciates the support of both
Subcommittees on this important matter. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify today and I look forward to your questions.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
General Stewart.
STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL VINCENT R. STEWART, USMC,
DEPUTY COMMANDER, UNITED STATES CYBER COMMAND
Lieutenant General Stewart. Yeah. Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Members, members of the committee, first of all, thanks for the
opportunity to do this. I think the support that we've gotten--
that we've received from the committee that's driven us to
think about the policy, think about the strategy, think about
the readiness of the force, has pushed us in the right
direction. So, I thank you for the opportunity to be here.
But, more than that, I thank you for the opportunity to be
able to speak about the men and women who make up this cyber
force, extraordinary men and women who today are on mission
against a threat that's operating--that's pervasive in this
space. I look forward to the opportunity to talk about that,
and I certainly look forward to the opportunity to discuss that
in closed session.
Among the things that we've learned over the last year or
so is that success in cyberspace requires--in fact, it
demands--persistent engagement, it demands persistent presence,
and it demands a persistent innovative spirit. Failure to do
that means that we will never compete against near-peer
competitors in this space. So, we're thinking our way now
through how we move from growing this force to how we
persistently engage, persistently have presence and we innovate
in this space.
We have shifted from building out those teams to how we
build a force that is operationally relevant and is able to
deliver outcomes, as necessary, from the Chairman--from the
national authorities, all the way through the Chairman.
We've shifted a little bit from building capacity--we think
about just personnel and their training readiness--to the
capabilities. Those capabilities requirements speaks to our
necessity for the right tools or the munitions that we need in
order to be successful in this space, the access that we need,
the authorities we need, the infrastructure we need, and the
intelligence necessary to support operation of a relevant
force.
So, we're now melding--in order to get a better sense of
readiness, we're melding both capability and capacity against
the problem sets that we've been assigned. So, as we look
forward, we realize that the future requires us to be
continually engaged in order to compete in cyberspace. We're
building a combatant command that will be postured for success.
We couldn't have built that without--or accomplished what we
have for this Nation without your dedicated support that we
receive from the committee. The language you included in the
Fiscal Year 2019 NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] was
especially helpful, and we thank you for your continued
advocacy and support, and we look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Stewart follows:]
Prepared Statement by Lieutenant General Vincent R. Stewart
u.s. cyber command (uscybercom) statement for the record
USCYBERCOM's mission is to direct, synchronize, and coordinate
cyberspace planning and operations to defend and advance national
security interests in collaboration with domestic and international
partners. Success in cyberspace requires persistent engagement,
persistent presence, and persistent innovation. To support the Nation's
priorities as a combatant command, USCYBERCOM's focus has shifted from
building a cyber force to focusing on readiness, partnerships and
building the ethos of a new Command.
USCYBERCOM is diligently working to build a more robust fighting
force for the future. We are embracing innovative ways to develop and
strengthen our workforce. If we are to maintain our strategic advantage
in cyberspace, we must invest heavily in the talent of our people and
the resources they need.
USCYBERCOM is acutely aware of the challenges that result from
being in persistent contact with the adversary in cyberspace. Our
adversaries continue to adapt and evolve . . . so must we.
operational readiness
One component of our evolution is our approach to measuring
readiness. As a command, we have evolved from a model focused on
building a force to a model that ensures the sustained readiness of the
force we've built. Early in our development as a combatant command, we
measured readiness based on number of people and the status of their
training. Now that we have matured, previously used readiness metrics
are not sufficient to provide a holistic readiness picture. The
sustained readiness approach we are developing merges capability
metrics with capacity metrics to provide a more complete readiness
picture. In other words, our new approach assesses readiness in terms
of both ``capacity'' (people and training), as well as ``capability/'
(tools, access, authorities, infrastructure, and intelligence).
workforce
As a trailblazer for DOD's Cyber Excepted Service (CES) personnel
system, USCYBERCOM is using new, fast and flexible hiring authorities
to tackle civilian vacancies and recruit talent necessary to build our
Combatant Command. Outside the confines of the traditional DOD hiring
process, USCYBERCOM is pushing past the norms of laborious, slow hiring
by actively recruiting talent through job fairs and hiring events where
our teams screen resumes and conduct on-site interviews leading to the
best candidates receiving intent-to-hire job offers.
For our military workforce, like the other Combatant Commands,
USCYBERCOM relies on the Services to recruit and retain the talent we
need to deliver joint force objectives for the Nation. We applaud the
diligent efforts of the Services to organize, train and equip cyber
operations forces, including fully leveraging recruitment and retention
incentives and creating talent management programs that grow a robust
cyber workforce.
conclusion
Whether civilian or military, the men and women of USCYBERCOM are
committed to being part of something bigger than themselves. Our men
and women want to make a difference for this Nation, and they do--
everyday.
USCYBERCOM is a learning organization continuing to innovate and
adapt as we posture our force for success in the cyberspace domain.
With the sustained support of Congress, USCYBERCOM will build upon our
momentum and continue to defend and advance our Nation's national
security interests in cyberspace.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, General.
General Fogarty.
STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL STEPHEN G. FOGARTY, USA,
COMMANDER, U.S. ARMY CYBER COMMAND
Lieutenant General Fogarty. Chairman Rounds, Chairman
Tillis, Ranking Members, and members of the subcommittee, I
want to thank you for the support, from both committees, which
is vitally important to Army Cyber Command's continued progress
and the critical missions of our dedicated and talented
soldiers, Army civilians, contractors, and Reserve and Army
National Guardsmen carry out every day on behalf of the Army
and the Nation.
The Army's philosophy for training is to train as you
fight. For the Army's teams within the DOD Cyber Mission Force,
training to a joint standard is predicated on a culture of
adaptive learning for operations and form, training at every
level. A ``train as you fight'' philosophy in cyberspace also
depends on employing realistic, dynamic, and complex range
environments against simulated peer and near-peer adaptive
adversaries. Cyber Mission Force training must be tough,
realistic, relevant, and holistic, just like it is for the rest
of our forces. With the achievement of full operational
capabilities for the Army's CMF [Cyber Mission Force] last
year, the Army and joint forces are shifting focus to measuring
and sustaining CMF readiness. While achieving full operational
capabilities of these teams was an important milestone, it is
certainly not an end state and doesn't tell the complex story
of the Army and joint force's overall readiness to fight and
win.
Readiness is a combination of the CMF's ability to conduct
cyberspace operations, reflects a team's ability to plan,
develop access, report, and maneuver in cyberspace, hold
targets at risk, and deliver capabilities based on assigned
missions. This is the standard we use for operations, and it
must be the standard we use for training. This includes a focus
on nonstandard access methodologies, title 10 operator
training, and integration with mission partners to improve
mission readiness. Again, training as we fight.
Army Cyber Command's mission success rests on our people.
We must recruit, retain, and reward the most talented people.
As such, we put tremendous focus on talent management. Thanks
to your support, Army talent management initiatives continue to
show increased results in civilian hiring and military
recruiting. But, we do have a challenge with retaining the core
skills that we need. We have a superb recruitment pool that we
draw from. I think the training is outstanding. They get on the
mission. But, our challenge, as the other witnesses have
already mentioned, is the compensation to keep that trained
force. You know, the average interactive online operator, it
takes about 2 and a half years of training to be able to
conduct operations. In a 6-year enlistment, you get about 3,
maybe 3\1/2\ years of useful work out of that individual. So,
it's absolutely critical that we roll out, really, the
incentives we need to maintain that force.
Now, readiness of the total force requires that our
investment in cyber ensure that Active and Reserve and Guard
forces are trained and equipped to one standard. We also
continue to make progress toward fully integrating the Army's
Reserve and National Guard into the Cyber Mission Force. We're
already benefiting from the critical skills the Reserve
component brings to bear and look forward to their full
integration.
The Reserve component is approved to build and maintain 21
Cyber Protection Teams, 11 in the Army National Guard and 10 in
the U.S. Army Reserve. One Army National Guard and two Army
Reserve CPTs [Cyber Protection Terms] have already achieved
initial operational capabilities. The Army National Guard is
scheduled to have all 11 CPTs at full operational capability by
fiscal year 2022. In the Army Reserves, 10 CPTs will be fully
operational-capable by fiscal year 2024, trained and equipped
to the same standards as the Active component. I'll discuss PCT
[Persistant Cyber Training] at detail to answer your questions.
One of the things I did want highlight is, my command is
getting ready to move from Fort Belvoir down to Fort Gordon,
Georgia. We'll do that in about 18 months. That is a
significant investment, almost $1.3 billion, that the Army has
placed in Army Cyber Command and the Army Cyber Center of
Excellence, which is our premier schoolhouse. We train Active,
we train civilians, and then we train Army National Guard and
Reserve forces. For the Army, this is important, because we'll
have the operational headquarters, the operational platform,
and the schoolhouse all on the same location. We think that's
going to give us the ability to take operators that are in
Active missions to be able to move over and instruct, realtime,
in the classroom. It also gives a stability for our workforce.
You can have an entire career at Fort Gordon, Georgia, if you
decide that you wanted to have your family there.
The soldiers, civilians, and contractors from Army Cyber
Command are persistently engaged against a wide range of
adversaries and competitors in the cyber domain. We remain
committed to preserving U.S. superiority in cyberspace and
defending the Nation. Furthermore, we are committed to working
with our interagency partners, international allies and
partners, the defense industrial base, and defense critical
infrastructure partners to secure that critical infrastructure.
It's worth stating that operations in the cyber domain require
problem-solving in ways never employed before by the U.S. Army.
But, creativity, aggressive problem-solving, and rapid mastery
of new fighting methods are not just possible for the Army,
they are, in fact, qualities that lie at the core of our
service. I'm confident that, with your continued support, we
will continue to make progress and continue to achieve mission
success.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify today and look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Fogarty follows:]
Prepared Statement by Lieutenant General Stephen G. Fogarty
Chairman Rounds, Chairman Tillis; Ranking Members Nelson and
Gillibrand; and Members of the Subcommittees on Cybersecurity and
Personnel, thank you for your continued support of the dedicated
soldiers and Army civilians of U.S. Army Cyber Command (ARCYBER) and
the entire Army Cyber Enterprise. It's an honor to represent the Army's
Cyber Team, alongside my colleagues from the Department of Defense and
U.S. Cyber Command, to discuss the critical issues associated with
sustaining a ready Cyber Mission Force (CMF). My testimony addresses
the following topics as requested by the Subcommittees: retaining and
maintaining the Army's cyber talent; individual and unit level training
of the Army's CMF; integration of the Army's Reserve Component into the
CMF; and the development of the National Cyber Range Complex and
Persistent Training Environment.
retaining and maintaining the army's cyber talent
Army Cyber Command's mission success rests with recruiting,
retaining, and rewarding talented people, and as such we put tremendous
focus on talent management. Thanks to congressional support, Army
talent management initiatives continue to show increased results in
civilian hiring and military recruiting. The Army is on pace to man,
train, and equip Total Army cyber forces to meet current and future
threats. Readiness of the total force requires that our investments in
cyber ensure that Active and Reserve forces are trained and equipped to
one joint standard. We have established innovative and tech-centric
recruiting cells; are exercising our direct hiring authority for cyber
professionals supported by Fiscal Year 2017 National Defense
Authorization Act; and using internships, scholarship programs, and
talent management initiatives focused on attracting, employing,
developing and retaining technical people, including our Cyber Officer
Direct Commissioning Pilot supported by Fiscal Year 2017 National
Defense Authorization Act. The first two 1st Lieutenants under the
Direct Commissioning Program are now training and we are assessing the
next accessions from hundreds of applicants. With the expanded
constructive service credit (up to O6 (Colonel) level) included in the
Fiscal Year 2019 National Defense Authorization Act, we intend to
attract candidates from a wider pool of applicants in the coming
months.
To help the Army resolve some of our toughest talent management and
technical challenges, we have partnered with the Pentagon's Defense
Digital Service (DDS) to bring technically-gifted soldiers together
with interns and top private sector civilian talent to rapidly develop
immediate-need cyber capabilities. We have also partnered with DDS on a
Civilian Hiring as a Service Pilot to streamline the hiring process for
technical talent and better leverage hiring authorities and incentives.
We are working with DDS and the State of Georgia to expand this program
to Fort Gordon and the region surrounding Augusta, Georgia, the Army's
center of gravity for cyber operations and training. This innovative
partnership is solving problems and serving as a powerful retention and
recruitment tool. Additionally, in partnership with DDS, ARCYBER and
the Cyber Center of Excellence launched a training pilot in January
2018 to compress and streamline joint cyber training courses.
individual and unit level training of the army cyber mission force
The Army's philosophy for training is to ``Train as you fight!''
For the Army's teams within the DOD's Cyber Mission Force (CMF),
training to a joint standard is predicated on a culture of adaptive
learning, where operations inform training at every level. A ``train as
you fight'' philosophy in cyberspace also depends on employing
realistic, dynamic, and complex cyber range environments against
simulated peer and near-peer adaptive adversaries. Cyber Mission Force
training is tough, realistic, relevant, and holistic.
With the achievement of Full Operational Capability of the Army
CMF, the Army and Joint Force are shifting focus to measuring and
sustaining CMF readiness. Readiness of the CMF's ability to conduct
cyberspace operations reflects a teams' ability to plan; develop
access; report and maneuver in cyberspace; hold targets at risk; and
deliver capabilities based on assigned missions; this is the standard
we use for training. This includes a focus on non-standard access
methodologies, title 10 operator training, and integration with mission
partners to improve mission readiness.
The readiness of our defensive teams is tested daily, during
remediation of routine incidents; proactive defensive cyberspace
operations; and during contingency operations. Training programs must
constantly sharpen our edge to adapt faster than our adversaries.
Mission rehearsals, simulating complex conditions, are necessary to
ensure sufficient procedures are in place, while real-world operations
grow our understanding of our adversaries' capabilities and add a
decisive edge to our collective training.
The Army's Cyber Protection Brigade has taken the lead in Cyber
Protection Team (CPT) training by developing a concise training manual,
known as ``Cyber Gunnery Tables,'' that defines the tasks individuals,
crews, and mission elements must master. These tables provide
foundational training for individuals and teams and serve as training
and readiness validation events, certifying that a crew has the
required knowledge, skills, and abilities to participate in collective
exercises as part of a mission element. They also provide a metrics-
based assessment to determine individual and crew readiness.
The Army's Cyber Electro-Magnetic Activities Support to Corps and
Below (CSCB) initiative provides another venue to improve team
readiness levels. Teams are integrated into the Combat Training Center
rotations, War Fighter Exercises, and senior leader developmental
exercises and events that train and challenge supported units and keep
teams proficient on individual and collective skills. Army Cyber
Command has built real-time reach-back links between Corps and Below
level forces at the National Training Center and cyber operators at
Fort Meade, Maryland and Fort Gordon, Georgia, that further enhance
training capabilities for the Army's Brigade Combat Teams as well as
our cyber forces. Based on lessons learned from the CSCB initiative,
the Army will start building a Cyber Warfare Support Battalion (CWSB)
in fiscal year 2019, dedicated to integrating tactical operations with
strategic cyber capabilities, and supporting Electronic Warfare and
cyber planning and integration.
Training is critical for operators and teams, but the CMF also
needs infrastructure, tool development, and mission alignment of these
ready teams. In 2017 the Army completed the second of two joint mission
operations centers for offensive cyberspace operations, located at
Forts Meade and Gordon. The Army has also established tool development
workspaces at three locations and aligned talented personnel to
innovate the creation of these in-house tools. To support this effort,
the Army is developing a sustainable career map for tool developer
Officers and Warrant Officers.
The Army is also leading the way with broadly-scaled multi-domain
exercises for the Active, Reserve, and National Guard components. These
exercises take place at existing CTCs and purpose-built environments
like Muscatatuck, Indiana's ``Cybertropolis'' facility. In September,
2018 the Army exercise ``Cyber Blitz'' based out of Joint Base McGuire-
Dix-Lakehurst, New Jersey will allow Total Army forces to synchronize
new technologies and define how the information warfare capabilities
can be employed in the Multi-Domain fight. Specifically, the Army is
looking at how Cyber Operations, Information Operations and Electronic
Warfare can be synchronized with maneuver warfare and precision fires
to bring effects to bear against adversaries.
the army's investment in fort gordon, ga as a power projection platform
Thanks to congressional support and over $1 billion in cumulative
construction and modernization projects, Fort Gordon, Georgia will be
the Army's focal point for cyberspace operations and training for
responsive and enhanced support to the Army and the Joint forces. The
ARCYBER headquarters will relocate to Fort Gordon beginning in 2020.
The new purpose-built, modern headquarters will support more than 1,300
new cyber soldiers and civilian employees at Fort Gordon, is projected
to be ready for occupation in summer 2020 and fully operational by
2022. The co-location of Army cyber operational and institutional
forces will enable collaboration, flow of instructors, and speed up
requirements development and acquisition.
Additionally, the transformative modernization project of the Army
Cyber Center of Excellence (Cyber CoE) at Fort Gordon will break ground
in fiscal year 2019. This will increase training capacity and provide
modern training and workspaces to gain efficiencies across the
installation. The Cyber CoE continues to make significant progress
growing the cyber, electronic warfare and signal workforce. The Cyber
CoE is the Army's principal organization for future cyberspace, EW and
signal innovation, providing capability through concepts, design and
experimentation, across Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel,
Leadership and Education, Personnel, Facilities, and Policy. In
addition to training, the Cyber CoE provides force modernization,
capabilities and career management for Signal, Cyber and Electronic
Warfare forces.
The Cyber CoE trained over 13,000 students in fiscal year 2018.
This includes students from the Cyber School, Signal School and the
Non-commissioned Officer Academy. The Cyber School trains officers,
warrant officers, and enlisted soldiers from all three force components
(Active, Guard, and Reserve), provides training across the joint
forces, and offers two industry certifications tied to training.
The Signal School provides trained soldiers to the operational
force to conduct Department of Defense Information Network (DODIN)
operations and cybersecurity, training 17 military occupational
specialties and providing 42 industry certifications tied to training.
Signal soldiers install, operate, and maintain the Army's portion of
the DODIN. The Signal School provides a common foundation in networking
fundamentals in support of DODIN Operations to all new Signal soldiers.
integration of the army's reserve component into the cmf
The Reserve Component (RC) is approved to build and maintain 21
CPTs; 11 in the Army National Guard (ARNG) and 10 in the U.S. Army
Reserve (USAR). One ARNG and two USAR CPTs have already achieved
Initial Operational Capability, the ARNG is scheduled to have all 11
CPTs at Full Operational Capability (FOC) by fiscal year 2022, and the
USAR's 10 CPTs will be FOC by f24; trained and equipped to the same
standards as the Active Component.
Beyond the build of these teams, soldiers from the Army's Reserve
and National Guard are trained, ready, and on-mission today, performing
critical and unique support and effects-delivery roles for Army and
Joint cyber missions. The 91st Cyber Brigade was initiated in
September, 2017, as the Army National Guard's first cyber brigade. In
August, 2017, the all-National Guard Task Force Echo was launched to
engineer, install, operate, and maintain critical networks for U.S.
Cyber Command.
Our RC cyber soldiers bring critical skills that are a force
multiplier. Continued support from Congress for programs to attract
soldiers, such as Direct Commissions, Special Duty and Assignment Pay,
and Cyber Affiliation Bonuses will assist in recruiting and retaining
RC cyber talent.
the national cyber range complex and persistent cyber training
environment
Currently, DOD operates four Cyber Training and Test Ranges: the
DOD Cyber Security Range; the Joint Information Operations Range; the
National Cyber Range Complex; and the C5 Assessments Division range.
The Persistent Cyber Training Environment (PCTE) is a material solution
that provides the total cyber force a training platform to conduct
joint training (including exercises and mission rehearsals),
experimentation, certification, as well as the assessment and
development of cyber capabilities and tactics, techniques, and
procedures for missions that cross boundaries and networks. PCTE will
use resources from all four of the DOD ranges, as well as resources
from other existing cyber training facilities.
Headquarters, Department of the Army is the DOD's Executive Agent
for Cyber Training Ranges, a responsibility led by the Army's Deputy
Chief of Staff, G-3/5/7. Army Cyber Command is in support as a primary
advisor to the G-3/5/7, with the Army's Program Executive Office for
Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation (PEO-STRI) serving as the
lead for acquisition, prototyping, and deployment of PCTE. The entire
PCTE effort is governed by a board that includes Army Cyber Command,
the DOD's Principal Cyber Advisor, and the Undersecretaries of Defense
for Personnel & Readiness and Acquisition, Technology, & Logistics, as
well as U.S. Cyber Command's J7, through which the Joint Cyber Service
Components take part in shaping the PCTE to meet current joint
operational needs.
The PCTE v1.0 prototype was delivered 31 July 2018, just one year
after the Army received initial funding for the project, and is
currently undergoing limited user assessment, with feedback informing
the next prototype, PCTE v2.0. Follow-on capability drops are projected
to occur every six months (v2.0 in January 2019; v3.0 in July 2019;
etc.). To meet the requirements for individual and lower-level
collective training, the Army is also using a commercially available
cyber range product. To meet higher collective training tasks, the Army
is evaluating another commercial platform used by the U.S. Navy, which
provides a broader collective training environment. All Services are
currently using, or considering, both platforms to meet training
requirements. These tools will be a bridging effort until the PCTE is
fully operational.
conclusion
Thank you again for inviting me to appear before you today
representing the Army Cyber Enterprise. Your support has been
enormously important to the maturation of Army Cyber Command, the Army
Cyber Enterprise, and the critical mission our dedicated and talented
soldiers and Army civilians conduct for the Army and the Nation. The
Army Cyber Enterprise has made tremendous progress during the last
eight years--building a cyber branch, schoolhouse, cyber
infrastructure, and a Total Army cyber force. Although much remains to
be done, I am confident that with your sustained support we will
continue to make progress and achieve mission success. The tasks before
us are great, however the talent and drive of our people is greater.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, General.
This group in front of us as a team has a huge
responsibility. Cyberspace, this new domain, requires
personnel. The reason that we're doing a program like this with
both subcommittees, Personnel and Cyber, together is because we
recognize the seriousness of the situation at hand.
General Fogarty, the Army faces significant manning gaps in
the roles of tool developers and interactive on-network
operators, or, I think, as we call them, IONs. While the Army
needs about 150 operators, for example, it has about half of
its requirements. Part of the problem is that the Army has only
about 14 spots in the RIOT training, which is Remote
Interactive Operational Training, which is provided by the NSA.
About half of these personnel will fail the training, meaning
that the Army might only see seven graduate to the Cyber
Mission Force as capable operators for any given RIOT course.
This could leave the Army below the replacement level, given
promotions and retirements, and yields a major capability gap.
The Air Force has noted to us that the NSA has facilitated--
they're obtaining more spots in training, as required, and
that, because they send their operators to training later, they
are less likely to fail, leaving them without the shortfalls
that afflict the Army.
My specific question is, What is the impact of the
resulting gaps--in particular, in infrastructure, IONs, and
tool developers--on your operations?
Lieutenant General Fogarty. So, Senator, we have identified
three critical missions for--or critical work roles for the
offensive force. So, the IONs, the exploitation analysts, and
the tool developers. Each one is really--for the Army, is in a
different point. So, you've aptly described our challenge with
IONs. There are two things that we're doing about this. First
of all, as we conduct more and more operations off of title 10
infrastructure--and the Army is really--we were the service
that had title 10 infrastructure first, we've got the most
robust capability--what we recognize is, not every ION has to
be RIOT qualified. We have a title 10 operators course that
allows our IONs to actually operate off the title 10
infrastructure. That gives us the opportunity to observe them
as they start to act, conduct reps. Then we can identify better
those star athletes that we need to send to RIOT. What we're
hoping is, we can identify someone who has better aptitude, a
better likelihood of actually graduating, and that would
essentially double our numbers if we can get that straight,
per----
Senator Rounds. Excuse me. You don't----
Lieutenant General Fogarty.--per year.
Senator Rounds.--you don't quite have it straight yet, so
what is that doing to your operational timelines today?
Lieutenant General Fogarty. So, what happens, sir, is, with
the current limit of 15 per year--and I would say, for the Air
Force, we actually gave up slots, both for EAs [exploitation
analysts] and IONs, so they could actually get fully
operational-capable and meet their timelines. So, we took a
little bit of hit there. But, I think the big thing is, we
weren't selecting people that were making it all the way
through the course. So, by getting them in the title 10
operators course, we get them actually on mission much sooner
than we do if we send them through RIOT training. That allows
us to determine the best athletes that would then allow us to
get them into RIOT, have a much better chance of graduating.
So, we think that will increase graduation.
We've also talked to General Nakasone. We think,
ultimately, we're going to have to expand the throughput of the
RIOT course. So, we think that's going to be necessary to meet
our ultimate requirements.
But, we think success, for us, is a number of RIOT-trained
operators, and then a larger number, actually, of title 10
operators. Because, again, as you said very eloquently, we've
got to get off of the NSA platform, become more independent.
The title 10 infrastructure with title 10 IONs actually allows
us to achieve that goal.
Senator Rounds. One thing that I'm going to ask, for the
record, of both you, General Fogarty, and also for you, General
Crall, is a timeline for actually meeting the guidelines
necessary to make that happen.
[The information referred to follows:]
Lieutenant General Fogarty. Since the standup of the Cyber
Mission Force (CMF) in 2012, the work roles presenting the
greatest training and retention challenges for the Army are
Interactive on-Network Operator (ION) and Tool Developer (TD).
Both are high demand, low density work roles requiring
personnel with advanced technical aptitude, training and
certification. Since 2012, changing mission requirements,
organic platform developments, and programmatic changes
necessitated a revised model for Army's training of IONs. The
Army developed our own interactive cyber operator course
external to NSA's training pipeline with a curriculum informed
by and more directly supporting the evolving USCYBERCOM
mission. Since the Army's development of this course in 2017,
as of January 2019, 73 Army students have graduated, and over
21 individuals have been Joint Qualification Reviewed (JQR)-
certified and are on-mission supporting USCYBERCOM operations.
The remainder are fulfilling JQR requirements. The Army plan
going forward is to hand-pick the high performing graduates of
this course and select them for the RIOT course. We project
this will increase graduation rates, and help close the ION
gap. Tool Developers (TD), much like IONs, fill a critical role
in the execution of cyberspace missions by building software
and hardware capabilities to enable a variety of operations. To
better serve the TD mission, the Army built a developer
environment that enables the rapid production and delivery of
cyberspace capabilities to our operational force. Our
experience indicates officers and civilians are the best
equipped to fill the TD work role, often arriving with computer
science, electrical engineering, or computer engineering
degrees. As a result, the Army developed the Tool Developer
Qualification Course (TDQC) in partnership with the University
of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) Training Center. The 11-
month course provides students with the basic fundamentals of
computer science and programming. The average class size is 14,
with a graduation rate of approximately 75 percent. The high
pass rate is directly attributed to the strong emphasis placed
on identifying and assessing the best candidates for the
course. Since 2016, the Army has successfully graduated 64
soldiers. The Army executes assessment tests and selection
panels to identify the best qualified TD and ION candidates.
The most experienced in the force administer the assessments
and oversee the selection panels, ensuring the prospective
candidates understand the rigors and challenges ahead of them.
Once a candidate is selected, (e.g. IONs for RIOT), a mentor is
assigned to them to ensure help is available should the need
arise. However, the aptitudes and talent required for ION and
TD roles come from the same population. As we improve
recruiting and training, we must also improve retention of our
Cyber force. The attrition rate of trained IONs and TDs equals
or exceeds the production rate of new personnel. Part of the
challenge with this highly technical force is compensating
trained and experienced IONs and TDs at an appropriate level.
Currently HQDA has authorized the maximum Selective Retention
Bonus it can provide ($72,000 for a 6-year re-enlistment) for
enlisted soldiers serving as IONs, TDs, and Exploitation
Analysts (EA). HQDA has also implemented a Written Bonus
Agreement that will have a maximum of $100,000 for an
additional four years of service for our most experienced
senior Non-Commissioned Officers, and has approved Assignment
Incentive Pay ranging from $200-$500 a month and Special Duty
Assignment Pay ranging from $150-$300 per month for personnel
trained and serving in these key work roles. ARCYBER leadership
continues to work with HQDA to maximize the benefits that can
be provided to these soldiers by law, in order to reduce the
compensation gap that can be offered by the private sector, or
even other governmental agencies.
Senator Rounds. General Crall, I'm out of time, but the
same questions that I've asked of General Fogarty I will be
asking of you for the record, as well.
[The information referred to follows:]
Brigadier General Crall. [Deleted.]
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
With that, Senator Tillis.
Senator Tillis. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Again, thank you all for being here.
General Crall, thank you for, I think, covering good
landscape in your opening comments.
Ms. Miller, my first question is for you. I believe you
chair the Cyber Workforce Management Board. Is that correct?
Ms. Miller. Yes, sir, along with----
Senator Tillis. And P&R [Personnel and Readiness] co-
chairs, right?
Ms. Miller.--P&R, exactly.
Senator Tillis. Tell me a little bit about how that
relationship works, and how the roles are playing out right
now.
Ms. Miller. Well, actually, sir, we're very well aligned.
The board was charted to manage the health and welfare maturity
of the force, both civilian and military, so we have an
opportunity to oversee and assess the use of the force, how we
are doing on the recruiting and attracting, as General Crall
talked about. Predominantly, efforts have been focused on Phase
1 and how we code the positions, identifying the work roles and
understanding where our shortfalls are and where we need to
focus our efforts. But, I think it's pretty safe to say, the
relationship between the three organizations are very closely
aligned. We meet on a regular basis, and our staffs are joined
at working the issues, be it with the coding or with the
hiring-and-retention piece.
Senator Tillis. This question is probably for all of you. I
spent virtually all of my professional career in technology,
first in research and development, then architecture
definition, deployment, and then project execution. Sometimes I
worked at Pricewaterhouse, so sometimes we would acquire
another firm, or at IBM we would acquire another firm, and it
would be standing alone, but it really didn't make sense to
have it stand alone for long. In most of your mission sets, I
can see a very rational basis for--the mission of the Marines
has its own kind of training, tools, tactics, it's separate
from the Army, the Navy, the Air Force. But, in this domain,
I'm struggling--except at the atomic level, maybe equipment
that you need to a service line--I'm struggling to understand
why we're not looking at a more innovative way to leverage--you
know, we had matrixed organizations, where we have the silos of
the service lines now, or we had market domains or technology
domains--but the common platform that we're talking about, can
you explain to me the rationale for having--and the risk of
having duplicative systems and environments and potentially
sub-optimizing some of the cross-learning? I'm not saying that
any one service should own it, but I'm wondering whether or not
we should be looking at a very different structure than the
current trajectory.
Lieutenant General Stewart. Let me take the first shot at
this one. In fact, what we've designed and what we've put
forward, Senator, is what we call the Joint Cyber Warfighting
Architecture. It is an integrated architecture. It includes
building common firing platforms, common set of tools, common
infrastructure, common cockpit for command and control. Now,
none of the services will do that by themselves, but we will
designate a specific service to build one element of that Joint
Cyber Warfighting Architecture.
Senator Tillis. So, a center-of-excellence sort of
capability.
Lieutenant General Stewart. So, for the training component,
the Army will take that persistent common training environment.
so, they will bring that into a common architecture, where U.S.
Cyber Command will set the standards, set the information
exchange protocols, and then each of the elements within our
subordinate elements within Cyber Command will build those
pieces and those components to a common standard. So, we get
the idea that we don't want each of the services build their
own unique tools, build their own training environment, build
it on--and so, now we've put that all together, and we
structured that into what we call the Joint Cyber Warfighting
Architecture.
Senator Tillis. And the government----
Lieutenant General Stewart. So, we're moving in that----
Senator Tillis. Okay.
Lieutenant General Stewart.--direction.
Senator Tillis. Because I'm going to be limited on time--I
have to step out briefly to go to a VA [Veterans Affairs]
Committee--I think that the--with respect to something that
General Fogarty and I talked about, and as Chair of the
Personnel Subcommittee, we have provided some authorizations
that, hopefully, are helping you be a little bit more
competitive recruiting and retaining resources. But, you can
expect that we'll have a hearing in Personnel to talk about
what more we can do.
General Crall, you made a very important point. If we're
giving you these authorities to use to be more competitive, but
we're also going to be expecting seeing how they've been used
and what the results are. We'll discuss those in the--we'll
discuss those in the hearing or in meetings that we'll have in
my office.
For many of you, I've got a lot of questions, and I know--
I'm looking forward to getting back so we can go to the closed
session, but I'll probably have a number of questions that are
structural in nature that'll be instructive to some of the work
we'll be doing on the Personnel Subcommittee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Senator Nelson.
Senator Nelson. General Stewart, how are we going to
objectively measure the readiness of Cyber Mission Force to
execute their mission?
Lieutenant General Stewart. So, we know we have a standard
now that the Chairman measures: personnel readiness, number of
folks that the services are providing, the level of their
training. So, we have a standard approach for measuring that.
Now, what we have to do is--in U.S. Cyber Command, is clearly
define the mission essential task and the joint mission
essential task that says, ``When a team is presented to us,
here are the things that we need them to do against a
particular target set.'' That is more than just the personnel.
That's easy objective measurement. The services are either
providing them at a certain level or they're not, they're
either trained to a certain level or not. Quite frankly, the
services are doing a remarkable job in presenting personnel.
Senator Nelson. Will the combatant commanders understand
this so-called meaningful set of metrics that you're talking
about, a standard?
Lieutenant General Stewart. There is no doubt in my mind
that we've identified intelligence requirements that are
essential for delivering capabilities, we've identified access
requirements that are important, we've identified tools and
munitions that are important, we've identified architecture
that's important to get to the target. Those are things that I
think any combatant commanders would understand, ``In order for
me to have an operational effect, here are the things that I
must have in order to deliver those outcomes.'' So, we think
that's pretty well-defined, and we'll continue to refine that
over time.
Senator Nelson. So, how are you going to make sure that the
services are giving you what you need in their training and
standards?
Lieutenant General Stewart. We've now mandated or laid out
the requirements for 1,000-2,000 level. That's the basic entry-
level training. The services are building capability and
capacity. We were just down in Georgia, had an opportunity to
see the things that the Army was doing. All of the services
understand the requirements. Quite frankly, Senator, I think
they're delivering a fairly capable--and I say that, ``fairly
capable,'' because we now have to take them, when they come to
Cyber Command, and take them from the journeymen and the
apprentice level to the mastery level. I think the services are
doing a remarkable job, and we have to--to go back to the
question on IONs, for instance, we have to now define whether
or not we have the right number of IONs on the teams. We
started with a number, based on our best guess of how we would
operate in the space. The reality is, we may not need as many
IONs, and that will change the training requirements and allow
us to do some things that are more creative to get our
workforce from journeyman, from apprentice, to a mastery level.
I--we're working to refine those as we speak.
Senator Nelson. General Fogarty, the Secretary assigned to
you the job of building a cyber range and training system. Why
aren't all of these separate ranges being consolidated and
moving to a cloud?
Lieutenant General Fogarty. Senator, currently, there are
so many ranges--there are so many ranges. I'm the executive
agent for the training ranges. There are a whole series of
test-and-evaluation ranges that TRMC [Test Resource Management
Center] is the executive agent for.
Services have built ranges. So, what we're trying to do at
this point is start to move these ranges, connect them. The
objective actually is to move them into the cloud. So, that's
the direction we believe we need to be at.
But, it's--I think it's similar to many challenges. Over a
long period of time, you had organizations that built their own
capability because they had an immediate need for it. We're at
the point now where we're--we've inventoried those. We know
what the advantages and disadvantages of the different ranges
are, how to better connect them. There are certain ranges that,
frankly, we'll probably have very limited interest in. It
doesn't mean there's not a requirement, but it's not for the
Cyber Mission Force. There's others that are very robust. We
don't want to duplicate that. We actually want to connect to
those ranges.
Senator Nelson. Can I assume that what you're saying is
that you're going to move to the cloud so that you don't have
to constantly upgrade the in-house computing infrastructure?
Lieutenant General Fogarty. Senator, that's actually a
succinct way of saying that, but we're----
Senator Nelson. Okay.
Lieutenant General Fogarty.--we're not there yet----
Senator Nelson. Let me----
Lieutenant General Fogarty.--for sure.
Senator Nelson. Let me ask General Crall. Cyber Command,
created in 2009, but it wasn't until 2013 that we actually
started to build the mission force. So, a number of years, we
had a command with no forces. It took another couple of years
for the Department to start the acquisition process for command
and control, network, infrastructure, weapons, and so forth.
Why the delays?
Brigadier General Crall. Sir, that's probably a question
that I'll have to go back and do some forensics to give you an
adequate answer. I can give you a few answers that I think
apply generally, and certainly not making excuses. But,
understanding what rightsizing looks like, I've learned the
challenges of moving anything quickly in the Department.
Matching resources, at the time they're available, with the
need and the planning that we're trying to execute has also
been a challenge. You could ask the same question on our
infrastructure, writ large. We've been modernizing our IT
infrastructure for 10 years, at least, in a holistic fashion.
Change has been difficult, but I think we're looking at the
problem set in a new way. And, in the closed session, we're
going to lay out a placemat for you to consider the ``eaches''
of how we're trying to do this in a way that makes some sense.
But, I'll tell you, sir, one of the areas that we're making
improvements on, General Stewart has already covered. We've
allowed too much of unique building. Lack of standards,
allowing each person to do what's right in their own eyes in
the process, and not holding individuals or services
accountable for a common standard, I believe, have all been
contributors, and significant contributors, to delays.
Senator Nelson. Thanks.
Senator Rounds. Senator Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. General Stewart, I appreciate that your
authority is focused on addressing foreign cyberactivities and
you're constrained in working on domestic matters. However, I'm
very concerned that foreign adversaries have abused the
borderless nature of the Internet to stage cyberattacks on our
domestic critical infrastructure, such as our election system.
How do you coordinate with domestic Federal agencies, as well
as local and State agencies, where much of our election
security is entrusted?
Lieutenant General Stewart. Well, we're generally not,
Senator, directly interfacing with the State and local levels.
We are, in fact, working closely with the Department of
Homeland Security. We've had a series of engagements to ensure
that they understand the threats as we see the threats, that
we've asked them to pass those indicators of compromises down
to the States so they can also see the threats. So, we're
working this, to borrow a phrase, by, with, and through DHS
[Department of Homeland Security] to get the insights that we
have, both from Cyber Command and from our NSA partners, turn
those into real indicators, and pushing those out to the State
and local level. Beyond that, we have limited authority to go
to the State and local levels.
So, if I were going to use this platform to send a message,
I suspect the message would be: As we move indicators of
compromise from DHS down to the State levels, how do we make
sure the States are loading those indicators of compromise onto
the appropriate sensors and then passing them back up through
DHS so that we can be proactive in going after the adversary in
gray and red space?
Senator Gillibrand. It also sounds, though, that your
limited authority is limiting for you. I'm concerned that, you
know, you have a mission to protect this country and our
critical infrastructure. That's part of Department of Defense
mission. But, you've not been given all the authorities you
need, in fact, to prevent or stop or respond to cyberattacks to
critical infrastructure if it has to do with the electoral
system. I think that's a mistake. So, one thing that I hope you
will do is seek the authorities that you think you need from
this committee, because, regardless of what the administration
believes, I believe that better coordination, more holistic
coordination, through the National Guard perhaps, so that the
States can have on-the-ground expertise that is feeding
information and data and intelligence back up to the
Department, so that you have a fully integrated defense system
for this country. Because if they were bombing a powerplant or
they were bombing, or even cyberattacking, a powerplant, you
might have a response, or a responsibility, but, because
somehow it's an election infrastructure, you have to stay
hands-off. So, I hope that you will seek authorities, as you
believe from your expertise you think you should have them.
Lieutenant General Stewart. In the closed session, we
should probably talk about the changes in authorities over the
last 6 months.
Senator Gillibrand. Correct.
Lieutenant General Stewart. If you had approached me 6
months ago about the limits of our authorities, I would tell
you that it would cause me great frustration.
Senator Gillibrand. Yes.
Lieutenant General Stewart. We're in a much better place
today, Senator.
Senator Gillibrand. I understand. But, I think there's even
more authority that you should seek, especially in giving more
support to the National Guard to continue to be eyes and ears
on the ground. We will--I will pursue this more in closed
session, because I think it's so vital.
General Crall, the military's ability to pay for high-
quality educational degrees through ROTC [Reserve Officer
Training Corps.] programs or direct accession programs for
skilled doctors and lawyers have undoubtedly played a key role
in recruiting talented individuals into our uniformed ranks. In
addition to paying cyber operators for the skills through
specialized compensation, I also believe we should leverage our
ability to pay for the educational--education of servicemembers
and civilians interested in joining the cyber workforce. Do you
believe that a cyber ROTC scholarship or advanced degree-
holders would help us to attract skilled military cyber
officers?
Brigadier General Crall. Ma'am, I do. I believe that's a
wise course of action. In fact, in the opening, we talked about
expanding all the opportunities. But, what I would also add to
that is, it's important for us to ensure that, when we track
this, we learn what's working and what doesn't work. I've found
that sometimes these things are a bit counterintuitive. We have
to apply our resources properly, as you would expect us to, and
we want to make sure, as the markets change, we follow those
trends very carefully and we apply our valued resources to the
right population groups and pockets.
But, I will say this. Every university--this is anecdotal,
this is me walking around and talking to people in these
environments--it is the most talked-about subject matter.
Whether we're at the service academies or out in the local
communities, we've got a large force of young civilians who are
very interested and eager to work in the cyber workforce.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, to our witnesses, for being here today.
Talent management is a critical component of the ability to
maintain cyber readiness. That means that we need to recruit
and retain for a set of skills that might not necessarily be
considered traditional military skills. I was glad to see that
talent management is included as a key component of the
Department's updated cyber strategy, which was released last
week. But, the strategy doesn't offer much detail on the
specifics of how exactly the Department plans to recruit and
retain men and women with the necessary skills.
So, can I start with you, General Crall? Can you be more
specific for us on the Department's long-term plans for cyber
talent management?
Brigadier General Crall. Yes, ma'am, I can. I'll also share
with you some shortcomings in that, because I think your
instincts of maybe--on some of the leads of understanding that
market, we may not be as refined as we need to be. I share--if
those are your concerns, I share some of those.
But, yes, when it comes to developing, you know, the
recruitment aspect, the military side has a very unique
recruiting campaign and designated workforce that gets after
that, professional recruiters who work very aggressively at
ensuring that message is out. In part of my opening, I
described a kind of a vacuum for the Federal Government side.
The civilian side, we really don't have, even the initial
tenets of our Cyber-Excepted Service, well known. So, we need
to get our message out, for one.
One of the ways that we could get that message out is to
ensure that we have very robust presences in areas where these
people are being trained--in academia, you know, our
universities, internships, exchanges with private sector--all
of those areas where we can get natural exposure to some of
those benefits that only we can provide. And, while it's still,
I would say, maybe anecdotal to express it this way, the people
that we've spoken to have explained very carefully their desire
to serve the Nation, do unique mission sets they can't do in
the private sector, and work with emerging technology. Those
are things that we can offer that--very unique to our
government. So, yes, we need to do more in that.
On the civilian side for Excepted Service, I had mentioned
we've covered a few to close some of the pay gaps. Congress has
given us the authority to address some of those, to include
regional pay gaps, compensation, higher step increases. But,
those are normally only known by those who are really at our
doorstep already. We need to do a better job of getting the
word out on what we can offer, and to pursue those individuals
at a very early start.
Senator Warren. Well, I'm very glad to hear this, General
Crall, and glad to hear your enthusiasm for this. You know, our
readiness is only as good as our people. If we don't recruit
and retain the best and offer the kind of career incentives for
people to stay in public service, then we can't mount an
effective cybersecurity defense or response. So, thank you for
that.
I have one other issue I want to raise. I am a big
supporter of the Defense Innovation Unit, which has an office
in Cambridge, for piloting new approaches to technology,
including cyber and software engineering. I want to ask about
one of those experiments. In 2016, the software system at the
Al Udeid Air Operations Center in Qatar was so outdated--are
you ready for this? In 2016, airmen were using a flight board
to manage aerial refueling. Now, in response, DIU [Defense
Innovation Unit] worked with the Air Force to sponsor a small
program, called the Kessel Run, to teach Active Duty Air Force
personnel how to code. In the span of 4 months, at a cost of
just about $2 million, they designed a software application
that automated the refueling. And because the airmen now have
the coding skills, they can continuously update that software
to meet the mission.
So, maybe I could ask you, Ms. Miller. Do you think having
in-house coding ability like this can also help improve our
cyber operational readiness?
Ms. Miller. Yes, ma'am, I do. That's actually one of the
skillsets. If you look at the list of specific skills that we
know we need to mature, that is one at the top of the list.
Senator Warren. So, we're trying to build this in-house. I
think that makes a lot of sense. I'm glad to hear it. But,
getting the Kessel Run Development Lab up and running was not
easy. I understand there was some real resistance within
segments of the Department. So, the question I want to ask is,
How can we normalize and scale these types of programs up and
make technical skills, like coding or cyber defense, a core
competency for Active Duty personnel and defense civilians?
General Crall, it looks like you want to answer.
Brigadier General Crall. Yes, ma'am. This is an exciting
question, because you're----
Senator Warren. Good.
Brigadier General Crall.--you're spot-on. We have young
folks, who are--have zero experience in doing this formally,
who are writing programs for us today. Going back to my answer
earlier, the proper venue and outlet for this is to ensure that
we have the right developers toolkits and the right coding
infrastructure, the lateral limits, left and right, so that
they know what standards to write these to. We spent a lot of
time and frustration in the Department of trying to make these
disparate software applications communicate with each other. In
the closed session, I can cover some of the solutions we have.
But, they are screaming for ways to contribute, and we are
taking that onboard, and it's showing great promise. But, there
is a lot of work ahead, ma'am.
Senator Warren. Good. So, I--again, I'm glad to hear your
enthusiasm, but I sure want us to concentrate on how we can
scale this up and normalize it within the Department.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, Senator.
Okay, this will conclude the open portion of the session.
My intention is to recess until 4 o'clock, and that will be in
SVC-217.
At this point, we will recess.
[The open portion of the hearing concluded at 3:42 p.m. The
Subcommittees recessed until 4:00 p.m. to meet for the closed
portion of this hearing.]
[Questions for the record with answers supplied follow:]
Questions Submitted by Senator M. Michael Rounds
redundancy
1. Senator Rounds. Lieutenant General Stewart, to serve in the
interim as the Unified Platform is developed, does Cyber Command have
or plan to develop an integrated database or organizing structure of
all tools and tool development efforts in the Services and its own
capabilities development group?
Lieutenant General Stewart. [Deleted.]
2. Senator Rounds. Lieutenant General Stewart, what redundancies
has Cyber Command seen in the Services and what efforts are underway to
mitigate them?
Lieutenant General Stewart. [Deleted.]
missing authorities and outstanding resource issues
3. Senator Rounds. Brigadier General Crall and Lieutenant General
Stewart, please provide a list of missing authorities, outstanding
resource issues and misallocations, and interagency issues that are
hampering the readiness of the Cyber Mission Force, to include
difficulties in using accesses and tools that originate with the
intelligence community.
Brigadier General Crall. My fellow witness, Lieutenant General
Stewart, is best positioned to provide a response regarding the
authorities related to the Cyber Mission Force.
Lieutenant General Stewart. [Deleted.]
tools
4. Senator Rounds. Lieutenant General Stewart, how much do each of
the Services and how much does CYBERCOM spend on tool development each
year? How does this compare with the NSA?
Lieutenant General Stewart. [Deleted.]
5. Senator Rounds. Lieutenant General Stewart, what efforts--
manning, technological, and policy--are underway to accelerate
CYBERCOM's tool development (including accessing and surveilling of
adversary networks)? How can Congress help?
Lieutenant General Stewart. [Deleted.]
information warfare
6. Senator Rounds. Brigadier General Crall, what efforts are
underway to integrate cyber operations with information operations,
electronic warfare and military deception especially at CYBERCOM? How
can Congress help in this regard?
Brigadier General Crall. [Deleted.]
7. Senator Rounds. Brigadier General Crall, how are the PCA and
CYBERCOM working with ASD(SO/LIC) and SOCOM to integrate information
warfare into cyber operations? What efforts are still required?
Brigadier General Crall. [Deleted.]
metrics
8. Senator Rounds. Lieutenant General Stewart, it is our
understanding that the readiness metrics CYBERCOM uses are built off of
those used for conventional forces, assessing manning, training, and
``equipment'' as percentages instead of measuring the capability and
capacity of a given team. How do these metrics compare to those used by
SOCOM, and is work underway to determine what the best metrics to
measure force capability are going forward?
Lieutenant General Stewart. [Deleted.]
9. Senator Rounds. Lieutenant General Stewart, please provide a
complete spreadsheet of the manning status of each required position--
including tool developer, exploitation analyst, and on-network
operator--for each team in the Cyber Mission Force.
Lieutenant General Stewart. [Deleted.]
timelines
10. Senator Rounds. Lieutenant General Stewart and Brigadier
General Crall, with the Department's cyber posture review and recent
policy changes, what is the expected future operational timeline from
identification of a target to insertion of malware?
Lieutenant General Stewart. [Deleted.]
Brigadier General Crall. I support the responses from my fellow
witnesses, Lieutenant General Stewart and Lieutenant General Fogarty,
on this specific question regarding the expected future operational
timeline from identification of a target to insertion of malware.
combatant commands
11. Senator Rounds. Lieutenant General Stewart, how many of EUCOM's
priority Russian targets has Cyber Command compromised? For how many of
these has Cyber Command developed or identified an extant tool? For how
many of these has Cyber Command delivered the tool?
Lieutenant General Stewart. [Deleted.]
12. Senator Rounds. Lieutenant General Stewart: How many of PACOM's
priority Chinese targets has Cyber Command compromised? For how many of
these has Cyber Command developed or identified an extant tool? For how
many of these has Cyber Command delivered the tool?
Lieutenant General Stewart. [Deleted.]
__________
Questions Submitted by Senator Kirstin Gillibrand
civilian personnel and cyber force mix
13. Senator Gillibrand. Brigadier General Crall, Cyber Command
appears in many respects to have been conceived along the lines of a
traditional military operational unit, meaning most immediately that
``operators'' are primarily military personnel. This has led to much
discussion about relaxing military standards to enlist or commission
nontraditional recruits for military service. Meanwhile, civilian
employees are not subject to these standards, cost less to the
Government in terms of pay, benefits, and training, and generally can
stay in one place longer as part of a successful career. Moreover,
civilian positions can be filled by individuals who are otherwise not
interested or qualified to serve in uniform, leaving those military
recruits available for other military duty. For those who are qualified
to serve, civilians can also serve in the Guard and Reserve as a
compliment to their civilian duties. What is your view of the proper
use of civilian personnel in building the cyber force?
Brigadier General Crall. [Deleted.]
14. Senator Gillibrand. Brigadier General Crall, what is your view
of the optimum force mix of military and civilian personnel?
Brigadier General Crall. [Deleted.]
15. Senator Gillibrand. Brigadier General Crall, what is the proper
force mix between Active Duty and Reserve personnel (who may also be
full time civilian employees within the command)?
Brigadier General Crall. My fellow witness, Lieutenant General
Fogarty, is best positioned to provide a response regarding the proper
mix between Active Duty and Reserve personnel.
16. Senator Gillibrand. Lieutenant General Stewart, among the
operational billets in Cyber Command, what percentage are filled by
civilian personnel?
Lieutenant General Stewart. [Deleted.]
17. Senator Gillibrand. Lieutenant General Stewart and Lieutenant
General Fogarty, are any restrictions on the hiring of civilian
personnel hampering your ability to hire more civilians? If so, please
explain.
Lieutenant General Stewart. [Deleted.]
Lieutenant General Fogarty. There are restrictions hampering the
Army's ability to hire more civilians within the cyber workforce. First
is the time requirement to acquire a Top Secret (TS), Sensitive
Compartmentalized Information (SCI), Counterintelligence (CI) Polygraph
(Poly) security clearance. Cyber professionals are required to obtain
and maintain a TS, SCI, Poly which could potentially take over one year
to obtain. There may also be an additional security vetting requirement
if the place of employment is located with the National Security Agency
(NSA) teams/workspace which may take an additional six months for
adjudication. The security requirements add significantly to the
timeliness of hiring and on-boarding a civilian employee, which may
dissuade applicants from applying and following through for these types
of positions. However, we are addressing this setback by authorizing
civilian new hires to train and work on unclassified mission sets until
such time as the security clearance vetting process is complete. Second
is the salary rate of cyber professionals working in the private sector
compared to that of DA civilians. Private industry can offer
significantly higher salaries, stock/share options, bonuses and
financial incentives, loan incentives, various types of paid leave
packets, daily meals, campus transportation, medical, dental, and child
care on work-site as well as an environment that's conducive and
attractive to cyber professionals. While dollar for dollar, the
salaries are incomparable, the Army can offer a wide range of
compensation and incentives that include recruitment, retention, and
relocation incentives, student loan incentives, accelerated salary
incentives, additional leave incentives, paid federal holidays, paid
sick leave, Thrift Savings Plan match incentives, Permanent Change of
Station (relocation) benefits and entitlements, coupled with the
standard DA civilian compensation packet to include a defined benefit
plan (pension) not normally offered in the private sector, plus the
stability of the Government workforce. Currently, however, when DA
Civilian compensation packages are compared to that of private
industry, the Army's inability to offer a comparable industry salary
may limit future recruiting and retention efforts of cyber operators.
18. Senator Gillibrand. Lieutenant General Stewart, Lieutenant
General Fogarty, and Brigadier General Crall, do you believe that
existing personnel authorities for military and civilian personnel are
adequate to build the cyber force to meet identified requirements?
Lieutenant General Stewart. [Deleted.]
Lieutenant General Fogarty. A holistic DOD strategy to building a
cohesive cyber workforce that includes the current authorities and an
industry level compensation program, for both military and civilians,
would reduce the retention and recruitment challenges and help
stabilize the current highly skilled cyber workforce while building the
future identified requirements. The 37 U.S. Code Sec.
353 limits skill
incentive pay to $1,000 per month, and proficiency bonuses to $12,000
per year for qualified cyber soldiers. While adequate for most military
career fields, these monetary incentives may not be competitive or
commensurate with that of other government agencies and private
industry in order to retain our highly skilled talent. Amending the law
to enable payments up to $5000 per month for skill incentive pay, and
$60,000 per year for proficiency bonuses, provides additional
incentives close the compensation disparity between private and
military/government sectors. Furthermore, this would enable the
services to establish a Cyber Proficiency Pay/Bonus scale similar to
that of the Medical and Legal Corps. Furthermore, increased incentive
may aid in the retention of the Army's highly skilled, cyber
professionals, who are routinely recruited by other government agencies
and private industry based upon their extensive training, knowledge,
skills and abilities, within key work-rolls. For DA civilians, the
current Direct Hiring Authorities (DHA) are adequate. However, the
variations between multiple DHAs may hamper the Army's ability to build
a cyber civilian workforce. Specifically, streamlined and flexible
hiring process would be beneficial to Army Cyber.
Brigadier General Crall. I support the responses from my fellow
witnesses, Lieutenant General Stewart and Lieutenant General Fogarty,
on this specific question regarding personnel authorities for military
and civilian personnel.