[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.A.S.C. No. 116-4]
MILITARY SERVICE ACADEMIES'
ACTION PLANS TO ADDRESS THE
RESULTS OF SEXUAL ASSAULT
AND VIOLENCE REPORT AT THE
MILITARY SERVICE ACADEMIES
__________
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
FEBRUARY 13, 2019
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-337
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL
JACKIE SPEIER, California, Chairwoman
SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
GILBERT RAY CISNEROS, Jr.,
LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
California, Vice Chair
PAUL MITCHELL, Michigan
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
DEBRA A. HAALAND, New Mexico
MATT GAETZ, Florida
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia
Jamie Jackson, Deputy General Counsel
Dan Sennott, Counsel
Danielle Steitz, Clerk
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Kelly, Hon. Trent, a Representative from Mississippi, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Military Personnel.....................
4
Speier, Hon. Jackie, a Representative from California,
Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Military Personnel.................
1
WITNESSES
Carter VADM Walter E., Jr., USN, Superintendent, United States
Naval Academy..................................................
30
Christensen, Col Don, USAF (Ret.), President, Protect Our
Defenders......................................................
5
Morris, COL Lawrence J., USA (Ret.), Chief of Staff, The Catholic
University of America..........................................
6
Silveria, Lt Gen Jay B., USAF, Superintendent, United States Air
Force Academy..................................................
31
Van Winkle, Dr. Elizabeth P., Executive Director, Office of Force
Resiliency, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Personnel and Readiness........................................
26
Williams, LTG Darryl A., USA, Superintendent, United States
Military Academy...............................................
28
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Carter VADM Walter E., Jr....................................
89
Christensen, Col Don.........................................
60
Morris, COL Lawrence J.......................................
64
Silveria, Lt Gen Jay B.......................................
100
Speier, Hon. Jackie..........................................
57
Van Winkle, Dr. Elizabeth P..................................
68
Williams, LTG Darryl A.......................................
74
Documents Submitted for the Record:
Air Force Academy email submitted by Ms. Speier..............
123
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
Dr. Abraham..................................................
127
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
Mr. Bergman..................................................
134
Ms. Escobar..................................................
132
Ms. Speier...................................................
131
MILITARY SERVICE ACADEMIES' ACTION PLANS
TO ADDRESS THE RESULTS OF SEXUAL ASSAULT
AND VIOLENCE REPORT AT THE MILITARY
SERVICE ACADEMIES
----------
House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Military Personnel,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, February 13, 2019.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:13 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jackie Speier
(chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JACKIE SPEIER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, CHAIRWOMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL
Ms. Speier. Welcome, everyone. We are somewhat late in
starting this hearing because all the women of the House and
Senate take a picture every year to draw attention to women's
heart health, and that is why we are all dressed in red today.
So if you see members who are of the distaff version coming in,
that is because that picture is still being taken right now.
But I think, without any objection, we will start with them
in absentia, and move forward. So this meeting will come to
order. My name is Jackie Speier, I am the chair of the
Subcommittee on Military Personnel, and I welcome all of you
who are here today, those who are witnesses, and those as
members of the audience.
I was profoundly disturbed when I read the Annual Report on
Sexual Harassment and Violence at the Military Service
Academies. The results show that after a decade-plus of
concerted efforts to address sexual harassment and assault, the
problem has only grown worse. I believe we all appreciate how
alarming these numbers are. I cannot stress enough that this
survey is among the best measures of the prevalence of unwanted
sexual contact and harassment at any university, company, or
organization.
The survey has been administered for over a decade with the
same questions and an expert-approved measurement. Sixty-eight
percent of the students participated. This isn't a blip, a
#MeToo bump, or some accident. It is a clear illustration of a
destructive trend and a systemic problem.
The report says that in 4 years, occurrences of unwanted
sexual contact increased from 327 to 747, more than doubling
the number of sexual assaults at the military academies. Now,
the term ``unwanted sexual contact'' is being defined in the
survey by asking very specific questions, which I am going to
read now, lest any of us think that this is some mild tap on
the buttocks.
The questions are: Sexually touched--the question is:
Unwanted sexual contact behavior. Sexually touched you, for
example, intentionally touching of genitalia, buttocks, breasts
if you are a woman, or made you sexually touch them. Attempted
to make you have sexual intercourse but was not successful.
Made you have sexual intercourse. Attempted to make you perform
or receive oral sex, anal sex, or penetration by a finger or
object, but was not successful. Made you perform or receive
oral sex, anal sex, or penetration by a finger or object.
Those were the questions asked and the answers to those in
questions doubled from 327 to 747. What makes this even more
disturbing is that the number of reported sexual assaults
occurring at the academies remained stagnant. That means the
numbers went up dramatically, but the numbers who actually
reported stayed the same.
Only 12 percent of assaulted individuals formally reported.
So we have to ask the question: Why is it that only 12 percent
of those who have been sexually assaulted, in the terms that I
have just spoken, did not come forward? Low report should be no
surprise given that half of those who did report were
retaliated against.
Thirty-seven percent of those who reported experienced
social ostracism, reflecting a culture defined by victim-
blaming. Out of these 747-plus assaults and 69 unrestricted
reports, the academies only convicted 4 perpetrators. Victims
report at their own peril. That is the message that is being
sent, because they are more likely to face consequences than
their perpetrators.
The case of Ariana Ballard and Stephanie Gross, former West
Point students who are presently--who had previously appeared
before this subcommittee, demonstrate the problem. Ariana, a
top swimming recruit was ostracized by her peers when she
reported that fellow swim team members had sexually harassed
her as a freshman. So who was punished? She was. She had to
train alone.
Stephanie was violently raped the same year, and an
investigation found insufficient evidence to bring charges
against her rapist. After Stephanie was raped again, she
considered not reporting, fearing that, again, no one would
believe her. Stephanie reported anyway and her attacker was
convicted of assault, but not sexual assault.
Stephanie and Ariana faced mounting retaliation in the form
of mental fitness and drug tests until they chose to leave the
academy. This type of treatment for the brave few that do
report deters the rest. Meanwhile, half of all women at the
academies reported being pervasively or severely sexually
harassed in the 2017-2018 academic year.
Think about that for a minute. One-half of the women cadets
and midshipmen reported being sexually harassed. That is 1,622
future officers who start their careers being harassed by their
peers. None of them reported formally, not one. Sex harassment
can be a precursor to assault. We need to appreciate that.
The survey also found that only 56 percent of the cadets
and midshipmen think their peer leaders make honest and
reasonable efforts to stop assault. So if the peer leaders are
not people you can trust, it shouldn't surprise us that they
are not reporting.
And despite the Department touting relatively high trust in
uniformed leadership, that number of 70 percent is worse than
it was 2 years ago. To live, study, and learn in an environment
where harassment is so pervasive, expected, and accepted, that
half of all women are harassed and none report is a stunning
rebuke in the confidence of the system and a stunning example
of perseverance by the young women.
My colleagues and I have had the privilege to appoint high
school seniors for admission to the academies. That is one of
the great privileges we have as Members of Congress. They are
consistently among the best, brightest, and most accomplished
young people in our communities. They are earnest, respectful,
and dedicated, and then they go away to school and we get this.
I wonder if we are missing something when we recommend them, if
we should be looking more closely at their moral fitness, or if
the culture at these schools is that corrupting. Perhaps it is
a little bit of both.
I do know this: Three out of the four high school seniors
that I recommended for admission this year are women. Women
will continue to attend the academies and serve our country.
All three academies' freshman class have at least 24 percent.
And I understand that next year, the numbers will grow. So the
number of women coming to the academies is only going to grow,
and that is why it is essential that we fix this problem.
These results don't call for tweaks and adjustments. The
superintendents have been touting incremental fixes made after
this survey were administered, but there is no reason we should
expect adjustments to change the overall trend. This report is
a scathing indictment of the academies' culture. We need to
expand our toolbox and use both carrots and sticks to hold
perpetrators accountable, and to deter others through serious
repercussions.
Academy leaders must promote a strong culture of dignity,
respect, educate students on right and wrong, and have zero
tolerance for violations. The superintendents have said they
are doing much of this, but the problem has gotten worse.
Leaders must earn students' trust by making good on promises to
impose severe penalties on predators. They must treat survivors
uniformly, modeling best practices from other academies. And
they must address the issues that stem from over 25 percent of
the students self-identifying as being problematic drinkers.
I guess my message really is quite simple. I am putting the
academies on notice. We are putting all of you in the situation
where it is time for us to recognize that this is a crisis, and
I intend to watch it like a hawk. You know, it is time for us
to elevate the brave women, and some men, who come forward, and
knowing full well that retaliation is likely, and instead, take
the kinds of actions against perpetrators that will finally rid
us of this rot.
Today we have two panels. During the first panel we will
have the opportunity to hear from outside experts who have
dedicated their careers to these sensitive issues. During the
second panel, the Department of Defense and the superintendents
of our military service academies will explain why their
current approach to this problem have failed, and how we can
rethink our approaches to sexual violence at our academies.
I look forward to hearing from all of you today. But before
I introduce our first panel, let me offer Ranking Member Kelly
an opportunity to make some opening remarks.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Speier can be found in the
Appendix on page 57.]
STATEMENT OF HON. TRENT KELLY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MISSISSIPPI, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY
PERSONNEL.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you to the Chair. First, I want to
congratulate Representative Speier on becoming the chairwoman
of this very important subcommittee on the very important Armed
Services Committee. I want to welcome our fellow members of the
subcommittee on both sides. I look forward to working with each
of you on all the issues impacting our service members and
their families.
I also am very troubled by the results of this year's
Annual Report on Sexual Harassment and Violence at the Military
Service Academies. Just as the nation continues to struggle
with an increase in sexual violence, it is clear that the
military and our service academies are not immune from this
crisis. Every cadet and midshipman is told from day one that
they must rely on each other in order to succeed at the
academy.
The vast majority of cadets and midshipmen treat each other
with dignity and respect and go on to distinguished careers in
the military. However, when a cadet or midshipman preys on
another through sexual assault or harassment, the betrayal is
profound and shakes the institution to its core.
These horrific crimes not only deeply impact the victim,
they do wide-ranging damage to the entire academy and to our
society as a whole. The academies have put enormous resources
and attention towards improving sexual assault prevention and
response; nonetheless, the problem seems to be getting worse.
While this is a multifaceted and difficult issue, one thing is
clear: The results of this survey are unacceptable, and the
leadership of the military service academies must redouble
their efforts in order to fix this immediately.
Therefore, I look forward to hearing from both of our
panels today about how to improve sexual assault prevention and
response. I am particularly interested to hear from the
superintendents about their plans to address this increase in
prevalence. I am interested to hear more about the efforts to
enhance preadmission screening in order to accurately identify
candidates who have character issues that may preclude their
admissions. I would also like to hear more about how the
academies are improving prevention and intervention efforts to
ensure they resonate with young cadets and midshipmen.
Finally, as a former district attorney who has prosecuted
sex crimes, I would like to learn more about how the academies
use the judicial and administrative authorities they have to
hold perpetrators accountable. One case of sexual assault,
violence, or harassment is one too many. And one case of sexual
assault that is not reported because of systemic problems is
unacceptable.
I want to hear how each of the service academies is
proceeding to address this critical issue. With that, I look
forward to hearing from both of our panels, and I yield back.
Thank you, Ms. Speier.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Ranking Member Kelly. Each witness
will have the opportunity to present his or her testimony, and
each member will have an opportunity to question the witnesses
for 5 minutes. We respectfully ask the witnesses to summarize
their testimony in 5 minutes. Your written comments and
statements will be made part of the record.
So now we will welcome our first panel. First, Retired
Colonel Don Christensen, United States Air Force, who is
president of Protect our Defenders. And, second, Retired
Colonel Lawrence Morris of the U.S. Army, Chief of Staff now to
The Catholic University of America. Welcome to both of you.
And, Colonel Christensen, you can begin.
STATEMENT OF COL DON CHRISTENSEN, USAF (RET.), PRESIDENT,
PROTECT OUR DEFENDERS
Colonel Christensen. Chairwoman Speier and Ranking Member
Kelly, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you on
this vitally important topic for our nation's security. As a
brief introduction, I retired after 23 years' service as an Air
Force JAG [judge advocate general]. During that time, I served
twice as a defense counsel, multiple times as a prosecutor,
including as the chief prosecutor for Europe and Southwest
Asia, and as the chief prosecutor for the United States Air
Force. I have served as a trial judge, and I had been selected
to serve as an appellate judge when I elected to retire.
For the last 4 years I have been the president of Protect
our Defenders, a human rights organization dedicated to
advocating for victims of military sexual trauma. We provide
attorneys free of charge, and I, myself, represent clients who
are going through the often hostile military justice process.
During this time, I have talked with hundreds of survivors,
including those from all the service academies.
As Congresswoman Speier has very succinctly and very
correctly identified, there is a huge problem with sexual
assault at the academies. The one thing that I really think
needs to be brought to this committee's attention is these
rates compared to the Active Duty force. Sixteen percent, just
about 16 percent of the women at the academies are sexually
assaulted. That is four times the rate of the Active Duty
force. For men, 2.4 percent. That is three times the rate of
the Active Duty force. These are sobering estimates, especially
when we compare to the Active Duty force.
Yet accountability for perpetrators is almost nonexistent.
Last year, only four offenders were convicted at a court
martial for their offenses, and a tiny handful were discharged.
This should be a wake-up call for academy leadership. The
failure to weed out perpetrators means that hundreds of sex
offenders are commissioned into the Active Force every year.
That should be very sobering. Every year, hundreds of sex
offenders are commissioned into the Active Force.
We can only imagine the impact this has on the military's
ability to address sexual assault and harassment throughout the
services. A service academy commission undoubtedly gives an
officer an advantage for the competition for promotions,
command, and ultimately the attainment of general and flag
rank.
The last three Chiefs of Staff of the Air Force and five of
the last seven have been Air Force Academy grads. The current
Chief of Naval Operations is a Naval Academy grad. The
academies have an impact on the Active Force much greater than
the actual numbers of their graduates. It is for this very
reason that Congress, the President, and the American people
must demand solutions to what is going on.
However, I fear the reality of the rampant epidemic of
sexual harassment and assault is not being accepted by
leadership. I also fear that leadership does not understand the
level of distrust that the survivors have of the chain of
command. When I talked to academy survivors, the constant I
hear is the fear of leadership: the fear that leadership won't
believe them; the fear that leadership will not hold the
offender accountable; the fear that leadership will drive them
from the academies if they report, and the numbers bear witness
to that.
Thirty-one percent of the Air Force Academy women, and 32
percent of the women at the Naval Academy, do not believe that
senior leadership is making honest and reasonable efforts to
stop sexual assault. Almost a third of the women attending
those two institutions do not trust senior leadership. Is it
any wonder that women are reluctant to report when they are
more likely to be forced out of the academies and then end up
paying hundreds of thousands of dollars in tuition than they
are to see their perpetrator held accountable?
Despite sexual assault being up 50 percent from 2 years,
and over double from 4 years ago, report rates as a percentage
have plummeted. Unrestricted reports, the kind of report that
allows us to prosecute a case, are actually down to 8 percent;
92 percent of the victims do not report in a way that can
result in an investigation.
We cannot solve this crisis if men and women are afraid to
report. And, again, what does this mean? That the perpetrators
are commissioned officers and future leaders on our Active
Force. Leadership controls every aspect of the discipline
process. It is time for them to acknowledge that this is in
their control, and it is time for them to ask, and for you to
ask, What tool have they not had for the last 20 years that
they need now? And what promise are they going to make that
they are actually going to carry out?
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Colonel Christensen can be found
in the Appendix on page 60.]
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Colonel Christensen.
Colonel Morris.
STATEMENT OF COL LAWRENCE J. MORRIS, USA (RET.), CHIEF OF
STAFF, THE CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY OF AMERICA
Colonel Morris. Thanks, Chairwoman Speier and members. I
will just try to highlight a couple of things from my prepared
remarks. It was my great honor to serve 30 years in uniform, 27
of them as an Active Duty judge advocate and 3 as a reservist
tanker in Milwaukee while I was in law school. I had a pretty
typical Army career, trying cases all over the world, later
supervising people who tried cases in normal installations and
in Bosnia, Southwest Asia. I had the privilege of advising
commanders, and later on, supervising counsel on both sides of
the courtroom, including when I served as the Army's chief
defense counsel, the one job that I did seek during my career.
I also was the chief prosecutor at Guantanamo Bay, and the
SJA [staff judge advocate] or general counsel at West Point. I
helped initiate the Army's training program regarding sexual
assault for prosecutors and defense counsel after I left the
Army, and then I have been at Catholic University since then.
I also served on the Response Systems panel from 2012 to
2014. I am the son and father of West Pointers, and the father
of a Marine. Today, I am just here giving my own opinions.
The four matters I would like to mention--and, first off, I
expect that I differ little in my biases and expectations from
Colonel Christensen. We had parallel careers in many respects,
starting from the same law school in Wisconsin, and I think we
both have a particular affection for and loyalty to people who
serve.
The first point about data. I am not an expert in looking
at the data that has been produced, and think at least it has
to be taken for the idea that there is an intractability to
this problem. It is not unique to the military, it is not
unique to the academies, but it is stark in the way it presents
itself, and poses the question of how to care for, make people
feel protected and confident in the system.
It caught my eye, though, that also there is a relatively
high level of confidence by the cadets and midshipmen in their
senior leaders. So we do expect more of the academies--but that
was a notable contrast.
Second, on training. The training is not a panacea, but it
does work and is part of the solution. I think in the military
we have what is sometimes considered the conceit that we can
train out of anything, and train to most any standard and
ambition or behavior. Tougher to do. Sexual behavior is harder
to train out of than, let's say, smoking or drug and alcohol
abuse and those sorts of things. And, in addition, society's
messages regarding sexuality are not always clear or consistent
to the emerging adult, and our students at the service
academies come from that same culture. Still, training plus
accountability is part of the approach.
Third point, on administering discipline. Where the
military is unique and particularly well-suited to the range of
sexual offenses because it has a uniquely rich range of
administrative and disciplinary options, it gives the
opportunity, rightly exercised, to snuff out the sort of
precursor behavior and hold somebody accountable, and send a
message of accountability to survivors and observers, besides
the person himself who sees the system against him.
I am sure as well, though, that my experience isn't unique
in having taken to trial in military courts cases that civilian
authorities would not pursue.
Last points on some fundamentals of the system and some
cautions. It seems that one of the key questions you are
tangling with is whether and how much to trust commanders and
their counsel to rightly exercise the considerable justice-
based instruments available to them. If you think commanders
are unsuited by training, not being lawyers, or perspective--
considering they might be self-protective or, for some reason,
disinclined to attack sexual misconduct--then you might want
another system or a great change to the current system.
My sense is that commanders are pledged to care for,
enforce good order and discipline, and that uniting of command
authority with discipline authority leavened by the required
and appropriate involvement of judge advocates along the way,
is appropriate to the requirements of the service and the
expectations of command. So disassociating that authority would
reduce accountability, and not enhance discipline in general,
nor in the realm of sexual misconduct in particular.
Last point, defending soldiers and coaching and training
defense counsel was the hardest and most rewarding work I did
in my career. I am also aware of the risks of unlawful command
influence, and believe, unlike our appellate courts, there is
such a thing as they call command influence in the air, that
some participants in the system might be inclined to convict or
adjudicate harsher punishment based on a perception of a
commander's predilections.
So in fixing the system, it is important still to take care
to preserve the integrity of that system for all participants.
Finally, we should be cautious in seeking justice-related
metrics such as preferral rates, conviction rates, average
sentences. They might provide some insight into the workings of
the system, but alone shouldn't be the major indicators of
success in combating sexual assault.
Thanks for the opportunity to be here.
[The prepared statement of Colonel Morris can be found in
the Appendix on page 64.]
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Colonel Morris.
Colonel Christensen, what is stunning to me about this
report is that we see the increase in sexual assault go up
100--I mean, 50 percent. And we see the incidents of
retaliation being such a factor in the unwillingness to report.
Why, in your estimation, has the prevalence of assault at the
academies gone up so much?
Colonel Christensen. Well, from my conversations with
cadets at the academy, there is a perception among many that
senior leadership does not care. And as you see, there is such
a lack of accountability. So for perpetrators, they understand
that the odds of them ever being punished are almost zero. They
probably have a better chance of being struck by lightning.
So there is absolutely nothing to dissuade those who would
commit a sexual assault from doing so. And then you have the
problem of trust. When the women and the men do not feel that
they can come forward and report without them suffering more
consequences than their perpetrator suffers, they won't come
forward.
Last, I believe 2 weeks ago, the Air Force Academy finally
got a conviction of a cadet for digitally penetrating another
cadet without her consent. He got a whole whopping 75 days of
confinement, while facing 30 years of confinement. So we have a
process that doesn't deliver a sentence that deters. And then
after this happened, from several sources at the academy,
cadets who have contacted me and said that there is a rampant
social media campaign shaming the victims. And that is the kind
of stuff that has to stop.
And it has to be an acceptance by leadership that this is
going on. I think one of the biggest problems is, is that
leadership hears these numbers but they truly do not
internalize them as a problem. And I am not necessarily talking
about the superintendents, I am talking about the people in
between the superintendents and the cadets.
I had an opportunity to meet with the vice commandant of
cadets at the Air Force Academy last year. I was representing a
young cadet that they were talking about kicking out after she
reported. I asked him, have you ever talked to a survivor when
it wasn't an adversarial process? And he said, I don't have
time for that. And to me, that was such the wrong answer,
because you will never know what survivors are going through if
the only time you talk to them is when you are trying to kick
them out of the institution.
So I think that those people that are in the middle need to
accept that there is a problem, and they need to be willing to
ferret out those who are shaming victims.
Ms. Speier. One of the issues that comes to my mind, having
spent time with all of the superintendents over the last few
days, is that there is really a difference that exists in how
they handle the cases. For instance, in some of the academies,
a victim can take a sabbatical. In others, they cannot. Some
may want to transfer to another academy, and that hasn't been
an opportunity made available to them. Some have wanted to--in
some situations, there is going to be recoupment, not just at
the junior and senior level, but at the freshman and sophomore
level where a cadet is found to have sexually assaulted.
Do you have any thoughts on whether it is time for us to
make sure that all the academies follow a similar process in
terms of the kinds of resources that are available to the
victim survivors?
Colonel Christensen. Absolutely. I think it is time for
them to have a unified front. That cadets and midshipmen
understand that they are going to be treated the same no matter
where they are going to school. You know, this has been a
complex issue that they have taken individually versus in a
unified manner. So therefore, you know, I don't think there is
enough of an effort to see what is working at West Point. Is
that going to work at Annapolis? Is that going to work at the
Air Force Academy?
I also, you know, one of the difficulties that we face in
the military is we have what we call the uniform military code
of justice, and the ``uniform'' doesn't mean what we are
wearing, it means that it is supposed to be the same. And each
service has their own way of doing things that often pull apart
what is actually supposed to be uniform. And I think there
would be great benefit for, especially in the academies, each
one of them, focusing on how do we do this jointly.
Ms. Speier. Thank you. Ranking Member Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you again, Chairwoman Speier. I am of the
view that we need to fully acknowledge the problem, and we have
a problem, and I think we are doing that. But we need to get to
work on fixing it immediately.
Mr. Christensen, what are some of the specific things that
service academies are not doing that they had should be doing
to reduce sexual assault and sexual harassment, from your
perspective?
Colonel Christensen. Well, I think the number one thing is
trust, and that trust results in reports. So, for example, in
the Air Force Academy last year, they had 29 reports of sexual
assault out of over 200 actual cases. Of those 29, 20 of them
are restricted reports, which for those, if you don't
understand, that means they can't be prosecuted. That means
only 9 people out of over 200 actually reported. And what did
that get? Well, it finally got one conviction.
I think that there is a definite value to training, I am
not anti-training, I just don't think it is the panacea. And I
think one of those things, as a prosecutor talking to a
prosecutor, is to acknowledge that prosecution is one way to
deter crime. Prosecution is another way to send a message to
survivors that we are going to take you seriously.
The second thing I would say is that I think this is a
problem across both the Active Force and at the academies, is
experience levels of the people who are acting as investigators
and acting as the prosecutors. The services have to commit to
making sure that we have the most experienced and best people
doing those jobs. We have a ton of talent in the military, but
they often get rotated out of those jobs very quickly.
And as a prosecutor I think you would agree with this, that
90 percent of the case is won or lost before it ever reaches
you by the great work done by investigators. And if they don't
uncover what you need, it is kind of tough to finish it up at
trial. So we need to make sure we have the best investigators
possible. And again, this isn't a slam on the people who are
doing it, they are very dedicated, very hardworking, but they
don't stay in those positions long enough to become the experts
they should be.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you very much. You know, as a former
commander who has administered UCMJ [Uniform Code of Military
Justice] up to the brigade level, and also as a former district
attorney and has seen the inside of both the grand jury and a
courtroom, I think that is very important to look at--how do we
collect the facts? How do we get the evidence? Because the case
is only as strong--so very good point, Colonel Christensen.
Mr. Morris, you have experience in dealing with these
issues in both the service academy setting and a civilian
university setting. What are the differences between how
civilian universities handle sexual assault and harassment
claims versus service academies? And are there any best
practices that civilian universities are using that we can
adopt?
Colonel Morris. The way in which they are differing is the
adjudicative process, the way in which they are similar and
should be--I am the rookie here.
There is similarity in prevention and education, and the
great difference is in adjudication. So I don't think there is
much difference in the way you have to smother your student
population with information about sexual assault and about
prevention and about dignity and respect and all of those
factors that contribute to somebody's behavior.
And as I mentioned before, you are taking a product of
society, and to some degree, reorienting those individuals. In
the adjudicative process, though, a great difference. Under
title 10, of course, there is the expectation since the ``Dear
Colleague'' letter produced by the Obama administration in
2011, to essentially set up amateur informal court systems,
adjudicative systems, and they have proved to be really tough
to manage. All coming from the right impulse of attacking this
behavior and having a system that has enough credibility that
it cares for the survivor and sends a message to the other
students that this process has the possibility of bringing
about justice. That it stings enough to correct that person's
behavior, hold that person accountable, and deter others.
The difficulty there is it is really quasi in being quasi-
judicial. You know, you are allowed to have counsel there, but
they can't speak. There is not direct cross-examination. All of
the things that are limited because they are just--they are
created and kind of cooked out of the university's processes.
So the contrast is the military system, of course, has that
full range of administrative and nonjudicial options and
corrective training and all that available to it, besides the
cases that are appropriate to get to a court-martial.
Mr. Kelly. I agree with Mr. Christensen that training
alone--we just can't train ourselves out of this crisis. But I
am at a loss to see how removing the commander and the
authority of a commander, which has many more tools than--I can
tell you as a former district attorney and prosecutor, has many
more tools available than just a prosecution side.
I am at a loss to see--do you know any way, Mr. Morris, in
which removing the commander from sexual assault prosecutions
improves this situation?
Colonel Morris. I think I understand where the impulse is
coming from, because it comes from a point of frustration of
feeling like we are many years into this and haven't been able
to crack it. While understanding that, my sense is almost to go
more in the other direction, to hold commanders more
accountable, to be still more demanding on those leaders to
turn this around, and to use all of the levers that are
available to them.
So the removal of them then makes them less accountable,
disincentivizes them, as opposed to providing extra incentives
and the appropriate pressure that the system can bring.
Mr. Kelly. Then my final question, Chairwoman Speier, and
this one I think is really important. Meeting with all the
service academy superintendents over the last week, one of the
things that--and DOD [Department of Defense], senior DOD
officials. One of the things that is apparent is you have got
dual competing chains of leadership, of leaders. You have,
number one, the superintendents and all the cadre that are
professional officers and soldiers and should conduct
themselves that way. And then you have the peer chain of
command and the peer pressure from a group. And having three
children of my own, I understand sometimes the peer pressure
can be greater than parental or teacher pressure.
And so what can we do to reduce the amount of peer pressure
so that they feel comfortable among their peers reporting, and
also feel that same peer pressure to keep them from doing
sexual assaults or harassment. And that is to both--to Mr.
Morris also, I guess.
Colonel Morris. I mean, one of the unhappy results of this
long-term struggle at all institutes of higher education is
that there is a pretty well-understood set of best practices in
terms of education and prevention. You can vary from school to
school, but there is an understanding of hitting them--I mean,
at our school, you have to do some online training before you
walk into class your first day of school in August. And then
they have mandatory training all along the way. There is this
thought of what the industry calls booster shots at each year.
So that as their perspectives on their world change, you are
catching them again, and you are trying to reinforce the right
behavior.
So it is the sustained aspect of it more than anything
else.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Chairwoman Speier, and I yield back.
Ms. Speier. Thank you. Mr. Cisneros.
Mr. Cisneros. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Colonel
Christensen, could you explain to me just the difference
between restricted and unrestricted reports?
Colonel Christensen. Sure, I would be happy to. So about
2004-2005 timeframe, Congress looked at the reporting problems,
and one of the problems was that many victims were looking for
mental health treatment or medical treatment, talk to an
attorney, talk to a chaplain or something. But when they did
that, because we don't have, for example, medical privilege in
the military, they would go to the ER [emergency room], say, I
was just raped, I just want treatment, I am not looking for an
investigation, but they had to be reported.
So Congress said, Hey, we need to do something about that.
So they gave the option of restricted reporting. And so
restricted reporting allows the survivor to go to mental
health, go to medical, go to the SARC [Sexual Assault Response
Coordinator], go to a victim advocate, go to an attorney, go to
the chaplain, and get whatever service they believe they need
without it starting a corresponding investigation.
An unrestricted report is if the military finds out in any
other way that there has been a sexual assault, by law that
must result in an investigation, and by law that investigation
must be done by one of the criminal investigative services,
NCIS [Naval Criminal Investigative Service], CID [Army Criminal
Investigation Command], OSI [Air Force Office of Special
Investigations]. And so, if a survivor tells her commander,
that is unrestricted. If a survivor tells a friend, that is
unrestricted. If a survivor tells OSI, that is unrestricted.
Ms. Speier. But that victim also still gets services as
well?
Colonel Christensen. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Cisneros. So you just kind of said--can you go through
that again? Who are mandatory reports? If a victim comes to an
individual there at the academy, or even the military, who is
required to report that sexual assault?
Colonel Christensen. Anybody other than--anybody who is
wearing a uniform, other than the SARC, the victim advocate,
attorney, such as a special victims attorney, medical, mental
health, chaplain. So if they tell anyone else, that is a
mandatory report.
Mr. Cisneros. So according to this report and according to
your statement, 92 percent of the victims are choosing to do a
restricted report rather than to go and tell somebody who would
have to then report it?
Colonel Christensen. Well, what--actually 92 percent aren't
telling anyone.
Mr. Cisneros. Okay.
Colonel Christensen. About 4 percent, depending on which
academy you are at, about 4 to 8 percent are doing restricted
reports, and somewhere around 6 to 8 percent are doing
unrestricted reports.
Mr. Cisneros. Okay. Colonel Morris, with your experience at
a university--a civilian university, if somebody came to an
individual or doctor there at the university, would that
doctor, physician, counselor, be required to report that
assault?
Colonel Morris. They would not, only under the narrow areas
in the law where there is mandatory reporting, and of course,
that is mainly of minors.
Mr. Cisneros. Okay. All right. So one of the problems I
see, and I understand the concern of the victim, right? We want
to take care of the victim and have their privacy, but if the
numbers are continuing to increase where they don't feel
comfortable to where they can report it and it is going to be--
people are going to go and be held accountable for their
actions, we are in a situation now, like you said, where sexual
harassers, people who commit sexual assault are going out into
the military service now, more or less maybe with the
opportunity to do it again and commit that crime again.
What recommendation would you have to get around this to
where we can go and make the victim feel comfortable where they
can do an unrestricted report?
Colonel Christensen. Number one is understand what a
survivor is going through. You know, somebody who has been
sexually assaulted is usually suffering from PTSD [post-
traumatic stress disorder], PTSD that is going to affect their
ability to succeed. A lot of times it can result in minor
misconduct. It can also result in counterintuitive behavior and
destructive behavior.
What we see too often is that the academies turn that
natural impulse from being a survivor into a reason to kick you
out, and that is the message that is being sent. The second
thing I would say is making sure survivors understand that if
they choose to want to pursue justice through a court-martial,
that that is something that if the evidence is there, it is
going to be taken seriously and done.
I think commanders have a role, regardless of who makes the
ultimate decision to prosecute. I just think that the person
who makes the ultimate decision to prosecute should be a very
experienced, seasoned JAG, not a commander. What needs to be
understood is that within the military there are 14,000 or so
commanders. There are only about 400 of them that have general
court-martial convening authority, and only about 140 of them
actually use it.
So commanders have a role every day that comes short of
prosecution. And when we talk about non-judicial punishment, we
talk about administrative actions that Colonel Morris talked
about, those all still exist. But a member--but a survivor has
to have faith. There was a survey done by the Iraq-Afghanistan
Veterans of America that was just released a couple weeks ago,
and they asked thousands of veterans and Active Duty members,
would you be more likely to report if a prosecutor made the
decision than a commander? Over 50 percent said yes, only 3
percent said no.
So I think professionalizing the justice system would go a
long ways to doing that.
Ms. Speier. All right. Your time has expired.
Mr. Cisneros. I yield back my time.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Abraham.
Dr. Abraham. Thank you, Madam Chair. As a medical doctor, I
can tell you it takes extreme courage to--when you are an
assault victim and survivor to step out of the shadows and tell
your story. So I agree. This question is for both of you
gentlemen.
I do believe the academies are trying to work this out and
find the right solution. Specifically, for both of you, what
programs have you seen that work? And what programs would you
change to help allow that survivor, that victim to step out?
Colonel Morris. I don't have a program as such to
recommend, I just have watched programs now, particularly when
I served at West Point, and then watching it in the civilian
world. The greatest thing is to make no assumptions about the
experience or perspective of these 17-, 18-, and 19-year-olds
as they come through the door. And to work from a standpoint
kind of institutional humility on information they would need
to make right decisions.
We have a little more freedom at a private Catholic school
to fully bring out issues of how those choices are made and
framed. But the biggest thing is to have a plan that isn't
perceived by the students as sort of this obligatory burst of
stuff, and then they don't hear about it again or then there
is, you know, a display or something later in the year.
It is a, you know, prepared, planned out, sustained program
that grows as the student works its way through the school, is
the greatest part, because you don't lose them. And then they
have a sense that they really must take this seriously, they
are talking to me about this again.
Dr. Abraham. So a continuing education----
Colonel Morris. Certainly.
Dr. Abraham [continuing]. So to speak. Colonel Christensen,
do you have any comments?
Colonel Christensen. Well, this isn't unique to the
academies, but I think one of the most important things that
has been done, and this is, again, a result of the action by
Congress, was the creation of Special Victims Counsel, Victims
Legal Counsel program. I think that is the most ground-changing
legislation that has been passed concerning military justice.
It is a game-changer for survivors because they have somebody
in their corner. And beyond that--I will give General Silveria
credit, he speaks passionately. I think those words need to be
heard.
One of the problems, though, with command being in charge
is if General Silveria speaks too passionately, speaks
critically of certain processes, or any of the other
superintendents do, as Colonel Morris rightfully talked about,
that creates the perception of unlawful command influence. And
it is one additional reason why I think commanders need to be
freed to be advocates for change without having the burden that
if they talk too much as a commander, too much as somebody who
says this is unacceptable, that it creates unlawful command
influence ideas.
Dr. Abraham. Okay. And the second question, but again, to
both of you, the way I understand it, most of the retaliation
is from the peers. What can we do to prevent that? Colonel
Morris, I will start with you.
Colonel Morris. And I don't have a particular perspective
on that other than in my prep for this, that really struck me,
that there seems to be a substantial amount of that, plus you
see the great contrast in the statistics between the cadet
trust of their peers and the cadet trust of the leaders, a
really high level, 80 percent, more or less, I guess, 70--in
the 70s and 80s of leaders, and in the 40s and 50s of their
peers. So as you are looking at how do we direct things, the
peers always have the greatest influence. And in the academies,
more so, because your life--you don't have much volition in how
you live.
So just looking at it as somebody who once served there and
looking at the new data, if I were to look where to
concentrate, it would be on building that trust and changing
whatever is afoot there that makes the peers not a trusted
source of support and encouragement and deterrence.
Dr. Abraham. Colonel Christensen, do you have a comment?
Colonel Christensen. I would say that there needs to be
greater attention to social media and the impact of social
media on shaming of victims. From the clients I talked to, that
is a huge problem is the social media bullying. I know that is
not necessarily easy for the academy to follow, but I think
they should make efforts to see what is going, and then when
they see that that is happening, for example, the people
shaming the victims in the case last week, that they need to
speak out about it--leadership needs to speak up.
Dr. Abraham. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Speier. For the new members, let me just point out that
when the plebes come to the academies, they are overseen by the
senior leadership of the institution. As they matriculate into
the sophomore and junior years, they are overseen by senior
leaders within the actual military academy, who are also
cadets. So it is cadet leadership that is overseeing
sophomores, juniors, and seniors for that matter.
All right. We will now go to Ms. Haaland.
Ms. Haaland. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you both for
being here today. And what roles and responsibilities do senior
academy leaders have in preventing and responding to
occurrences of sexual assault and sexual harassment at military
service academies? And, second, how do you believe senior
leaders should be held accountable for continued increased
rates of the USC [unwanted sexual contact] at those academies?
Colonel Christensen. Well, I think the role is the central
focus of each academy, what can the superintendent do? They are
the voice. For those who haven't served in the military, I know
many of you have, when you are a cadet, people like General
Silveria and the other superintendents are gods, and their
words matter.
And so being that vocal person, holding people accountable,
whether it is people on their staff who are retaliating,
holding cadets accountable who retaliate. I think retaliation
is just one of those huge problems that they really need to
tackle.
And I am sorry, your second question was?
Ms. Haaland. Excuse me. How do you believe senior leaders
should be held accountable for a continued increase in rates?
Colonel Christensen. Well, I say this mindful that they are
sitting next to me. I would say that there are certain times,
you know, we need to let people go, move them on if they aren't
getting the job done. There seems to be, institutionally now in
the military, a reluctance to hold senior leaders accountable.
You know, General Eisenhower during World War II fired, I
think, half his generals over the war.
It is almost rare--it is exceptionally rare that a general
is ever told now, you are just not getting the job done, time
to move on. And I think that is it. You know, how many times do
you get to fail before you are fired?
Ms. Haaland. Thank you.
Colonel Morris. I agree. I don't have much to add other
than the superintendents are just phenomenally in charge of
those institutions, even in some ways greater than a division
commander or some equivalent in the field. So they are able to
marshal all of that authority and prominence in constructive
ways.
When I was the staff judge advocate at West Point, one of
the things our superintendent did was went to a lot of women's
sports games more than he went to men's, just one micro piece
of making clear that we really all are part of the same team.
But it then requires at times to leverage that prominence and
that power to potentially be unpopular by being just inflexible
on matters like sexuality in particular, and driving home in
all of the ways you can with those peer and near-peer levels.
And accountability, same thing. The traditional Army military
methods of holding senior leaders accountable is, sure, an
appropriate outcome.
Ms. Haaland. Thank you so much. Madam Chair, I yield my
time.
Ms. Speier. Thank you. Mr. Bergman.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thanks to both
you, Colonel Christensen and Colonel Morris, for your decades
of service, because as SJAs, and as legal advice to commanders,
good commanders rely on you for good sage advice to make wise
decisions on behalf of whatever unit they are in command of.
That is not easy, and it is not exact.
Colonel Christensen, you mentioned--you used statistics
comparing academy to Active Duty. Did your Active Duty
statistics include a breakdown of officer and enlisted?
Colonel Christensen. It does, although I could not, off the
top of the head, tell you what it does or what those are.
Obviously, in the Active Force crime rates are higher among the
young----
Mr. Bergman. The point is, you enter the academy at the age
of roughly 18?
Colonel Christensen. Right.
Mr. Bergman. You are coming out of high school. There is a
pretty good chance you are going to enter the enlisted ranks at
the age of 18 or fairly close?
Colonel Christensen. Correct.
Mr. Bergman. And if you are going into an officer program,
you know, you are going to enter--as you become an officer, it
is going to be, you know, you are going to be 22, 23.
Okay. Mr. Christensen, in your testimony you said that
Congress needs to either, quote, ``Empower military prosecutors
to lead the process and decide whether to prosecute cases, or
if necessary, turn over all academy cases to the relevant
civilian justice systems,'' end quote. However, back when you
were on Active Duty you successfully prosecuted many cases that
civilian jurisdictions simply refused to.
And my understanding is that the services still prosecute
sex-related offenses that would never be taken to trial by
civilian prosecutors. What is the basis then for believing, at
this point, that the civilian system would be better?
Colonel Christensen. Well, yes, I have prosecuted many
cases, and I have prosecuted cases that were declined by
civilian systems. I think to remember, too, is that there are
cases being prosecuted right now in the civilian system that
the military would not have prosecuted.
Mr. Bergman. What precipitated the change, because you were
on one side and you were successful. Is there some tool or
whatever that you used or the folks on your team used to
successfully do these that no longer exists in the military
side?
Colonel Christensen. There is no tool that--the difference,
but what we are looking at is a systemic failure at the
academies, and I did mention that----
Mr. Bergman. So what you are--what I hear you saying then
is that we have a long-term systemic failure that has now
fallen outside the realm of the services' ability, in this
case, the academies' ability to utilize the UCMJ effectively?
Colonel Christensen. Well, it is clearly not being used
effectively, if you only have four convictions. There were
about 70 actual reports that were unrestricted, only 4 result
in a conviction. That tells me we are not doing a good job of
that. I am not----
Mr. Bergman. What has changed?
Colonel Christensen. What has changed since when?
Mr. Bergman. Well, what caused the change?
Colonel Christensen. I am sorry.
Mr. Bergman. Well, if you were successful but now we are
not being successful, what has changed?
Colonel Christensen. Well, I can arrogantly say that I am
not there anymore, but----
Mr. Bergman. That is a fair assessment. Any good commander
has good faith in their own ability.
Colonel Christensen [continuing]. That is not the case.
Mr. Bergman. Well, I will tell you what, before we run out
because my time is--Mr. Morris, do you have any comments on
that particular situation?
Colonel Morris. On the issue of----
Mr. Bergman. Of basically transitioning the cases to
civilian as opposed to under, you know, under the UCMJ as we
would do it now.
Colonel Morris. I do, just because I have thought about it
a lot, and it is the thing that all of us discussed and argued
about among ourselves as we worked our way through the system
from both sides. So I have a pretty strong sense that a system
that reinforces the authority of commanders in military justice
is appropriate to the expectations we have of commanders. That
you have to unite the responsibility, you know, the
comprehensive responsibility that a commander has for his or
her people is like nothing else in society. And to extract the
ability to bring discipline from that makes that commander less
effective.
And it is not to say all commanders are the perfect fonts
of wisdom or anything. It is not a solitary undertaking. It is
understood to be, in most respects, with the counsel of a judge
advocate, and you know, the rules for court-martial require
that a judge advocate certify that there is sufficient evidence
to go forward in a case to begin with.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you. I see my time has expired, and I
yield back.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
And thanks to you all for being here as well. Nice to see
you, Colonel Christensen, again. I know we were working on
these issues for many, many years, and rather than go back and
review some of that, there are a few more specific questions I
had.
One is, Colonel Christensen, you mentioned that one of the
good stories out of this is the special victims' advocate, and
I would agree with that. I think that we have at least had good
reports coming back from time to time, that the training and
the ability to actually testify on behalf of a victim was
very--made a big difference really in the way that the victim
was seen, I think, and understood.
Do you feel that that is so in the academies, that the role
of that Special Victims' Counsel is one that you see reflected
even for Active Duty the same, or is there a difference?
Colonel Christensen. I think they are probably similar.
Going back to what I talked about before though, what I see is
a lack of experience. Special Victims' Counsel, all the ones I
have dealt with, are very dedicated, fighting very hard for
their clients. But for many of them, the first survivor they
ever talked to is when they were Special Victims' Counsel, and
they never talked to one before.
I can't specifically speak to all the Special Victims'
Counsels and VLCs [Victims' Legal Counsel] at all three
institutions, but the ones I deal with are trying. But what I
have seen, my experience with them, is that mistakes made by a
lack of experience that have resulted in less justice than I
think could have been.
Mrs. Davis. Okay. Thank you. I wanted to double-check with
that.
And, Colonel Morris, I know that you have had that regular
university experience. It is a Catholic university, perhaps
there are some different expectations there as well. But could
you speak to really the differences that you see, because we
would think it would be cultural, perhaps.
I am particularly concerned that as sophomores, there is a
difference at the academies in the rate of reporting that we
have seen. One can suggest that perhaps the pressure on
students is different as freshmen. As sophomores there is a
little bit more freedom.
What do you think is different? Because I am wondering
whether--if you were to look at all that goes on in the
academies, is there any difference, you think, between the
pressure that young people are under? We know that it is tough,
academically it is tough, socially it is tough, physically it
is tough. I mean, there are differences in--how do you compare
that to university?
Colonel Morris. I think, no doubt, there is an intensity at
the academies that there isn't an equivalent to in many
civilian universities. The harder question out of that is then
what out of that entire package of, you know, heavy
regimentation, you know, a literal regimentation on so many
parts of your life, is there any correlation between all of
that and what looks to be some reluctance, or some lack of
confidence to report?
You know, does it relate to how we are running the academy?
Does it relate to always being in a minority, right? No matter
how high the numbers are, you still have three-quarters, 80
percent, 20 percent split. And when you are looking at all the
peer relationships, which seems to be such an ongoing concern,
it is both with the men, but also with other women. You know,
and are there aspects of even energizing that subpopulation of
upper-class women to help to fix that----
Mrs. Davis. Do you see any reluctance to take a look at
that on the part of the academies, on the part of others who
deal with this issue? I mean, how central is it? I am not
suggesting that that alone is something that we need to be
aware of, but I am just raising that question as we look at
those statistics.
You know, it is interesting to note the difference between
freshmen and sophomores and going onto juniors. So perhaps that
is something that--and I hope our superintendents are going to
address that in a little while.
What--my time is running out. What--any last-minute thought
about that?
Colonel Morris. I am outside my competence on current
academy operations.
Mrs. Davis. Okay.
Colonel Morris. But, you know, in--we have looked at--we
had, for a while, a declining order of confidence as people got
to be--as women got to be juniors and seniors. We expected it
to be otherwise. And what it reflected at that time was they
had kind of a legacy perspective of a not very strong reporting
culture.
And then we saw that change with the next wave who worked
through, which just reinforced the idea that a continued drum
beat, then we ended up with juniors and seniors, previously
with less faith, then increasing the faith through all 4 years,
increasing their trust in the system through those years.
Mrs. Davis. Okay. Thank you. I think my time is up, Madam
Chair.
Ms. Speier. Your time is expired. I would say, Mrs. Davis,
that one of the things we should look at, though, with the
Special Victims' Counsel, is how they are being utilized,
because with one of the victims that I spoke with, she only
ever talked to her Special Victims' Counsel by phone, so we
might want to evaluate the actual exchanges that take place and
whether we need more resources there.
Ms. Cheney, you are next.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman, and
thank you for holding this important hearing. I commend you and
our witnesses for being here today.
This is an incredibly difficult set of issues that both of
our witnesses, I think, have pointed to the fact that it is
something we are dealing with across the nation, certainly at
our service academies but at, you know, probably every single
institute of higher learning. And looking for ways that we can
address the issue, that we can effectively address the issue,
and that we can reduce the numbers is a priority for every one
of us.
I wanted to ask a couple of questions. Colonel Christensen,
you began talking about the issue of restricted reporting
versus unrestricted reporting. And it sounded to me like you
were saying that the numbers, in terms of cases that are
brought to prosecution, are clearly affected by the fact that
some of the reports are restricted. Can you address that?
And I think we all share the view that it is very important
for victims to be able to get help and support without telling
them they must absolutely go public. But it sounds to me like
you were suggesting that the restricted reporting is some sort
of a difficulty or a challenge.
Colonel Christensen. Yes. As a prosecutor, you are
frustrated by a restricted report because you know that there
is a crime out there that you can't address. And it is not
without controversy, restricted reporting versus unrestricted.
Ms. Cheney. But are you advocating changing that?
Colonel Christensen. No. No. And the reason I am not is
because for survivors, they tell us it is very important.
Ms. Cheney. Exactly. Thank you. I appreciate that.
And then, one of the topics that we haven't addressed yet,
and I would like to hear both of the witnesses' perspective on
this, is the issue of alcohol. And I think any conversation
about sexual harassment, sexual assault on college campuses,
including at the service academies, has to get into this issue
of alcohol. And I would be interested to hear both of your
perspectives on what we can better do at our academies on that
issue in particular, as it relates to these set of attacks?
Colonel Christensen. Yeah. I think that is a great
question, Representative Cheney. Obviously, alcohol is a
factor. I think it is too easy to look at as a panacea, if we
get rid of alcohol, it goes away. Well----
Ms. Cheney. No, there is certainly no panacea on that.
Colonel Christensen. Yeah, it won't go away.
I do think de-glamorization of alcohol is important, you
know. And I think at the academies, it is particularly
important, because we are talking in a college atmosphere. And
I think that is where a lot of this responsibility goes on the
seniors at these academies, who are the legal drinking age, to
ensure that they are setting the right example.
So, for example, I have, you know, talked to academy grads
who have said, Yeah, I remember when I was a first-year being
ordered by the senior to find alcohol for him. And my job was
to bring him a case of alcohol, you know, and you were supposed
to leave it in the staircase. Okay. That is something that
needs to be rooted out. You can't have a culture that allows
that.
So, you know, getting at alcohol clearly is something that
reduces a risk factor for sexual assault.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you.
Colonel Morris.
Colonel Morris. I think you can't emphasize that enough.
Alcohol plus youth plus first-time unsupervised, there is a
giant correlation, and I think an indisputable one. And it is
both the formal stuff, how do you keep it away, the informal of
managing it even if a person is going to drink, and then
letting other things go on.
You know, there used to be a discussion at West Point
about, you know, when the Firstie Club would close and the
seniors would stream their way back to the barracks, not all of
them sober. You know, we always talk about the harder right. Is
the harder right some serious crackdown that makes clear to
those peer leaders that you don't, you know, take the guys to
New York City to drink underage, but you really do step up and
provide an example, you know, an unpopular, constructive
example that has an impact on things like the rates of assault
that you see.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you. And I think, again, I am sure all of
us on this panel agree that we need to do better across the
board. But I would like, Colonel Morris, to get your
perspective on, you know, as we are looking for ways to do
better and to improve the system, and we look at what is going
on in the civilian world and we are looking at the possibility
of removing these cases from the command authority, is there
something that you see in the civilian world, particularly on
our college campuses, that would make you think that would
somehow be more effective?
Colonel Morris. No. And we have had a lot of--we have a
good relationship with the MPD [Metropolitan Police Department]
here in Washington. But, of course, of course, there is a
reluctance to try the marginal case in the military. And I am
generalizing from my experience, but just not my personal one,
but of my time serving, is much more willing to try the close
case, willing to take a chance and lose the close case for the
collateral benefit of serious solidarity with the victim and a
person knowing you are still brought through the court martial
process, even if you escape un--not convicted. You have
exercised the process in a way that has an impact on those who
observe it, and not just the principals involved in that case.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you very much. My time is expired.
Ms. Speier. It is expired.
Mrs. Luria.
Mrs. Luria. Didn't the bell ring for votes?
Ms. Speier. They have called for votes, but there is 10
minutes left and we are going to continue until about 5 minutes
before, because we want to try and finish this panel before we
bring the superintendents in.
So Mrs. Luria.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Well, thank you very much for being here
today and talking about this important issue.
I just wanted to quote back Mr.--or, Colonel Morris, a
comment that you made in your opening remarks that you were not
an expert in looking at the data. And I just wanted to note
from my review of the data that there seemed to be some sharp
disparities in the data.
It seems that, you know, the number of women that the
academies over time--we just passed the 40-year mark of having
women at the academies. Myself, I am a graduate from
approximately 20 years ago. Are we normalizing this data at all
as the number of women at the service academies grows, based
off of the number of women in the population at the service
academies?
Colonel Morris. I can't answer that for you.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. And there was a reference by both of you
early on in your remarks that we have seen a 50 percent
increase over the last year. And I am looking at the data and I
am looking at, you know, first, the number of reports for West
Point, for the Military Academy, went from 43 to 48 reports.
And then--well, the way that it is estimated, so cadet--
this is the blue dots on the chart--cadets estimated to have
experienced unwanted sexual contact based on the survey
prevalence rates. The best I can tell is that this is an
extrapolation from the number of reports to correlate to the
number of incidents that happened.
And if you look at that from the 2015-2016 academic year to
the 2017-2018 academic year at the Military Academy, for
example, it looks as though this jumped from 129 to 273, which
is an alarming amount. However, if you are basing it off the
number of reports, which more than doubled themselves, could
this not indicate that we have an improved reporting rate
versus an increased number of actual incidents?
It is very unclear the way the methodology of the report is
written and analyzing the data, you know, how such a
significant jump can take place in those--that 2-year period,
and to discount the fact that actually reporting has gone up,
because reading the comments of what the superintendents at
each academy has done, it actually shows that they have taken a
lot of creative measures to improve reporting.
And I did have the opportunity to sit down with the
superintendent from the Naval Academy earlier this week, and
just the simple effect of, you know, having moved the location
of the person that you go report to to a more out-of-the-way
spot that was not as visible, you know, when midshipmen wanted
to go report, had a significant impact on their, you know,
willingness to report in what they felt to be a more
confidential way.
And also during the earlier remarks, I heard you say that
senior leaders trust, so trust in senior leadership that people
would report, was an issue. And I read the report, and, you
know, I was actually quite pleased that at the Military Academy
it says 85 percent; at the Naval Academy, 76 percent; and at
the Air Force Academy, 80 percent have confidence that their
leadership is taking correct action in order to prevent these
types of incidents.
So, you know, I am hearing one tone in your remarks, but
that is not matching the data that is indicated here. Can you
explain the difference?
Colonel Christensen. So, first, on the data you just talked
about, so what I broke that down to was the women. And so the
overall academy rate, for example, might be 80 percent, but at
West Point and at--excuse me, at Annapolis and at Colorado
Springs, what you see is among women, who have the higher
sexual assault rate, their satisfaction rate or confidence rate
was about 60--or, excuse me, 70 percent.
So, now, you can say, wow, that is great, 70 percent think
you are doing good. When I was chief prosecutor, I had 20
prosecutors working for me. If a third of my prosecutors
thought I wasn't doing a good job, I would think I was failing.
I don't think those are really good numbers, you know, glass
half full, glass half empty.
As for actual----
Mrs. Luria. Okay. I think I understand your point on that
topic, that we disagree on the numbers of confidence that we
are reporting back----
Colonel Christensen. Right.
Mrs. Luria [continuing]. From the midshipmen. And there is
a difference based off of gender, which, you know, could be
expected, based off of people interpreting the question
differently or having had different life experiences.
Colonel Morris, you also said, quote/unquote, ``I am
outside my competence in current academy operations.'' So I am
curious as to when the last time is you visited the academies
and spoke directly to leadership there, at either the
midshipmen leadership level, the company officer level, the
brigade officer level, or the senior leadership, superintendent
or commandant level to have an assessment from their
perspective on the effectiveness of these measures that they
are implementing.
Colonel Morris. None at all. No formal contact. I have been
up there a lot because I found people who have been there----
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Thank you. I yield the balance of my
time. Thank you.
Ms. Speier. There is 6 minutes left in the vote. Mrs.
Trahan, you can go ahead if you would like or we can--no. Go
right ahead.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you.
Thank you so much for your service, and thanks for being
here today.
The survey indicates that there are far more instances of
unwanted sexual contact than there are actual reports,
restricted or otherwise. And as you noted, it does seem clear
that accountability must be clear and consistent to make real
change. Men and women must feel as though they will be safe and
the perpetrators dealt justice if they are going to come out of
the shadows.
But you spoke about training being a constant over the
years while sexual assault numbers continue to rise. I am
curious to understand if you see any merit in the training
programs as they are designed today, and what other steps we
should be taking.
Colonel Christensen. Sure. I am not an expert on training.
I have sat through many of the trainings. I do think trainings
have important part of this. I think it aware--brings awareness
to issues. It makes people see things in a different way.
I leave it to what I believe are very dedicated experts in
the SAPR [Sexual Assault Prevention and Response] programs to
develop that training. I am not critical to training. I am just
saying, it is not going to end what we are doing. And so, I
think the right mix of training, how that is done, is left to
the experts, which I am not an expert on training.
As far as, you know, accountability and where we are and
things like that, you know, going back to the question earlier
about when--what has changed, well, when we talk about
accountability at the academies, it has never been good.
You know, in the 2003 crisis at the Air Force Academy, I
believe there were, like, 139 women who said they were sexually
assaulted, and zero had a prosecution out of it. So when we are
talking about differences, it is just a decades-long problem
that hasn't changed. And the question is, how many times are
you going to say, Well, we are going to change the program, and
we will get a different result.
Mrs. Trahan. Then, I guess, my only other question in terms
of, you know, culture often reinforces training, what cultural
factors at the service academies are at play in allowing these
crimes to continue?
Colonel Christensen. Well, I think one of the cultures we
have talked about is alcohol. I think another culture is there
is definitely perception there is a different accountability
level for athletes than there are for the rank-and-file
members.
There was a West Point, I think it was the starting
quarterback for West Point who had alcohol violations,
allegations of sexual assault. And, you know, he led West Point
to a game over--a victory over Navy. I know that is a big deal
for them.
And Navy felt--excuse me, Army failed to tout his virtues
as a cadet. He had some pretty serious misconduct in his
background, and so, when you look at victims who are being
forced out because of what is really minor misconduct, for them
it is very difficult to understand why there is this cultural
divide.
Mrs. Trahan. Great. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Ms. Escobar, there is still about 250 to 300 votes that
have not been recorded, so we still have time. So please go.
Ms. Escobar. Madam Chairwoman, thank you so much for having
this hearing. This is such an important topic.
And, gentlemen, thank you for your testimony here today.
You know, I--the military, obviously, is a very different
institution than any other institution, but are there other
male-dominated institutions that could offer some best
practices? I know, you know, training you mentioned, we are not
going to get ourselves out of this through training. But are
there some best practices that have not yet been embraced,
adopted, utilized as a way to try to attack the problem?
Colonel Christensen. If I were the superintendents, I would
have Terry Crews at my academies next week. They need to hear a
voice from somebody like him. He comes from the sports and
entertainment industry. He has been a survivor. What an amazing
human being.
I think the most important things for people to hear is
actual voices of survivors. And the difficulty is, it is very
difficult for a cadet survivor to stand up and talk to the
cadet wing, because of what they go through. But if you can
bring in somebody who has instant credibility--and if Terry
Crews can be sexually assaulted, anybody in the world can be
sexually assaulted--and so that--leaders like him, who can
speak powerfully to the issue.
Colonel Morris. Nothing to add, other than to--once you
have a sense of a program in place leave it in place long
enough to evaluate it. You know, there is always a lagging
indicator from any kind of training and any kind of
consciousness raising on most any behavior.
You know, the military saw it and attacked it with unusual
success, with drugs and alcohol and fitness and other things.
Sex is harder to do anyway. You know, it is not just subject to
sort of the solitary self-discipline that some of those other
behaviors relate to.
But there is no lack of really excellent programs that have
worked at places. But, you know, put it in place, have a set
of, you know, reliable metrics and monitors, and then let it
work long enough that you know you are evaluating a system that
has given you, you know, replicable results.
Ms. Escobar. You know, the other aspect that was mentioned
earlier that is very troubling is the sort of social media
bullying that happens as part of the retaliation, and that is
something that is obviously prevalent, you know, in every
aspect of our lives. I mean, you know, kids, middle school kids
deal with a lot of that in a way that my generation never did.
My children have had to deal with that in a way that my
generation never did.
But one of the things that I tried to teach my kids was
about being witnesses. When they witness something, when they
sense something, you know, about being an advocate. And many
times that is very, very difficult because then the advocate
himself or herself faces the same retaliation or similar, or
sometimes maybe even worse retaliation.
But is that a component of the training so that, you know,
individuals who are witnesses, either through what is happening
on social media, or witnesses to retaliation or bullying, that
they have an obligation to stand up and, you know, show that
strong moral character to speak out and act out?
Colonel Christensen. Yeah, absolutely. And to the academy
credit, all academies, I think they have emphasized very
strongly bystander training and the importance of bystander
intervention. The surveys indicate that the self-report of
people who are bystanders, that they do become involved.
Obviously, a lot of sexual assault doesn't incur in front of
somebody else. If it did, it would make it a lot easier to
prosecute. But, yes, I think, you know, stepping in----
Ms. Escobar. But the retaliation----
Colonel Christensen. Yeah.
Ms. Escobar [continuing]. Sometimes is--many times is not
in secret, especially on social media.
Colonel Christensen. Right. Right. And then I--and then
they have to feel comfortable that when they come forward to
leadership, say, I saw this--Boss, I saw this on whatever
social media site. This is what they are saying about cadet so-
and-so and bring that to them. And I don't know if they have
that confidence level.
Ms. Escobar. Anything to add?
Colonel Morris. Same thing. Social media has been a big and
recent part of the emphasis, because both of the chatter as
well as the sharing of images and that kind of stuff. And then
bystander, same thing. It seems to be one of the most tried and
true. You know, we show movies about, you know, accidentally
spilling a drink on somebody to just break the situation, so
the students then talk about that and realize that is
appropriate to them and a legitimate expectation of them as a
fellow student.
Ms. Escobar. I yield my time.
Ms. Speier. All right. Your time is expired.
And we are going to thank both Colonel Christensen and
Colonel Morris for their participation.
We are going to take about a half-hour break so everyone
can go vote, and then we will be joined by the Director of the
Department of Defense, Dr. Van Winkle, and the three
superintendents. Thank you. We are in recess.
[Recess.]
Ms. Speier. Welcome back, everyone. We are returning to our
second panel today, and I want to introduce each of them. I
know them well and have a great deal of respect for them as
individuals. And hopefully, this will be a very valuable
opportunity for all of us to get a new perspective on how we
can address this problem.
First on our panel is Dr. Elizabeth Van Winkle. She is the
Executive Director, Force Resiliency, at the Office of Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness.
Our second panelist is Lieutenant General Darryl Williams,
the Superintendent at the United States Military Academy.
Third, Vice Admiral Walter Carter, who is the
Superintendent of the Naval Academy.
Finally, Lieutenant General Jay Silveria, who is the
Superintendent of the U.S. Air Force Academy.
We welcome each of you now to make your opening statements.
STATEMENT OF DR. ELIZABETH P. VAN WINKLE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
OFFICE OF FORCE RESILIENCY, OFFICE OF THE UNDER SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
Dr. Van Winkle. Thank you. Madam Chair, Ranking Member
Kelly, and other distinguished members of the subcommittee,
thank you for having me here today to discuss the results of
the DOD Annual Report on Sexual Harassment and Violence at the
Military Service Academies.
Two years ago I sat before you and pledged we would do more
to end sexual assault at our academies. Two years ago, I told
you how we were committed to promoting an environment where all
were treated with dignity and respect. I vowed we would work to
reinvigorate our prevention approaches.
I meant what I said, yet I sit before you and deliver news
too similar to what I reported 2 years ago. Sexual assault is
on the rise again at the academies. While each of the academies
developed and implemented action plans that were not yet fully
in place for the current assessment, Department leadership was
not complacent waiting for implementation, and therefore,
another increase in rates is simply unacceptable.
Preventing criminal behavior and other misconduct,
providing care for service members, and holding offenders
appropriately accountable, have been and continue to be top
priorities. And yet our most recent data indicates we have far
to go to eliminate this abhorrent crime.
It is devastating to be sitting here again to deliver this
most unwelcome report. Our data tells us that rates of unwanted
sexual contact increased by varying degrees across the
academies, all too high. Rates of sexual harassment also varied
among the academies, but are also unacceptably high,
particularly among women.
The data also indicated that across the three academies a
large majority of students think their senior leaders are
making honest and reasonable efforts to address these
behaviors, but not all do. These same students rate the efforts
of their peer leaders much lower, and additional data showed
declining rates for students watching out for each other to
prevent these crimes.
This tells us that despite our hard work, some cadets and
midshipmen still feel empowered to disrespect and victimize
others. And equally challenging, there are some who feel
neither empowered nor responsible in their daily peer
interactions to hold each other accountable.
The vast majority of cadets and midshipmen are good people
and will become the strong leaders our nation needs. Yet we
must show them how to leverage their moral courage to create an
environment where all can serve with dignity and respect.
There is no single fix for this. We cannot blame our way
out. We cannot train our way out. The Department, Congress, and
our nation as a whole, has been challenged to crack the code on
how to change behavior regarding sexual misconduct. But the
Department of Defense, we are the ones who have been entrusted
by the country to lead the way. We must lead, and we are
working to do just that.
We will change our approach. What we have done in the past
may not be abandoned, but we must determine what needs to be
done differently, what needs to be adjusted, and what needs to
be implemented anew. We are analyzing the breadth of data we
have, and we will continue to partner and collaborate with
other experts in this field who have found strategies that show
promise.
We have already taken some steps. We have hired prevention
specialists from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
to inform our efforts and assessments. We are enhancing
reporting procedures that will be available throughout the
Armed Forces but geared towards the unique concern of our
cadets and midshipmen and aim to address repeat offenders.
We will refocus our efforts and look at the full life cycle
of cadets and midshipmen from selection through to graduation,
and work to target our approaches accordingly. Our focus will
be to not only achieve progress, but to sustain it over time. I
am optimistic our new direction will render intended results,
and I sit before you today frustrated but resolved.
I have been working in this field for over 20 years, 10 in
the civilian sector and nearly 10 with the military. I left the
civilian sector because I felt I was spending too much of my
time fighting a system that seemed impervious to influence.
I am committed to stay with the Department of Defense
because I have the support of my leadership, and because I have
witnessed our system make changes over the past decade to
produce an infrastructure of policies, programs, and resources
that have benefited our military members and are not found in
the civilian sector.
We are not there yet, but we are committed. No one has
solved this, and if there were a single solution to eliminate
sexual assault, we would have done it already. We are
responsible for behavior change. We take individuals and we
mold them, we instill courage where there may have been none,
we impart discipline where there may have otherwise been
disorder, we create lethal global warriors from young women and
men who may have never even left their local communities.
Eliminating sexual misconduct from the ranks remains a
challenge, but one we refuse to run from. We will not tolerate
it, and we will not stop until we get this right. We appreciate
your concern and support as we work to protect the people who
volunteer to keep our nation safe.
Thank you for the opportunity to come and speak with you
today, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Van Winkle can be found in
the Appendix on page 68.]
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Dr. Van Winkle.
Next, Lieutenant General Williams.
STATEMENT OF LTG DARRYL A. WILLIAMS, USA, SUPERINTENDENT,
UNITED STATES MILITARY ACADEMY
General Williams. Madam Chair, Ranking Member Kelly, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity today to talk about the very serious problem of
sexual assault and sexual harassment at the United States
Military Academy.
I wish I were here to tell you how we have solved this
problem at West Point, but I am not. Instead, I am here today
because this abhorrent behavior continues to manifest itself
within our ranks. Any case of unwanted sexual contact or sexual
harassment is unacceptable.
Our mission is to develop leaders of character for the Army
who will fight and win our nation's land conflicts, and who are
ready to lead in the crucible of ground combat. The issues I
will discuss today have a direct impact on Army readiness.
Sexual assault and harassment erode readiness and our ability
to accomplish the mission.
I am personally committed to preventing sexual assault and
harassment, and I am resolute in my commitment to continue to
seek solutions at West Point.
While I am here to talk to you about West Point, I
recognize this problem is not isolated to West Point and the
Army. The increase in the number of cadets experiencing
unwanted sexual conduct is unacceptable and troubles me
greatly.
These acts erode trust, are contrary to our Army's core
values, and impact readiness. These are situations that no one
should ever have to experience. As leaders, we must protect the
welfare of the victims who trusted us, while at the same time
holding the perpetrators accountable and appropriate for their
actions in--as appropriate for their actions in accordance with
due process of law.
As we continuously improve our program, we must also focus
on changing the culture to prevent these acts from occurring in
the first place. To that end, we are open and welcome to forums
such as these to find ideas we may not yet have considered.
While much of what we see within the survey is troubling, some
of the results are encouraging, and indicate our efforts so far
having some effect on trust in our organization.
Eighty-five percent of cadets surveyed indicated they
believe the academy senior leaders are taking honest and
reasonable efforts to stop sexual assault. The fact that cadets
trust their leadership is a direct result of our continued
efforts to address this problem. More troubling, though, is the
lack of trust they have in their peer leaders. This is a
cultural problem that we must address.
When cadets first report to West Point, they bring with
them a set of values developed over their past 18 years. Our
job is to take these young men and women and mold them into
leaders with the character that aligns with the ideals of West
Point and the values of our Army.
We frequently talk about our leader development program as
a 47-month developmental experience. But when it comes to
sexual harassment and sexual assault, we don't have 4 years to
shape their behavior and attitudes. We must prioritize our
prevention efforts early on in their cadet experience.
Moving forward, we will strengthen our education efforts to
provide cadets the knowledge and skills needed to define and
address the behaviors that are occurring. We will also continue
to address cultural challenges, like social media, and access
to illicit materials that impact our population, with the goal
of helping cadets think more critically about themselves and
their relationships.
Success in our prevention and education efforts must
permeate throughout the entire West Point community. Every
individual working or living at West Point needs to recognize
his or her role in contributing to this cultural change. Thank
you for the opportunity to share our work with the committee.
I appreciate your feedback and helping us find a solution
as we are in the business of developing leaders of character
for our Army and nation. We must set and continue to enforce
the highest of standards. I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of General Williams can be found in
the Appendix on page 74.]
Ms. Speier. Admiral Carter.
STATEMENT OF VADM WALTER E. CARTER JR., USN, SUPERINTENDENT,
UNITED STATES NAVAL ACADEMY
Admiral Carter. Madam Chair, Ranking Member Kelly, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today on behalf of the United
States Naval Academy.
Our mission is to develop midshipmen morally, mentally, and
physically, and to imbue them with the highest ideals of duty,
honor, and loyalty. We have a responsibility to ensure that the
brigade of midshipmen has the opportunity to develop
professionally in an environment that fosters dignity and
respect.
Despite dedicated efforts by the Naval Academy leadership
and the brigade, we continue to experience incidents of
unwanted sexual contact within our ranks. I and the rest of my
leadership team have actively sought out professional advice
from the experts on the best strategies to reduce this scourge
within our student body. While we have made some productive
improvements, we must do better.
We initiated our plan of action this past summer. It is a
comprehensive approach from admission to graduation and
includes the following four primary components.
First, we continue our rigorous preadmission screening
process, which relies on required teacher recommendations and
police record checks to identify potential character challenges
of those applying to the Naval Academy.
Second, we continue to hone our sexual assault prevention
programs. In addition to updating our student-led training
program, this past year we launched an interdisciplinary
evaluation of the entire 4-year leadership curriculum, pulling
together all themes addressing life skills. This effort more
closely aligned all programs and resulted in publishing a life
skills handbook.
Third, we have launched several initiatives to promote
responsible alcohol choices, as we understand the strong
correlation between alcohol use and unwanted sexual contact.
Since we put these new initiatives into effect, we have
experienced a 49 percent fewer alcohol-related incidents.
Finally, we must continue to hold perpetrators
appropriately accountable. All allegations of sexual assault
are thoroughly investigated by the Naval Criminal Investigative
Service and receive careful legal review prior to me deciding
on a disposition.
We are not where I want us to be, nor where the Navy needs
us to be. The Naval Academy must produce leaders that not only
treat others with dignity and respect, but also demand the same
of those they lead.
Thank you for your time today. I am prepared to address
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Carter can be found in
the Appendix on page 89.]
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Vice Admiral.
Lieutenant General Jay Silveria.
STATEMENT OF LT GEN JAY B. SILVERIA, USAF, SUPERINTENDENT,
UNITED STATES AIR FORCE ACADEMY
General Silveria. Madam Chair, Ranking Member Kelly, and
other distinguished members of the committee, I appreciate the
opportunity today to discuss an issue that is fundamental to
the health and safety of our cadets at the United States Air
Force Academy, and of grave importance to our national
security.
Thank you for your dedication to confronting sexual
harassment and sexual assault, misconduct that has no place at
our academies or in our military, and for your concern about
the well-being of our cadets and cadet candidates. I can assure
you that these are concerns shared not only by myself and also
by our dedicated staff, faculty leadership, and most
importantly, the cadets.
As Superintendent of the Air Force Academy, I am here on
behalf of our 4,281 cadets and 203 preparatory school cadet
candidates, as well as the faculty and staff that are
developing them into the future of leaders of our Air Force.
But I am also here as an academy graduate, as a leader of
airmen privileged to wear this uniform for more than 33 years,
and as a father of two young members of this same generation we
are training and educating.
From each of these perspectives, the results of the recent
survey are disgusting. They do not reflect the standards we
hold ourselves to as leaders. They do not reflect the core
values of the United States Air Force or our academy, and we
are committed to addressing these issues head on, to be an
example for the Air Force, Department of Defense, and society.
It is clear our past efforts have not had the effects we
intended or expected. These results are unacceptable. There is
no question, even one instance of sexual assault or sexual
harassment at our academy is a problem. Far too many of our
cadets have had experiences along this spectrum of harmful
behaviors from sexual harassment to sexual assault.
The survey data shows that our cadets have been harmed, and
that too many feel they can't come forward for help and
support. It shows that cadets have harmed the peers they intend
to serve alongside in defense of our nation. The data does not
show us exactly why these egregious acts occurred, but we know
that these are people, not statistics, and that leadership is
the solution.
I am frustrated and angered by the results, but I will not
rest in my leadership until we get this right. In addition to
implementing direction from the Department of Defense and
Department of the Air Force, we are taking action with several
current and future programs I have highlighted in my written
testimony that we can elaborate on today and provide detailed
information on as requested.
Holding perpetrators of these crimes appropriately
accountable is key to our efforts. When a victim makes an
unrestricted report of sexual assault, we make sure the victim
is getting necessary care and support, and the Air Force Office
of Special Investigations begins to investigate.
In addition to courts-martial and administrative discipline
tools, we have a cadet discipline system that allows me to
disenroll cadets for misconduct, as well as boards of inquiry,
typically used for officer discharges. For those victims who
are hesitant to testify publicly, these processes give them a
voice in a nonpublic setting while affording those accused of
crimes their due process rights.
In recent years, this committee has heard testimony from
our academies' superintendents, from experts, and from
survivors on our progress, or really lack thereof, on this very
topic. I appreciate your continued vigilance on a serious
problem that requires steadfast attention. Your oversight is
rooted in a care for our cadets and our military that I
wholeheartedly share.
I also share your frustration, impatience, and anger that
you may have for the results we have seen this year. I have
personally met with many survivors, both men and women, one on
one that come to me voluntarily. I have learned and will
continue to learn a great deal about their survivor
experiences. As a commander, leader, airman, and father, their
stories and their faces rock me to the core. And my motivation
to change this culture--and they are my motivation to change
this culture and stop this crime.
We invite you to come visit our campus, see our programs
firsthand, please, and speak with faculty, staff, and cadets,
who hope that through these interactions, we can work together
towards improvements.
Thank you for this opportunity to discuss a topic so vital
to the future success of our academy and our military and to
the health and safety of our cadets. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of General Silveria can be found in
the Appendix on page 100.]
Ms. Speier. Thank you, General Silveria.
I would like to begin by asking Dr. Van Winkle a general
question. You have been in this area for a very long time. You
have done a lot of research. You do a lot of analysis. In your
experience, what percentage of victims are telling the truth?
Dr. Van Winkle. Based on the data that we have, and this is
Active Duty and at the service academies, we see about 2
percent of the reports of sexual assault to be unfounded, which
means that there is evidence that the crime did not occur. So
it is a vast minority.
Ms. Speier. So vast minority. It is 98 percent of those
that are coming forward are telling the truth?
Dr. Van Winkle. Well, what we know is there is a larger
proportion where we have an unsubstantiated report, and that
means there wasn't enough evidence to move forward with a case
of sexual assault, but that is very different than a false
report. That false report, meaning that the crime did not
occur, is at that 2 percent.
Ms. Speier. So one of the issues that I think we have to
address moving forward is the fact that there are so many
restricted reports, and they are restricted because of this
fear of retaliation. I think that if we get to a place where
that information is shared, maybe online with Callisto or some
other company that provides that kind of benefit so that the
victim can go online, put down information about their
experience, photographs if they want, identify the perpetrator,
and then if they see that that perpetrator is, in fact,
responsible for conducting himself or herself in the same
manner with others, they are more motivated either to come
forward in an unrestricted report and hopefully rid the
military of the predator.
Let me ask the three superintendents: Have each of you
spoken to your cadets and midshipmen about this report? Have
you had an actual information setting in which you have
provided them with this information?
General Williams. Yes, ma'am, I have electronically through
the whole corps. My commandant in the last week has. And I--we
are doing a full West Point stand-down. There will be no
classes. There will be no sports. There will be nothing but me
talking to the cadets on the 25th of February. I plan to shut
down everything and do what we call a stand-down.
So I have not had the opportunity to talk to the cadets,
but my commandant has in the last week. And I have talked and
sent a note to--immediately after the report came out, I sent a
note electronically to every single one of my cadets.
Ms. Speier. Vice Admiral Carter.
Admiral Carter. Madam Chair, I have. I have addressed the
entire brigade upon their reformation after holiday break. And
I rarely have the whole brigade together where I do not cover
this topic. But we covered this topic based on this report, and
they have heard the details of this report. And to be quite
frank, the reaction from the brigade was also the same reaction
that all of us have. It was one of shock. So I don't take that
as anything that changes that, except the brigade was surprised
by the results.
Ms. Speier. General Silveria.
General Silveria. Yes, ma'am. I have addressed the cadet
wing about this report, and part of that, I told them that I
was planning on discussing with them. Next week, I have
sessions planned with all of the classes to discuss this
testimony. Additionally, I opened up to all of them after I
explained the report to send me emails, and at this point, I
have so many that I can't get through.
Ms. Speier. General Silveria, I am in receipt of an email
from the vice commandant, which I would like to ask unanimous
consent that we submit for the record. And I think the copy has
been made available to you? Do you have it there?
General Silveria. Yes, ma'am, I have it here.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 123.]
Ms. Speier. So what troubles me about this email is it
appears that there has been a crest that has been stolen at the
academy, and I guess it is one of those pranks that happens not
all that rarely.
But the essence of the complaints, I guess, that have been
visited on Colonel Campbell is that there is more interest in
the concern about returning the class crest than in talking
about the results of the survey of sexual harassment and sexual
assault.
The one part of this email that is deeply troubling to me
that I want to read and get your comments on, is the last
paragraph, in which he says, ``you cadet leaders''--``Your
cadet leaders are not at fault for the information flow; I am.
If you want a target, it is me. They have no control over--on
this topic. If you are that passionate, my door is open. Come
on in and we can discuss.
``If you want to attack from a platform or medium of
anonymity, then have at it. You are a coward and we aren't
listening. If you have a problem, bring a solution. There is no
room in our Air Force for those not willing to own their
opinions or positions.
``If you don't like this idea, you are free to leave. I
will happily expedite your transition to the civilian world. We
hold higher standards here. If you don't like them, move on.
You don't deserve to lead our incredible airmen.''
Do you have a comment about that?
General Silveria. Yes, ma'am. If I can add some context,
yes, it was a prank where the cadets, the freshmen, the fourth
classmen had stolen the crest.
Ms. Speier. I am not concerned about the crest.
General Silveria. Yes, ma'am. And so in the effort to
recover the crest, the cadet leadership was trying to find
through where--who had taken the crest. And in that, there was
a lot of conversation about the crest, and it was beginning to
take over a lot of the conversation among the cadet wing.
And so at the same time was the moment that I stepped in,
and I addressed the cadet wing about these results and told
them that I was going to testify. And so Colonel Campbell was
very concerned that the cadets perceive that there was a
perception that the crest was more important than the results
that I had discussed.
Ms. Speier. I understand all that, General. My concern is,
one of the issues that we are dealing with is this fear of
retaliation. And anonymity is often offered to these cadets in
a restricted report because of their fear of retaliation.
And the way I read that last paragraph, he is mocking those
who are commenting about the fact that there is more interest
and concern about the crest being stolen than about talking
about this issue of sexual assault and sexual harassment in the
academies. And the tone of that email is hostile.
And for anyone--if I was a cadet at the Air Force Academy,
which I would never have gotten into, but if I had--if I was a
cadet, and I read that paragraph, I would know full well the
last thing I would ever do is report a sexual assault.
General Silveria. Ma'am, in this case, the anonymity that
he is referring to is using anonymity to use it as a platform
to criticize. And that cyberbullying is what was going on that
he was addressing directly. We all have--at all of our
academies, we all have social media platforms that are
anonymous, and they continue to be a problem. There is all
sorts of different versions of them.
And so this anonymous platform was being used to be very
critical, very negative, and in his view, very cowardice. It
was not about the fact that they were--that they wouldn't have
a chance to report something anonymous. It was about the fact
that they were anonymously criticizing about that fact. Ma'am,
we fully support the idea of the restricted report. We fully
support the idea of Callisto and others to give cadets that
opportunity to report anonymously.
Ms. Speier. Okay. I don't know that I fully agree with you
in terms of the evaluation of that paragraph, but let's move
on.
I want to see uniformity of benefits for the victims. I
want to be able to say to each appointee that I make to the
academies that you are all going to be treated alike if you are
sexually assaulted or sexually harassed.
So let me ask you this: Would each of you offer to a cadet
or a midshipmen who has been sexually assaulted, either
restricted or unrestricted, either confirmed or unconfirmed,
the ability to take a sabbatical year? Lieutenant General
Williams, just go down the line, if you would.
General Williams. Madam Chair, I would. In fact, we do. We
do that now. It is called a medical leave of absence.
Ms. Speier. I don't know that we need to call it a medical
leave of absence, but I think a sabbatical is something that
doesn't take--carry with it a spin one way or the other.
Yes, Admiral.
Admiral Carter. Yes, ma'am. We initiated that program a
number of years ago, and it is alive and well.
General Silveria. Yes, ma'am. We have had it for a number
of years and it functions very well, 6 months and for a year.
Ms. Speier. And it is automatic if it is requested?
General Silveria. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Speier. All right. How about a transfer to another
academy, General Williams?
General Williams. Ma'am, if it would help the victim and
help them heal in this process, I would support it, yes, ma'am.
Ms. Speier. But you don't have it presently, correct?
General Williams. We do not, Madam Chair.
Ms. Speier. Admiral.
Admiral Carter. We have not gathered our thoughts together
on the mechanism to do it. I am not opposed to it as
Superintendent of the Naval Academy. I do think that we would
have to understand that that would extend somebody's academic
time, but if it benefited them to get through the undergraduate
program at any of the service academies, I don't think any of
us would have an issue with it.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
General.
General Silveria. Ma'am, I completely agree. If it
benefited a victim, we don't have that mechanism in place right
now, but if it benefited the victim, then I would fully
support.
Ms. Speier. All right. And how about--I know at least one
of the academies have taken a public position that you will
not--there will be no action taken against you for collateral
violations if you want to file a sexual assault or sexual
harassment report. Is that true for all of you?
General Williams. Yes, Madam Chair.
Ms. Speier. Has it been made public to all of the cadets?
General Williams. Yes, Madam Chair.
Ms. Speier. Admiral.
Admiral Carter. Madam Chair, we have the same program and
we--this is one of those events where collaborating and seeing
how the Air Force did it presented a much better idea than how
we were doing it. So we have incorporated their program and it
has been announced to our brigade.
Ms. Speier. So this is the first year it will be
operational?
Admiral Carter. Well, it is a slight difference. We don't
hold any of the victims to collateral misconduct during the
course of the investigation. But in light of the way we see how
Air Force did it, if the knowledge of misconduct comes up
during the course of the investigation, never be held against
the victim at all. We have been previously revisiting some
misconduct after adjudication, but not to a separation level. I
like the way I saw the Air Force Academy was doing it better,
and we have just instituted that.
Ms. Speier. All right.
General.
General Silveria. Ma'am, we did start that, initiate that,
as we call it, a safe-to-report policy that ensures that--no
collateral misconduct, that there is--no charges would be
brought or any, you know, any retribution in any way for some
misconduct if they were a sexual assault victim.
Ms. Speier. And, finally, I think one of the admirals--one
of the superintendents that I have spoken to in the last few
days indicated that you are about to implement recoupment from
first- or second-year cadets or midshipmen. Historically, it
has only been juniors or seniors. And I want to know to what
extent we can make that something that is going to be used in
each of the academies across the board where there is a
conviction.
General Silveria. Ma'am, I will start. That was me. We, as
you know, all of us seek recoupment for the last 2 years, but,
yes, we have changed that. So in the first 2 years, if you
commit serious misconduct, in this case, sexual assault or, you
know, drug offense or something, that you are disenrolled for
serious misconduct, then we will seek recoupment.
Ms. Speier. Admiral.
Admiral Carter. We have not explored that possibility. We
are now aware of it and we are very interested in understanding
how it works exactly. It should be the same. And as you know,
it is a recommendation by us to our Secretary of the Navy or
our service secretaries for that eventual decision. But I am in
full support of that option.
General Williams. Madam Chair, I would be open to that as
well, but we have not currently been in that space.
Ms. Speier. All right. And, finally, Dr. Van Winkle, having
gone over those various services for the--and benefits for the
victims, do you have any comments that you would like to make
about them?
Dr. Van Winkle. No. I would just say that at the--on the
OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense] side, we obviously
understand that each of the academies have unique cultures and
may have some differences in their policies and protocols. But
where there is a promising practice, we support standardization
across the academies.
Ms. Speier. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The best way to prevent these crimes from happening is to
prevent those with character issues from entering the academies
to begin with. If each of you, starting with you, Dr. Van
Winkle, can tell me how we can improve the nomination process
as Members, and you as the academies who is overseeing them, to
ensure we have a good assessment of the candidate's character.
Dr. Van Winkle. Thank you for the question.
As you heard in my opening statement, we are looking at the
entire life cycle of the cadets and midshipmen, including
selection into the academies. This is not to say that the
current selection criteria is inadequate. What we are looking
at, and we are still in the infancy stages of evaluation on
this, is whether there are additional metrics that we could use
that get to that moral development and moral character that we
are looking for.
So we are, right now, just in the evaluation stage of the
data and what we are looking for and what metrics might be
feasible. But, again, it is important to note that we are in no
way saying that the selection criteria be changed. It would be
more of an enhancement.
General Williams. Thanks, Ranking Member Kelly.
I think this is a place where we owe you a better model.
Currently, when we admit cadets to West Point we know very well
their academic potential based on their academic performance,
their SATs, ACTs. We require them to take a physical readiness
aspect.
What is missing, in my humble opinion in 7 months as the
superintendent, is more there. We owe you a better template. We
ask principals, teachers to write essays about cadet X, Y. I
think it is okay, but I think it could be more robust with more
rigor in that space.
Mr. Kelly. Admiral.
Admiral Carter. Sir, this is a tough problem to figure out,
but I will tell you what we are currently doing, where I think
we could maybe do a little bit more. We put a great deal of
stock in the teacher evaluations of prospective midshipmen. We
often pick out nuggets within those evaluations that are very
worthy for us to look at.
The interviews that we do, we have Blue and Gold
representatives. They represent me in the admission process
and, of course, interviews that either you or your staff do for
your prospective candidates from your voting districts. We look
at police records.
I would like to be able to tell you we have the access to
look at everybody's social media background. We certainly do
that for a number of the midshipmen that come to the Naval
Academy, but it is not 100 percent. That is a space that could
probably be looked at more.
And I will share with you that on occasion, we get an
anonymous letter about something that might have happened. And
when that happens, we take that very seriously, and we set up a
character review board on that individual. So, again, we are
doing as much as we can right now, but I think we could still
do a little bit more.
Mr. Kelly. And, General, real quickly.
General Silveria. Yes, sir. Sir, I think I would agree that
we owe you a better--that we need to work together better on
that with your staffs and with your nomination processes. That
all of us need to focus on qualities as opposed to
qualifications of an individual. And just like Admiral Carter
points out, we all look for the slightest hints and clues from
teachers, from coaches, from recommendation letters, we look
for the slightest, and we pursue those, whether it is social
media, police, you know, we pursue any slightest lead that we
have if there is any concern.
Mr. Kelly. The only thing I will say, and I know we already
have issues with this resource-wise and getting security
clearances for enough people, but that is much more in depth
and they are much better qualified. So I don't know if we can
morph that into something else or do something a little
different, but sometimes those folks, having gone through a
security clearance, may be able to do a similar thing that goes
beyond what just the teachers say.
As a former district attorney, I am aware how challenging
sexual assault offenses can be to prosecute. There are a litany
of reasons why victims don't come forward, some are
retaliatory, some are a whole different range of options of why
they don't come forward.
Can you explain the current options you have available to
hold the offenders accountable? And I will start with you,
General. What can you do as a commandant to hold a potential
offender--an offender accountable?
General Williams. Ranking Member Kelly, thank you. The
Uniform Code of Military Justice, as we spoke earlier, gives me
the options and tools I need as a commander. Short of that, you
have nonjudicial punishment. I have administrative actions I
can take as well, as well as working at echelon with my
commanders.
So the chain of command in this space is very valuable in
setting the right tone. Commanders set tone and expectations in
a command, and that is the tools that I most cherish in this
space.
Mr. Kelly. And I would also just encourage--encourage you
to understand that there is a code of moral and ethics and
honor at each of the academies, and sometimes you may not be
able to prove an unsubstantiated report against an offender,
but other things they are doing makes them unfit to serve as an
officer in the military service. And I would just encourage
you, when you have that opportunity, you can still have that
person go away if they have a course of conduct that you can't
substantiate the sexual assault, you maybe can do that
otherwise.
Developing morally and ethically strong officers is the
primary mission of all the service academies. Trust is
tantamount to good military orders, and especially among
leaders. How do you incorporate character development into the
curriculum at the academies, and if you can real quickly just
tell me that. Character in the curriculum.
General Williams. Ranking Member Kelly, we have the West
Point leader development system, which is focused primarily on
character. It is ingrained in all things we do, whether it is
in academics, whether it is in sports. Character is my number
one line of effort at the United States Military Academy. So we
do that both in terms of curriculum, in terms of pedagogy, but
also in terms of practically how we do it day-to-day from a
practitioner standpoint as well.
Admiral Carter. Sir, we have it embedded in our leadership
curriculum, but recently, just over the last couple of years,
it has taken us about 2 years, that we have completely revamped
our aptitude measuring system, which now encompasses everything
except academic performance and physical education performance
so that we can look at the character development specifically
of our midshipmen. They actually get a discrete grade in a very
subjective system that uses everything from peer ranking to
rankings by others that are in their sports teams, their clubs,
and ultimately the officer that is directly over them. So this
is relatively new and we find good progress.
General Silveria. Sir, we have a center for creative
leadership--a Center for Character and Leadership Development,
and we use that as an integrating function for character
elements across the curriculum, across the military training,
and across the athletic department so that it is integrated
everywhere that a cadet interacts; there is character
development and there is leadership responsibilities.
Mr. Kelly. And the final question, and I will start with
you, Dr. Van Winkle, but I want to preface this with a
statement. You guys are accountable to get this right and to
make this the right thing. Our job is to make sure you have
every tool available to you to make sure that we take care of
each and every soldier and so that we don't have one sexual
assault, especially not a sexual assault that is not reported.
So, Dr. Van Winkle, and each member, what tool can we give
you that will help you do that? And if you need to do that in
writing later, I am fine. But what tool can we give you as
Congress that helps you to do this mission?
Dr. Van Winkle. I can respond right now generally that your
partnership is extremely important. I do feel from the data
that we see that our infrastructure is sound. We have some
evidence that when somebody does make that courageous decision
to report, that our systems that are in place are good systems.
Eighty-one percent of the service academy students who came
forward to make a report said that they would make the same
decision again.
However, we have too few people reporting, and we have an
issue in terms of our culture and climate, and that we need to
look at our strategies. And we certainly appreciate your
feedback on that as our partners in this space.
General Williams. Ranking Member Kelly, 273 young men and
women spoke to us on this survey. You have given us what we
need, you have given us the resources. It is my responsibility
as the superintendent at West Point to take care of the sons
and daughters that you have given us. You have given us what we
need. We need to get an action plan and come back to you and
talk to you how we are going to fix this.
Admiral Carter. Sir, we are developing a multifaceted plan.
I don't know that I need to ask for more resources or more
capability in terms of us owning it, which we need to do. And I
think that is what you are hearing from us today. I have been
the superintendent for 5 years, and I have testified in front
of this committee before. And as Dr. Van Winkle said, I
committed myself to trying to improve in this.
I am frustrated. And I think that we can't educate our way
out of it, we can't train our way out of it. The accountability
piece is what is going to move the needle on this. And I am
committed to getting that part better and more right. I think I
have the resources to do that. But if we come up with something
that we could ask you for, we are going to send you a note,
sir.
General Silveria. Sir, I have the same sentiment. I have
the resources. I have the policy that I need. What I need is to
continue to build on the culture that I own and I am
responsible for as the leader. And it is clear from the survey,
one of the major areas that we have to work on is the peer-to-
peer relationship. And we are going to take that on. We already
have some plans to do that, and I will come back to you if I
need resources. But right now, sir, I have the resources I
need, but it is my responsibility as the leader to execute
this, and I do own this.
Mr. Kelly. Madam Chairman, I yield back.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Since you have indicated that you have a resource issue
with reviewing the social media of applicants, why not ask the
Blue and Gold Officers to do that as they are spending time
interviewing the potential candidates?
Admiral Carter. I think we could certainly incorporate
that. In certain districts, it is just going to be a little
more time consuming, and I don't think there is anything that
prevents us from doing that. I don't think there is any legal
reason why we can't do that, so we will explore that.
Ms. Speier. All right. Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Madam Chair. And going to the social
media situation, and I know that--I think, Dr. Van Winkle, you
mentioned this as well. I remember a hearing that we held
several years ago actually, and General Neller was there, and
we asked that question basically. Are you monitoring Facebook
and Twitter, every possible account that a student has? And at
that time, quite honestly, they weren't.
And I know I had a discussion with the general just
recently about this, and it still sounds to me like they are
not doing as much as they could be doing in general recruiting,
and so I think when it comes to the academies as well. I am not
suggesting that that is a panacea here. But on the other hand,
I think even from a sense of entitlement that somebody might be
expressing on Twitter, which isn't blatant, I guess I would
read that and I would, you know, want to know a little bit
more.
And so I am really hopeful that if there are problems, if
there are barriers, let's address them, let's figure it out. I
can assure you that we don't have a barrier when we hire
someone in our office. We let them know that we are going to
take a look at their accounts.
And I just think that is important. I think it is important
for young people to know that for their future it is better,
and then not engage in that kind of behavior, even if they
think it is, you know, just cool. So I hope you do that. And
that, you know, could be helpful.
I also wanted to ask, I believe Admiral Carter, you
mentioned that you thought you were getting at the alcohol
problem or you were seeing improvements. Is that right, sir?
What are you doing, specifically?
Admiral Carter. Yes, ma'am. What we have done is, again, a
multifaceted approach. We went on this campaign in front of the
whole brigade to make them understand that this is part of
their professional life. We went to health and comfort
inspections in the large dormitory that they all live in called
Bancroft Hall. We have made sure that there is no alcohol
inside the dormitory. And there is a very well-stated policy
that if you are found with alcohol in your room, it is a
dismissal, meaning you will be separated from the Naval
Academy.
We put together a joint task force that actually helped in
putting together the education programs to show midshipmen why
responsible use of alcohol was needed. We put together a
program called the Midnight Teachable Moments, where we
actually use alcohol under controlled circumstances to show
midshipmen exactly what the results of those are.
So those are just some of the things that we have done. The
midshipmen themselves created a Guardian Angel program, these
are the seniors. So they go out in downtown Annapolis, which is
walking distance from our campus----
Mrs. Davis. Right, I've heard of that.
Admiral Carter [continuing]. And they are preventing things
before they happen. Now, I will share one example with you. We
had an incident a couple weeks ago where a midshipman got out
of hand with alcohol and got into a little bit of an engagement
with one of these Guardian Angels. We secured liberty for the
entire brigade of midshipmen for 2 weeks. So one alcohol
incident was now treated to punish the entire brigade. I can
tell you, the brigade got that message very quickly. They had a
hard time understanding it. But we are now enforcing that type
of part of the program. And then, of course----
Mrs. Davis. And do you think--I am sorry to sort of
interrupt, but do you think that that is being heard in sort of
the same context for men and women?
Admiral Carter. I don't have the breakout between men and
women. I know men at the Naval Academy have a higher tendency
to be involved in binge drinking than women. But in our case,
72 percent of all--this is by survey--of all of our unwanted
sexual contact has involved alcohol. I am not blaming alcohol
or saying if you take it away completely that these things
won't happen, but I know reducing that will have an impact.
Mrs. Davis. It does have--uh-huh. And the ``Safe to
Report'' that you mentioned--because I think that--my
understanding is that there are a number of women who feel that
they are held accountable if they had a few drinks, and
therefore, they will not report a sexual assault or harassment
because they are then transferred or something happens to them
that is negative. So the ``Safe to Report'' allows them to
report without that, is that correct, in terms of drinking?
Admiral Carter. Ma'am, I have never separated a female
victim for collateral misconduct.
Mrs. Davis. Okay. And, finally, we talk about peer leaders
and how important they are. Are we doing the same kind of
climate assessments of their leadership, so that if it is
determined that in fact they are not leading well, that their
advancement is hampered--called into question? How actively are
you doing that? How much--do they know you are doing that? And
how many people have you stopped in their career ladder because
of that behavior?
Admiral Carter. This is exactly why we created this new
aptitude measuring system. Part of that is to measure their
leadership capability, whether they are a junior or a senior. I
want to make sure that I didn't have anybody flying under the
radar that was meeting all the minimums academically and
physically and everything else looked okay because they didn't
have a conduct record.
This is a chance to have their peers and those that know
them best tell us about them. And I suspect, even though this
is relatively new, we are going to be putting midshipmen in
front of us that have problems that might not have shown up
before. So I am optimistic about this new approach for how to
look at that measuring system.
Mrs. Davis. Right. Thank you. Because sometimes people are
achieving, but that doesn't mean that they are acting
appropriately. Thank you.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
I just want to make a point here that I think is important.
We are talking about alcohol, and we would be amiss if we
somehow want to place the blame on alcohol, because in the
actual survey, at West Point 45 percent of the women indicated
that the alleged offender had been drinking alcohol. So almost
half, but not a significant majority of cases.
At the Naval Academy it wasn't broken out quite the same
way, it just said nearly two-thirds. Sixty-four percent
indicated that they or their alleged offender had been drinking
alcohol. And then at the Air Force Academy it was 53 percent
who indicated the alleged offender had been drinking, and 51
percent indicated that they had been drinking. So maybe it is
half, but it is not 65, 75, 85 percent. So I don't want us to
lose sight of that fact in looking at this issue.
Mr. Abraham.
Dr. Abraham. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Admiral, back to you and Mrs. Davis' exchange, the Navy has
been recognized for its prevention program in sexual assault
and sexual prevention. It is evidently doing some good stuff.
Was some of that that you mentioned some of the highlights of
that program, or would you wish to elaborate on maybe a couple
more that the committee could learn from?
Admiral Carter. The program that we have at the Naval
Academy is called SHAPE, it is Sexual Harassment and Assault
Prevention [Education]. It is evidence-based education that has
been developed by experts, we have been working on it for 12
years. It is 20 hours of education and training across 4 years,
it starts on induction day. It is peer-led, small-group session
with fleet mentors and it has been updated. We have peer
educators. We have well over 130 that apply for 80 positions,
including varsity athletes, leaders within the brigade. They
receive an extensive 2-week program, and they lead nine
syllabus sessions during the course of each year.
We also have guides that are part of this program. These
are midshipmen embedded into each of the 30 companies, each
company is about 150 midshipmen, 2 per company, and they are
that resource that knows when somebody is having a problem, can
say, hey, here is where the resource is where you can get
counseling or make a report. They also receive an extensive 2-
week training program, and typically we have about 130
applicants for that. So that is just a thumbnail of what that
education program looks like.
Dr. Abraham. And, General Silveria, is your HRT [Healthy
Relationship Training] and CHiPS [Cadet Healthy Interpersonal
Skills] program similar to that? Give me a little G2
[intelligence] on that.
General Silveria. Sir, very similar in the elements that
they have in that we all know at this point that small group in
this subject matter works best. While initially when our cadets
and our midshipmen arrive, we need to get a lot of information
out quickly. But we move to--CHiPS is the Cadet Healthy
Interpersonal Skills, and it was recognized as a best practice
to the committee. And we have shown with evidence informed of
how that is beginning to change behavior in surveys after they
have had some of that.
Healthy Relationship Training, sir, is--a lot of the
programs that we have done in the past have been about what not
to do. And so we tell someone that they can't do this and they
can't touch this and they can't do that and they can't do it
without consent. Healthy Relationship Training takes a
different approach. It teaches them how to have a healthy
relationship between two people. What consent is, what
boundaries are. So it is an approach of how to, what to, how to
have a healthy relationship. So those are a little bit
different, sir.
Dr. Abraham. Dr. Van Winkle, I will take this for the
record, if you need, you can certainly answer it if you can.
But I was looking at your resume and it is quite impressive,
but you have a Ph.D. in applied experimental psychology. On
these predators, or whatever we want to call these people that
do these terrible things to these survivors, have you
analyzed--is there a blip on the radar screen in something they
have done in a personality previously? Just that marker that
won't certainly definitely say that they are going to go this
particular way, but maybe they might?
Dr. Van Winkle. I would have to take that for the record.
It is not within my area of expertise, and certainly there is
research to predict offending behaviors. It is certainly not a
settled science, but I can take that for the record and get you
the information we do have on that.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 127.]
Dr. Abraham. I would appreciate that. As a physician, it
would be interesting.
And my last question, and, General Williams, I will send it
to you, and we can certainly get the others' involvement. On
the last panel, Mr. Christensen mentioned in the last--one of
his talking points, if I understood that right, that athletes
are not held to the same level of accountability as other
cadets. Now, is that true?
General Williams. Congressman, that is not true. All
athletes, cadets, are handed the same standard at West Point,
and I am sure the other academies as well. There is no
sanctuary for athletes at the United States Military Academy.
Dr. Abraham. I understand. I see the others nod.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Speier. All right. Mrs. Luria, you are next. Is it that
you would like to postpone?
Mrs. Luria. I will--I don't----
Ms. Speier. All right. Let's then move on to Ms. Escobar.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Dr. Van Winkle, so in the report, one of the reasons why
women did not choose to report was, quote, that they would take
care of the problem themselves. Does this indicate that there
is a problem in the actual reporting process or that it is
cumbersome or that--what are your thoughts about that? Why--or
just a sense that it is, you know, too painful to go through
the process.
Dr. Van Winkle. I appreciate the question. The data doesn't
get at exactly what they mean by when they say that they took
care of the problem themselves, either by avoiding or
confronting the person. We know a few things, though, from our
focus groups. We do go out every other year to talk to the
cadets and midshipmen. We talk to them about the survey
results. We ask them questions about it. And often what we see
in our data is the reasons for not reporting are often very
personal reasons, less to do with the system in place, but much
more to do with wanting to forget about it and move on.
We also have concerns within the academy about gossiping
and peer response, which again, speaks to what we are trying to
do when we are engaging the cadets and midshipmen themselves.
And it also looks a little different than what we see in the
Active Duty.
What we hear in the focus groups is freshmen and sophomores
often say they would hesitate to report because they don't want
that to define them. They are only there for 4 years. Juniors
and seniors often say they don't want to report because they
don't want the investigation to follow them into the Active
Duty or be defined as they move into the Active Duty by this
report.
And all of them talk more about concerns about peer
reaction than, again, barriers in the actual system that is in
place. And I mentioned the data point that when we do get folks
to come forward and report, from our survey data, 81 percent
said that they would make the same decision again. It is
getting them to come forward and report. That is a challenge we
are trying to address.
Ms. Escobar. That peer reaction, that is very interesting.
And I feel like that is where we as a society, whether it be in
the military or in the private sector or public sector, where
people need to feel accommodated and supported by their peers,
or that their peers will stand up to that retaliation. So we
have clearly still got a long way to go on that front in the
military. Thank you so much.
To the superintendents, so the four focus areas were
mentioned, the promoting responsible alcohol choices,
reinvigorating the prevention of sexual assault, and the third
one I am very curious about, enhancing a culture of respect.
Could each one of the superintendents just briefly tell me how
you are doing that?
General Williams. Congresswoman, yes. So as my colleague
mentioned, we have a Simon Center for Professional Military
Ethic as well. So I have an organization within the West Point
that is charged with designing character in this space about
trust. But the folks that really are going to get at this daily
are the cadets, our tactical officers, each company. We are
organized at West Point into company teams. In each one of the
companies there is a captain, a commissioned officer, and a
senior noncommissioned officer with that company, and then our
coaches and also our rotating faculty.
So all of those folks emulate what it means to be--what
respect looks like, what it means to be an officer or a cadet
in good standing. So by being good role models. But more
importantly, they have real conversations.
Last week, and it wasn't because of a result of this panel,
but I witnessed a--we had 119 classes last Wednesday during the
commandant's hour, what is called a Leader Challenge three,
where we had cadets, the company tactical officers, the
academic professors, led by the cadet leadership. Well, they
were talking about real issues. They were talking about sex and
healthy relationships that was mentioned earlier.
And so what is important is you get the cadets, the
faculty, the coaches, all of them pulling the same way in this
area. It can't be just the cadre, it can't be the cadets doing
this. It requires a comprehensive approach across the academy.
Admiral Carter. I will just briefly give two examples. One
is this life skills handbook that I mentioned in my verbal
testimony that we have now initiated. It not only dives down
into this understanding of what dignity or respect means from a
midshipman perspective, it also helps redefine that for all of
our influencers. So our coaches, our faculty, our staff, our
sponsor parents. I think it is really critical. And that is
built into our in-classroom curriculum.
And, finally, Sheryl Sandberg came and spoke to the Naval
Academy in 2013, and it is where she coined the phrase ``lean
in.'' And the Naval Academy has taken on ``lean-in circles,''
and it is really starting to grow even more. There are
approximately 200 midshipmen that meet in 12 different circles,
and they cover every tough topic of what it means to be a
professional. Some of them are all women, some of the circles
are all men, some of them are mixed. I think this is a
grassroots growth program that we can continue to cultivate.
And, by the way, we have fleet mentors in there, so they are
helping them guide the conversation.
General Silveria. Ma'am----
Ms. Escobar. My time has expired. Thank you very much.
Ms. Speier. General, you can respond.
General Silveria. Ma'am, for us what that means is that we
are looking about the whole person here. It is not just about
dignity and respect regarding another gender in the area of
sexual harassment or sexual assault, because what we have to
teach is that discrimination in all manners, whether it is
race, religion, background, sexuality, any discrimination in
any way takes away and degrades at that dignity and respect.
So we go out of our way to support and encourage a number
of affinity groups in the areas of LGB [lesbian, gay, bisexual]
and a number of race groups and ethnic groups that allow them
and the cadets interact in that way. I mean, just Friday night,
a couple weeks ago, I was with the Jewish cadets, as an
example. And so we have to continue to show that richness of
diversity. And I have spoken a lot about that to my cadets,
specifically about that richness of diversity.
We all have remarkably diverse campuses and remarkably
diverse student bodies that are continuing to grow that more.
That is what we are referring to.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Mr. Bergman, you are next.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Madam Chair.
General Williams, I want to make sure I got this right.
Cadets lack trust in peer leaders? Did I get--could you just
expound on that for me, please?
General Williams. Congressman, thank you. Yes. The survey
suggests that cadets do not have the same respect or trust, and
this is about accountability. Part of being a professional,
whether it be an airman or--is about stewardship. And so they
are struggling with, depending on what their class is,
ownership for each other. This is a part of what we do in our
military--the ethos of our culture, the Army culture.
So the cadets work very hard in their 47-month experience.
They understand General Williams or Captain Smith, who is their
company tactical officer, but as they develop and are learning
to take ownership for their profession, they have a hard time
sometimes holding each other accountable.
Mr. Bergman. Is that something that has happened over time,
or because of their high school experience they are used to--
they are not used to the hierarchy that maybe some of us who
are older and went to high school, you know, decades earlier,
where now everybody feels as though they--you know, the
participation trophy mentality?
General Williams. Congressman, I think that is part of it.
We are taking folks from all over America, and it is a tough
transition for some. Some need 47 months, some need a little
longer than 47 months to make that transition.
Mr. Bergman. So since we are talking about--we got Blue and
Gold. Do we have black and gold? And what does the Air Force
have?
General Silveria. Prop and Wings Officers, sir.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. So the point is, could any or all of you
just describe the--is this Blue and Gold or black and gold or,
you know, Prop? Is that a volunteer position? Is it a paid
position? Tell us a little bit about who these people are and
how much time they have to devote to, if you will, digging into
the background of an applicant?
Admiral Carter. Sir, I will answer first. Our Blue and Gold
Officers are representatives of the superintendent but work
through our admissions department. They are volunteers. They
are not always Naval Academy graduates. They are in every
voting district throughout the country. They are over 2,000
strong. And they are the eyes on, they are the validation of
who we are looking at, beyond just what we see on paper, the
personal statement, the teacher recommendations, the grades,
all of it.
Mr. Bergman. Yeah, I don't want to dwell on this, but the
idea is they are volunteers?
Admiral Carter. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bergman. So their time--they are working probably a
full-time career doing something else, and because of their
passion for the service academies, they have volunteered their
time to interview, to interact with, et cetera, et cetera, and
to advise potential----
Admiral Carter. And they are required to get training every
periodic moment--or every period of time, about 5 years, so
they understand what we are looking for.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. And then one final question that any or
all of you can answer. Is there any--or maybe, Dr. Van Winkle,
is there any comparative data to other nonmilitary, your basic
public, private colleges and universities, as to the type of
behavior, the type of at-risk behavior, if you will, that the
18- to 20-year-olds who are in those first couple of years, I
mean, is there comparative data out there that says the service
academies have more of a problem than XYZ college or
university?
Dr. Van Winkle. I can speak to that in general terms. We
don't typically have a good comparison point in civilian
colleges and universities, nor do we compare ourselves with
them. Certainly our mission space is different, our
expectations are different, our selection criteria is
different.
Mr. Bergman. But if we were just, you know--and I know my
time is going short here. The idea is, two friends graduate
from high school together, one goes to an academy, one goes to,
you know, some other school. They come in, they are matched
ideally, if you will, in their experience, their outlook, their
education, everything, they are a match, but then they split
and go down two different educational paths.
I am wondering, is the behavior of the individual who
chooses something other than a service academy, are we--do we
know, are there differences?
Dr. Van Winkle. What we do know in looking at colleges and
universities comes from a 2015 study sponsored by the American
Association of Universities, which looked at 27 colleges and
universities across the country. Looking at those rates,
comparing them to ours now, which again are slightly apples and
oranges in terms of metrics and scientific methods behind it,
we are about on par. But as I mentioned, we certainly hold
ourselves to a higher standard.
Mr. Bergman. Well, thank you very much. And I yield back.
Ms. Speier. All right. Dr. Van Winkle, you had indicated
that of those that do come forward, 80 percent of them are
happy with the way they were treated. Is that correct? Is that
how you put it?
Dr. Van Winkle. No. For clarification, I would say that 81
percent--and this is from the survey, so this is an estimate--
--
Ms. Speier. Right.
Dr. Van Winkle. [continuing]. Of those who came forward and
reported would make the same decision to report again.
Ms. Speier. Thank you for that clarification.
What I think is important for us to point to, and it is
true in each of the academies, it is probably most true at the
Air Force Academy, is that women who have not come forward to
report do not have a high confidence that they will be
protected.
At the Military Academy, 55 percent of the women indicated
they would trust the academy to a large extent to ensure their
safety. At the Naval Academy, it was 46 percent. At the Air
Force Academy, it was 39 percent. So that would suggest to us
that there is not the confidence in the academy leadership that
their safety will be ensured if only half or less than half
have confidence in it. So that is something we should drill
down about later.
Mrs. Luria.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Thank you for being here to testify
today. And I am trying to go through, you know, some of the
comments that have been made and rectify these, you know, in my
mind versus my personal experience, being that, you know, I
attended the Naval Academy and also spent 20 years in the
fleet, and as a commanding officer having to deal with these
types of situations for sailors who worked for me.
And there are several comments that have been made, but,
you know, I wanted to kind of touch on this in the setting of
the hearing because Admiral Carter and I discussed it in my
office earlier this week was, you know, how does this compare
relative to the fleet or to our Active Forces? And then, you
know, are there any lessons that have been done more
effectively within the fleet that we think we should be
transferring back to the academy setting?
And I will start with you, Admiral Carter, since we already
touched on that.
Admiral Carter. I certainly think there are things to learn
from the two living conditions and the demographics and the age
group. I think we could take ourselves down a dangerous path if
we think that the 17- to 21-year-old demographic of the fleet
is the exact same representative of what we see at the Naval
Academy.
Mrs. Luria. But, I mean, myself in command, and I know
yesterday when we spoke, you said you had been in command in
some capacity since 1999, and then you were the XO [executive
officer] when we served together on Truman shortly after that.
That is the demographic, at least from my experience, where
most recently these reports come in as far as fleet sailors as
well. So why do you consider there to be a difference?
Admiral Carter. The enlisted sailors that are coming in,
and that would be the demographic we are looking at, they are
changing, very different than when you and I served on Harry S.
Truman 20 years ago. They are better educated. Many more of
them are married, they live a different lifestyle. And then, of
course, once we send them out on a ship or on a deployment with
an air squad or on a submarine, they live in a very, very close
environment where they are controlled and they are watched in
their work environment, and there is no alcohol involved in
that.
So, you know, over the course of that time in that
environment, you are going to see a whole lot less of these
unwanted sexual contact data, and I am confident of that. The
midshipmen still are in an academic setting, even though they
are in a very controlled academic setting, and that is not to
make a pass for, you know, the type of lifestyle they have at
the Naval Academy, but it is just a different environment, as
you recall, living there.
But I think we can still look for best practices that come
from the fleet and see if they can apply to what we do at the
Naval Academy.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you.
And so out of all the comments that were made today, there
were a couple things that, you know, popped out, because I
think we are all scratching our head, these are not the results
that we wanted to hear. And something that did come up in the
earlier testimony was that, you know, the Victims' Legal
Counsels, for example, didn't have a lot of experience in
dealing with victims. So that is just a point of maybe an area
that we could look at what type of training they get.
And then, you know, on the side of medical professionals
and the faith community, with how they fit into the whole
picture of developing midshipmen morally, mentally, and
physically, that they tie into that picture with, you know,
dealing with the victims.
And, you know, I think my frustration as a commanding
officer in the fleet when I had sailors who dealt with this was
that I felt that the reticence of people to report was because
they thought nothing was going to ever happen. And the nothing
that was ever going to happen was not because the chain of
command didn't take it seriously, because we took it very
seriously, but it was more so that the process took so long for
anything to happen, it moved at a glacial speed.
And like you said, Dr. Van Winkle, you know, people are
worried about this in their second class midshipmen, so junior
year following through with them to the fleet. And so I don't
know how to crack that nut of, you know, a more expeditious
process to make sure that, you know, it is being handled, but
people know it is being handled, and, you know, what the
results are because----
You know, Admiral Carter, as we spoke the other day, you
said accountability was the biggest issue. But if someone
reports something and nothing happens for 18 months or 2 years,
that is hard to draw the accountability back, because people's
memories are actually short. So I don't know if anyone has any
comments on that topic.
Admiral Carter. I will just say one brief thing. The Victim
Legal Counsel was brought on during my tenure here at the Naval
Academy. I thought it actually would change and really make a
difference for those that had stepped forward. And quite
honestly, I did not see more female victims actually go through
with the investigation or go through with the preliminary
hearing office. I didn't see that change.
That Victim Legal Counsel does not work for me. They are
independently assigned to the Naval Academy. They are
permanent. I found them to be very experienced, it is not their
first legal job. And they do meet with their survivors or
victims in person.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Well, thank you for sharing that. That
was different than what was mentioned earlier.
I yield back my time. Thank you.
Ms. Speier. Ms. Cheney.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman. I wanted
to--and I appreciate that the chairwoman read or submitted for
the record the entire email from Colonel Campbell, but I wanted
to mention a couple of things that were not read.
In the first paragraph of the email, the colonel says that
the SAGR [Service Academy Gender Relations] report is, quote,
exceptionally important. In the second paragraph he says,
sexual assault and gender relations, the report is absolutely a
command priority. In the third paragraph, he says, don't for a
minute think we believe the class crest is more important than
sexual assault. And the paragraph that the chairwoman did read
has absolutely nothing to do with victim anonymity. And I think
it is very important that the record reflect that that is not a
conversation at all about victim anonymity.
And I think, in fact, victim anonymity is crucial, and I
think that it is very important that we not look towards
increasing the number of unrestricted reports as our only
measure of success here. I think, as Dr. Van Winkle mentioned,
there are a number of reasons why people don't report, a number
of reasons why they want to be able to report in a restricted
fashion, including that they don't want to have this follow
them for their life. They don't want to be known as a victim.
And I think that is very important. And I think that we need to
keep in mind that compassion for survivors and for victims, and
not look as though we are forcing everyone into a public
reporting setting.
Secondly, I would say that while it is true that the report
shows that alcohol was a factor in at least half of these
incidents that were reported, that is a huge issue. And I think
it would be reckless and irresponsible for us if we did not
address the issue of alcohol. It is not a silver bullet, it is
not a panacea, but when we have something that we know is
present in approximately half, in some cases a little over half
of these incidents that we know of, we have got to address it.
And so I would like to ask each of the superintendents if
you could talk specifically about the programs that you have in
place, the programs that you think you need to put in place, at
each of the academies to deal with this issue of alcohol abuse.
General Williams. Congresswoman, we have a long way to go
in this space. We have done everything from a cadet who has
created--or had some sort of misconduct and alcohol. We put him
in the alcohol substance abuse program. It was mentioned
earlier about the leader development program, if a cadet
commits some act in this space, he gets an F. He gets an
academic grade, F, it is part of his GPA [grade point average].
So those are sort of one end of the spectrum.
The other end of the spectrum is every week they work this,
our TAC [company tactical officer] and TAC-NCOs [tactical non-
commissioned officers] work this really, really hard. Before
special events, before every weekend, they do briefings with
the cadets. But I am not satisfied where we are in terms of--I
am having my commandant look at all of our policies in term of
how long. We have a number of places on West Point where
cadets, if they are of age, they can't be underage, if they are
of age, where they can drink alcohol.
I am relooking at all our current policies. And so we are
looking at doing some changes in that respect. So we are doing
a lot right now, but we are not doing enough, and I am
relooking the whole thing.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you.
Admiral Carter.
Admiral Carter. Ma'am, I started to talk about some of our
programs, such as the Guardian Angel program, the Midnight
Teachable Moments, the task force that we stood up. I would
also tell you that accountability at this lower level of
problem before it turns into a potential assault. When you take
away the alcohol piece, as I said, won't take them all away,
but for us we think it has a significant part. We are
redefining what those are.
So, for example, if you get a DUI [driving under the
influence] at the Naval Academy, you will be separated from the
Naval Academy. Two alcohol-related incidents, whether they
happened plebe year and senior year, you will also be
dismissed. A failure from an alcohol treatment program will
also be cause for dismissal. A higher penalty for underage
drinking, even though it is not a zero-defect mentality, it is
one that we have to continue to go after.
And as we are hearing--as you are hearing us today, we all
meet and talk about our best practices and how we are doing it,
so that we can get to some more common themes so that we are
all doing it about the same way.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you.
General Silveria.
General Silveria. Yes, ma'am. After I arrived, I didn't
like the way that a lot of the alcohol was available and the
way that it was handled within the cadet wing, and so I made a
number of changes last year in the availability, how it was
served. And I made a number of changes increasing supervision,
both at events inside the academy and outside the academy with
supervision.
The other thing that we have done is we have created a
training program for our third classmen, our sophomores,
because that is the age when they become of age, for most of
them. So we have created a training program that focuses on
prevention of alcohol-related incidents. And all of the
commanders have availability, and they use it. If they get a
risk factor where they see that somebody has used it, they can
put someone in that prevention program, whether they are a
three-degree or not. So we are training and then the increased
supervision.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
Ms. Speier. All right. That brings us to the end of the
hearing.
Let me thank you very much for your participation today. I
really believe that you want to do the right thing. I also
worry that we have not found the formula that is going to
reduce the numbers. They can't keep going up.
And, Dr. Van Winkle, I am very heartened to hear you say
that we are not going to be able to train ourselves out of this
problem. We have got to recognize that there is something more
that needs to be done.
I do know, and in talking to a couple of the
superintendents, that you have also realized that once there is
a conviction or once someone is identified, some of these
cadets have turned into predators, where it wasn't just a once,
it was to a number of cadets that they had either sexually
harassed or sexually assaulted. So it is a very serious
problem, and these are our leaders for the next generation. We
have a responsibility.
So thank you for being here. Thank you for your commitment.
And I am hopeful that we will make a number of trips to the
academies over the course of the next year to work with you.
With that, we will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 6:13 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
February 13, 2019
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
February 13, 2019
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
February 13, 2019
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING
THE HEARING
February 13, 2019
=======================================================================
RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY DR. ABRAHAM
Dr. Van Winkle. This is a very complex issue; however, the research
available to date is summarized as follows: Research with civilians
shows a significant minority of men perpetrate sexual violence. Most
men who use coercive tactics to obtain sex use those tactics repeatedly
over time; however, most rape perpetration occurs over a more limited
time frame. Hundreds of studies have examined risk factors for sexual
violence perpetration. Risk factors are behaviors, experiences,
attitudes, or cultural norms that are statistically associated with
self-reported sexual violence in research studies. Consistently
supported factors include: history of experiencing child abuse, a peer
group that supports forced sex, peer pressure to engage in sexual
activity, relationship conflict, sexual risk behaviors (early
initiation of sex, sexual promiscuity, casual sex), hostile views of
women, and attitudes supporting the use of violence. Studies have found
that a combination of risk factors expressed over time is more
predictive of sexual violence than single risk factors. Many risk
factors can be modified or mitigated, which facilitates reduction of
sexual violence. Multiple military studies have found that military
sexual violence perpetrators reflect similar risk factors and offending
patterns as civilian perpetrators. Similarities between sexual violence
perpetrated by military members and civilians suggests that civilian
research can be used to inform prevention approaches implemented in
military settings. The Department will continue to use this literature
to guide prevention planning and execution.
[See page 43.]
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING
February 13, 2019
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SPEIER
Ms. Speier. In at least 2016, the Academies and DOD considered
replacing the measure of unwanted sexual contact used in the Academy
survey with the UCMJ-linked measurement used in the active force
workplace and gender relations survey. The Academies and DOD reportedly
pushed back against adopting the active force measure. Why did the
Academies push back against the active force measurement? Why is the
unwanted sexual contact measure preferable?
Dr. Van Winkle. The Department determined that the Unwanted Sexual
Contact (USC) measure was a better fit for victim privacy and survey
administration considerations at the Academies. To better align with
language describing the sexual assault crimes defined in Article 120 of
the Uniform Code of Military Justice--and as part of its review and
administration of the Department's active duty sexual assault
prevalence survey in 2014--the RAND Corporation compared responses to
the existing USC measure to responses to the new sexual assault measure
it designed. RAND's comparison found no statistically significant
difference in how either measure estimated past-year prevalence of
sexual assault at the top-line. However, RAND's measure offered certain
advantages in conducting follow-on analysis of responses. In 2015, the
Department worked with the Academies to assess whether RAND's new
measure would be appropriate for administration of the Service Academy
Gender Relations (SAGR) survey. This assessment involved review of the
measure by Academy victim assistance staff and a small group of
selected cadets and midshipmen. Feedback obtained through this process
indicated that the new RAND measure was more explicit in language and
took much longer to complete than the USC measure. These observations
made use of the new RAND measure on the SAGR survey problematic in two
ways: 1. Administration time. The SAGR survey is administered in person
in a room with several hundred cadets and midshipmen at once. This is
done to keep response rates in the 70 to 80 percent range, as computer
administration has been associated with markedly lower response rates.
Students who may have experienced a past-year sexual assault would
spend a considerably longer time taking a survey with the RAND sexual
assault measure survey than a survey with the USC measure. The
Department concluded that increased administration time would likely
expose students taking a longer time with the survey to unwanted
scrutiny and/or assumptions about whether they were a victim of sexual
assault, which ultimately might impact a student's willingness to
disclose victimization on the survey. 2. Administration method. The
SAGR Survey is administered via paper and pencil rather than the
computer administration employed in the active and reserve components.
Again, by employing the in-person method, the Department has achieved
high response rates from cadets and midshipman on the SAGR Survey.
Active duty and reserve component members completing the survey via
computer can take a break and come back to it should the experience of
answering the RAND measure's very detailed questions become stressful
or troubling. However, similar breaks are not possible given the in-
person administration employed with the SAGR survey. Given the
anonymity of responses, there is no way for a student to take a break,
come back later, and finish the survey. The Department subsequently
asked the Academy Superintendents for their input on which measure the
SAGR should use to estimate past-year prevalence of sexual assault. The
Academy Superintendents unanimously requested the SAGR continue to
employ the USC measure to address not only survey administration time
and method concerns, but also consistency of their prevalence trend
information since 2006. Given this input, the DOD Sexual Assault
Prevention and Response Office and the Office of People Analytics
decided to keep the USC measure as the means for estimating past-year
prevalence of sexual assault on the SAGR Survey. The academy survey
continues to utilize the shorter unwanted sexual contact measure with
the scientific assurance that both measures yield similar, accurate
estimates of sexual assault prevalence.
Ms. Speier. In at least 2016, the Academies and DOD considered
replacing the measure of unwanted sexual contact used in the Academy
survey with the UCMJ-linked measurement used in the active force
workplace and gender relations survey. The Academies and DOD reportedly
pushed back against adopting the active force measure. Why did the
Academies push back against the active force measurement? Why is the
unwanted sexual contact measure preferable?
General Williams. USMA does not have record of ``pushing back''
against the measures in the DOD survey. We understand these questions
mirror language from the UCMJ and we have no issues with them as
presented. Further, we do not have an opinion at this time if unwanted
sexual contact is the more preferable measure. As this is a DOD wide
policy, we believe it would be more appropriate for OSD to respond to
this question.
Ms. Speier. In at least 2016, the Academies and DOD considered
replacing the measure of unwanted sexual contact used in the Academy
survey with the UCMJ-linked measurement used in the active force
workplace and gender relations survey. The Academies and DOD reportedly
pushed back against adopting the active force measure. Why did the
Academies push back against the active force measurement? Why is the
unwanted sexual contact measure preferable?
Admiral Carter. USNA did not push back on the language or standards
used to measure USC in the survey. However, in considering any future
changes, it is important to consider consistency in language and
standards over a long period of time to better establish reliable
trends and keep historical data relevant to contemporary data.
Ms. Speier. In at least 2016, the Academies and DOD considered
replacing the measure of unwanted sexual contact used in the Academy
survey with the UCMJ-linked measurement used in the active force
workplace and gender relations survey. The Academies and DOD reportedly
pushed back against adopting the active force measure. Why did the
Academies push back against the active force measurement? Why is the
unwanted sexual contact measure preferable?
General Silveria. The Service Academy Gender Relations (SAGR)
survey is conducted every even numbered year at all the service
academies and reported with the release of the SH&V report. The SAGR
reveals data specific to sexual harassment and sexual assault at each
of the Military Service Academies including the U.S Air Force Academy
(USAFA). This survey has been conducted for over a decade which allows
for analysis and tracking of trends and patterns. During the previous
discussions regarding the questions related to ``Unwanted Sexual
Contact,'' the justification for not changing the definitions to match
the active duty force instrument was that it would adversely impact the
ability to make longitudinal comparisons. In other words, changing the
questions would prevent the services and Congress from being able to
accurately compare future data with past data. Certainly, there are
valid arguments to be made regarding the use of an active force measure
that allows more accurate comparisons be made between the Academies and
active duty force; however, at the time of the discussions, it was
viewed as more beneficial to be able to make longitudinal comparisons
amongst the Service Academies. As such, this is one of the longest
existing surveys on a college campus of its kind which can allow for
data driven strategies and operations.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. ESCOBAR
Ms. Escobar. Dr. Van Winkle, what would you say contributed to the
nearly 50% increase in sexual harassment and sexual assault detailed in
the 2017-2018 Annual Report on Sexual Harassment and Violence at the
Military Service Academies?
Dr. Van Winkle. Survey results capture the experience of large
numbers of people with great scientific reliability and validity, but
they cannot isolate the causes behind those experiences or perceptions.
That said, the data indicate that academy approaches have not prevented
disrespectful, interpersonal conduct between cadets and midshipmen,
which is a driving force behind challenges in sustaining progress.
First, estimated rates of sexual harassment maintain at consistently
high rates, with 51 percent of academy women and 16 percent of academy
men indicating a past-year experience in APY 2017-2018. Second, marks
for confidence in the efforts of cadets and midshipmen peer leadership
continue to hover at relatively low rates. Finally, rates of alcohol
use among students continue to be a concern: More than half of sexual
assault incidents involved alcohol, and about 15 percent of women and
32 percent of men acknowledged heavy drinking in the past year.
However, the survey also found that most cadets and midshipmen believed
that Academy leadership make honest and reasonable efforts to stop
sexual assault and harassment. While the Department acknowledges the
high marks in Academy leadership, we recognize that this important
achievement is not by itself sufficient to combat these crimes.
To address unsatisfactory results, each of the Military Service
Academies have developed a plan of action that focuses on four key
lines of effort to address sexual assault and sexual harassment:
reinvigorating prevention efforts, improving sexual assault and
harassment reporting, enhancing a culture of respect, and promoting a
disciplined force. These plans will proactively engage with cadets and
midshipmen, especially at the student leadership level, and include:
Implementing policies, programs, and practices that
target and reduce sexual harassment and other forms of misconduct
between peers.
Focusing initiatives on improving cadet and midshipmen
leadership (e.g., selection criteria, how we train our student leaders
on sexual assault and harassment, how we hold student leaders
accountable).
In conjunction with these efforts, the Secretaries of the Military
Departments hosted a national university and college and US Academies
summit in April 2019 at the Naval Academy in Annapolis, Md., focused on
preventing sexual assault and sexual harassment.
Ms. Escobar. Dr. Van Winkle, in your opinion, what type of support
or resources do military service academies need from Congress to ensure
that students feel comfortable reporting sexual assault and harassment?
Dr. Van Winkle. The Military Service Academies (MSA) have developed
programs to provide students a professional response to all reported
allegations of sexual assault and sexual harassment. Upon making a
report of sexual assault, students may obtain victim assistance and
advocacy, healthcare, spiritual support, and confidential legal
counsel. The Department requires that Service leadership provide fully
resourced programs and oversight to ensure sexual assault prevention
and response programs function as designed. Likewise, students
reporting sexual harassment have a variety of services and support
options available to help them resolve complaints informally or
formally with direct command investigation and action. Should
legislative barriers arise, we would submit proposed legislative
remedies through the Department's legislative proposal process.
Ms. Escobar. Dr. Van Winkle, are victims aware of the variety of
support services available to them? Are there barriers in getting this
information out that Congress should be aware of?
Dr. Van Winkle. Students at each academy receive annual, mandatory
sexual assault training where they learn of the resources available to
them should they ever experience a sexual assault. During this
training, the academies introduce students to the sexual assault
response coordinator (SARC) as the single point of contact who can
provide information about the wide variety of resources available to
students who experience a sexual assault incident. In the event a
student experiences a sexual assault and files a report, the SARC
explains the options of both Restricted and Unrestricted reporting, as
well as the complete range of support services that are available to
the victim. DOD surveys indicate that there is a relatively high level
of fluency in the basic provisions of the Sexual Assault Prevention and
Response Program. There are no systemic barriers within the Department
to providing the sexual assault training and access to support
services.
Ms. Escobar. To the superintendents, what are the unique
circumstances of each academy that may have contributed to the dramatic
increase in sexual harassment and sexual assault?
General Williams. Based on the available data, USMA is unable to
identify any unique circumstances which would explain the increase in
prevalence or reporting at West Point during APY 17-18. We have
maintained vigilance over this and did not expect these results. We
have in fact noticed that the measures we took that were different than
previous years may have contributed to victim willingness to
anonymously report more incidents on the SAGR and for more victims to
report their incidents to SHARP personnel. Some of these actions
include (1) a deliberate focus on education to ensure our Cadets
understood the components of the crime itself, (2) creating the
conditions for victims to believe their voices mattered and needed to
be heard, and (3) to create safety and support for those willing to
come forward. In a very deliberate and focused manner, we examined the
following areas within our training and education program:
--The crime of sexual assault as it occurs in college settings
--Exploring the nuances of consent and the impact of alcohol in
relationship decision making
--Presenting information on male sexual assault, to destigmatize
this issue and create a common language and support to empower male
victims to report
--Breaking down the impact of victim blaming, to increase empathy
and support for victims
These actions are a few of the programmatic efforts and constitute
some measure of our continued efforts to create an integrated and
synchronized effort to create a culture of respect among our community.
Ms. Escobar. To the superintendents, what are the unique
circumstances of each academy that may have contributed to the dramatic
increase in sexual harassment and sexual assault?
Admiral Carter. While the United States Naval Academy did not
experience dramatic increases in sexual harassment and sexual assault
in the most recent survey, the survey demonstrates we have more work to
do. We are committed to eliminating sexual assault and sexual
harassment at the Naval Academy and we will continue to do all we can
to achieve that goal. USNA is unique among the Military Service
Academies in that it is physically located in a busy town with many
establishments serving alcohol and promoting a much more relaxed social
atmosphere than the professional atmosphere of our campus. The
immediate vicinity and easy access presents leadership challenges
different from West Point or Colorado Springs where there is a greater
distance and less interaction with immediate outside influences.
Historically, most of our incidents of USC and harassment occur off
campus and involve the use of alcohol.
Ms. Escobar. To the superintendents, what are the unique
circumstances of each academy that may have contributed to the dramatic
increase in sexual harassment and sexual assault?
General Silveria. When analyzing estimated sexual assault
prevalence data across the last decade, similar patterns emerge between
the service academies. In 2018 all academies had a significant increase
in estimated prevalence of sexual assault (women at US Naval Academy
(USNA) and USAFA and men at USNA). And in 2014 a significant drop in
estimated prevalence occurred across the three academies. When similar
patterns occur between institutions, particularly those that are
separated geographically and culturally, there likely other factors
that are impacting the data collected. We cannot rule out social
factors that go beyond each installation's gates. Numerous factors
including high profile military and civilian cases, leadership
turnover, and socio-cultural differences can influence estimated
prevalence and reporting data and impact our cadets' willingness to
exercise their voice, even on anonymous surveys. Examining general
trends over time between the academies supports the idea that something
larger than just what is occurring on the academy grounds may impact
the estimated sexual assault prevalence data. This is not to excuse us
from working on the solution or being responsible for what occurs on
our grounds, but does challenge us to open the aperture of what
prevention looks like. Determining the root cause of behavior is
challenging. We know that the specific population of college students
has a higher estimated rate of sexual assault. This year we saw an
increase in the instances of alcohol use by either or both the offender
and victim. Alcohol use and misuse is another factor within this aged
population that impacts estimated prevalence of sexual assault. USAFA
saw an increase in the number of cadets who enter into the academy
having already experienced sexual assault in their past. There is a
higher risk of re-victimization by those who have a past experience of
victimization. Additionally, cultural indicators such as victim blaming
beliefs increased this year according to the data from the SAGR survey.
These data points, though not specifically unique to USAFA, may all
impact the estimated prevalence of harassment and assault at USAFA.
Further analysis is needed and programs based on such analysis are
required to impact estimated rates of prevalence and related issues at
USAFA.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BERGMAN
Mr. Bergman. Mr. Christensen, in the hearing, you recounted a
conversation you had with the Vice Commandant of Cadets at the Air
Force Academy and that the Vice Commandant said he didn't have time to
meet with victims of sexual assault. I have since been made aware that
that particular conversation did not happen in the way you have
suggested. Could you please clarify your statement?
Colonel Christensen. You have asked about a conversation I
referenced during my testimony with the Vice Commandant of Cadets.
Contrary to the inference in the QFR, my testimony accurately reflected
my conversation. The conversation occurred as prelude to the Vice
Commandant meeting with my client in a hearing that could lead to her
being removed from the Academy. Based on my conversation with my
client, as well as many other survivors, I was and am concerned that
commanders rarely speak with survivors in other than adversarial
settings. I believe this colors their understanding of the impact of
trauma on victims. Very early during my meeting, I asked the Vice
Commandant if he had ever met with a victim in a non-adversarial
setting. He responded, as I testified, he had 4000 cadets and did not
have time to do that. After my testimony, the Vice Cadet reached out to
me to discuss my testimony, and I agreed to talk with him. After our
conversation I told him I would write a letter to the Chairwoman and
Ranking member. The Vice Commandant did not ask me to do this. I
drafted the letter and sent it to the Vice Commandant to see if he
thought it was fair. He agreed that it was. As I said in my letter, our
conversation was very productive and professional. We left the
conversation in a much better place than our previous meeting. We did
not reach an agreement on the words the Vice Commandant used; however,
my prior testimony accurately reflects my memory of the exchange, and I
stand by it. I did not send the letter to correct or diminish the words
I used in my testimony. Instead, I sent the letter because after our
most recent conversation I did not believe it was the Vice Commandant's
intent to indicate he did not have time to meet with victims. After
this conversation, I believed it was necessary to bring this to the
attention of the subcommittee to provide context.
[all]