- STRENGTHENING AMERICAN DIPLOMACY: REVIEWING THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S BUDGET, OPERATIONS AND POLICY PRIORITIES
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
STRENGTHENING AMERICAN DIPLOMACY:
REVIEWING THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S BUDGET,
OPERATIONS AND POLICY PRIORITIES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MAY 23, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-140
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-175PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
Amy Porter, Chief of Staff
Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director
Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
WITNESS
The Honorable Mike Pompeo, Secretary of State, U.S. Department of
State..........................................................
5
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
The Honorable Mike Pompeo: Prepared statement....................
8
APPENDIX
Hearing notice...................................................
80
Hearing minutes..................................................
81
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........
83
Written responses from the Honorable Mike Pompeo to questions
submitted for the record by:
The Honorable Edward R. Royce, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California, and chairman, Committee on
Foreign Affairs..............................................
85
The Honorable Eliot L. Engel, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York........................................
86
The Honorable Christopher H. Smith, a Representative in
Congress from the State of New Jersey........................
121
The Honorable Albio Sires, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New Jersey......................................
132
The Honorable Paul Cook, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California..........................................
137
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly...............................
143
The Honorable David Cicilline, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Rhode Island...............................
147
The Honorable Ami Bera, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California..........................................
150
The Honorable Lois Frankel, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Florida.........................................
155
The Honorable Robin L. Kelly, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Illinois........................................
162
The Honorable Dina Titus, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Nevada..............................................
164
The Honorable Bradley S. Schneider, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Illinois..........................
166
The Honorable Ted Lieu, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California..........................................
175
STRENGTHENING AMERICAN DIPLOMACY:
REVIEWING THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S
BUDGET, OPERATIONS AND POLICY
PRIORITIES
----------
WEDNESDAY, MAY 23, 2018
House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:00 a.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. We will call the committee to order.
I'd like to welcome Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and
congratulations, Mr. Secretary. Congratulations on your service
to the U.S. Army, to your service in the U.S. House of
Representatives, as CIA Director, and now, as our Nation's 70th
Secretary of State.
The committee looks forward to working with you, in a
bipartisan way, to meet our challenges and to seize our
opportunities.
We have made important progress on a major security
challenge--routing ISIS on the battlefield. This is a big
development, one that you've played a role in, and, Mr.
Secretary, we must maintain the momentum.
Islamist terrorism will threaten us for years and years to
come. Increasing pressure on Iran and checking its hegemonic
moves is imperative.
Our partner, Israel, is on the front lines. But Iran's ICBM
program is a danger to us--intercontinental means from there to
here.
Your Monday speech, Mr. Secretary, outlined a much-needed
strategy to match Iran's range of hostile activities. The
challenge now is to present a unified front with our allies.
Last budget hearing, I said that our Nation's longstanding
commitment to global stability, open markets, alliances, and
the rule of law, and human rights has paid off greatly. If we
don't lead, others will.
Our formidable military, though, is only one side of the
coin. You, Secretary Pompeo, have rightly recognized that
diplomacy must lead our foreign policy.
American diplomats serve on the front lines. We need them
well-trained. I'm encouraged by the department's interest in
strengthening the Foreign Service Institute.
And we need sufficient funding to combat wildlife and drug
trafficking, to build open markets, to save lives during
natural disasters, and to do the many other things our aid
accounts support.
The appropriations process will adequately fund diplomacy
and development, I believe. The National Endowment for
Democracy, in particular, should be strongly supported.
Let's face it. Democracy is on the ropes worldwide.
Supporting it is a moral and strategic good. NED is backing
critical programming in Venezuela, Nigeria, and worldwide.
It is no time to cut this programming. On the challenge of
Russia, yes, we should cooperate with Moscow when possible. But
we must diligently protect our national security.
The administration has rightly provided lethal arms to
Ukraine, which remains under siege by Russian proxies. A far
more severe threat is Moscow's information war. This committee
has heard that Moscow's goal isn't so much to make Western
citizens think this or think that. Russia's goal is to destroy
all confidence in objective thought.
By undermining fact-based discussion with lies, our enemies
hope to gravely damage Western democracies. The State
Department must aggressively counter disinformation through its
Global Engagement Center, other means, and with department
officials speaking out for the truth.
We wish the administration success negotiating with North
Korea. It will be a tall task to strike a viable, effective
nuclear agreement.
Ranking Member Engel and I have led efforts to ratchet up
the financial pressure on North Korea over many years with the
legislation we have passed here in the committee. Keep up that
pressure, Mr. Secretary.
It is a big reason why the Kim regime wants to talk with
President Trump. And as this process plays out, work closely
with Congress. We're stronger together.
And I'll now turn to our ranking member, Mr. Eliot Engel.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Secretary,
welcome to the Foreign Affairs Committee. We always pride our
committee in being the most bipartisan committee in Congress
and always say that we believe when we talk about foreign
policy, partisanship should stop at the water's edge.
It doesn't mean that we won't have disagreements and some
of those we are going to discuss today. But I think that this
committee, perhaps more than any other committee in Congress,
has worked very effectively to set up bipartisan majorities.
So welcome, Mr. Secretary. You're no stranger here, and we
look forward to what you have to say, obviously, today.
After the administration sent its 2017 budget request,
which we were very disappointed with, Congress' message was
clear. Cutting diplomacy and development by a third was
unacceptable.
We sent that message through letters and statements and,
finally, with the 2018 funding bill, and let me say once again
bipartisan majorities stopped those draconian cuts from going
forward.
But this administration has ignored that message,
unfortunately, and rejected the will of Congress. The White
House wants to cut $334 million as part of the so-called
recision package.
How short-sighted is this request? The day after we
received these proposed cuts including cutting $\1/4\ billion
from our Ebola response, reports surfaced of an Ebola outbreak
in the DRC.
The reason we fight pandemic overseas is so we don't have
to fight them here at home. The American people, whether in New
York or in Kansas, are concerned about things like Ebola
because diseases don't respect borders.
We cannot allow another outbreak to go unchecked because
the White House considers arbitrary budget cuts to be good
politics.
Now, the State Department--and I realize this was all
happening before you came, Mr. Secretary, so I am hoping that
you can work with us in trying to change these things and to
right the wrongs--the State Department has now sent us another
budget that would again slash diplomacy and development efforts
to promote our security that keep America safe. It's, frankly,
insulting that the administration would send us another request
like this when we rejected it last year.
So I predict that Congress will reject this budget just as
we did last year's. Again, Congress, on a bipartisan basis,
rejected the budget.
Fortunately, Congress has the final say on how much we
spend on international affairs. But whatever the size of the
check Congress writes, it's, obviously, the administration's
job to make policy and manage departments and, Mr. Secretary, I
worry about what you've inherited at the State Department.
The administration's first priority was an ill-conceived
reorganization effort. It cost millions of taxpayer dollars for
private consultants but resulted in absolutely nothing beyond a
demoralized and depleted State Department.
On your predecessor's watch, the department lost more than
200 Foreign Service officers, many among our most senior
diplomats, some of the very experienced diplomats you once
called incredibly professional.
The department will soon have only a single official at the
rank of career Ambassador, the highest rank of our diplomats. A
staggering number of senior positions remain vacant.
Perhaps most troubling are the allegations from
whistleblowers who have reported to this committee that the
administration has targeted career employees because of their
perceived political beliefs.
This is, potentially, a violation of laws governing State
Department personnel. It also strikes at the idea that politics
should stop at the water's edge--that the way we carry out
foreign policy should put American interests first and leave
partisan interests and concerns behind. It's how we run this
committee.
But that principle has been under attack recently. I think
you can draw a line from the moment straight back to the most
egregious example, the recent memory of playing politics with a
tragedy. I know the Benghazi Select Committee on which you sat,
the creation that was set up to tear Hillary Clinton down as
the majority leader admitted that was used to impugn the
character of one of your predecessors.
Partisanship has no place in the halls of the State
Department. I am glad the Inspector General is now looking into
those whistleblower allegations as Senator Menendez, Mr.
Cummings, and I advised.
But the department has not produced the required documents
that would allow Congress to conduct effective oversight
despite a commitment from the spokesperson to do so.
So I hope, Mr. Secretary, that you'll help to get us those
documents and that you'll leave behind any political
considerations in the way the department is run under your
leadership.
Unfortunately, after 16 months we are feeling the effects
of a foreign policy that has marginalized diplomacy and made
Americans less safe.
The President has alienated our friends, doubted the value
of our alliances, and undermined American credibility around
the world.
The result? A recent Gallup poll put America's global
approval rating at an historical low of 30 percent, nearly 20
percent lower than the previous year.
At the rate we are breaking our word and unwinding our
country's commitments, I imagine we will see that number dip
even further.
The administration's slogan of ``America first'' it's
looking, unfortunately, more like ``America last'' and
``America alone'' and ``America by itself in the world'' where
we don't nurture alliances and cultivate new friendships, where
we don't put our values at the center of our politics, where we
don't help countries become stronger and more stable partners
on the global stage.
An America in that world is an America that's less safe.
Perhaps the worst example that the administration has blatantly
ignored is the ongoing threat to our security, which is
Russia's attack on American democracy.
As you said when you served as CIA Director, we are staring
another Russian attack in the face. I agree with you. I am
worried that the President is just going to let it happen.
I am worried that even if we did want to push back, the
State Department is so hobbled and hallowed out that we won't
be able to. I am worried that the administration is giving
Russia a pass because Putin supported President Trump over
Hillary Clinton.
If we allow foreign interference in our elections so long
as it supports our political objectives, then we have put party
before country and put our democracy in crisis. I would be just
as outraged if the Russians helped Hillary Clinton. I think the
Russians should stay out of our democracy.
There are so many issues I could get into but I want all
our members to have a chance to ask questions today. There are
tough questions, Mr. Secretary, but I look forward to working
with you and I know that your service here in the House will do
you well in working together with the House to effectuate a
better foreign policy for our country.
Thank you.
Chairman Royce. This morning, I am pleased to welcome
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo to the committee. Secretary
Pompeo previously served as Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency and as a Member of Congress representing
the people of the Fourth District of Kansas.
Among his committee assignments, he served as a member of
the Intelligence Committee. He also served in the U.S. Army and
is a graduate of both West Point and Harvard Law School, and we
appreciate the Secretary being with us today.
Without objection, the witness' full prepared statement
will be made part of the record. Members will have 5 calendar
days to submit any statements or questions or any extraneous
material that they might have for the record.
The goal today is to get to all of our members. To make
that goal, I'll ask members to be aware of their allotted 5
minutes. That's for your question and that's for the
Secretary's answers to your questions.
We do have questions for the record, and speaking of that,
I have a question for the record that I'd like to submit on
behalf of Mr. Donovan, without objection, addressing the State
Department's role in combating the opioid crisis that is
ravaging communities across America.
So we will begin now with Secretary Pompeo's testimony.
Mr. Secretary.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MIKE POMPEO, SECRETARY OF STATE,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Royce.
Thank you, Ranking Member Engel. It's good to see you both
again, and thank you, distinguished members of the committee,
that I had the privilege to serve with. It is great to be back,
and I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the 2019 budget
request----
Chairman Royce. And, Mr. Secretary, maybe if we straighten
the microphone it'll be----
Secretary Pompeo. Yes. How's that? Is that good enough?
Chairman Royce. Perfect.
Secretary Pompeo. All right. Very good.
Thanks. I want to talk about both the State Department and
USAID's budgets this morning. In order to achieve the
objectives laid out in the national security strategy we have a
plan and you'll hear a great deal about it today.
The proposed request reflects our obligation to use
taxpayer dollars wisely and effectively. Our request also makes
clear the United States must exert a proportional financial
commitment in the pursuit of goals shared by the entire
international community.
It's time for other nations, especially those with high
GDPs, to assume greater responsibilities and devote greater
resources toward our common objectives. Whether it's crushing
terrorists, stopping Iran's malign behavior, strengthening the
NATO Alliance, eradicating infectious diseases, and so much
more, we expect good help--good financial support from our
partners and allies.
President Trump is committed to diplomacy as the primary
means of achieving the United States foreign policy objectives.
So am I.
We must maintain America's historic role as a truly global
power whose first instinct and overwhelming preference is to
use diplomacy to solve global challenges. We are already seeing
this in the preparations for our historic meeting with North
Korea, still scheduled for June 12th.
We have a generational opportunity to resolve a major
national security challenge. Our eyes are wide open to the
lessons of history but we are optimistic that we can achieve an
outcome that would be great for the world.
Our posture will not change until we see credible steps
taken toward the complete, verifiable, and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.
On Monday, I unveiled a new direction for the President's
Iran strategy. We will apply unprecedented financial pressure,
coordinate with our DoD colleagues on deterrence efforts,
support the Iranian people--perhaps more importantly--and hold
out the prospect for a new deal with Iran. It simply needs to
change its behavior.
We seek to work with as many partners, friends, allies as
possible to achieve the common objective of stopping all of
Iran's nuclear and non-nuclear threats.
The President's highest priority is keeping the American
people safe. This request for $7.3 billion in security
assistance will help protect Americans at home and overseas and
I look forward to talking more about that today.
The State Department will continue to lead the
international efforts to denuclearize North Korea and prevent
other actors from unlawfully acquiring weapons of mass
destruction as their means of delivery, while strengthening the
capacity of partner nations to do so as well. Countering
proliferation is at the top of President Trump's national
security agenda.
The budget request also calls for $5.7 billion support for
coalition efforts to continue to defeat ISIS and other
transnational terrorist and criminal groups that threaten
Americans everywhere.
The State Department and USAID will sustain programs that
address the conditions on the ground that give rise to those
threats and we will diligently work to attract additional
donors to support these very same efforts.
America's prosperity and national security depend on a
strong and growing American economy. This budget request seeks
$2.2 billion to help stimulate American economic growth by
expanding markets for U.S. investment and ensuring that partner
countries can fully participate in the global economy.
America's message, a noble one, must be shared with the
world at all times.
Chairman Royce, you mentioned the Global Engagement Center.
We will work with the $55 million-plus available to cover both
its original mission--counter extremism--plus countering state-
sponsored disinformation campaigns.
We will not tolerate Russian interference in our 2018
elections. Much work has been done. There is more to do. Rest
assured that we will take the appropriate counter measures in
response to the continued Russian efforts.
Finally, let me also update you on what's happening inside
the State Department. Our workforce is the most important
asset. Since become Secretary of State, now 3 weeks and a
couple days ago, one of my highest priorities has been ensuring
the finest diplomatic corps in the world is fully prepared and
empowered to do its work in every corner.
I am unleashing teams to do what they do best on behalf of
the American people. Last week, I held my first town hall in
which I laid out my vision and committed to working as one team
with all of our personnel.
In 3 weeks, they've give me great support. I have taken
their counsel and I have relied on their expertise greatly.
There are many challenges that remain.
Among my first acts was to begin to put the team back on
the field. We lifted the hiring freeze on eligible family
members--indeed, broadened that to lifting the hiring freeze
for the entire Foreign and Civil Service.
All Foreign Service and Civil Service hiring will be
consistent with funding levels but the freeze is no longer. To
help the team get on the field, I also know that we have got
work to do on some of our systems' IT at the front.
I know our professionals need that assistance to perform
their work efficiently.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I am happy to conclude my
statement, as it's been submitted for the record. I am happy to
take questions from you and the committee.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Pompeo follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Chairman Royce. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary.
Let me begin by recognizing your efforts to secure the
release of Americans wrongly detained in North Korea. So we are
very glad to have them home.
When we think about what happened to Otto Warmbier, your
efforts were all the more important in terms of securing them.
You are one of the few Americans also to have met Kim Jong-un,
and I would just ask you for your opinion on this. What are his
goals for this negotiation?
Many have speculated that one of those goals is to try to
split the U.S. and South Korea and our alliance with South
Korea. I will just ask you what do you think his goal is here?
Secretary Pompeo. So in my conversations with him, we've
talked about what our mutual goals are--the things that the
world demands and that America demands and the things that
North Korea wants to see for itself as well.
There's places where we still have lots of work to do to
find common ground. But he has shared, candidly, that he
understands that economic growth for his people, the well-being
of his people depends on a strategic shift and we hope he's
prepared to make that.
Our demands have been unambiguous. When I spoke with him, I
could not have been clearer about the scope of the verification
work that would be required--all of the elements that would be
necessary in order for America to understand that there had
been real denuclearization. He took those on board. In return,
he made clear it was important to him that when that time
came--when those objectives had been achieved--that he, in
turn, would receive economic help from America in the form of
private sector businesses, knowledge know-how from others,
perhaps--contributions, foreign assistance, and the like and
that he wanted security assurances from the world--the end of
the status that sits between South and North Korea, with the
eventual goal of being a peace treaty.
Those were the objectives we discussed. I am very hopeful
that he and President Trump will get a chance to elaborate on
that further in the next couple weeks.
Chairman Royce. As you prepare for the potential June
summit in Singapore, I think it's very important we keep the
pressure applied here to the Kim regime.
I will ask you this question--when will the administration
begin implementing sanctions against shipping registries--this
is something that I've had a particular concern about--on those
governments that knowingly violate U.N. Security Council
resolutions barring trade with North Korea?
These were mandated by Title 3 of the act we passed here,
the Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act.
Secretary Pompeo. I don't know the answer to that. Let me
get back to you, Congressman Royce. I do know the
administration has, again, redoubled its efforts on ship-to-
ship transfers----
Chairman Royce. Okay.
Secretary Pompeo [continuing]. Something I think is
imperative. With respect to the registry and sanctions, if I
may I will take that back for the record.
Chairman Royce. I appreciate that.
The last question I was going to ask you, Mr. Secretary, is
for those who've talked to anybody who's ever been in and out
of those prison camps in North Korea, it is a human rights
nightmare.
You have got over 100,000 North Koreans suffering in
barbaric conditions in those camps. It's important that any
future economic engagement with North Korea not empower the
regime to continue its brutal mistreatment of Koreans in that
kind of circumstance, and regardless of any agreement, we
should be ramping up, I think, Radio Free Asia broadcasting and
dissemination of information.
And I think it's critical that we maintain our military
deterrence. Last week, the U.S. reportedly cancelled a U.S. B-
52 bomber exercise over South Korea. Was this a concession to
Kim Jong-un's regime?
Secretary Pompeo. Chairman Royce, I will leave the
discussion of that military exercise to Secretary Mattis. It is
my view that we have made zero concessions to Chairman Kim to
date and we have no intention of doing so.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Well, in our interest to get to all the members, I am going
to go to Mr. Engel now for his questions.
Thank you.
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, budgets reflect an administration's values,
or lack thereof, and I realize a lot of this happened before
you came. So we are looking for you----
Secretary Pompeo. For 2020, yes.
Mr. Engel [continuing]. To try to right the wrong. The
international affairs budget proposal that President Trump now
has sent to Congress 2 years in a row brings with it a clear
message to the world that the United States has no interest in
maintaining our global leadership role because of the cuts.
It's a budget that makes Americans less safe. And as you
know, I am not alone in feeling this way. Over 150 retired
generals and admirals, former Secretaries of State from both
parties, Fortune 500 CEOs, and religious leaders all agree that
the administration's proposed cuts to the international affairs
budget would have a devastating effect on U.S. global
leadership.
So why are all these people wrong? In the last 2 years,
Congress restored the cuts. Is Congress wrong, too? I would
like to hear your views on it and I hope you will lead us into
a more enlightened path than we've seen so far.
Secretary Pompeo. Ranking Member Engel, thanks for the
question.
Here's the commitment I've made to the team at the State
Department, the commitment I've made to President Trump, the
commitment I will make to you here today.
I will ensure that the State Department has every dollar it
needs to achieve its mission around the world. You mentioned
the international affairs budget. There's humanitarian
assistance money. There's lots of different pieces of the State
Department's budget. I will make sure we have every single
dollar we need and not $1 more.
Mr. Engel. And I hope not $1 less.
Secretary Pompeo. Every dollar we need, not $1 more.
Mr. Engel. This past March, Ranking Member Cummings,
Senator Menendez, and I wrote to the State Department
expressing concern over allegations that senior officials,
including the Director of Policy Planning, retaliated against
career State Department employees based on their national
origin or because they were perceived as not sufficiently loyal
to the President.
Do you believe officials who targeted career employees in
this way should be working at the State Department?
Secretary Pompeo. I do not.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. In the letter I sent with Ranking
Member Cummings and Senator Menendez, we requested access to
emails and other documents, a request that Heather Nauert
confirmed to the press would be granted.
So far we haven't heard anything. Can you give us an idea
of when will we be granted access to those documents?
Secretary Pompeo. I can't, but I will get you an answer.
You have my commitment I will have you an answer on the time
line by the end of this week.
Mr. Engel. Okay. Thank you.
And finally, you said--and I agree with you--that Russia is
working to interfere in this year's election just as it did in
2016. Has the administration done enough to deter and
countering Russian interference in our next election, which is
only 6 months away?
Secretary Pompeo. Indeed, elections are ongoing, as you all
know better than I do, right. We have primary elections going
on even as we speak.
There is a great deal more work to do. Having said that, I
am incredibly proud of the work that this administration has
done in countering Russia. It is light years better than was
done in the previous administration. I could go on for a long
time speaking about them. I am happy to enumerate them if you'd
like to do so.
But I have to say there's more work to do. We have not been
able to achieve effective deterrence of some of these efforts
of the Russians. But this administration has taken enormous
efforts to push back against Russia that haven't been done in
an awfully long time either here in the United States or,
frankly, from our partners who are even more threatened by
Russia than we are in Europe and elsewhere.
Mr. Engel. So is it your position that the administration
has forestalled the next attack on our democracy? Because if
so, I haven't seen it.
Secretary Pompeo. No responsible government official would
ever state that they believe they've done enough to forestall
any attack on the United States of America.
We work diligently at it each day. We reduce threats. We
take them from the battlefield. We take them from the economic
sphere. We reduce them diplomatically. We work at it hard every
day. But I will never share with you that I believe we have
accomplished that to 100 percent certainty.
Mr. Engel. Okay. I look forward to working with you on all
these issues. There are, obviously, many important issues--our
support for Israel, Iran's aggression, and we could go on and
on--and I hope that this committee can be a partner with you.
Our views may diverge, but we are all Americans and we all
care about these issues and I think it's very important to
discuss them, to have hearings, and we are glad that you're
here this morning.
Secretary Pompeo. Yes, sir. I am counting on the
partnership with this committee on both sides of the aisle.
Mr. Engel. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen of Florida.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, welcome. It's great to see you in this
position. I wanted to commend you and the administration for
calling this week's election in Venezuela what it was--a sham
and illegitimate.
The administration has stood strong in support of the
Venezuelan people, using new Executive orders and targeting the
Maduro regime with sanctions. Thank you for that.
I also want to thank you for the actions the administration
has taken against the Ortega regime. The situation in Nicaragua
is quickly deteriorating and it is alarming--over 75 killed and
hundreds more injured or detained in just these past weeks.
We need to take swift action before we are facing a similar
situation--a crisis in Nicaragua--that we face in Venezuela.
I urge the administration to press our friends in the
Senate to pass our NICA bill so it has even more tools at its
disposal to hold Ortega accountable. We passed it out of the
full House twice already.
I also wanted to follow up on a letter that I had sent to
you last week alongside Congressman Deutch, McCaul, and Lowey.
We've met with the families of the American citizens and legal
permanent residents being held in Iran many times and it's
clear that they're growing frustrated.
They see Americans being freed from North Korea and they
are so happy for them and their families, but I only reminds
them that there hasn't been any continuity or leadership within
the administration to resolve their cases.
But now that the President has announced his intent to
appoint a special Presidential envoy for hostage affairs, we
sincerely hope that this individual will lead on those hostage
cases and have the authority to bring them home.
I ask for a written response on this following question,
Mr. Secretary. Does the administration support the Reciprocal
Access to Tibet Act, H.R. 1872?
It's a common sense that would help stop China's
destabilizing behavior in Tibet by revoking the visa of any
Chinese official found to be responsible for restricting the
access of U.S. citizens to Tibet.
And then the one question that I have for you to answer--
the what question--I wanted to follow up on something that I
had asked Ambassador Satterfield last month. He said he would
get me a written response but I don't--I don't have it yet.
What is the justification for allowing the PLO office to
remain open, given the lapse in waiver authority with no new
waiver having been issued?
And it's particularly timely, Mr. Secretary, given that the
Palestinians submitted a referral on Israel to the ICC this
week, which would trigger several provisions of U.S. law.
So that's the one question I have and thank you for the
administration moving the Embassy to its rightful capital.
Secretary Pompeo. Congresswoman Ros-Lehtinen, thank you.
With respect to leaving the office open without a waiver,
with your permission I will get back to you and find out the
details. There may be a legal issue that I am not aware of.
With respect more broadly to issues there, continued
funding for UNRRA is under review. We are trying to figure out
how to make sure we get that right, to continue to make sure
that there's security while note rewarding bad behavior. We are
deeply aware of the Taylor Force Act and its implications as
well and we are working through that process.
I've had one chance to be briefed on the State Department's
role there. There will be more. And if I might take just 1
second to address two other points you made, first, with
respect to Venezuela we did this morning receive a formal
notification that our charge d'affaires had been PNGed.
We will respond appropriately, certainly, reciprocally. But
perhaps more than that, perhaps proportionately.
We understand that there's a second U.S. officer who will
also be PNGed. We are watching the Maduro regime continue to
engage in destructive behavior for the Venezuelan people.
And then, finally, you opened with your concerns about the
hostages being held by the Islamic Republic of Iran. I know
those cases well--the case of Bob Levinson. I mentioned three
others in my remarks on Monday.
I know Mr. O'Brien as well, who will be our special envoy,
know that it will a very important part of what the State
Department does to try and get not only those held in Iran but
Americans held throughout the world back home to their
families. It was quite a remarkable thing to be able to bring
home three from North Korea. There remains a great deal of work
to do.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. It's so wonderful to have you in this
post. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Brad Sherman of California.
Mr. Sherman. I will have a number of statements and
questions for the record. I know we have this 5-minute time
limit and I look forward to reading most of your answers.
As to Iran--you knew I would do that--as to Iran, we need
to get Europe on our side to impose sanctions, whether or not
they view those as sanctions because they don't like the Iran
deal or because they don't like Iran's other non-nuclear
policies.
I want to thank you for bringing to the attention of our
European friends the assassinations that Iran has been
responsible for in Europe. I know you faced some push back on
that.
But whether it's the death in Bulgaria in 2012 by the
assassination of Hezbollah, an Iranian surrogate, or whether
it's the death just last year in Istanbul or whether it's the
Netherlands assassination of an advocate for the Arab minority
in Iran, there are assassinations in Europe.
And you should know that sitting right there Secretary
Kerry told this committee that it is fully consistent with the
JCPOA for the United States to impose sanctions on Iran for
their non-nuclear wrongdoing including sanctions against the
Central Bank of Iran.
I had only wished that the administration had gone to
Europe, urging sanctions for that reason rather than asking
them to repudiate the JCPOA.
I want to associate myself with the ranking member as to
the issue of resources and particularly ask you to focus on
appointing an East Asia and South Asia Assistant Secretary.
As to Pakistan, it is a country of great importance to us
and has various regions. I hope the State Department would do
public diplomacy in the Sindhi language and I hope that you
would reach out to the leaders of Pakistan about the
disappearances in Sindh--the force disappearances.
As to North Korea, I can understand that your bargaining
position is a complete immediate dropping of their entire
nuclear weapons program in a verifiable and irreversible
manner.
That has been referred to as the Libya model. I would hope
that, while you can go into negotiations with that, if you can
come out with verifiable limitations, an end to the creation of
new fissile material, a halt permanently to their ICBM program,
that should not be regarded as a failure simply because you
don't get complete verifiable irreversible denuclearization of
the Korean Peninsula.
As to Turkey, I hope that the administration would oppose
the sale and prevent the sale of the F-35s. They are not a
weapon to be used against terrorists. They're a weapon to be
used against Greece.
And I hope the State Department would at least be neutral
should Congress consider, as we are considering, the
remembrance of the millions of Armenian, Greek, Assyrian,
Chaldean, and Syriac victims of the Ottoman Empire at the
beginning of the last century.
As to our trade deficit with China, that grew from $309
billion to $337 billion in the first year of the administration
and I hope that we don't see a shuffle where we continue to
import oil, then China buys our oil and natural gas, and then
we are told, oh, we've done something about the trade deficit.
We should not count oil and gas exports to China as a reduction
in the trade deficit.
I would hope that when you talk to President Sisi you urge
him to protect the Christian minority and note that only 53
permits have been issued to renovate or build churches when
over 5,500 applications have been made.
One question for an oral response or a quick response, and
that is: Can we meet our challenges around the world with a 30
percent cut in the foreign aid budget?
Secretary Pompeo. I am still poring through the reports on
this. A 30 percent cut seems like an awful lot to achieve, so
you have my word. As I said, we are going to get this piece
right, I assure you.
And I want to comment on one other. I am close to making a
number of significant announcements about new members of the
team--Assistant Secretary for East Asia Affairs and South
Central Asia amongst them.
Ambassador Shannon is retiring here shortly. We'll need a
replacement for him and we are very close to moving along.
We've got to get them through the Senate, but I am looking
forward to getting the whole team built back.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Chris Smith of New Jersey.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Secretary, thank you for your leadership.
Thank you for recognizing the existential threat that Iran
poses with regards to nuclear weapons and for recognizing what
needs to be done to try to get us to a better place and a
negotiated text that is viable and predictable and will protect
the security of the United States, Israel, and others. So thank
you for that.
Mr. Secretary, as author of the Trafficking Victims
Protection Act, a law that created a comprehensive whole of
government approach to combatting sex and labor trafficking,
protecting women from this unbelievable cruelty, both
domestically and internationally, I respectfully ask, if you
would, to move as quickly as possible on appointing an
Ambassador-at-Large.
That post, which is the point person, has gone unfulfilled,
and I know you're new on the job, and I know that you care
deeply about that issue. Please move on that.
And in like manner, in 2004 I authored the Anti-Semitism
Special Envoy. That too has not been filled, and I know you
care deeply about combatting this scourge of anti-Semitism
which is rising all over the globe. Please move on that as
well.
Secretary Pompeo. You have my word we'll move on them.
Mr. Smith. I appreciate that.
And thank you for ratcheting up the pressure on Joseph
Kabila. You know, we have been working really hard in our
Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and
International Organizations.
We want a smooth transition, as smooth as possible, and
Kabila certainly has the capability to cause unbelievable
violence and war, and the sanctions certainly play a real--and
I know you have already meted out some of those sanctions.
I especially want to thank you for designating India,
Brazil, and now Japan as violative of the Sean and David
Goldman International Child Parental Abduction Return Act.
Japan is notorious for not returning American children,
including American service members' children, and your
department now has taken that step which previously was not
done to say they are noncompliant with the Goldman Act, and I
deeply appreciate that and I hope there will be follow-up on
sanctions with that.
With regards to the negotiations with China, one of the big
misses with North Korea, China, and Iran, especially with the
hostages, was not including human rights in the talks.
Andrew Natsios, who worked on North Korea issues very
effectively--a former USAID Administrator--said the big miss
with North Korea was keeping human rights separate from all the
negotiations. So I encourage you, if you would. Xi Jinping is
in a race to the bottom with Kim, frankly, and other dictators
around the world on religious freedom persecution and like-
minded human rights abuses. So please make that a more robust
part of the efforts. I know you, personally, believe that and I
hope you will do that.
And, finally, over the last couple of days, weeks, I've
been meeting with Hua Qu, whose husband has now been held in
Iran in Evin Prison for 653 days. Her husband, Xiyue Wang, is
an American. He's a graduate student and has done nothing
wrong. He had all the preclearances before he went to Iran to
do his studies and then before he returned was arrested and has
been maltreated.
His wife, at a big Princeton rally that she put together,
said, and I quote--very, very telling--she appealed to you and
to the President. ``My husband,'' she said, ``is an innocent
man, Mr. President. He is in prison solely because he is an
American.''
I just encourage you and I know you believe this and we now
have a hostage and perhaps it'll be part of his portfolio--Mr.
O'Brien--Charles O'Brien--who will work on this. It has to be
24/7 to get these Americans to safety because they are being
used as pawns by the Iranian regime.
And, again, having seen her tears, her family, her little
boy, it just breaks your heart. So the more you can do on that,
the better.
Secretary Pompeo. Yes, sir. She is correct in her analysis.
Her husband is completely innocent and held for a singular
reason, and I hope you will come out and join me at the State
Department in a couple weeks when we roll out our International
Religious Freedom Report. I invite all of you to join us. It's
an important day. Much work to be done there as well.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, and I would note David
Saperstein, our former Ambassador-at-Large, obviously, did a
wonderful job, and Sam Brownback is doing a wonderful job.
You're doing a great job on religious freedom. It is one of the
most elemental of all human rights in the world. It is under
assault perhaps as never before from radical Islamic belief to
communist dictatorships.
So, again, I want to thank you for the work that you're
doing on that. My hope is that Vietnam will be designated a CPC
country. I also hope that Erdogan in Turkey would also be so
designated for what he has d1 years to date against the
Orthodox as well as so many others.
So I thank you.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Greg Meeks of New York.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I have some concerns because I can recall
your immediate predecessor sitting here and he said almost
exactly the same thing that you said about the budget--that
they would not spend $1 more. And yet, we received such drastic
cuts that you heard Mr. Engel speak about and other members.
So I am worried about that aspect of it. You know, when
preparing for this hearing I couldn't help but go back and I
looked at some videotape, and the videotape was actually of
you, Mr. Secretary, and the attitude that you had about a
predecessor--you didn't give her any courtesy when Secretary
Hillary Clinton was sitting in a seat before the Benghazi
Committee and you scolded her. You went after her with venom. I
couldn't believe the tape when I saw it and you basically went
after her about the QDDR report, which you said only included
two pages of Diplomatic Security. You then said and implied and
said clearly that meant that the report had no balance and
therefore diplomacy security was only mentioned a few times and
so the insinuation was that therefore the Secretary was not
interested in Diplomatic Security. That came from your mouth at
that time at that testimony.
So I went back and I looked at your testimony, Mr.
Secretary, when you were before the Senate for confirmation. I
waited patiently here listening to your testimony here today,
Mr. Secretary.
I have not heard you mention one single time about
Diplomatic Security--not once--not once. And then, I know at
the time too, and I will try not to play with my colleague
playing politics but we are here on hallowed soil so I think
we've got to get to the facts of the matter, and on the facts
of the matter we heard the majority leader, Kevin McCarthy, at
the time say that it was about bringing Hillary Clinton down.
And so I hear that I may be giving you the benefit of the
doubt. If it wasn't about bringing Hillary Clinton down at the
time, then I ask you, Mr. Secretary, should we conclude that
because you have not mentioned it, not once, should we
conclude, based upon that fact, that you do not care about
Diplomatic Security, Mr. Secretary? Haven't heard it from you--
not once.
Secretary Pompeo. No. You should not conclude that.
Mr. Meeks. Okay. I will take you at your word.
Secretary Pompeo. You should note--if I may--if I may
respond----
Mr. Meeks. I will take you at your word. You said no. I
take you at your word.
Secretary Pompeo. No, but I feel like I need at least----
Mr. Meeks. I only have 5 minutes so I am going to take you
at your word. You will have time. I am going to take you at
your word----
Secretary Pompeo. You should know the very first briefing--
--
Mr. Meeks [continuing]. Because I happen to agree with you.
Secretary Pompeo [continuing]. The very first briefing I
received as a nominee was from the head of Diplomatic Security.
Mr. Meeks. I happen--Mr. Secretary----
Secretary Pompeo. You should know that the very first
briefing I received----
Mr. Meeks. Reclaiming my time. Mr. Secretary, I happen to
agree with you.
Secretary Pompeo [continuing]. When I became the Secretary
of State was from the head of Diplomatic Security.
Mr. Meeks. I happen to agree with you.
Secretary Pompeo. You should know that I am diligently
working on it. I am----
Mr. Meeks. I happen to agree with you, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Pompeo. I take Diplomatic Security very
seriously. Never make an accusation of that kind.
Mr. Meeks. I happen to agree with you. Oh, now the real
Secretary is coming out.
Chairman Royce. If I--if I could just--if I could just
explain.
Mr. Meeks. I am reclaiming my time.
Chairman Royce. Okay. We are going to give you time but we
want to give the Secretary a chance to respond.
Mr. Meeks. Well, he didn't do that with Secretary----
[Crosstalk.]
Chairman Royce. Okay.
Mr. Meeks. He did not--he did not do that with Secretary
Clinton, let me tell you that.
Chairman Royce. Okay. Well, we are going to--we are going
to proceed with the questions and the answers.
Mr. Meeks. But I agree. I am taking him at his word that
because--simply because something is not mentioned in a report
it does not mean that someone doesn't care. I believe that you
do. That's why I am taking you at your word.
But I think that we can conclude that what does matter is
how much money is appropriated for Diplomatic Security, and in
this whole thing, when I look at the budgets that was for
Diplomatic Security I saw that in fiscal year--under the Obama
administration, over $3 billion went to Diplomatic Security.
But once President Trump came in, I see it went down to $2.1
billion and fiscal year 2019 down to $1.6 billion.
So the budget or the money for Diplomatic Security has gone
down about 45 percent from the Obama administration. So where
is the concern now on the side of this administration about
Diplomatic Security?
Secretary Pompeo. Diplomatic Security is not about dollars
expended. It's about delivering real security. It's about
getting the right outcomes. It's about having the right people
in place. It's about being thoughtful about where you put
people.
We are going to take risks. We are going to be an
expeditionary State Department. I think President Trump demands
it. I think each of you do as well.
But I will take a back seat to no one with respect to
caring about and protecting the people that----
Mr. Meeks. Nor did Hillary Clinton take a back seat about
diplomatic security in this country.
Chairman Royce. Okay. [Sounds gavel.] Order.
Next in the queue is Mr. Dana Rohrabacher or California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Secretary, might I suggest that we
have more opportunities and I hope that now that you are the
Secretary to talk to you privately and have discussions like
this so we wouldn't have to use up time at a hearing and do
things publically. So I hope that----
Secretary Pompeo. Mr. Rohrabacher, can I say this? I would
welcome that with as many of you as I can. My theory on this is
as many cups of coffee as we can have to have these
discussions, the more we can work together to achieve
American----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let's have some of those sessions so
people can get their points across and have a discussion
because we are limited with time here.
I am very pleased that we have an administration now and a
Secretary like yourself who knows that we shouldn't be treating
enemies like friends. We should be treating enemies like
enemies and friends like friends, not the other way around, and
I am afraid that our Government quite often has gotten into
that pattern.
I would like to ask--based on that concept, I would hope
that we are going to be supporting the Kurds. Erdogan has
become our enemy. He is not our friend and the Kurds are the
people who need our help.
I hope that we are going to have a relationship with India
and Japan and accelerate that relationship because that is
pivotal. They are friends that are pivotal to helping us defeat
our enemies.
I understand that the budget request has no increase for
Pakistan. I don't see any reason whatsoever to give the
Government of Pakistan any money in terms of our foreign aid
until Dr. Afridi, the man who helped us bring justice to Osama
bin Laden, the man who slaughtered 3,000 Americans and our
Pakistani friends have proven their friendship by keeping him
in a dungeon.
In Afghanistan, we have a great friend, a man--if anybody's
seen ``12 Strong''--helped defeat the Taliban and Dr.--and
right now, he is the vice--supposedly the vice president,
General Dostum--he is in virtual exile now and he's--there's
been assassination attempts. I hope that we make it very clear
that General Dostum is the guy who can defeat the Taliban. He's
done it before, and we need to stick by him.
Third, again, Egypt--in Egypt now we have a government that
is against radical Islamic terrorists and in fact they replaced
a government that was pro-Muslim Brotherhood.
But we have policies that make it more difficult for Egypt
to purchase American weapons than when Egypt was under the
President who was part of the Muslim Brotherhood.
This is ridiculous. I hope that that would get your
attention.
Finally, Iran--congratulations on taking hold of this
situation and stepping forward with positive leadership as you
have. Let me just note, when it comes back to treating your
enemies as enemies and your friends as friends, we have a lot
of friends in Iran.
People always mistake, and I keep reminding our folks here,
the Iranian mullah regime--that's the enemy. The people of Iran
are our friends.
These folks over here in their yellow jackets, these are
Iranians who love freedom and we need to make sure that we work
with the Baloch, with the Kurds, with the Azaris, and others,
and the Persians who are pro-freedom in Iran and be proactive
like Ronald Reagan was when he ended the Cold War and we can
defeat the mullah regime without having a military operation by
helping these people who believe in freedom.
And now I've given you a minute to reply. [Laughter.]
Secretary Pompeo. If I might, I will try and tackle two of
those. I will tackle Pakistan and then the Kurds, if that's
okay.
So with respect to Pakistan, we released far fewer funds in
2018 than in the year prior. The remainder of the funds
available are under review. My guess is that that number will
be smaller still.
I worked diligently on the issue of Dr. Afridi in my
previous role, unsuccessfully. Please be aware that it's in my
heart and I know it's important and we can do that. We can
achieve that outcome.
Mr. Rohrabacher. When it's getting worse in Pakistan--if
people in Karachi and the Sindhs and the others, they are now
facing these--you know, people who are killing their leaders or
killing their people who believe in certain things that are
different than the radical Islamic philosophy of some of the
people in the Pakistani Government.
Secretary Pompeo. Our State Department officials are being
treated badly as well. The folks working in the Embassies and
in the consulates and other places are not being treated well
by the Pakistani Government either--a real problem that we need
to take the measure of also.
If it's okay, I will get back to you on the Kurds in a
written note.
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right, and as I say, Mr. Secretary,
looking forward to some private sessions where we can all
discuss things.
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Albio Sires of New Jersey.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here.
Mr. Secretary, going to the Western Hemisphere, as I look
at it, being a part of the Subcommittee on the Western
Hemisphere, I look at Venezuela, which basically has become a
satellite of Cuba with Cuba having 30,000 people or more in
Venezuela running just about everything, from security to all
the other things that run somehow in Venezuela.
The other concern that I have is, obviously, Nicaragua--I
am glad that the administration is finally speaking up on
Nicaragua. I think we definitely have to support those student
and the people that are on the streets.
But one of the things that always concerns me is as part of
the Ayatollah's efforts to export the revolution, it seems that
we have been building cultural centers in some of these Latin
American countries.
Are we really monitoring to see how much influence they
have and how many they're opening? I mean, they started out
with 10. Now they're about 100.
I am concerned about the security. Can you----
Secretary Pompeo. I don't know the answer to how well or
how frequently we are monitoring that. I will get you an
answer.
Mr. Sires. Okay, because I think----
Secretary Pompeo. I am aware of this issue but I don't know
what monitoring is taking place.
Mr. Sires. Okay. Going now to Cyprus, are we considering to
lifting the arms embargo in Cyprus so we can sell them arms?
What's happening in Cyprus is Turkey keeps sending people,
more and more on their side, and this is an issue that the
Cyprus people feel that they have to have in order to protect
themselves, and we have an arms embargo.
I know that you only just got to the State Department but
these are questions that I think that we should look into.
Secretary Pompeo. I will mention this. I don't want to
address that issue in particular but, rather, talk about issues
in the Eastern Med, more broadly.
I met with the Greek Foreign Minister on Monday of this
week. There is a great deal of work we have--increasing
threats--that America has enormous interests that we have to
figure out precisely how to deal with each of them. It's a
complex place.
Congressman Rohrabacher mentioned Turkey. Maybe a couple
others have as well. We have a NATO ally, that I will meet with
their Foreign Minister early next week to try and plot a path
forward together with them in Syria but who is proving
incredibly difficult.
Mr. Sires. And I hope that you consider not giving them the
F-35s in the future. It seems that we give and give and give,
and we get slapped in the face when we need them.
I represent the largest Coptic Christian community in New
Jersey and I am always very concerned about the security.
I hope that the State Department makes an effort to really
concentrate on the safety of the Coptic Christians in Egypt. It
is important there were over 16 million Coptic Christians in
Egypt and they were under assault day in and day out.
So if we can put more pressure on the Government of Egypt
to give them more protection, that would be good for all those
people that are under such pressure.
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you.
I think the administration has done a reasonably good job.
I think we've made real efforts. I agree with you that there
remains a great deal of work to do to make sure that they have
the protections they need to practice their religion in Egypt.
Mr. Sires. And going back--I have about a minute--and going
back to the Iran question, they seem to be building more and
more their forces in Syria.
How closely are we monitoring this? It seems that they're
getting ready for something.
Secretary Pompeo. So I actually am very familiar with this
issue--the Iranian efforts in Syria. Their forces have expanded
modestly over this past 24 months. But they have become more
willing and more capable.
That is, the weapons that they have moved into Syria have
become more capable. That is, their capacity to threaten the
region including Israel has increased over those same 24, even
36 months now.
It is a difficult complex environment to respond in. Rest
assured, we are working closely with our European partners, our
Israeli, our Arab partners.
We are well aware of the threat from Iran and we are
working to develop details under the strategy I laid out on
Monday about how to respond to that.
Mr. Sires. And how is the investigation on what happened in
Cuba going with our diplomats?
Secretary Pompeo. So the Accountability Review Board, I am
told, will have a report to me by the middle of next week.
And if I may, you're speaking about the incidents--the
incidents in Havana?
Mr. Sires. Yes.
Secretary Pompeo. If I might add here for the benefit of
those who saw the news last night, we had an incident in
Guangzhou that the medical indications are very similar and
entirely consistent with the medical indications that have
taken place to Americans working in Cuba.
One incident--we announced it to the workforce while we
slept here last night. We have medical teams that are moving to
be on the ground there. We are working to figure out what took
place both in Havana and now in China as well.
We've asked the Chinese for their assistance in doing that
and they have committed to honoring their commitments under the
Vienna Convention to keep American Foreign Service officers
safe.
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. We appreciate very much your department
keeping us in the loop on this as this proceeds.
We go to Steve Chabot of Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Secretary, as a founding member of the
Congressional Taiwan Caucus, I would like to focus first on one
of our key allies in what can be, obviously, a very dangerous
world--the nation of Taiwan--and I say nation intentionally.
It's not a faux pas. Taiwan has been a de facto independent
country for more than half a century now. They, of course, have
to put up with China's bullying on an ongoing basis.
The State Department had a self-imposed policy that
prevented top Taiwanese officials--the President, Vice
President, Foreign Minister, and Defense Minister--from coming
to the United States, including to our Nation's capital here,
Washington, DC.
They could transit through, say, Los Angeles or San
Francisco as they headed to South America, for example, but
that was it.
And top U.S. officials couldn't travel to Taiwan. That
policy was disrespectful and counterproductive, in my view.
Recently, the House unanimously passed H.R. 535 and I would
like to thank my Democratic colleague, Mr. Brad Sherman, as
well as Chairman Royce and others for joining me as principal
sponsors in what passed the House unanimously and passed the
Senate unanimously, and then President Trump--God bless him--
signed it into law.
I would note that the resolution not only allows high-level
visits but encourages them.
Mr. Secretary, I would like to encourage you and the rest
of the administration to take advantage of this, and I don't
want to put you on the spot or anything but I would hope that
at some point in the not too distant future, President Tsai of
Taiwan herself could come and address a joint session of
Congress or visit President Trump in the White House.
So, that being said, Mr. Secretary, could you comment on
the Taiwan Travel Act and how you would see it working in real
time?
Secretary Pompeo. In my previous role, I was part of the
discussions around that, trying to at least understand American
national security implications for it.
The administration has had many discussions. We understand
its implications, not only its urgings but the direction of
travel that was required by that, and you should have great
confidence that we will continue to abide by that.
My recollection is there was an Assistant Secretary that
travelled there just before my time or maybe it was a couple
months before my time.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much, and we are sending a
letter I believe today to John Bolton to encourage him perhaps
to go as well. So my guess is he would probably like to do
that.
So thank you very much.
The next thing I would like to mention, we had a hearing
last week. I've introduced legislation a number of times. As
you know, gas prices have gone up to $3 a gallon in Cincinnati
and other places. They're higher here in DC. But they're
hurting a whole lot of people.
And it was called NOPEC--I would introduced it with John
Conyers in the past. We'd passed it in the House. They passed
it in the Senate. But it wasn't identical. There would be
climate change stuff put in in the Senate. So for whatever
reason we didn't get it across the finish line.
It's my understanding that President Trump likes the idea.
In essence, what it does is it would allow the attorney general
to file a lawsuit for anti-competitive violations, basically,
which would be in violation of anti-trust law--the Sherman
Act--and I would encourage you to take a look at that. The
legislation, hopefully, will be passed here in the House in
time in the near future and those OPEC companies who work with
Russia and others are artificially keeping production down,
which drives the price up. So if you would take a look at that
I would greatly appreciate it.
Secretary Pompeo. I would be happy to.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you.
Secretary Pompeo. And I also hope the good oil and gas
people of your great state would get after it as well.
Mr. Chabot. I totally agree with you.
And then one final thing I would like to do, and I would
like to commend my colleague from Virginia, Mr. Connolly, for
not letting the world forget about Crimea, which too often, I
think, they have.
I think Russia's invasion and criminal annexation of part
of Ukraine--Crimea--is going uncommented on by the rest of the
world too often.
So if you could elevate that in any way I would greatly
appreciate it. I don't know if in the little time you have left
if you could comment on that.
Secretary Pompeo. I appreciate the need to elevate that.
The last trip I took in my previous world was actually to the
Donbass to see the challenges that are presented to Ukraine and
its people there.
This is a very, very serious matter. The Russians annexed
one-fifth of that country. We should never forget that that's
the case.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Ted Deutch of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Secretary. Thanks for your service to our
country and thanks for being with us today.
As my colleagues know, I make the same request of every
official who comes before this committee. You have already had
a chance to speak to this and you and I have had many
conversations over the years about Bob Levinson, the longest
held American hostage, and all the other Americans who are held
in Iran. I appreciate the commitment that you have made here
today to focus on bringing them home and we are proud to be
joined today by Bob's youngest son, Dan, who's sitting with us
here.
Because there are now no longer any regular direct channel
talks with Iran, where the American hostages were brought up on
then sidelines, I just would ask that, at a minimum here, for
you to commit to continuing to communicate with the Levinson
family to keep them apprised of the extent of your efforts to
help bring him home.
Secretary Pompeo. Of course.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate that.
Mr. Secretary, you said in your testimony that we won't
tolerate Russian interference in the 2018 elections and we have
to take countermeasures in response to an effort to do so.
I just wanted to get your quick response to something.
Yesterday, particularly given your previous position--in
January 2017, ODNI found the Russian Government favored the
Trump campaign over Hillary Clinton and that Putin personally
ordered to influence the campaign to undermine public faith in
the American democratic process.
Yesterday, our Homeland Security Secretary said that she
didn't believe that she'd seen that conclusion that the
specific intent was to help President Trump win.
I just wanted to confirm that you share the view of the
intelligence community and the conclusion that they reached in
January 2017.
Secretary Pompeo. Yes. I haven't seen anything that would
dissuade me from believing it's right. It's worth noting,
however, that that particular judgment that was made was the
least confirmed--that is, there was the least support for that
and the intelligence committee report make that clear as well.
Mr. Deutch. So and just confirming that it's--it was still
a conclusion reached by the intelligence community.
Secretary Pompeo. Yes, sir.
Mr. Deutch. Also, again, not tolerating Russian
interference in 2018 also means, I think, that we need to fully
understand everything that happened in 2016.
To that end, I just wanted to ask whether you support
allowing the Mueller investigation to play out so that we can
gather all of the necessary information to make conclusions
about what happened in 2016 in order to safeguard, as you point
out in your testimony, and prevent any Russian interference in
the 2018 elections.
Secretary Pompeo. I am not going to comment on any of the
ongoing investigations. As I said in my confirmation hearing, I
was interviewed by Mr. Mueller's team. So I've been part of it.
I was part of it in my role as Director of the CIA, providing
information to committees here in the House, committees in the
Senate as well.
I am simply going to make no comments about any of the
ongoing investigations.
Mr. Deutch. On Iran, I want to just go back to the
President's decision to withdraw from the JCPOA and where
things stood the moment before that happened and just ask
whether--as your sense of how things can go forward.
At that moment, there were ongoing discussions--
negotiations with our European allies about addressing the
shortfalls in the JCPOA, specifically, the inspections regime,
the sunsets, and the ballistic missiles, and I would add human
rights to that.
And the understanding was by a lot of us that if we could
reach some agreement on those issues to strengthen the JCPOA
and address those shortfalls that that would have been
sufficient for the administration to remain in the deal.
There is this 180-day period now before the sanctions are
fully implemented after the President's decision. Are those
discussions continuing with our allies?
Is there any chance, if our allies were to agree to the
demands of the administration to strengthen the JCPOA and there
were an opportunity to achieve that with them, would that have
an impact on what we do over the coming months following the
President's announcement to withdraw from the JCPOA?
Secretary Pompeo. So we will certainly continue to work
with our European partners. Indeed, the German Foreign Minister
will be here on Thursday--tomorrow--or maybe it's even this
afternoon when he will arrive.
I was part of those negotiations. While I don't want to go
into the details, I can say this. We worked diligently during
my 2 weeks as Secretary of State to try and bridge that gap
and, ultimately, the three European countries would not sign up
for that.
It's worth noting--so there were an extended period that
negotiations took place, some of it--some of which predated my
time. It's worth noting that during the entire duration of the
JCPOA, in spite of their attested willingness to put additional
sanctions in place, no sanctions were put in place.
So everyone--there was this discussion about how there were
these--we can still continue with non-nuclear sanctions. The
actual willingness to do that, to actually engage and say we
are going to sanction Iranian missile conduct, for example,
which would, if put in place properly, have required European
businesses not to be in Iran--they're still engaged in this
missile activity--I think we can all agree it didn't happen.
Mr. Deutch. And so are we prepared to fully impose
secondary sanctions on our allies?
Chairman Royce. The gentleman's time is----
Secretary Pompeo. The answer is the sanctions are back in
place today with a 90-day and a 180-day wind down period for
different components.
Chairman Royce. Let me say, I appreciate our Mr. Ted
Deutch's continued focus on Bob Levinson and his fate. Let me
also add that I would add this with extreme caution, Mr.
Secretary. The U.S. permanent resident, Nizar Zakka, is
reported to have disappeared from prison in Iran and I hope the
administration is working swiftly to locate him and ensure his
well-being.
The reason I raise the point is there is reports not only
that he was in poor health but also reports that he had been
tortured. And so thank you for your engagement on this.
Secretary Pompeo. Yes, sir. We are aware of those reports
as well.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We go to Mr. Joe Wilson of South Carolina.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here today. I had
the extraordinary opportunity to lead a delegation for the
opening of the Embassy in Jerusalem.
What a fabulous positive celebration this was, and I was
really grateful for the leadership of President Trump, for your
leadership, Ambassador John Bolton, and, of course, the
extraordinary Ambassador to the U.N., Ambassador Nikki Haley.
In working with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, I
believe this will help promote the peace process in the Middle
East. So thank you for your success.
Additionally, the question would be the results of the most
recent elections in Lebanon change what's the status of U.S.
policy? Do we need to make changes on how to provide our
economic and security assistance to be more effective to
counter Hezbollah and Iranian influence, and what do you see as
the most effective tool pursuant to U.N. Security Council
sanctions that the United States can promote to enforce the
disarmament of Hezbollah which, today, has 150,000 missiles
directed at Israeli families?
Secretary Pompeo. So I think there were three questions
there. I will start with the last one with respect to Lebanese
Hezbollah.
So we not only now have them as a problem in Lebanon, we
have them as a problem in Syria as well--Iranian-funded,
Iranian-fueled. Part of our Iran strategy is aimed, clearly, at
reducing their capacity to create havoc and conduct terror
operations around the world.
Second, you asked about the election. Certainly, changes,
but ultimately it's our assessment at this point that the
overall balance of power won't be materially changed as an
outcome of that.
That's good and bad. The existing balance of power is not a
good one in its own right and so there are real challenges
about how America can introduce its influence and get Lebanon
to move in the direction of that great nation.
To date, we've largely relied on two places including the
Lebanese Armed Forces to help us achieve the security element
of our efforts there and we need to review each of those to
make sure that we are using American taxpayers' dollars right
and supporting the groups that can most likely achieve our
outcome there.
Mr. Wilson. I am also grateful that the administration is
providing additional funds for European Deterrence Initiative
to provide for military NATO troops and Estonia, Latvia,
Lithuania, American troops in Poland.
To me, this is so important. But the challenge that you
have is that only 15 of the 29 NATO allies have said that they
would reach the 2 percent minimum by 2024.
What can we do to encourage our allies to better defend
themselves to promote peace through strength?
Secretary Pompeo. President Trump should be credited with
making real progress there. That is, there are more countries
today meeting the 2 percent commitment. There's a corollary
commitment of 20 percent for equipment as well--more countries
achieving that as well.
I was with Jens Stoltenberg this past week. He's committed
to putting pressure on each of them to do so. There's a NATO
summit in July that the President will attend, and I hope that
two things will take place--one, that every country will show
up with a plan, at least, to get to 2 percent. Some of the
countries, including Germany, have the financial wherewithal to
do so and have simply chosen not to; and second, I hope that
the countries that have plans will move their date closer--that
they will get to their 2 percent target in a more timely
fashion.
Mr. Wilson. And I am really grateful, a rare example but
it's true that we worked together with Gerry Connolly and Steve
Chabot, and that is that we are concerned about Russian
aggression, beginning in Moldova. Then it was the Republic of
Georgia, and then 10,000 were killed in Ukraine.
What more can we do to work with our allies to provide
proper equipment, particularly to the three nations that I
mentioned, to stop the aggression by the Putin regime?
Secretary Pompeo. So, Congressman Wilson, I don't know the
details of the armaments issues with respect to those three
countries. I am happy to take a look at it.
I was with the Georgian prime minister. We had the seven
U.S.-Georgian dialogue hosted at the State Department this
week. We can keep these issues at the forefront.
We can make clear with respect to at least Georgia that we
are working to get their accession to NATO. These are the kinds
of things that can support the people of those countries in the
right way.
We also, in that same neck of the woods, made the decision
last year to provide defensive weapons systems to the
Ukrainians--weapons systems that they have now used--and there
is much work that remains--I concur, this is not partisan--much
work that remains to promote those former Soviet entities who
are on a path toward joining the Western world.
Mr. Wilson. And I've seen the success of Bulgaria and
Romania, and now Georgia. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Mr. Bill Keating of
Massachusetts.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Mr. Secretary. Three things--first, the
President's reversal on the telecom giant from China, ZTE--you
know, in 2012, the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence
of the House said that ``This company could undermine core U.S.
national security interests.''
Even last week, your nominee to the Counterterrorism Center
said that they present a serious security risk to the United
States. Even Senator Rubio said it'd be crazy to go back on
this.
So it's really not an issue if it presents a security
question. Yet, the President, by a tweet, took the pressure
right off just 3 days after getting a loan arrangement that'll
support the Trump brand and reverse this.
Now, either last night or this morning he said, well, maybe
it could be dealt with with a fine or changing the principles
of the company, which you know are run by the Chinese
Government and influenced by the Chinese Government.
Number one, should that be reversed? Should that ban be
reversed and, number two, should the President really divest
himself of these business interests?
Now, second quick question is on the President's phone.
There have been reports that his cell phone isn't equipped with
sophisticated security devices and it exposes him to hacking
and surveillance in that regard.
You wrote, Mr. Secretary, a couple of years ago, dealing
with the former Secretary described for the letter and spirit
of the law in her handling of classified information is not a
political issue--it's a national security issue that puts
American interests and American lives in danger.
Second question, will you advise the President to change
his phone and make it more secure in that respect?
And finally, if you could, you said just a few minutes ago
that security is about being thoughtful for where you put
people. So I would like your opinion on the fact that in all
the people in the administration and all the qualified people
in the United States of America, the President has put the
chief negotiator for Middle East peace in the hands of his son-
in-law, Jared Kushner, who is limited in his knowledge of this
because he's been denied security clearance necessary, really,
to have a full grasp of that issue.
His temporary clearance was removed due to apparent
conflicts of interest and a very large number of discrepancies
on his SF-86 form.
So on those three questions, if you could, Mr. Secretary,
please respond.
Secretary Pompeo. Sure. Let me take a swing at all three of
them.
Mr. Keating. Thank you.
Secretary Pompeo. I will try to do them in the sequence you
provided them.
With respect to ZTE, you note that this threat has been
known since 2012. You should note nothing was done in what now
amounts to almost 6 years.
This administration is going to do something. We are still
working on the appropriate response and how to address it. But
it's worth noting that for 6 years, mostly under the previous
administration, nothing was done.
Mr. Keating. Mr. Secretary, but just a quick comment----
Secretary Pompeo. Sure.
Mr. Keating [continuing]. That doesn't make it right.
Secretary Pompeo. No, sir. It doesn't.
Mr. Keating. Either there is danger or there's not. The
President has been in office for a year--over a year now and
nothing was done, evidently.
Secretary Pompeo. I agree.
Mr. Keating. So time to do it, right?
Secretary Pompeo. I agree. I agree. We need to make sure
that America is secure from threats to all. There are
multiples--ZTE is one amongst many of these same types of
threats, and I look forward to working this. This seems to me a
bipartisan issue.
Mr. Keating. So it still should be banned?
Secretary Pompeo. We are going to get this right. We are
going to reduce the risk from ZTE to America. It's still under
review what's taking place. I've been part of some of the
discussions, although not all of them.
But I understand, at least as of yesterday afternoon, no
final resolution had been reached.
I will leave to others the President's phone. I won't walk
away a single bit from what I said previously. Every government
elected official has the responsibility to comply with----
Mr. Keating. Including the President, Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Pompeo. Every government official----
Mr. Keating. So who would tell him that, in your
organization?
Secretary Pompeo. Congressman, I don't have any comment on
that. We all have a responsibility.
Mr. Keating. But excuse me--if you know it and it's true--
if it is true, would you feel compelled to say, Mr. President,
you got to change your phone--it's a security risk? Wouldn't
you at least do that for America?
Secretary Pompeo. [Laughter.] I will tell you this. I will
tell you this.
Mr. Keating. You can't do that for America? Come on now.
Secretary Pompeo. We are both great patriots. I think we
share that. I am going to do everything I can----
Mr. Keating. You wouldn't tell the President if he had an
unsecure phone, hey, Mr. President, you got to get a new phone?
You wouldn't tell him that? Why wouldn't you tell him?
Secretary Pompeo. I have managed for 16 months not to talk
about conversations I've had with the President. I do not----
Mr. Keating. Well, have you had that conversation?
Secretary Pompeo. I do not intend to violate that principle
today with respect to conversations between myself and the
President.
Mr. Keating. Well, I am going to take that, if you will,
that you have never told the President, hey, you better get a
new phone that's secure.
Secretary Pompeo. I can't account for how you will take it.
I can only tell you that----
Mr. Keating. You can't account for how he'll take it?
Secretary Pompeo. I can't account for how----
Mr. Keating. Who can?
Secretary Pompeo. You shouldn't construe the absence of a
comment from me one way or the other. Know this--every time I
see a security issue, I try to do my best to face it, whether
it's something that I got wrong or someone else made an error
as well.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Mike McCaul of Texas.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Secretary, it's great to call you Secretary. It's great
to see a friend and former colleague in the position that you
are in, having travelled with you to the Middle East and
Northern Africa.
I've seen you and your talent as a diplomat and we are just
so proud of you in the House.
With respect to the allegations about the Diplomatic
Security corps, I would just respond that nobody knows that
issue better than you, having served on the Benghazi Commission
where our Ambassador was killed in the previous administration.
I sort of think you appreciate that issue probably more
than anyone. And so with that, I would like to move on to Iran.
When you and I talked about the JCPOA when we were in the
Congress together, we had concerns about the ballistic missile
capability.
We had concerns about the inspections not being anytime
anywhere, no access to military installations, and the $150
billion that has gone into terrorism that now we see as the
Shi'a Crescent, as Netanyahu calls it, into Iraq, Syria, in
Lebanon, and now Yemen.
I know you have these E-3 negotiations that apparently got
pretty close to an agreement.
I applaud the efforts to move forward with more leverage on
Iran by lifting the sanctions in a 90- to 180-day time frame.
Can you tell us about what the status of those negotiations
are and if there is any path forward to come forward with a
deal with our European allies, the Saudis, and Iran?
Secretary Pompeo. So we are not very far along. We are only
a handful of days post the President's decision to withdraw
from the JCPOA. But a number of discussions have taken place
below the Foreign Minister level.
I am planning for, depending on, frankly, my schedule,
sometime in earlier June or mid-June to gather up with a number
of partners including the E-3 partners to plan our way forward.
There is near perfect overlap in our values and interests
on this. There is no dispute about the Iranian missile program,
about its malign behavior, about the assassinations that were
spoken about earlier.
Everyone agrees to the problem set. We need to find a path
forward together to address it, and economic sanctions get a
lot of attention. They're important. They're an important tool.
But there's a great deal more to that, some of which we can
talk about in this setting, some of which we cannot, each of
which needs to be delivered globally.
So when you think about our allies, it's not just the three
Europeans. We have Arab countries and their back yard. We have
the airport in Riyadh that has missiles landing in it.
There are Americans going to land in the Riyadh airport
within the next 12 hours. These are serious issues. We are
simply asking Iran to be a normal country. Some said my remarks
were fantasy. I hope it's not killing folks. Doesn't seem like
a fantasy.
We demand it of every country in the world. We certainly
ought to be able to achieve that and get our partners to agree
to help Iran be----
Mr. McCaul. Well, I think the President put the right man
in the job to get that done. We have every faith and confidence
in you.
North Korea--you're one of the few diplomats, if not the
only American diplomat, to have met with Kim Jong-un, which is
an incredible experience, I am sure.
We know their track record. We have constantly looked at
sanctions to get to the negotiation table and they have
consistently violated--they have consistently--they got out of
the nuclear proliferation treaty--consistently pulled the rug
out from under us.
So what is your sense of the man himself, having that
opportunity to meet with him, and what is your sense of any
optimism that we can achieve a true negotiation that's good for
the United States with him?
Secretary Pompeo. So it is always with the deep knowledge
of the history of the relationship and North Koreans'
unwillingness to honor their commitment that, one, begins any
discussion on this--one, eyes wide open that we have been
fooled before and can't permit that to happen again.
Having said that, the discussions I've had with them, he
knows the file. He doesn't use notes. He is speaking. We have
real conversations through a translator, obviously. We would
have hard conversations about what America was prepared to do
and how we might be prepared to do it--our demands, the things
we need from North Korea in order to achieve that--real
conversations, not stilted talking points, as we've had in the
past with the North Koreans.
He's from a different generation and at a different time,
and it's my hope that when he and President Trump get a chance
to be together that we can get the North Koreans to make the
strategic shift about how best to serve the country--that the
nuclear weapons program isn't in fact the thing that keeps the
regime in power but the thing that prevents the regime from
being in a place it wants to be with economic success.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Royce. We go to David Cicilline of Rhode Island.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, welcome to the committee. I have four
questions that really require a yes or no answer before I get
to my other questions.
Will you, as Secretary of State, do what so many other
Secretaries have not and recognize the genocide perpetrated by
the Ottoman Empire against its Armenian citizens during World
War I? Yes or no.
Secretary Pompeo. I can't answer that. I don't know the
answer. I will review the issue.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay.
You strongly criticized the Obama administration for not
including issues like human rights in the nuclear deal with
Iran.
Do you have a commitment from the Kim regime in North
Korea, the most brutal dictatorship in the world, to take steps
to alleviate the human suffering of their own people, including
opening civil and political rights as part of any negotiated
deal?
Secretary Pompeo. The issue was raised directly between me
and Chairman Kim and it will be part of the discussions as we
move forward.
Mr. Cicilline. Will it be part of the deal? Do you have a
commitment from the Kim regime?
Secretary Pompeo. We have broad outlines of what it is that
each nation is prepared to do.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
You said in response to written questions for the record
during your Senate confirmation hearing that you would appoint
a new special envoy for the human rights of LGBTI persons at
the State Department.
That special envoy position has been vacant for some time.
Will you expeditiously appoint someone fill that post?
Secretary Pompeo. Yes.
Mr. Cicilline. And can you give us a time line?
Secretary Pompeo. No.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay.
Secretary Pompeo. But just know, I have a couple dozen
posts that are of similar importance, each of which we are
working through and developing lists. Yes.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
You have talked a lot about supporting freedoms in the
Middle East region. Have you raised your concerns with the
Government of Saudi Arabia about the recent arrests of
activists, particularly, women activists?
Secretary Pompeo. I've spoken with that with the leadership
of Saudi Arabia, although I haven't had a chance to speak to
them lately on----
Mr. Cicilline. I hope you will.
Next, Mr. Secretary, I want to build on Mr. Keating's
question about ZTE. Do you believe it's appropriate for the
President's business organizations to benefit from Chinese
Government loans and financial incentives while the
administration considers official matters related to the
Chinese Government?
Secretary Pompeo. I will leave that to others to comment
on.
Mr. Cicilline. Do you think it's appropriate?
Secretary Pompeo. Yes, I am going to leave that to others.
Mr. Cicilline. Do you have an opinion as to whether that is
appropriate?
Secretary Pompeo. Yes. That's, I think, six levels of
hypothetical that I don't know the facts----
Mr. Cicilline. Well, no, Mr. Secretary, with due respect,
it's not hypothetical.
Secretary Pompeo. No, it is.
Mr. Cicilline. The President reversed his decision and
received a financial benefit. If in fact the President doesn't
divest himself of his business interests, how will you ensure
that this body, the Congress of the United States, that you are
not engaging on matters of foreign policy and national
security, where the President's interest is really the bottom
line, in your mind, rather than the interests of the American
people?
Secretary Pompeo. Well, first of all, I can assure that
that's not true.
Second, I can prove now that it was a hypothetical. You
said that the President had changed his position. It's still
under review. We are still working our way through it.
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Secretary, if the President's business
interests remain in place how will you assure the American
people and this Congress that the decisions that you make on
matters of foreign policy will be dictated by the best
interests of the American people and not the financial benefits
to the Trump organization or President Trump?
Secretary Pompeo. If I guess--I guess----
Mr. Cicilline. When you don't even have an opinion as to
whether or not it's a good thing or a bad thing.
Secretary Pompeo. I guess----
Mr. Cicilline. You wouldn't even render an opinion as to
whether or not you think it's appropriate for the President's
business organization to benefit from financial loans and
incentives from a government that you're negotiating with?
Secretary Pompeo. I am confident that the President will
comply with the ethics rules that are in place. Right. So,
yes----
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Secretary, that's a very disappointing
answer, with all due respect.
Secretary Pompeo. I did--I did comment----
Mr. Cicilline. I will go to my next question. In your
speech on Iran this week, you outlined 12 demands for the
Iranian Government now that President Trump has abandoned the
JCPOA.
And while I agree with all the goals that you laid out in
your list, I have to say it was more like a letter to Santa
Claus than a policy document.
It's nice that you have 12 things that you want the
Iranians to do. But that is far different from having the
negotiating ability, the skill, and the coalition to support
those efforts.
And from what I've seen so far, this administration has
none of these things. In fact, this administration has been in
power for a year and a half and nothing in the JCPOA prevented
the administration from cracking down on Iran's malign
activities in the region and they've done very little.
So why will it be different now how you translate this very
lovely wish list into actual policy?
Secretary Pompeo. May I actually answer this question?
Mr. Cicilline. Yes, please.
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you.
In the almost 3 years of the JCPOA, the Iranians marched
across the Middle East. They conducted heinous activities. I
don't know which of the 12 asks you would like me to get rid
of. Do you have what you'd like me to drop from the list?
Mr. Cicilline. No. No. Mr. Secretary, I am asking how do
you take this list? Your administration has been in office for
15 months. They have done nothing to hold Iran accountable on
any of this malign activity.
What I am asking you is how you convert this wish list
which, you know, a terrific list--I agree with its contents--
into actual policy--how you make those things happen? What's
the strategy?
Secretary Pompeo. So I laid that as well. It took me about
13 minutes at the Heritage Foundation to lay it out. I am happy
to deliver that to you in the 5 seconds I have remaining.
You should know we are committed to developing a diplomatic
solution that gets there.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the chairman will allow you to
answer the question if you'd like to share the way that you
expect to make that actual policy. I think it's----
Chairman Royce. We go to Mr. Tom Marino of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Marino. Thank you.
Welcome, Mr. Secretary, and congratulations.
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Marino. I will get right to the point. Is there an
aggressive plan to punish China and Mexico for flooding into
the United States the extremely deadly drug fentanyl?
Secretary Pompeo. Yes.
Mr. Marino. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Ami Bera of California.
Mr. Bera. Thank you. Caught me a little bit off guard
there.
So first off, thank you, Mr. Secretary. In your opening
comments you talked about how the State Department workforce is
its best asset, and I couldn't agree more.
And I think it's important for all of us to recognize the
incredible work that that workforce does every day representing
the United States.
I am going to turn my focus of my questions to global
health. I am a physician by training. Public health has been
something I've done for a long time and, obviously, we know
that there is an outbreak of Ebola in the DRC right now and we
obviously have some concerns.
My concerns are whether the administration is placing the
right amount of priority on global health security and
preparedness and here's why I have that concern.
If we think about the 2014 Ebola outbreak and the response
and the lessons learned from that outbreak, there were a few
things.
Part of the delayed response was the lack of funding that
was available to quickly respond, and as a physician and global
health expert, it is incredibly important to get ahead of these
outbreaks very quickly to contain them.
So I am grateful for the $8 million that's been allocated
to help address this response but also concerned about--you
know, we spent about $5 billion or we appropriated $5 billion
in that 2014 response.
About $1 billion was left over that we allocated to USAID
and CDC to work in 49 countries to help build better
infrastructure there, better disease surveillance, et cetera.
In the current budget allocation or ask the administration
is talking about pulling funding from 39 of those 49 countries.
I think that would be a mistake. I also know in the current
rescissions proposal the administration seeks to pull back $252
million in residual Ebola funding. That also would be a
mistake, particularly given the outbreak that we see right now,
and here's why.
What we know is we built in some flexibility for response
not just to Ebola but to other outbreaks and, when we had the
Zika outbreak a year and a half ago, we were able to quickly
respond, take some of that funding and respond to that Zika
outbreak and get ahead of it.
As you go back and, again, that rescission decision may
have been made before the current Ebola outbreak--I would say,
you know, let's take that out and I would make that same
message to the appropriators.
A third lesson that we learned from that Ebola outbreak was
the importance of having a command and control structure that
could take charge, could work across agencies and you had
someone who, clearly, was in charge.
I am very worried right now. With kind of the dismantling
of that--the biosecurity wing of the NSC, the loss of Admiral
Tim Ziemer, who, clearly, was an expert here, and the loss of
some of our expertise, with regards to addressing these global
health and security challenges, I guess my question would be
with this reorganization in the midst of a potential Ebola
emergency, would you agree that this is not the right time to
be doing this reorganization--this would not be the right time
to be pulling that $252 million and what that org chart would
look like in terms of biosecurity preparedness?
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you for your question.
A very important topic--frankly, gets too little attention,
I think, from time to time.
Three thoughts--first, with respect to the Ebola outbreak,
I believe we have the resources in the short run to do the
things we need to do and to respond.
Frankly, it's probably never fast enough, but to respond in
a way that is important and material and gets ahead of this in
a way that we weren't able to do before. I think we'll execute
on that.
Second, with respect to the rescission package, I will
certainly review it. I've had conversations even in just these
3 weeks about that rescission package. There's another as well.
I've expressed my views internally inside the administration on
each of those.
And finally, with respect to the broader structural issues,
I know what existed before. I am not familiar with where those
structural decisions are today.
I will have my team come up and help me out to make sure
that we have command and control right and not only for this
immediate issue but as we move forward, thinking about these
important global health issues as well, sir.
Mr. Bera. Well great. Mr. Secretary, I would invite you to
work with us in Congress, those of us that are interested in
global health security, to make sure we have the right command
and control structure and the right personnel in place.
Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Paul Cook of California.
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Secretary. I think one of the previous
conversations we had was, I think, in the SCIF talking about
the Cuban situation with our diplomats and you raised that
issue today. It's, like, everything goes full circle.
I wanted to bring up something and it's about the Western
Hemisphere. You have got a lot on your plate. We got the
upcoming conference, everything in the Middle East and
everything else.
But we had group of us that went down to the conference in
Peru and the takeaway that we had, I think, all of us--it was
very, very bipartisan in nature--was that our friends in the
region feel like the United States have abandoned them in many,
many ways.
I think that's part of the reason your predecessor went
down there, and there's a lot of things going on in the world
but this is an important year. There's 13 elections.
You got the upcoming OAS General Assembly, the G-7 Summit,
the G-20, and they're all very, very nervous about a lot of
things going on, particularly with the influence of China--
China's money, their economic power, and how they are aligning
themselves with certain countries.
And the second, of course, is the Iranian influence.
Hezbollah in some of the countries, and even some of the
countries in the Caribbean which, quite frankly, I think are
aligning themselves with the Maduro government in Venezuela.
Each one of those small countries had one vote in the OAS, the
same as the United States.
What I am looking for is some kind of feedback. I know you
got a lot on your plate, a lot of balls in the air. But what I
was trying to convey to you is there's this feeling of a lot of
the countries in the Western Hemisphere that we, as a
longstanding partner, have kind of overlooked, ignored our
allies and I think it's incumbent upon us to reassure them and
do something on that.
Can you address that comment?
Secretary Pompeo. I am not sanguine about their views about
us having abandoned. I spent a fair amount of time there in my
previous role. I had a chance to meet many of the leaders in
those countries.
In 3 weeks I've met with a number of Foreign Ministers.
I've participated in the layman group discussions.
Frankly, I've found there to be a great deal of energy and
shared vision for how things ought to proceed in Central and
South America alongside of us.
And so I am very hopeful. I think there's enormous
opportunity in that region and I will spend a good deal of my
time trying to build a team out.
We have an Assistant Secretary now close to being on board.
We will--the State Department will have Western Hemisphere at
the top of its mind across many of these important economic and
security issues.
Mr. Cook. Yes, and in line with this, foreign military
sales. A number of the countries are concerned. Peru is--I
think they're putting in a plug for the C130-Js--very, very
interested--and so I, obviously, am very, very concerned before
in the past we were much more involved in that.
And as I said, there's a lot of countries, most notably
China and Iran, that are involved in that. What can we do to
increase foreign military sales in that region?
Secretary Pompeo. I, for one, would advocate for working
closely with them and encouraging them to purchase U.S.
equipment that fit their country, that was the right tool set
for them, for themselves and their security interests.
I hope that we can across the board streamline the State
Department's process connected with foreign military sales.
There's work to do.
Mr. Cook. And I've brought up this subject before in
regards to NATO. You know, Eastern Europe, they're still
relying on the parts from Russia.
Once you go with another country you're going to be
dependent on that. So I think we've got to look at that whole
situation. Or once they buy, they're going to be buying there
for----
Secretary Pompeo. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cook [continuing]. The next five generations or
something.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. We go to Lois Frankel of
Florida.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you. Welcome.
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you.
Ms. Frankel. So I am going to try to be very calm about
this, but if I really had my way I would be yelling and
screaming because--and not at you, yet.
Secretary Pompeo. Soon now. [Laughter.]
Ms. Frankel. But soon. No.
Here's what I am concerned about. We've heard a lot in this
committee about the undeniable link between the treatment of
women and global peace and security, and also women's
prosperity and that link.
And I think a lot of us are very, very concerned what's
happening to the women of this world by policies of this
administration--slashing international family planning
assistance by half, eliminating all assistance to the U.N.
Population Fund, which also combats sex trafficking and child
marriage, genital mutilation, leaving the Ambassador-at-Large
for Global Women's Issues vacant, reinstating and expanding the
inhuman global gag rule that forces health care providers to
cut services for women, and which really causes and increase in
maternal deaths and unwanted pregnancies.
And I am not talking about funding abortion, all right. We
can have that argument on a separate date. I am sure you
probably know this, abortion is not contraception, and I just
want to give you an example of what's going on in your
department.
There were reports every year, I believe it is, 200
countries on human rights reports are put out. There's a
section on women.
Last year, for every country there was a section--women--
there was a section on rape and domestic violence and then
there was one on sexual harassment and discrimination and
reproductive rights.
The new report has completely eliminated reproductive
rights and substituted--it's almost insane what--I will just
give you an example.
Last year's report for El Salvador said that women were
being imprisoned for miscarriages. That's an example.
It said Ugandan men were beating their wives for using
contraception and in the Philippines poor women were being
denied family planning services.
Now, basically, there's a substitute for this--basically,
that just--it just will--it's almost ridiculous what it says
now.
So, really, my first question to you is--I don't know
whether you're aware of this, whether you will look into this.
Why don't we start with that?
Secretary Pompeo. I am not as familiar with the report as
you are. It may have been issued on my watch. I would guess it
was before that. But I am happy to look into the issues.
Ms. Frankel. How about the Ambassador position, on global--
--
Secretary Pompeo. You mean the global women's issue?
Ms. Frankel. Yes.
Secretary Pompeo. Yes. Yes, ma'am. It's on my list.
Ms. Frankel. And how about----
Secretary Pompeo. By the way, I agree it's important. We
need to find the right person. I think the issues are
incredibly important.
Ms. Frankel. All right.
The global gag rule has been expanded to not--again, this
is not--we are not talking about the Federal funding of
abortion.
It's been so expanded now that health care money is getting
cut off from agencies that even might refer or mention services
that will perform abortions.
So, basically, contraceptive services--I am not talking
abortion--contraceptive services are being cut off. My question
to you is this--whether or not you will take a look and see how
this is impacting the women's health all over this world.
Secretary Pompeo. Yes. Always about data and facts.
Ms. Frankel. You're about--okay. Well, here's what I would
like you to be about, please.
Please stop with this--we have, from this administration,
what I call abortion hysteria. Because of this hysteria, you're
cutting off health care to women all over the world.
So if I could just ask you to calm down from this hysteria
and really take a look at the health of what's happening to
women and to remember that women's rights are human rights and
it is absolutely tied into the peace and security and
prosperity of the world.
Secretary Pompeo. That's an easy one. I am fully committed
to that. This administration has demonstrated enormous
commitment to the health of every woman.
Ms. Frankel. Well, no, that's not true.
But thank you for being here.
Chairman Royce. We go to Scott Perry of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, welcome. Congratulations. Thank you for your
service on multiple levels. I am confident in your judgment.
I will begin with an observation. I want to commend my
friends on the other side for their concern about totalitarian
communist socialist Russian/Chinese involvement, malign
involvement and actions in our country.
The Bolshevik Revolution was in 1917. So for 99 years I
think it's fair to say that they have been silent on this issue
and maybe a strong case can be made that they actually helped
the other side in this issue.
So for 99 of the last 100, I wish they'd have been where
they are not. But I am happy to see they finally got in the
fight and they're here and I am with them in their concern.
Mr. Secretary, a couple questions. Let's start with
Ukraine. Is air defense artillery something that the
administration is considering regarding our actions toward
Russia and thwarting their activities and continued activities,
of course, which they deny, but I think with air defense
artillery present it would be hard to deny that Russian
separatists were indeed flying over Ukraine if one of their
aircraft landed on the ground?
Secretary Pompeo. Is your question about what the Russians
have moved into the----
Mr. Perry. No. My question is whether we are considering
either selling or providing air defense artillery in Ukraine.
Secretary Pompeo. The administration is committed to
providing the defensive weapons systems to Ukraine. I don't
know with respect to any particular weapons system whether
that's under consideration or not.
Mr. Perry. Okay. And maybe we can continue the conversation
along those lines to find more granularity in that and
specificity, and that includes the conversation that you had
with my colleague, Mr. Rohrabacher, regarding the Kurds and
Turkey.
I love the Turkish people. However, I find no favor with
the Erdogan regime and I think it's a matter of if, not a
matter of when. It's a matter of when, not if.
We have to change our strategy there, and if that's a
conversation that you're going to have in private or otherwise
I would like to be involved in that conversation with regards
to the Kurds and Turkey, air defense in Ukraine.
I read the State Department classification regarding UNRRA
and the IG report regarding the supply and content of
textbooks, and I am unsure why it's classified. And if you
can't divulge that in this setting I am happy to sit in another
setting with you.
But I am interested to know if that's going to change. I've
read the report. I see no reason. But maybe there's something
on this.
Secretary Pompeo. I don't know the answer. I am happy to
declassify it if it's appropriate.
Mr. Perry. Okay. So I am interested in follow up on that.
In Bosnia, I am concerned that there's an October election and
there's a problem with the constitution. The Dayton Accords
were never supposed to last 20 years. They have.
But I am concerned that we are not headed in the right
place there and I just want to get your thoughts on that. If we
are going to wait to see what happens, if we are going to take
preemptive action, I would hate to see that things burn down
and us end up with the United States having troops on the
ground there to try and secure the peace and also if we are
interested in pursuing--putting some forces there, again, to
thwart Russia and if that's a consideration. So those two
topics, sir.
Secretary Pompeo. So let me start, first, with Bosnia. We
are working on the very issue you described. I can't say a lot
about it. But you know that the State Department and others--
Department of Defense are there.
We understand the risk. We think the region is very
important. We know the--and this transitions to your second
part of the question, which is we know the Russians are hard at
work there destabilizing----
Mr. Perry. As are the Turks, right?
Secretary Pompeo. Yes. And so there are a handful,
although, admittedly, not sufficiently sized levers currently
being employed, and we are working to develop a strategy that
puts us in a better place.
There are important parts of the bulwark of democracy that
we need to continue to work on.
Mr. Perry. I appreciate that, and I would like to pursue
that further.
Mr. Secretary, this is a picture--I am sure you're well
aware of an M-1 tank manufactured right here in the United
States, paid for by the citizens of the United States with
their taxes.
That has a Hezbollah flag on it. I am concerned and have
written letters regarding the train and equip program in Iraq
and the Shi'a Crescent and the land bridges they're building
across Iraq with the militias there.
Again, many of the Iranian people want freedom. They want
peace and they don't agree with the regime that they're
working--living under.
But I offered amendments in the NDAA to stop the funding in
the train and equip program. One was found in favor, one was
not. So we leave it up to you.
I want to make sure that you're aware that this is
happening, including militias like Kata'ib Hezbollah, listed as
a terrorist organization for killing American soldiers.
And if the Congress is unwilling to stop it, I hope you
will be willing to stop the funding of the train and equip
program in Iraq and funding the Iranian militias that are
willing to kill Americans and Jews and everybody across the
Crescent that disagrees with them.
Secretary Pompeo. I will say this. It is the case that when
we perform train and equip functions, from time to time
equipment ends up in the hands of the wrong people. It's a risk
inherent in those operations.
The question becomes is the value we are getting from that
training--those exercises--outweigh the risk that happens. You
should know that the U.S. Government works diligently to put
rules and process in place to make that picture or pictures
like that as infrequent as possible.
Mr. Perry. I don't think the Iraqis are complying.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Joaquin Castro of Texas.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairman.
Secretary, thank you for your testimony. Is the North Korea
summit going to happen or not?
Secretary Pompeo. Sir, that decision will ultimately be up
to Chairman Kim.
Mr. Castro. So the President----
Secretary Pompeo. He asked for the meeting. The President
agreed to meet with him. I am very hopeful that that meeting
will take place.
Mr. Castro. You have been to North Korea twice and met with
North Korean leaders to lay the groundwork for a nuclear
agreement with Kim Jong-un.
How do you define the denuclearization of the Korean
Peninsula?
Secretary Pompeo. Well, we've said complete.
Mr. Castro. What does that mean?
Secretary Pompeo. So there are multiple components of their
system that threatens America. This would include their weapons
capability, their missile capability, the technology that goes
with that.
So engines and systems associated with space launch
vehicles in addition to the missile programs and then
everything that is upstream from that including the production
of fissile material, the technology that permits the capacity
to produce that material and all of the engineering and R&D
connected to that.
Mr. Castro. Will you leave them with a civilian nuclear
program?
Secretary Pompeo. We've said that it won't be appropriate
for them to have the capacity to enrich. I will say it this
way. I can't answer that question. I am not in a position that
I can answer that question for you today.
Mr. Castro. How will you move out the nuclear material?
Secretary Pompeo. Well, there will be long hard discussions
about how the verification of that work will go. It is one of
the most difficult verification programs that will ever have
been undertaken.
We have large teams already at work, preparing in the
eventuality that we are successful in negotiations so that we
can achieve that. It'll take many--it's a long hard process. It
won't be just American. There will be other partners that will
participate in it as well.
Mr. Castro. Will you suspect that would include Russia?
Secretary Pompeo. I don't know if it'll include the
Russians are not. It certainly would include the IAEA and
others that have tremendous capacity and expertise in this
area.
Mr. Castro. One of the things that has hurt this
administration is that on any controversial issue of foreign
policy and domestic policy often--but on foreign you often two
or three or four different answers depending on who you're
speaking to in the administration. That was certainly true when
your predecessor, Rex Tillerson, was Secretary of State.
So let me ask you, who is in charge of these negotiations?
Is it you or Mr. Bolton?
Secretary Pompeo. President Trump.
Mr. Castro. And who is going to lead up the team?
Secretary Pompeo. I will.
Mr. Castro. How many members are on the team and who is on
the team?
Secretary Pompeo. I am not going to go into the details of
how the team is being built out. There are different teams
work--there are lots of teams that work across all over the
United States Government, several within the State Department,
a number in the Department of Energy, Department of Defense.
There are many folks--folks at the National Security Council.
There are large teams working not only on--I think your
question was with respect to the negotiation but there are lots
of teams preparing for every element of our work on North
Korea. The existing pressure campaign, which continues----
Mr. Castro. Sure.
Secretary Pompeo [continuing]. Our work to ensure that we
are working alongside of our allies, the Republic of Korea,
Japan, and China to make sure that we are connected with them
and developing a comprehensive strategy.
There's a lot of focus on this summit with that.
Mr. Castro. Well, let me--I know, and I appreciate that.
Secretary Pompeo. There's a lot of work to do.
Mr. Castro. Let me ask you--I talked about getting
different answers on very controversial and important and
consequential issues. We saw a prime example of that the other
day in the middle of a press conference when Mr. Bolton talked
about the Libya model, which Secretary Mattis has also
mentioned before, and President Trump corrected him live on
camera, it seemed like.
So let me ask you, since you're leading up the team, which
approach do you take? Are you pursuing the Libya model that Mr.
Bolton has mentioned? Or do you think that's not appropriate
here, as Mr. Trump has indicated?
Secretary Pompeo. I don't think there's the distinction
that you draw. The model that we have laid forth is a rapid
denuclearization, total and complete, that won't be extended
over time, I think, when Ambassador Bolton was speaking about
this, although, obviously, it would be better to ask him.
What I think he was speaking of is a comprehensive
denuclearization that didn't take place in exchanges that
worked along the way--a slow years-long process where an
exchange for act X the United States sends a check across the
transom.
Mr. Castro. Well, does that include----
Secretary Pompeo. And he spoke about that and he's saying
that's not our model and it is, indeed, not our model.
Mr. Castro. Does that include helping to remove him 2 or 3
or 4 or 5 years later?
Secretary Pompeo. We are focused on denuclearization. The
President has made clear that we are prepared to provide
security assurances in exchange.
If we can get America's interest safe and secure, we are
prepared to do a great deal to ensure that we get that.
Mr. Castro. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. We go to Mr. DeSantis of Florida.
Mr. DeSantis. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Secretary. We had a great Embassy dedication
last week in Jerusalem--long overdue, very successful. The fact
that we now are recognizing Jerusalem as Israel's capital--will
you support allowing Americans born in Jerusalem to have Israel
listed on their passports?
Secretary Pompeo. You know, the team is looking at that. I
don't know the right answer. I think the President made the
right decision to recognize the reality of Jerusalem as
Israel's capital.
With respect to important but technical issues about how
that will manifest itself, the team is going to give me their
expertise and I will present those options to the President
shortly.
Mr. DeSantis. There was strong opposition within kind of
the rank and file of the State Department for the move to
Jerusalem. When I travelled last year to look at the Embassy,
pretty much everyone I talked to said it would be a total
disaster and that really hasn't happened.
So is there an issue with group think in the State
Department kind of at the career level that they're kind of in
more of one mind? Or do you have confidence that they're all on
board to implement the President's agenda?
Secretary Pompeo. You know, I think every team--every team
I've been part of in the private sector--when I was a young
lieutenant every team always suffers the risk that the status
quo is the path forward.
So I don't--and I view things like that I saw at CIA, too,
I am sure I suffered as well. And so when leaders make bold
changes I think teams sometimes lag in their understandings.
And my observations so far in 3 weeks at the State
Department is you have a team that very much wants to get out
and execute America's foreign policy as directed by President
Trump.
Mr. DeSantis. Great. In terms of what's going on in
Venezuela, there's a pretty significant Cuban presence of
military intelligence. Is that your estimation?
Secretary Pompeo. I am sorry. Could you repeat the
question?
Mr. DeSantis. In terms of the situation in Venezuela,
propping up the Maduro regime, is part of that the Cuban
military and intelligence apparatus?
Secretary Pompeo. In this setting I can say there are a
great deal of Cuban influence that is working alongside the
Maduro regime.
Mr. DeSantis. And it's not helpful to what America wants,
correct?
Secretary Pompeo. It runs adverse to U.S. interests--
directly adverse to U.S. interests.
Mr. DeSantis. The President, before you were Secretary,
announced a really strong re-evaluation of the Obama Cuba
policy. Not all of that has been implemented.
When is all that going to finally be implemented?
Secretary Pompeo. May I take that for the record? I don't
know the process or the timing but I will get the answer to
you.
Mr. DeSantis. Great. In terms of Iran, I think that your
speech was great the other day and I think the President's
decision was the right one. How do we go about--I mean, the
Iran deal gave them a cash windfall. I guess we are going to
now be moving to impose new sanctions. Are there going to be
other things that have not yet been enacted into law that
you're going to want Congress to do?
Because it seems to me Order A has got to be choking off
the money flow to this regime.
Secretary Pompeo. So Congress has granted the executive
branch a great deal of power to execute these sanctions
already. I am, having said that, confident that we will come
back to you seeking further authority to expand the scope of
what it is we are permitted to do.
It also goes beyond just the economic sanctions. There are
designations. There are issues with respect to visas. There are
a broad set of undertakings that not only the State Department
but other elements of government could take to achieve what the
President laid out, which is to deny around the wealth creation
opportunities that have permitted them to threaten the world.
Mr. DeSantis. The Iranian people, obviously, are not happy
with this regime. I mean, this is a militant Islamic regime
that's been really imposed on a relatively pro-Western
populace--educated middle class. We see the protests. The
President has spoken out I think correctly. What can we do to
help?
Because it seems like the regime cracks down on the social
networks. They don't want there to be a free flow of
information. But I think it's certainly in our interest to
empower people who view this regime as illegitimate and not
representative of their ideals.
Secretary Pompeo. It's long been a U.S. deeply held
position that we will do the things we can to ensure that
peoples all around the world have their human rights, their
political rights, and their capacity to express themselves.
We shouldn't shy away from that with respect to Iran
either. There are a number of tools that we can use, some of
which I am now responsible for their implementation. Others
exist other places in government. We should bring them all to
bear to allow the Iranian people to be governed by the leaders
that they choose.
Mr. DeSantis. Final question with respect to North Korea--
and congratulations on being able to be over there. I think you
have a chance to make history and there's no better guy to be
in your position than you, in my judgment, to get this done.
But there's been this issue about the Libya model or not
Libya model, and I think, as I read it, I mean, 2003 was
actually a good model because Gaddafi got scared. He realized
that the nukes were making his regime less stable, not more
stable--at least his program up to that point. But then you
have the 2011 Obama model, which is after he agreed to give up
his weapons they then attack.
So can you just say what--how does Libya--what's the model
that Kim Jong-un is going to look at and say, hey, how is
America going to react if I do a deal with them?
Secretary Pompeo. I should study the Libya case more
closely, perhaps. I could tell you what it is that President
Trump has directed me to do with respect to how we are going to
proceed against North Korea.
We are not going to do trade for trade. We are not going to
let this drag out. We are not going to provide economic relief
until such time as we have an irreversible set of actions--not
words, not commitments--undertaken by the North Korean regime
and when we get there, in exchange for that we are prepared to
do a great deal to help the North Korean people.
Chairman Royce. Robin Kelly of Illinois.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Secretary Pompeo, for coming to testify before
the House Foreign Affairs Committee. I am the ranking member of
the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform's Information
Technology Subcommittee and we are currently having a hearing
on the Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
scorecard.
And I don't know if you knew this but the State Department
has a D minus, and in 2017 the Department of State scored the
lowest of any agency on the Federal Information Security
Modernization Act.
Secretary Pompeo. I did know that.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Well, I guess you don't want to keep that
score? You do not?
Secretary Pompeo. I aim for at least a C, quick.
Ms. Kelly. The 2016 and 2017 Inspector General reports
found that the primary reason the department has not
implemented an effective information security program is
because the chief information officer does not have sufficient
authority to manage IT activities as provided in the law and is
not properly positioned within the department to ensure that
the department's information security program is effective.
And President Trump--his recent Executive order requiring
CIOs to report directly to the head of the agency, do you plan
to follow this order and restructure the CIO position in the
near future?
Secretary Pompeo. So I, in just 3 weeks, already spent a
lot of time staring at this.
Ms. Kelly. Congressman Meadows is interested in this too
because we did this together.
Secretary Pompeo. Yes. This is an important issue. I
actually saw this in my previous role as well where the agency
that I ran was in probably a little better position than the
State Department is but had a great deal of work to do as well.
We expended a fair amount of resources but, most
importantly, we made real progress in improving the systems
there. It is central that we do it here. There are security
issues surrounding it. There are efficiency issues surrounding
it. There is data management.
It is a broad system and, as best I can tell, that D is
justified. The D minus is justified, and I will empower our
CIO, but not only the CIO--the Undersecretary for Management
and everyone that is connected to that and, indeed, you don't
fix these processes and systems without an organization wide
commitment. No one person or one team can do it. I will be very
focused on this and I understand we have a great deal of
resources to attack the problem.
But I assure you if I don't have the resources I need I
will lay out a plan and come back and ensure that we make the
case to you that we have the resources that we need.
Ms. Kelly. And the Foreign Affairs Committee always talks
about being bipartisan but our subcommittee is very bipartisan,
led by Chairman Hurd, and we want to know what we could do to
help you implement what you want to do. So----
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you. There's much work to be done
but it's important work.
Ms. Kelly. The State Department has very few women and
people of color in senior level positions--a problem that was
exacerbated by your predecessor. During your confirmation
hearing, you spoke about the importance of diversity at the
State Department. Currently, there are no minorities in senior
positions at the State Department. How will you make sure
senior level officials at the State Department better represent
the diversity of the United States?
Secretary Pompeo. I did talk about this during my
confirmation hearing. It's actually been something I've cared
about all my life.
We had some success during my tenure at CIA. We had some
success when I was running little old Thayer Aerospace back in
Wichita, Kansas, some years ago to make sure that we had the
most talented people regardless of their gender, their sexual
orientation, their race.
I am confident we can do that at the State Department as
well. I've asked for the statistics and the history at the
State Department. I think I have them but not had a chance to
review them yet. But know that I will empower the
organization--indeed, demand--that it treat every single human
being with the dignity and respect that they deserve and that
we have a workforce that truly does represent America. It's
important for diplomatic reasons as well as just being the
right thing to do.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, and thank you for your time.
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Ted Yoho of Florida.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Pompeo, congratulations. Thanks for being here.
As you know, the world is going through a tectonic shift in
world powers we haven't seen since World War II. The State
Department and our United States Government needs the tools to
effectively counter and balance some of these rising powers,
i.e. China.
We can't compete with them dollar for dollar and I greatly
appreciate your written testimony regarding the BUILD Act. As
you know, the White House endorsed the measure in a press
release and encouraged that Congress consider a few changes to
strengthen institutional linkages between the new Development
Finance Corporation and USAID and a revised funding structure
to protect taxpayers from risk.
This committee worked with the National Security Council,
OMB, to adopt the White House's proposed changes in the bill
that was ultimately reported from this committee earlier this
month and I would like to dive down a little bit more, and ask
you your opinion of the amended HFAC BUILD Act and if that, in
your view, more fully aligns with the administration's goals.
Secretary Pompeo. It does. I don't know the details of it.
I think this is a very important piece of legislation. I think
there's real opportunity for the United States if we get this
right and I am happy to work with you or others on both sides
of the aisle to get to the right place here.
Mr. Yoho. I look forward to doing that because that's a
tool that we need. We met with somebody over at the Pentagon
and they said how this tool is so critically needed today to
counter some of these other foreign powers that are rising.
Secretary Pompeo. If I may--I actually think we can--we can
counter China dollar for dollar. It won't be taxpayer dollars,
necessarily.
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Secretary Pompeo. But this--America has been great not
because of the resources we've spent from the Federal but for
other reasons. I think this bill hits that perfectly.
Mr. Yoho. I think so, and we are excited about that. So I
am glad to hear that because that was my next question to ask
you.
Let me ask you something else. Earlier this Congress, the
House passed Chairman Royce's Cyber Diplomacy Act. This bill
would establish an Ambassador for Cyber Issues reporting to the
Undersecretary for Political Affairs to ensure that the office
covers the full range of issues in cyberspace.
Former Secretary Tillerson presented a plan to this
committee to create a cyber bureau. Do you plan to implement
this proposal?
Secretary Pompeo. I don't know. I am looking at it. I am
aware of that proposal. There were several dozen proposals
pending when I arrived. I will take a look. I don't know the
answer to that.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. Any information that we can provide you, I
know they'll be happy to do that.
So my second question was dependent on that one. Moving to
North Korea, the President is scheduled to meet with Kim Jong-
un in just under 3 weeks.
This committee has led efforts to sanction the Kim regime,
passing both H.R. 757 and the Countering America's Adversaries
Through Sanctions Act.
These bills have paved the way for the administration
policy for maximum pressure. How much more can be applied and
needs to be done through the use of secondary sanctions?
I would like to hear your opinion. Do you think we've done
enough with the other countries that are still dealing with
North Korea as far as funnelling money through their bank
accounts?
Secretary Pompeo. That's an excellent question. We actually
made really good progress along multiple dimensions, getting
the entire world to participate in this effort.
Mr. Yoho. Sure have.
Secretary Pompeo. It was well done. Not me, others, did
this good work. But the world came alongside and it's come
along side. Frankly, our focus today is to make sure that that
doesn't change. There is a tendency--a historic tendency when
there are discussions taking place and it looks like there's an
opportunity for there to be a shift, for folks to back away
from that----
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Secretary Pompeo [continuing]. To make decisions to begin,
for example, to rehire North Koreans that would remit money. We
are spending an awful lot of energy working with those
countries to remind them that this is a meeting--an important
meeting--but there's a long way left to go and the sanctions
that are in place today need to remain. There is still work to
do. There are still gaps in those sanctions. There are still
financial agents--North Korean financial agents distributed
throughout the world that we haven't gotten to yet. Know that
the Treasury Department, informed by the intelligence
community, working alongside the State Department, is working
to identify those as well.
Mr. Yoho. And that's great to hear and like the BUILD Act,
we see that as a tool that we have for an administration to
direct foreign policy. And so what we've done through this
committee, and I chair the Subcommittee on Asia and the
Pacific, is to call out the Treasury Department on why certain
entities haven't been sanctioned.
And one of the ones we are looking at, or two of them, are
the Agricultural Bank of China and the Chinese Construction
Bank. We'll go after the smaller ones but I hope that you will
continue pressure on these larger entities because no bank or
entity is too large not to sanction, to keep that maximum
pressure campaign.
I am out of time. I look forward to working with you.
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. We go to Brendan Boyle of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, I want to ask actually about two areas that
I don't think you have been asked for the entirety of this
hearing. The first is with respect to Syria and the $200
million of the stabilization program.
I am actually the co-founder and the co-chair of the House
Free Syria Caucus, along with my colleague, Adam Kinzinger. We
have both worked a great deal on this issue, give its
importance.
So I was quite surprised, shocked, when the announcement
was made that these funds were suddenly put on hold. I just
want to describe a few things that our $200 million go toward.
These are funds to ensure that the White Helmet first
responders can rush to the scene of an air strike to save
lives, and as an aside, having had a couple opportunities to
meet with the White Helmets they are remarkable people who risk
their lives to rush in to an area that has been bombed by the
regime, even knowing the regime will then bomb them while
they're trying to rush in and save lives.
These are funds for the investigation and prosecution of
persons responsible for the most serious crimes committed in
Syria since March 2011, otherwise known as IIIM, the U.N.
mechanism for accountability for war crimes in Syria--funds for
digital security for those who are willing to stand up to
Assad's war machine, a project to counter violent terrorism and
a basic recovery for those in territory formerly controlled not
by the ISIS--or not by the Assad regime but by ISIS.
So these funds do good work and are important in terms of
U.S. interests. So why was this funding suddenly put on hold
and what can be done to have that hold lifted?
Secretary Pompeo. Thanks for the question. So that
funding--the entire $200 million of that funding is under
review. I understand that there is a decision pending. I don't
know what that decision will be and I don't want to talk about
the internal discussions that we've had.
I've met the White Helmets, too. I know the remarkable
work--I know the remarkable people that they are as well. So
we'll have a decision shortly.
I will say this. We have also been hard at work at getting
other countries to provide support as well. This is a region
surrounded by a number of wealthy countries, each of which has
a direct interest in the same way that we do in making sure
that once ISIS is completely removed from the battlefield at
least as an organization capable of holding real estate that
doesn't--that they don't come back--that we don't allow that
real estate to be retaken.
Mr. Boyle. Let me just, since I only have a couple minutes
left, switch to a topic that hasn't come up this entire hearing
and I think gets too little attention here on Capitol Hill, and
that's Brexit.
One of the great achievements of American foreign policy
was the Good Friday agreement. There is concern here on Capitol
Hill--bipartisan concern as well as concern in Ireland, in the
U.K., and in the rest of Europe that one of the unintended
consequences of Brexit might be the ripping up of the Good
Friday agreement.
Given the severity of the situation, 32 members of the
House of Representatives--again, both Democrats and
Republicans--sent a letter to you requesting that a special
envoy be appointed to Northern Island, the position that George
Mitchell held and that a few others have had subsequently.
Will you appoint or will the President appoint a special
envoy to Northern Ireland?
Secretary Pompeo. I don't know. I haven't considered it. I
am happy to review your letter.
Mr. Boyle. You haven't considered the issue yet?
Secretary Pompeo. I haven't considered whether we should
appoint a special envoy or not. It hasn't----
Mr. Boyle. That is very concerning. As I mentioned, 32
Members of Congress have written on this issue. I believe we
previously have been given positive indications that it was
under consideration. So the fact that actually this issue
hasn't been considered by the leadership of the Secretary of
State, I would urge you to please consider it and to do so
promptly, as the negotiations right now are at a tenuous point.
Secretary Pompeo. I am happy to do that.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. We go to Adam Kinzinger of
Illinois.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here. A lot has changed
for both of us since we sat next to each other on the Energy
and Commerce Committee.
You went and ran the CIA and now you're Secretary of State,
and I grew a beard. So it's been a pretty interesting--a little
bit of time.
I just want to say a couple of quick things. I think it's
important to note the good work Colombia has done in the
Venezuelan crisis in terms of housing 700,000 people that have
crossed their border, 152,000 vaccines in 23,000 children in
part of this crisis.
Just a couple of points before I get into my questions.
First off, there's a lot of discussion about Russia and about
the Libyan model.
Firstly, on Russia, I think it's important to note that
this administration, and I think through your continued
leadership we'll continue to see it, has been one of the most
aggressive administrations against Russia that we have seen in
modern times.
Everything from pushing back to them in Eastern Europe, in
Ukraine, and everywhere else, and I think that's important to
note. We don't have to talk about everything that's being done
all the time in order to say this has been the most effective
administration for pushing back against that, not to mention
energy development, et cetera.
And on the Libyan model, people are bringing that up a lot,
and I get it. We all know what the point when it was mentioned
the Libya model. The point was get rid of all your nukes.
To push that into when Gaddafi was stabbed in the back of a
pickup truck is not appropriate. Look, you oppress your people,
you attack your people, they're going to rise up and take you
out.
It has nothing to do with the denuclearization of Libya. So
I think that's important to note. But I do want to ask you, as
my colleague had started to talk a little bit about Syria, I
believe that with the existence of Assad and that oppressive
regime, it actually creates a cauldron for the recruiting of
ISIS or the next generation of ISIS or the next al-Qaeda.
And so I think staying engaged in Syria is essential to
preventing that from happening in future generations.
Mr. Secretary, from your perspective, what would be a
successful outcome militarily and politically in Syria? And I
know that's a difficult question because it's a very difficult
conflict.
Secretary Pompeo. It is difficult--difficult especially to
do in a short time. Our mission statement is pretty clear--at
least, the near-term mission statement is pretty clear, right.
It's to continue--from the State Department's perspective, to
continue to support the Secretary of Defense's efforts to
defeat ISIS, to provide the diplomatic space for them to
achieve that so they don't have threats around them; second, to
work to de-escalate the violence so that we can set some
conditions for returnees. There have been a handful, right. We
are seeing this a little bit in Iraq.
We hope to be able to set conditions where we can achieve
that in Syria, although there is an awful lot of work left to
do. I can walk pocket by pocket in the north. I will meet with
my Turkish counterpart next week with the expectation that we
will walk out of there with a plan for how we don't have two
NATO partners at each other in that space.
And in the southwest, we see what happens when Iran
continues to advance, right. The Israelis are going to do what
they need to do to defend themselves. And so there's an
important diplomatic role there for us as well. To work with
the handful of willing partners we have in Syria to create the
conditions to first take down the level of violence so that the
Syrian people have a chance, and I will concede this is
aspirational for--that seems difficult to see today, but have a
chance to create conditions for themselves which aren't the
desperate ones in which they've been living for these past too
many years.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, and I know it's an issue you're
passionate about. And I want to echo what Mr. Boyle said about
the $200 million in aid. You answered that question so I won't
hammer on that but I am very concerned with what I've seen
including the freezing of $300,000 for the IIIM, which is
investigating war crimes. I think we have an obligation as a
country to prosecute and push back against war crimes and so I
would hope that part of that review that money is released.
I do want to shift briefly to the issue of Russia. You
served on the--you, obviously, understand energy issues as well
as foreign policy issues. Can you talk about the nexus between
our ability to push back Russian influence in Europe and the
development of European energy, our exports, et cetera, and how
that plays together and what we can do to actually strengthen
our hand there?
Secretary Pompeo. So, Representative Kinzinger, this
slightly simplifies it, but to the extent the Europeans are
dependent or reliant upon Russian energy, it makes their
freedom of movement in pushing back against Russia more
limited.
And it's a little more complex than that but it is a true
statement at its core. We have the opportunity--the real
opportunity to decouple them from Russia across many dimensions
coming out of the Caucasus. Lots of different parts who can
deliver this energy.
America ought to be part of that. We should continue to
push the Nordstrom II to be ended. We should not increase the
dependence that Europe has on Russian energy, and if we can
achieve those things we will put Europe on a much more sound
footing.
So if there's a day where there is a crisis, where there is
a real challenge and Russia decides to use that tool to advance
its interests that there are substitutes or capacity that that
power, that lever, that the Russians want to have won't exist.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you. Thank you for your time.
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Norma Torres of California.
Ms. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Secretary Pompeo,
welcome to the Foreign Affairs Committee. I wish you the best
of luck in everything that you do. As a true American, I hope
that you will represent all of our interests here at home and
abroad.
I want to talk to you a little bit about Central America. I
know that you have been very, very busy working on issues with
North Korea and the Middle East, and all of that is extremely
important.
I hope that you don't lose focus of what is happening in
our back yards. I've worked with Secretary Tillerson's folks.
They have been very supportive of U.S. policy in Central
America.
I am very concerned about what is happening with
legislators there, in Guatemala specifically. Are you aware
that some very corrupt officials and criminals are working to
undermine the efforts of local prosecutors and judges who are
fighting against corruption in Central America?
Secretary Pompeo. Yes, and I know that the team is engaged
to work to take down the level of corruption there and to
really, frankly, to enable the Guatemalans to do so themselves.
There's been some progress there.
Ms. Torres. Yes. We want to continue and build on that.
Secretary Pompeo. But much--yes, ma'am, much work remains.
Ms. Torres. Thank you, and thank you for being committed to
working to continue to improve the lives of the people in that
region so they can stay in that region and we can continue to
reduce the number of young people that are fleeing north to our
southern border.
When we become lenient, as we've seen with Honduras, they
were certified--that country was certified in the midst of a
terrible election. It was a head-in-the-sand time, I think, for
us to do that and was a slap in the face to the people of
Honduras that are facing a dictator.
So dictators exist in our own hemisphere. Please don't
forget that. I want to help you to the extent that I can on
ensuring--and every time you come to this committee I will
focus on this issue, I promise you.
I am very concerned from my constituents' perspective on
what is happening at the White House and who is advising the
President on foreign affairs issues.
How do you deal with advising the President and his ongoing
support of Fox News and getting advice from the TV channels or
newscasters?
Secretary Pompeo. So I've had many, many opportunities to
provide the President with intelligence. I did so most days in
my previous role. I found him to take on board the professional
work that the team that I represented then had done. They were
lively conversations. They were often lengthy conversations. He
took seriously the information that we presented and I often
saw him use that information to make decisive actions--to be
actionable. He based decisions on that. I've only been the----
Ms. Torres. Are his financial advisors present during these
meetings?
Secretary Pompeo. I am sorry. I am sorry. I didn't hear the
first part.
Ms. Torres. Are his financial advisors present during these
meetings?
Secretary Pompeo. Ma'am, the folks who were present most
days would have been----
Ms. Torres. Don, Jr. and Eric?
Secretary Pompeo [continuing]. The national security
advisor, myself, a professional CIA officer, the director of
national intelligence, often the Vice President, the President
himself, and I think that's it.
Ms. Torres. Don, Jr. and Eric?
Secretary Pompeo. I don't believe I ever saw either one of
them at either of those--at any of those meetings nor in
meetings that I've had as the Secretary.
Ms. Torres. Senator Rubio just made a comment earlier
saying that some in the administration are short-sighted over
ZTE. I am concerned about that decision and how the President
came to care more about Chinese workers than the workers at a
Fontana steel mill in my district and the impact that they
would have should there be job losses with a trade war with
China. I am very concerned at how he came to that conclusion
overnight.
Secretary Pompeo. I don't believe that's an accurate
statement about the decision the President made. He is
incredibly concerned about American workers.
One of the reason he has taken the approach he has with
respect to China's nonreciprocal trade arrangements--I am being
very polite there--I am learning diplomacy as I go.
Ms. Torres. Okay.
Secretary Pompeo. These are a very unfair set of rules that
have harmed American workers for an awfully long time and he is
determined to change those conditions so we will have more jobs
here in America.
He is the first President in a long time to take on that
challenge with respect to China.
Ms. Torres. Thank you for your time.
Chairman Royce. Ann Wagner of Missouri.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for organizing this
hearing and, Secretary Pompeo, thank you for your time this
morning and congratulations to you and your family on your
appointment. We are grateful for your service and excited to
see the vitality and dynamism that you're going to bring to the
State Department, as a former U.S. Ambassador and for 4 years
deeply involved with State.
Last week, a bill that I sponsored, the Elie Wiesel
Genocide and Atrocities Prevention Act, was passed unanimously
out of this committee and, among other things, the legislation
highlights the importance of mechanisms like the Complex Crises
Fund, or CCF, which supports flexible efficient responses to
unforeseen crises overseas.
I firmly believe that genocide prevention is possible and
necessary. But we need to make wise investments in prevention
that will save lives and taxpayer dollars over the long run.
The CCF is one of those investments. The Institute for
Economics and Peace estimates that every dollar invested now in
conflict prevention is $16 saved.
CCF funds were recently deployed in Central Africa
Republic, Burundi, and Jordan. Can you explain how this money
was used to mitigate atrocities and prevent further violence?
Secretary Pompeo. I don't know the details of that
particular deployment of that capital. But it is the case I
have the great joy now of being the leader of the organization
that gets to do the diplomacy--that gets to do this good work--
that can do conflict prevention. And there are many, many
places where we can use those resources to do just that and to
save the American taxpayer money in so doing.
And so I look forward to working alongside you. I am not
familiar with the piece of legislation you described, either.
But its intent seems incredibly important and noble, and if we
could achieve that--frankly, anyplace we achieve that we will
have done a good thing for America and for the world.
Mrs. Wagner. I think so, too. While the White House fiscal
year 2019 budget recognized the need for these kinds of rapid
response capabilities related to prevention, it didn't request
funding for CCF. How does the State Department plan to rapidly
kind of mobilize resources to prevent genocide and mass
atrocities?
Secretary Pompeo. So if I understand the history there
right--I've only had one, admittedly short, conversation about
this--there are resources that are available that are, if you
will, on standby.
That is, they could be accessed----
Mrs. Wagner. Correct.
Secretary Pompeo [continuing]. With relative speed to
deploy in the event that we see these issues emerging--that see
the risk of genocide emerging. It is often the case that it's
not a resource issue but a political will issue or an
understanding of the severity of the issue. That is, we, the
United States, ended up behind the curve. We didn't see it
coming fast enough or we reacted too slow to make decisions,
and not the absence of having resources to do so.
I think the most important thing we can do is make sure
that we have teams in place that send the flag up that identify
these challenges and so that we quickly develop decision making
processes that can put our team on the field to address them
before the conflict actually gets in a place where there is not
much we can do.
Mrs. Wagner. NGOs have found that comparatively small
investments in community identification and response to threats
have had great returns. And so how does the State Department
plan to deepen its investment in community-led peacekeeping and
peace building approaches?
Secretary Pompeo. I don't know the answer to that other
than to say that my experience has been the most effective
peacekeeping missions have always been driven by folks on the
ground, by local communities, by NGOs, where we've provided
some assistance, sometimes financial, sometimes technologic or
management and leadership, but almost always bottoms up as
opposed to top down and I think that's what you're describing
there as well.
Mrs. Wagner. It is, and, to me, prevention is the key here
and we have seen so many of these atrocities and genocides
occurring in many places--the Rohingya. We see it, certainly,
in Syria. Given also that the Burmese Government has cut off
Rakhine State to aid workers and international observers, how
is State working with--I would be interested in how you're
working with some of the local actors to mitigate the violence
against Rohingya Muslims in Burma.
Secretary Pompeo. So it's certainly--the United States is
involved trying to do that. It's not just the State Department.
There are others----
Mrs. Wagner. Right.
Secretary Pompeo [continuing]. Working as well. It's going
to take a big team effort. This is an enormous challenge. My
predecessor worked on this diligently. So has Ambassador Haley.
Mrs. Wagner. Yes.
Secretary Pompeo. We all identified the challenge and are
working to try and find the tools.
Mrs. Wagner. We are pleased to have that legislation make
it through markup. I look forward to working with you.
Chairman Royce. Brad Schneider of Illinois.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, and Mr. Secretary, thank you for
joining us here today. I appreciate your offer for coffee and I
look forward to having that opportunity.
Secretary Pompeo. It's not the best coffee but it's coffee.
Mr. Schneider. I am not a critic.
But I would like to focus my limited time I have on Iran's
malign activities in the Middle East and Russia's interference
in the U.S. election. Earlier when talking about Syria, you had
a list of four priorities.
Last among those four was in the southwest. However, in the
past year, Iran's advance has accelerated and solidified into
substantial bases and troops.
I am extremely concerned by Iran's continued and disturbing
presence in Syria and equally concerned and troubled by the
administration's lack of a strategy to ensure that Iran is not
able to maintain a permanent foothold in the country.
As we have seen in recent months, Iran is provoking Israel
into conflict and is intent on building a permanent presence
inside Syria.
I previously wrote to Secretary Tillerson about my concerns
and have yet to receive an adequate response. I would like to
know what specifically is the administration doing to counter
Iran's influence in Syria and prevent Iran for expanding its
presence there.
In particular, what are we doing to thwart Iran's efforts
to establish permanent bases and their development of an
indigenous missile-making capability not just in Syria but in
Lebanon?
How specifically is the administration supporting Israel,
our greatest ally in the Middle East and how are we pushing
back on Iran's activity on Israel's northern border?
And I have a long list of questions. I suspect I will have
to take your answers back in writing.
I also remain concerned by Iran's malign behavior beyond
Syria--in particular, its continued support for Hezbollah.
Iran's support has grown beyond weapons transfers to helping
build missile production facilities in Lebanon to enable its
indigenous rocket-producing capability for Hezbollah.
This would be a game changer for Hezbollah and for Israel,
and represents a very significant existential threat to Israel.
Hezbollah has also recently achieved significant electoral
success in the elections earlier this month. How is the
administration cracking down on Iran's support for Hezbollah?
What is the administration doing to stop the flow of Iranian
arms to Hezbollah and to disrupt their efforts to develop this
indigenous missile production supply chain?
I am also concerned by the lack of a clear plan and the
President's subsequent decision to withdraw the United States
from the JCPOA.
While I opposed the JCPOA when it was announced due to the
inherent risks, gaps, and flaws in the agreement, including
sunsets on limits to Iran's enrichment programs and failure to
address Iran's ballistic program and malign actions in the
region, however, once in place this agreement pushed Iran to
more than a full year away from a nuclear weapon and created a
window of opportunity for the United States and our allies to
craft a comprehensive strategy for the long term.
Iran must never be allowed to acquire a nuclear weapon--not
now, not for the duration of the JCPOA, not ever. I fear that
by walking away from the JCPOA this way the administration has
made it more challenging to ensure that Iran never gets a
nuclear weapon.
Earlier this week, you spoke about the administration's new
Iran strategy and that we will work with allies to counter
Iran's destabilizing activities, to address their missile
program and proliferation, and that ``We will also ensure Iran
has no path to a nuclear weapon.''
Can you please elaborate on how exactly the administration
will address Iran's malign behavior, missile proliferation, and
nuclear program?
How is this different from actions by previous
administrations? How do our goals differ? How do the actions we
are taking differ? How will we measure things differently--
measure their compliance but also measure our progress toward
the goal that Iran never gets a nuclear weapon?
And what is your plan if Iran rejects the demands you laid
out during your speech on Monday?
Moving to Russia, every week we seem to learn more about
the sophisticated activities by Russia used to spread
disinformation and misinformation in our election.
Our intelligence chiefs have concluded that Russia
interfered in the 2016 Presidential election and are unanimous
that they will seek to do the same in 2018.
You yourself stated earlier this year that Russian activity
and intentions will have an impact on the next election cycle
here.
What are we doing to make sure Russia cannot take action?
What actions are we taking specifically? What actions remain to
be taken?
The State Department's Global Engagement Center was created
in 2016 to lead U.S. efforts to counter propaganda and
disinformation from foreign actors.
I was surprised to learn that we haven't spent any of the
money necessary or allocated since 2016 to counter their
efforts and I hope we'll continue to invest in the GEC.
We didn't spend this money because the department failed to
act on its transfer authority and wasn't able to hire during
the hiring freeze. I hope we will take care of this.
I would like to hear from you how we are going to fix these
problems so the GEC will have sufficient funding and staff to
stand up to and counter malicious efforts by Russia and how
will you ensure that the GEC can effectively lead the
interagency process with DoD and the intelligence community to
counter propaganda from foreign states?
And finally, let me thank you for your pledge to support
the appointment of a special envoy to combat anti-Semitism.
Chairman Royce. The gentleman's time has expired. We could
just do that answer in writing if it's all right, Mr.
Secretary.
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Mr. John Curtis of Utah.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking Member.
Mr. Secretary, I am new here and haven't had a chance, like
my colleagues, to get to know you. But they all speak very
highly of you and you come with great recommendations.
Secretary Pompeo. Not all of them. [Laughter.]
Mr. Curtis. Many of them speak highly of you, and I look
forward to getting to know you and working with you.
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you.
Mr. Curtis. As you know, for almost 2 years Utahan Josh
Holt has been detained in a Venezuela prison without trial and
on spurious charges. It's my understanding that Senator Hatch
has worked hard with you and other members of the delegation--
Congresswoman Mia Love--to bring him home, with his wife,
Tammy.
With the heightened political turmoil in Venezuela, I've
received letters and phone calls, continue to from
constituents. Just last week, we saw reports of a video of
Josh, who Facebooked he feared for his life with the riots in
El Helicoide Prison.
Like so many Utahans, I am concerned about his safety and
hoping that the U.S. State Department is doing all they can to
bring him home.
Mr. Secretary, can you give me any update or on his
condition or any efforts underway to bring him home?
Secretary Pompeo. Unfortunately, I can't give you an update
on his condition. We were following closely the riots that
surrounded the place that he's being unlawfully detained.
I have spoken with many in your delegation and yourself,
Senator Hatch--I've communicated with Representative Love as
well. Our team is very focused on getting his return.
Unfortunately, we are going to have two of our senior
officials kicked out. So our capacity to reach them on the
ground will actually be diminished. I am very worried about
that.
Know that the plight of Mr. Holt is on our minds and we are
doing the things we can with the tools we can to encourage the
Maduro regime to at least, in this one instance, do something
right and send this fellow back.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you. On behalf of Utahans and his family,
I thank you for keeping it top of mind and doing all within
your power.
Last Monday, you gave a bold speech and talked about
pulling out of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action--the Iran
nuclear deal.
You insisted that Iran end all of its nuclear enrichment
and close its heavy water reactors. You promised them that if
they didn't they'd see the strongest sanctions in history.
Recently, I had a chance to travel in that region. As a
matter of fact, I followed you through a few countries by a
couple of days, and without exception there's great concern in
the region and, interestingly, I heard different opinions about
staying in the deal, pulling out of the deal.
But what was unanimous and was not contested is that the
deal would lead to Iran having nuclear weapons maybe sooner
rather than later, but eventually having nuclear weapons, and
that was unanimous among all the countries that I visited
which, as you well know, is totally unacceptable.
In addition to the sanctions, what else can we do and what
else can I expect the Utahans to expect to move us toward a
situation where we wouldn't have nuclear weapons there?
Secretary Pompeo. So there are many tools in addition to
the economic sanctions. There are designations of senior
leaders that will impact those leaders' capacity to move around
the world.
Our efforts in Syria are designed, certainly, to protect
our friends, Israel, the Jordanians, and others. But to the
extent we are successful in the counter ISIS campaign, we also
contain the space in which Iran can move with great freedom in
set conditions in Syria, which will, for the first time in a
long time, begin to call out Iran for what they're really doing
there, which is not fighting terrorism but, rather, working to
expand their power.
Iran moves in lots of parts of the world. We are aiming to
build a global effort, much like we were successful doing it
against North Korea to call out the Iranians.
And so if there are Iranians working in countries, we are
going to work to convince folks that they ought not be doing
the things that create the wealth, that, frankly, has been used
in ways that the Iranian people don't want it used.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you. I agree with that comment about
their influence.
We hardly visited a country where you couldn't see an
Iranian or Russian presence pressing on a border or in some way
impacting that country.
Let me quickly turn to North Korea. As the CIA Director,
you visited there. We have these talks coming up. It seems that
the expectations have been elevated to anything less than world
peace, right, is unsuccessful.
What would you have me take back to Utahans about
reasonable expectations? Just a really quick answer, please.
Secretary Pompeo. At its core, this problem gets solved
when these two leaders both agree that the solution we are
aiming for--complete denuclearization of North Korea in
exchange for fundamental assurances for the North Korean
regime--if we can get the two to agree that that's the end
state we are working towards, we will have had a good day.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you. I yield my time.
Chairman Royce. Tom Suozzi of New York.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you so much. You have an enormous
portfolio.
Who would consider to be your main point person on
Afghanistan and Pakistan?
Secretary Pompeo. So we have a number of people. We have
Ms. Wells working on it. We have our Ambassador in Kabul,
Ambassador Bass. We have our Ambassador in Islamabad,
Ambassador Hale--each of whom is working on implementing, at
least for the State Department's piece, working on delivering
the present South Central Asia--against the President's South
Central Asia strategy.
Mr. Suozzi. So I have the great honor of also serving on
the Armed Services Committee and it's clear to me that we
really have a military strategy to clear and hold in
Afghanistan.
It's well thought out. It's a comprehensive strategy. It
makes sense. I've supported the administration's efforts there.
But when it comes to the civilian side, it seems like we
have more of a list than a strategy. We have a lot of little
things that we are doing both from the State Department and
USAID that many of our partners are doing, that many different
agencies throughout the world that are cooperative with us--
India, for example, most recently--but it's a list of things as
opposed to a comprehensive strategy.
And this administration has made a decision that we would
move to--from a calendar-based strategy to a conditions-based
strategy as to what we are going to do. But we don't really
know what the conditions are that we are looking for for us to
move forward.
What are we going to do? What's our conditions we are
looking for regarding terrorism? What's our conditions we are
looking for regarding the form of government and its
democracy--it's not going to be like our democracy--regarding
corruption, regarding the economy overall, regarding security.
So I am really looking for you to try and describe to me the
strategy we have on the civilian side regarding Afghanistan and
Pakistan.
Secretary Pompeo. So there are--you may call this a list. I
would say it is a set of lines of effort that we are
undertaking. You laid out some of them--you described them.
But let me start with the end state--what are the
conditions that we are looking for? The President made this
very clear in his remarks, now, goodness--a while back. He said
we are looking for the conditions where the Taliban no longer
believes that it can prevail through the use of force--that we
concede that there's not a military solution to achieving the
stability and peace in Afghanistan that, frankly, most of the
world is looking for.
And so the effort was to apply all elements of the United
States Government pressure such that the Taliban would come to
the negotiating table.
President Ghani, now a couple months back, agreed. He said
he'd be willing to be part of those sets of discussions. Now we
need to find the right leadership inside the Taliban to
participate in those discussions and then we've got to bring
lots of different groups to bear.
If you have been there, you know. We have lots of different
groups that need to view being part of the solution as getting
for them in their region their particular ethnicity, right--get
all of those understanding that pieces gives them a better
outcome than the place Afghanistan has been for the last at
least 16 years.
Mr. Suozzi. Mr. Secretary, respectfully, this is obviously
such a complex issues and there's so much that needs to be done
to create an Afghanistan Government that will be able to
provide for its people, and we are not in the business of
nation building, according to this administration.
Secretary Pompeo. Right.
Mr. Suozzi. But there's so much being invested regarding
everything from schools to infrastructure to electricity,
toward training not only the police officers but also
prosecutors.
I think that we need to really have a document, quite
frankly, that says to us this is our plan on the civilian side,
taking into account these many different players that are
involved here from not only the State Department, USAID, the
Treasury Department, the DOJ, the DEA, and all these many other
varied governments, and we don't really have a plan from the
civilian nonmilitary side, I believe, that says all these
pieces fit together in a plan.
And I am not saying this as a criticism. Obviously, you're
new in this job. But I would like to work together with you to
try and figure out what that plan is going to be or I am sure
that there's pieces of it--lots of pieces. It's just not in any
kind of comprehensive strategy.
Secretary Pompeo. I welcome the chance to work with you. I
think it's more comprehensive than you describe. But I am happy
to work with you so that we can articulate in a way that does
communicate all the various lines of effort that we are engaged
in on the nonmilitary side.
Mr. Suozzi. I've approached a lot of people to try and get
a document--to try and get something that I can read that says
this is our strategy--this is our plan--and I haven't been able
to get that document.
So there's so many moving pieces. There's so many people in
the world dedicated toward this effort that I think we need to
fit it together into one comprehensive plan.
Hopefully, under your leadership, that can happen.
Secretary Pompeo. I would welcome that. It's worth
remembering--you mentioned this, right--it's not just an
American solution to this. There are----
Mr. Suozzi. A lot of pieces.
Secretary Pompeo [continuing]. NATO mission. There are lots
of other countries working alongside us that have made massive
commitments to this as well.
Mr. Suozzi. Well, I hope I will be able to work with you on
this. Thank you so much, sir.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Ted Poe of Texas.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here.
Congratulations as well. It's always good to see a House member
move up into the administration.
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Poe. I want to cover a multitude of sins, so to speak,
here. We'll start with Iran.
The last administration--the previous Secretary, Mr.
Tillerson, said before this committee that he thought that the
best end solution for Iran was a regime change--peaceful regime
change from within.
Do you still hold that philosophy?
Secretary Pompeo. What I said on Monday, which is the
President's policy, is that we are very hopeful that the
Iranian people will get a chance to elect the government that
they want.
Mr. Poe. And are we supporting the dissidents and
encouraging them or supporting them at least politically and
verbally in their desire of the protests that they're making to
have a regime change in Iran?
Secretary Pompeo. I have certainly spoken, both in my
previous role and now in this role and then in my previous
previous role as a Member of Congress, I have spoken about
supporting Iranians who feel that their voices aren't being
heard. We should continue to find our voice in doing that both
as a government and I think individually as well.
Mr. Poe. And, obviously, here in the audience today we have
family members of Iranians that have been murdered by the
current regime, and their desire is that there's a free Iran
where the people make the decisions and not the Ayatollah.
Just most recently when we moved our Embassy to Jerusalem,
Iranian student groups, supported by the administration,
offered $100,000 for someone to blow up the Embassy in
Jerusalem.
That group was sponsored by the IRGC, which is sponsored by
the Ayatollah. The Ayatollah made the comment, as he has done
before, ``Death to America.''
Do you still believe that that is the policy of Iran--long-
term is death to America?
Secretary Pompeo. Yes.
Mr. Poe. The withdrawal from the deal has been talked about
since long before the deal. I commend the administration for
its bold decision. It was a bad deal. It's a worse deal now.
I am a little disturbed that former Secretary of State John
Kerry went to the Europeans and to the Iranians right before
the decision was made by this administration to try to make
sure that the deal was not withdrawn from the United States.
But be that as it may, total support for looking out for
the interests of the United States. A lot of Americans don't
realize there was a side deal made by the IAEA.
Those documents are not public, and looking at those and
some of the other intel that we've had support the decision
that's made by the administration to leave the deal.
Georgia, Ukraine, and Moldova--I've recently visited with
the Speakers of the House of all three of those nations, and
they're in a bad neighborhood. They've got the Russians.
Moldova has Russians in their country. So do the Georgians and
the Ukrainians. They all have Russians in their country.
I would hope that we would, as a nation, focus on helping
those three nations move to the West instead of being tempted
to go back to Russia. Those Speakers of the House of those
three countries are coming to the United States this summer.
I hope that there's time on your calendar to meet with
them, if that is possible, so that we can encourage them and
help them to be a free country as opposed to one that's still
influenced by the Russians.
Turkey--do you think Turkey should stay in NATO?
Secretary Pompeo. They have been an important NATO partner.
If Secretary Mattis was sitting here he would say we need them
to be a NATO partner.
I would agree with that assessment. We need their behavior
to reflect the objectives of NATO and it's what we are
diligently working to do, to get them to rejoin NATO in a way
that their actions that are consistent with what we are trying
to achieve in NATO and not take actions that undermine its
efforts.
Mr. Poe. Mr. Connolly and I are on the U.S. delegation to
the NATO Parliamentary Assembly, which meets this weekend. I
hope we can bring up this subject of Turkey being a bad child
of NATO.
Most recently, they have purchased or received S-400s from
Russia, missiles--which violates sanctions by the United States
on Russia. At the same time, they want to buy F-35s.
Your department makes the decision on whether or not they
will be allowed to purchase F-35s. Have you made that decision
yet?
Secretary Pompeo. I have not, and we continue to work to
keep the Turks in a place where they don't actually acquire the
S-400.
Mr. Poe. All right.
Secretary Pompeo. I don't believe they have it yet and we
are hopeful they'll never take possession.
Mr. Poe. All right. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. We go to Ted Lieu of California.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Secretary of
State Pompeo for your civilian service as well and your
military service. I also appreciate you being here today and
agreeing to testify.
I would like to ask you about the conflict in Yemen, but
before that, I just need to ask you a few questions about
official statements the President of the United States made
this morning on his Twitter account.
He said there is a criminal deep state and, as you know,
Representative Nunes has said he's also going to investigate
the State Department.
Do you believe there is a criminal deep state at the State
Department?
Secretary Pompeo. I haven't seen the comments from the
President. I don't believe there's a deep state at the State
Department.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
You formally served as CIA Director. Do you believe your
colleagues at the CIA are part of the criminal deep state?
Secretary Pompeo. You know, this term deep state has been
thrown around. I will say this. The employees that worked for
me at the CIA nearly uniformly were aimed at achieving the
President's objectives and America's objectives.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. And that's your experience also when
you interact with colleagues at the FBI and Department of
Justice as well?
Secretary Pompeo. Yes. There are always exceptions to every
rule. I've never led and organization that didn't have bad
actors. I don't think any government organization is exempt
from having malfeasance as well.
Mr. Lieu. But, in general, you are confident that the
members of the various agencies are honoring their oath to the
United States Constitution?
Secretary Pompeo. Yes, in general. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. I would like to ask you now about
Yemen. As you know, the war in Yemen is now the world's worst
humanitarian disaster.
Over 22 million people are now at risk of starvation. Eight
million don't know where their next meal will be and every 10
minutes a child dies of preventable causes.
So the U.S. is involved in Yemen in two ways. One is we are
striking terrorists. I don't have a problem with that.
But the other way we are involved is we are assisting the
Saudi-led military coalition and, again, I don't have a problem
with assisting our allies.
But I have a problem when that coalition is killing large
number of civilians through air strikes that are nowhere near
military targets and as of last September more than 5,000
civilians have been killed, the majority from these air
strikes.
In 2016, the State Department--its lawyers--wrote a memo
saying that because we are refuelling these planes--these Saudi
jets, and also providing them other assistance--that U.S. could
be considered a co-belligerent and liable for war crimes.
I know you just came on as Secretary of State. I wonder if
you had a chance yet to read that memo.
Secretary Pompeo. I have not.
Mr. Lieu. At your convenience, if you----
Secretary Pompeo. But I will. I will review the memo.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. I appreciate that.
And if you could also make a request to your State
Department to see if Members of Congress could also review that
memo in a classified setting as well, that would be
appreciated.
Secretary Pompeo. I take it you have not had a chance to
see it?
Mr. Lieu. We have not. So if you could make that request
that would be great.
Secretary Pompeo. I will review that, absolutely.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
So when this conflict first started, we had all these air
strikes and a Saudi-led coalition, and what it turned out is
it's not that they were trying to hit a Houthi vehicle that was
moving, they missed, and struck a bunch of civilians.
What ended up happening is they intentionally struck those
civilian targets. So they struck hospitals, weddings, schools,
markets, and last year they struck a funeral that killed
hundreds of people, twice.
So they hit this funeral and the jets went around and hit
it again a second time, very precise. That's why the Obama
administration actually stopped shipment of precision-guided
because the realized these jets are intention to strike their
targets and they were civilians.
It's my understanding that the Trump administration is now
going to go forward with that sale. Just wondering why do you
think anything has changed in Yemen that would authorize this
sale to go forward?
Secretary Pompeo. So I am personally familiar with the
incident you're describing. There are a very rigid set of rules
that are thought deeply about in every national security that
I've been part of at the CIA before, now at State Department,
with respect to providing munitions to organizations that are
intentionally engaging in civilian targeting.
We have a complex set of rules and prohibitions. We would
never do that. It is this administration's judgement that
providing the precision guided munitions actually decreases the
risk to civilians, and it's for that reason we think this
actually makes sense certainly for our allies and partners but
also for citizens that are engaged in ordinary activity inside
of Yemen.
If I might, this administration has also taken serious
action to do our best to reduce the humanitarian crisis that is
Yemen as well. We have not resolved it but we have made real
progress.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for your testimony
and for sticking it out.
As you know, there is no more urgent or greater threat to
my constituents in the state of Hawaii and to this country than
the threat of nuclear weapons coming from North Korea.
As we meet today, we are literally at a historic moment in
time where we have a brief window of opportunity to peacefully
denuclearize North Korea.
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Dunford, has
remarked numerous times about how pursuing a military option
with North Korea would be horrific on a scale not seen since
World War II.
I commend your travels to meet with Kim Jong-un to lay the
groundwork for these negotiations with the goal and objective
of verifiable and complete denuclearization of North Korea.
This path forward should not be riddled with politics.
There's far too much at stake here. It's unfortunate that some
of our colleagues and some of the media are against this
meeting and trying to undermine this meeting from happening--
trying to say that we should set preconditions that are
unrealistic or that the North Korean leader does not deserve to
meet with the U.S. President.
They are, clearly, out of touch with the reality that faces
my constituents in Hawaii and the people of this country and
the urgency and the seriousness of this threat. They believe
that somehow we should not be meeting with who may be our
adversaries or who are dictators or leaders of countries that
are not our allies even as we are trying to further the cause
of peace. This attitude is dangerous and short sighted and can
only lead to more war and suffering.
There are numerous examples throughout history--JFK, Nixon,
peace agreements between Israel-Egypt, Israel and Jordan,
Reagan, Gorbachev--there are many examples of leaders making
this step to meet with those that may be their adversaries to
further the cause of peace.
So I encourage you and hope that you will continue your
efforts and that the meeting between Kim and President Trump
moves forward as planned so that we can achieve this historic
moment of denuclearization with North Korea.
I've introduced a resolution that's before this committee,
H. Res. 861, that has bipartisan support and co-sponsorship
that states this sense of Congress in support of the efforts
that this administration is taking to achieve this goal of
denuclearizing North Korea.
In the time remaining, I am wondering if you can share more
insights and details on your meetings and the administration's
desired framework.
You talked about earlier security assurances for North
Korea. It is something that they have set as a requirement in
order to achieve denuclearization. What does that mean and what
does that look like?
Secretary Pompeo. So, first of all, thank you. I am hopeful
to that the meeting will progress. You identified a number of
situations throughout history where conversations with
adversaries worked.
In each of those cases, if I read the history--at least the
way I read the history--it was the timing that was right and
the leaders that were right.
I am convinced that we have both the timing and, in this
case, the leaders right for this meeting to have an opportunity
to be historically successful and I hope that we can achieve
that.
With respect to the framework, I don't--I would prefer not
to provide a whole lot of detail about what the scope of those
assurances is.
But it goes without that Chairman Kim's view--frankly, his
father and grandfather's view--was that the nuclear weapons
that protected the regime. That was the security blanket.
And so they have worked diligently over years and years to
develop this weapons system to the point where in fact it does
threaten the United States today, your home state in
particular.
We now have this chance to stand that on its head, to
convince them that it's in fact those nuclear weapons that
present the greatest risk to the regime and to the North Korean
people and that we are prepared to do the things that provide--
the comfort and security that he knows that he can take away
this thing that he's depended on and, frankly, he had told his
people for a long time that this provided their security to
convince that, frankly, joining the list of civilization--the
nations that participate in that is actually going to provide
security for their people.
So we need to provide him a whole list of--it's not just
us--the South Koreans will have to do the same. China will play
a very important role here, so will Japan and, frankly, the
Russians will have a role in this along the way as well,
ensuring Chairman Kim that we want good things for the North
Korean people.
If we can do that--if we can build the trust and confidence
there along the way, we have a real opportunity to get the
denuclearization that your state and America and, frankly, the
world so desperately need.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. We go to Adriano Espaillat of New York.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Engel.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for taking all this time. I am
usually, like, the last--I am the Mariano Rivera of this
committee.
Secretary Pompeo. I was a junior member when I left, too. I
know exactly how you feel.
Mr. Espaillat. I am the closer, and very often the
questions that I already have been asked by somebody. But I do
want to turn to the Western Hemisphere, because I sit on that
subcommittee.
Very often people across America are under the impression
that we are giving away the store when in fact it's only, like,
a percent of the budget. And so this erroneous belief out there
that we are spending money all over the world and sort of not
taking care of people back home.
But I am concerned that in the Western Hemisphere, we sort
of turn our heads and we've been a little bit too complacent
and maybe even abdicated our leadership role in Latin American
and as a result all these bad things have happened.
China is now very much present. Panama, Costa Rica, and
most recently the Dominican Republic have stabilized
relationship with a country that still engages in currency
manipulation, in the stealing of our intellectual property
rights, fraud. They don't even allow their population to have
access to applications such as Wikipedia, What's App, even
Facebook.
And so what can we do to re-establish our presence in that
area? I met recently with one of the Latin American leaders and
he said to me, name me one major project, one major
infrastructure project that America is involved in investing.
As proposed to do in many of these countries--frankly, Mr.
Secretary, as they say in the schoolyard, they're eating our
candy. There is something that we have to do to establish
ourselves back and it's going to entail, potentially, a fiscal
commitment to the region as well as reestablishing our strong
presence there.
What do you propose we can do to reestablish our leadership
role on Latin America and engage vigorously in projects that
will improve the quality of life for many of these countries?
Secretary Pompeo. I think there's at least two questions in
there. Let me try and tackle each of them.
The first is China and China's involvement there. It's not
only true in South America. It's true in other parts of the
world as well but particularly in South America, I would agree
with you.
I am convinced that the candy that they're eating will
cause bad things to happen and that the people of South
American will come regret taking these investments.
And so we have a role to explain to them what it is the
Chinese are really engaged in there. They're not doing this
because they care about the people of Peru or Colombia or
anyplace else.
They're doing it to expand Chinese influence and they are
making loans that will one day be required to be repaid and the
Chinese influence in those countries will be devastating for
those people.
So we have a responsibility to talk about this openly about
what the Chinese actual aims are, why it is they're using their
capital to buy influence around the world.
Second, how can America be more involved? So there are
certain places where there will be resources required. I think
that's likely true. But it's often the case that when America
has demonstrated leadership in other places in the world it
hasn't been our money that we've led with. It's been our
presence, our leadership, helping democracies stand up, things
like the rule of law.
I was always reminded when I was Director of CIA I had one
of my counterparts in a very difficult part of the world tell
me that America's spent a lot of money here--they've done a lot
of things--the most important thing America did was they worked
alongside our officers to show us what it means to work in a
democracy--how to do the right thing--how to get up every day
and go to work, and the intrinsic core of who the American
people truly are.
And so I do think it's important that my team that are
working out of Embassies and consulates around the world is out
there every day interacting, engaged, proudly talking about the
things that America does and how we do it.
If we do that, I think we can have an enormously good
impact around the world but, certainly, in real opportunity
countries in the Western Hemisphere as well.
Mr. Espaillat. One quick last question. If the threats
against Israel continue to mount, will the administration
consider examining whether to increase current funding at an
adequate level?
Secretary Pompeo. I am confident that the administration
will do what it needs to allow Israel to have the capability to
defend itself.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Chairman Royce. We go to Mr. Gerry Connolly of Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, Mr.
Secretary.
I was just reflecting that I've, on and off, been working
here on the Hill for 20 years. You're my 10th Secretary of
State. So welcome and good luck in your new assignment.
Secretary Pompeo. That puts the mean at, roughly, 2 years.
I am going to try and beat it. [Laughter.]
Mr. Connolly. Well, Mr. Secretary, you remember this body
and certainly a part of and subjected to the sort of partisan
rancour that all too often accompanies the work we do up here.
Now you're in a new role, and I want to give you a quick
opportunity to comment on how you see that new role in terms of
working with Democrats.
Secretary Pompeo. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Who also love their country and want to see a
successful U.S. foreign policy.
Secretary Pompeo. I would more than concede that point,
that everyone on this committee and, frankly, every Member of
Congress comes here with a noble and patriotic objective.
I will equally concede the point that as a Member of
Congress, I could do partisan with the best of them, and I
understand that we all had constituents that had different
views and we did our best to represent.
I hope that during my time I did that for the people of
south central Kansas. They might well have had different views
than the people of your district or other members' districts.
I hope--and there were exceptions to this but I tried every
day to do that with dignity and respect. I didn't always quite
achieve it, but I tried. In this role I will do the same.
You have my word. I will work with members from both sides
of the aisle to achieve America's foreign objectives. We'll
disagree often about how to get there.
But I will be surprised if it's frequently the case that we
disagree about what we are trying to accomplish.
Mr. Connolly. I very much appreciate that. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, given the unprecedented and troubling
Russian interference in our 2016 elections, which have been
certified by all of our intelligence agencies including the one
you headed when you were there, Congress passed and the
President signed the Countering America's Adversaries Through
Sanctions Act, which includes at least seven mandatory sanction
provisions against Russia--mandatory sanctions--Russian
undermining cybersecurity, Russian crude oil products, Russian
financial institutions, dealing with Russian corruption,
sanctions evaders, human rights abusers, on and on.
There were seven major mandatory sanctions with respect to
Russia. How many of those mandatory sanction provisions has the
President imposed?
Secretary Pompeo. I don't know how many of those different
authorities have been used. I know that there have been
significant sanctions imposed under CAATSA and I know that
there are many more in the queue.
But I couldn't tell you which--how many of those seven have
been used. I will bet you can tell me.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, Mr. Secretary. The answer is one.
And I think, on a bipartisan basis, that bill passed
overwhelmingly, as you know, here in the Congress and I think
it absolutely expressed a certain point of view with respect to
that subject--not just that subject but certainly that
subject--and I think we do expect full compliance with the law
by the administration and I would give you the opportunity to
pelage your commitment to that implementation of what is now
statute.
Secretary Pompeo. Yes, sir. You can count on--may I give
you one caveat to that?
Mr. Connolly. Of course.
Secretary Pompeo. It is the case that Secretary Mattis and
I are both working to find places where we think that
legislation did not give us enough to make sure that we don't
do something that was unintended with respect to some of our
allies who have historic relationships with, in particular,
Russian equipment.
And so we--I think Secretary Mattis will take the lead but
I will be part of it alongside him to see if we can get
Congress to consider giving us waiver capacity so that we can
ameliorate are not the intended objectives of the CAATSA
legislation.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
I have a quick last question, because I am going to run out
of time--gosh, I wish we had more time--earlier this month in a
story by Ronan Farrow, I think in the New Yorker, it was
reported that a company called Black Cube involving Israeli
official--not officials, operatives--investigate former Obama
administration officials who were involved in the Iran nuclear
negotiations. Are you aware of that story and were you familiar
with any aspects of that allege investigation?
Secretary Pompeo. I am familiar with the story but I read
it as new information in the same way that it sounds like you
did as well.
Mr. Connolly. And to your knowledge, the administration had
no involvement in said activity?
Secretary Pompeo. To the best of my knowledge, that is
absolutely correct, sir.
Mr. Connolly. I thank you, Mr. Secretary. Look forward to
working with you.
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Secretary, the administration has taken
strong action, including recently sanctioning seven oligarchs
with close ties to Putin along with 12 companies that they own
or control under CAATSA.
We'll continue to push for full implementation of CAATSA.
Not only that, but in addition to CAATSA we are also calling
for the Senate to pass the Caesar Syria Civilian Protection
Act, which the House now passed into the Senate and which would
impose significant sanctions on Russia for its support for the
monstrous Assad regime's actions.
I do want to thank you for engaging with the committee, Mr.
Secretary. You have said you want today to be the start of a
close collaboration with us--and I know you well enough to know
that you're very sincere about this and I deeply appreciate the
time you have spent with us here--the capability for every one
of our members to engage.
I look forward also the dialogue we've had about continued
discussions for the members here.
Mr. Secretary, the challenges facing our Nation are
daunting. We've heard about many of them today. But we didn't
hear so much about the opportunity for Americans worldwide.
Americans are doing great things as private citizens.
They're doing great things as--in terms of the charities that
they run throughout this worlds--the business that engage
across the planet.
And the State Department often helps them in this regard.
Americans shouldn't be afraid of the world. We can do a great
deal to improve it, and I know that you understand that, Mr.
Secretary.
So, Mike Pompeo, thank you very much and we look forward to
our--I have just been reminded by the ranking member that there
may be one other member coming through the doors as we speak,
and that would be Karen Bass of California.
Secretary Pompeo. Of course.
Chairman Royce. So we will give her her 5 minutes.
Thank you for the 3-plus hours that you have spent with us
here this morning.
Ms. Bass. And thank you, Mr. Chair.
As always, Mr. Pompeo--Secretary Pompeo--I am sure you know
we have a very bipartisan committee here with wonderful
leadership, and I know you were hoping to get out the door. I
am not going to hold you long.
Secretary Pompeo. Ma'am, I've got all 5 minutes.
Ms. Bass. Okay. Well, and I know you know because you have
been on the other side.
Secretary Pompeo. I have.
Ms. Bass. And so we are definitely proud of your success
and are excited about you beginning your tenure at the State
Department.
Secretary Pompeo. Thank you.
Ms. Bass. So I really would like to ask you about the DRC
and the worsening situation there. I have met--we had a Africa
policy breakfast about this. We've had hearings, et cetera, and
what I am really worried about is that the President has said
he's going to have elections in December.
He has not said he's not going to run. There is no faith
that he's actually going to have those elections since they
were originally supposed to be in December 2016.
And so I just wanted to know what our policy is going to
be, moving forward, and what type of benchmarks are we going to
hold him to?
Secretary Pompeo. So there are many challenges in the DRC,
as you well know. We are worried about global health issues
there----
Ms. Bass. Right.
Secretary Pompeo [continuing]. Certainly, which adds a half
twist to the triple somersault, and just makes it more
complicated.
With respect to the DRC's election process, we've got teams
working diligently to push forward to try and find that
democratic solution that, frankly--I think you said December
16--the problem has been longer than that.
There's a great deal of work. What I would love to do is
get back to you and provide you with a detailed list of our
activities. Know that I think we share the same policy outcome
objective that you have just described.
Ms. Bass. So I would appreciate that, because there are a
few of us that plan to go soon and to have the ahead of time,
because right now I am just worried that we might have sent a
mixed signal--that my big concern is that it actually adds to
the confusion, especially because we have not secure anything
from him saying that won't run a third term.
Now moving on to another crisis, South Sudan, and the idea
that we need to have a weapons embargo for sure, but just
wondering where you see things going there and what our policy
is there and, in addition to that, Sudan, in terms of moving
forward with relaxation of sanctions. But we also are concerned
about a young woman who's on trial there for her life and a lot
of questionable circumstances around that.
And so I wanted to know about those two areas--South Sudan
and Sudan.
Secretary Pompeo. Let me try the region for you and----
Ms. Bass. Okay.
Secretary Pompeo [continuing]. See how they fit into that
picture.
I was--I think it was my second to last trip as the CIA
Director was in and around that region. So I got a chance to
see it for myself just a little bit at least.
So there are lots of countries that try and help what's
going on in both of those places--Sudan and South Sudan--who
share America's objectives.
I don't think America is going to have the capacity to deal
with that on our own. I think we need to find partners in the
region that are prepared--those that share our view to move
forward together.
I did advocate in my previous role for the relaxation of
sanctions against them.
Ms. Bass. Yes.
Secretary Pompeo. They had made marked improvement.
Ms. Bass. Right.
Secretary Pompeo. But relapse is always a risk and we need
to continue to provide them assistance but ensure that they
don't turn back to the place that they were before.
I think the direction there is good.
Ms. Bass. I do, too.
Secretary Pompeo. But we need to be mindful and we need to
provide support to further good works.
If we do that, I think we can get a really good outcome.
Something 5 or 10 years ago----
Ms. Bass. Right.
Secretary Pompeo [continuing]. We would have all thought
not possible. South Sudan is trickier and much more difficult.
I've got just a few seconds so I will leave you with this
thought.
It is incredibly important that we get that piece right for
all the reasons you describe plus the risk that extends from
terrorism in the region that threatens not only global terror
and the efforts from their hiding spaces but the uncertainty it
provides to the people of the region.
We have a real responsibility to try and get that right. It
is a devil of a problem.
Ms. Bass. Exactly. And one of concerns too in going to
Sudan is the state sponsor of terrorism designation and what
that does. It actually complicates things on both sides.
And so, you know, as moving forward and, of course, hoping
that they continue to move forward it obviously is contingent
on that, but that we do have to take a look at that category.
Secretary Pompeo. Yes, ma'am. I completely agree.
If we can continue to see progress I would love to see us
be able to rescind that.
Ms. Bass. Great. Thank you very much, and appreciate you
allowing me the time, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Congresswoman Bass.
And with that, Mr. Secretary, we stand adjourned.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:31 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]