- SUPPORTING ECONOMIC STABILITY AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY AS AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES AND THEIR FAMILIES AGE
[Senate Hearing 115-686]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-686
SUPPORTING ECONOMIC STABILITY
AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY AS AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES AND THEIR FAMILIES
AGE
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON AGING
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
WASHINGTON, DC
__________
JULY 18, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-20
Printed for the use of the Special Committee on Aging
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-284 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON AGING
SUSAN M. COLLINS, Maine, Chairman
ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah
ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., Pennsylvania
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
BILL NELSON, Florida
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
KIRSTEN E. GILLIBRAND, New York
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
BOB CORKER, Tennessee
JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
MARCO RUBIO, Florida
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
DOUG JONES, Alabama
----------
Kevin Kelley, Majority Staff Director
Kate Mevis, Minority Staff Director
CONTENTS
----------
Page
Opening Statement of Senator Susan M. Collins, Chairman..........
1
Statement of Senator Robert P. Casey, Jr., Ranking Member........
2
PANEL OF WITNESSES
Kelly Nye-Lengerman, Ph.D., MSW, University of Minnesota,
Institute on Community Integration, Research and Training
Center on Community Living, Minneapolis, Minnesota.............
6
Benjamin Wright, Father and Business Owner, Wilmington, North
Carolina.......................................................
8
Edward Mitchell, Independent Living Specialist, Jackson,
Tennessee......................................................
10
Jack Stollsteimer, Deputy State Treasurer for Consumer Programs,
Pennsylvania Office of the State Treasurer, Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania...................................................
12
APPENDIX
Prepared Witness Statements and Questions for the Record
Kelly Nye-Lengerman, Ph.D., MSW, University of Minnesota,
Institute on Community Integration, Research and Training
Center on Community Living, Minneapolis, Minnesota.............
34
Questions submitted for Dr. Kelly Nye-Lengerman..............
49
Benjamin Wright, Father and Business Owner, Wilmington, North
Carolina.......................................................
54
Questions submitted for Benjamin Wright......................
55
Edward Mitchell, Independent Living Specialist, Jackson,
Tennessee......................................................
56
Questions submitted for Edward Mitchell......................
64
Jack Stollsteimer, Deputy State Treasurer for Consumer Programs,
Pennsylvania Office of the State Treasurer, Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania...................................................
72
Questions submitted for Jack Stollsteimer....................
73
Additional Statements for the Record
Pennsylvania Constituent Support Letters for ABLE................
76
Joe Joyce, Chair, Autism Society of America......................
91
SUPPORTING ECONOMIC STABILITY AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY AS AMERICANS WITH
DISABILITIES AND THEIR FAMILIES AGE
----------
WEDNESDAY, JULY 18, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Special Committee on Aging,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:31 a.m., in
room SD-562, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Susan M.
Collins (Chairman of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Collins, Tillis, Burr, Fischer, Casey,
Gillibrand, Donnelly, Warren, and Cortez Masto.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SUSAN M. COLLINS, CHAIRMAN
The Chairman. This hearing will come to order.
Good morning. In 1983, the life expectancy of a person
living with Down syndrome was just 25 years. As a result of
advances in health care, a baby born with Down syndrome today
can expect to live past 60 years, a dramatic increase in life
span. To make the most of this progress, parents have been
trying to ensure a secure future for their disabled children,
and adults with disabilities have been working to enhance their
own financial security. But that has proven challenging as
poverty statistics demonstrate.
More than 56 million people in the United States live with
a disability, and about 34 million of them are of working age,
between 16 and 64. Last year this Committee examined issues
such as educational and vocational training, and social and
housing supports, that can help lead to a stable career and a
more satisfying life for many people who have a disability.
It has not always been easy, however, for people with
disabilities who can and want to work to save for their own
futures. federal law caps the assets of a single person with
disabilities who receives Supplemental Security Income, better
known as SSI, at just $2,000.
Depending on the specific disability, some individuals may
require certain supports, ranging from help with basic daily
activities to transportation and housing as they grow older.
Being able to save money to make necessary modifications to
a car, or a home, or just to pay for unexpected life events,
can preserve the independence of individuals with disabilities.
And aging parents of disabled children should also feel secure
about their children's futures as they enter into their own
retirement years.
Today we will discuss policies that enable individuals with
disabilities and their families to save, and thus achieve
greater financial security as they grow older. Improving
retirement security has been one of the major themes of the
Aging Committee.
One such policy is the Stephen Beck, Jr. Achieving A Better
Life Experience Act, also known as ``The ABLE Act,'' which was
authored by Senator Casey, the Ranking Member on this Committee
and Senator Burr. It has shown promising results in states
since it became law four years ago, and I want to applaud both
Senator Casey and Senator Burr for their extraordinary
leadership.
ABLE accounts have since been launched in more than 30
states. They allow individuals with a disability diagnosis by
age 26, and their families, to establish tax-advantaged savings
accounts. Similar to the 529 college savings plans, these
savings accounts can be used to set aside contributions not to
exceed $15,000 a year to cover qualified expenses such as
education, housing, and transportation.
Recently I met with members of the Autism Society of Maine
who shared that Maine is on the verge of establishing its own
ABLE program. I am happy to report that Bangor Savings Bank
will kick off Maine's ABLE program with pilot accounts starting
very soon. I know the Autism Society and many others in Maine
are eager to see this program launched, and they welcome the
opportunity for greater savings for disabled individuals and
their families.
It is important to note that approximately 27 percent of
Americans with disabilities live in poverty. That is the
highest rate of any subgroup in the country. This statistic
demonstrates why we must provide these individuals with more
opportunities for financial freedom and stability, particularly
during their older years. And it underscores why the ABLE Act
is so important.
As we will hear today, parents of children with
disabilities were once discouraged from saving for their
children's future. This led to needless worry, sleepless
nights, and a lack of financial security. Today, however, ABLE
accounts offer a means to savings that can turn the tide. These
options provide a sense of security to help produce a brighter
future full of hope.
I am now delighted to turn to Ranking Member Casey, who
suggested that we have this hearing, for his opening statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., RANKING
MEMBER
Senator Casey. Chairman Collins, thank you very much for
holding this hearing. I want to thank you for making it
possible, because we want to explore today the economic health
of people with disabilities and, of course, their families as
they age.
All American families worry about their economic future,
especially as we grow older. For people with disabilities,
finances, savings and income are of great concern.
In 2015 the National Disability Institute commissioned a
study that indicated that people with disabilities were more
than two and a half times as likely to have difficulty covering
their expenses than those without disabilities. The same study
found that people with disabilities were almost twice as likely
to be unable to cover a moderate-sized emergency expense
compared with those without a disability.
There are many reasons why people with disabilities and
their families are in an especially precarious financial
circumstance. I think our witnesses will provide us with some
of these details today.
I want to emphasize that as people with disabilities age
and as their families age, their economic challenges may become
worse. There are almost 750,000 people with intellectual and
developmental disabilities over the age of 60 who are living
with their families. In addition, almost a million families
with parents over 60 years of age are supporting their adult
sons or daughters who have an intellectual or developmental
disability.
People with disabilities are less likely to be employed and
much more likely to be underemployed; therefore, their earnings
over time are less than the average citizen. And because their
primary support person, usually a parent, has had to care for
them, often quitting their jobs to do so, the family's income
has been curtailed significantly.
With fewer opportunities to earn income and significant
barriers and penalties when trying to save, people with
disabilities and their families often are in difficult--and
that is an understatement--difficult financial situations.
Congress has removed some of the barriers to savings in
order to plan for the future. Senator Collins mentioned the
work that Senator Burr and I did to pass the Stephen E. Beck
Achieving a Better Life Experience, known as the ABLE Act, that
passed with overwhelming bipartisan support in both Houses of
Congress back in the latter part of December 2014. I want to
thank Senator Burr for his work and for the work that was done
in both Houses to get that done.
The ABLE Act makes it possible now for people with
disabilities to save for future expenses, as Senator Collins
mentioned, in a manner similar to a 529 college savings plan.
They now can save for a variety of expenses whether it is
education, health care, assistive technology, paying for a
move, for example, to obtain a job--a whole range of expenses
that are important to their lives. They can save for their
future without losing their federal disability benefits such as
Supplemental Social Security Income or Medicaid.
With the opening of ABLE accounts in now 39 states, over
21,000 people have been able to save what is now over $105
million, an average of $5,000. That $5,000 is, of course,
$3,000 more than the limit prior to ABLE becoming a reality.
And these families and these individuals can save up to
$100,000. Having assets means that people can open their own
businesses, they can save for retirement, and they can purchase
the technology that they need.
But we do need to do more. ABLE is not available to people
who acquired their disability after their 26th birthday. There
are still limits to monthly earnings that keep people with
disabilities underemployed and not able to accept a promotion
at work without losing their benefits.
As a Nation, we have begun to address these barriers to
economic health for people with disabilities and their families
as they age. I look forward to hearing more from our witnesses
and learning what you think are the next steps that we should
take to continue to help the 56 million Americans with a
disability to be economically healthy.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
I see that we have been joined by both Senators from North
Carolina, which shows their wisdom today, but I particularly
want Senator Burr to know that I have been raving about the
work that you did with Senator Casey on the ABLE Act. I am sure
your staff can get you a transcript of the compliments.
Senator Casey. You can add mine to that.
The Chairman. First I would like to introduce Dr. Kelly
Nye-Lengerman--I hope I got that right--from the University of
Minnesota's Institute on Community Inclusion. Her work as an
expert social worker for disability provider organizations in
both community- and facility-based programs has enabled her to
help many individuals with disabilities to achieve economic
security.
I will now turn to Senator Burr, the co-author of the ABLE
Act, to introduce our next witness, who is from his home state.
Senator Burr. Madam Chairman, thank you very much, and
welcome. It is my pleasure to welcome Ben Wright from
Wilmington, North Carolina. Ben is a small business owner, an
advocate, and a proud parent of four children, two of which
have Down syndrome. I want to thank the Committee leadership
for inviting Ben to testify.
I also want to thank the Ranking Member, Senator Casey, for
his work over the years in helping to lead our bipartisan
effort to pass the ABLE Act and to improve upon the initial
success of the ABLE Act.
Some have called the ABLE Act the ``most significant piece
of legislation affecting the disabled since passage of the
Americans with Disabilities Act almost 30 years ago.'' Senator
Casey and I got involved in an effort to pass ABLE over 10
years ago. This has been one of the toughest pieces of
legislation that made the most common sense of anything I have
tackled in the time that I have been here. The amount of
families around this country that are impacted, not just
parents but grandparents and relatives, who can now have the
comfort of knowing that a child that has a fruitful life in
front of them also has the security of a nest egg to make sure
that they have whatever they need, regardless of what they run
into.
Ben and his wife, Amy, are truly incredible people, and I
am lucky to have served them in the United States Senate. Ben
and his wife started Beau's Coffee Shop in 2016 to employ
people with disabilities. I think I surprised Amy one day when
I all of a sudden showed up in Beau's Coffee Shop, no notice,
only to order a smoothie. And today the coffee shop has grown
to employ over 70 individuals and has been named ``Bitty &
Beau's'' after their two children.
Since opening, they have shown countless customers that all
Americans are capable of working alongside each other. Just
this past year, Ben's wife, Amy, received the CNN Hero of the
Year Award for her advocacy and continued efforts to improve
the lives of others.
In addition to Bitty & Beau's, Ben is a financial planner
where he helps families save for the future. Ben's financial
planning business also employs a number of Americans with
disabilities, and Ben currently serves on the board of the
North Carolina ABLE Program. Ben continues to raise awareness
of ABLE programs and educate families on the benefits of
opening an account.
I think it is safe to say that the ABLE Act has begun to
change the way we think of federal benefits for Americans with
disabilities just as Ben and his wife have begun to change the
way Americans view people with disabilities. Ben, welcome.
Thank you for being here.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Senator Burr, for your
leadership.
Next I would like to introduce Edward Mitchell from
Jackson, Tennessee. In 2003 Mr. Mitchell was the victim of a
hit-and-run accident that left him paralyzed. He now lives
independently with the help of a nurse and his parents. He is a
strong and passionate advocate for people living with
disabilities and works to educate others about the benefits of
the ABLE accounts, which he himself is using.
I now will turn to the Ranking Member to introduce our
witness from his state.
Senator Casey. Thank you, Chairman Collins. And before I
get to Jack Stollsteimer, I do want to say Mr. Mitchell gave me
two of his cards today. One is paper, of course. This is
especially neat. It is made out of metal, so I will pass it
around. I think we should try these in the Senate. They are
more durable cards.
But I am grateful to introduce Jack Stollsteimer. I have
known Jack for a long, long time. I will not say he is an old
friend. I will say he is a friend of long standing. That sounds
a little better. But Jack is Deputy Treasurer of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. He resides--still in Havertown,
Pennsylvania?
Mr. Stollsteimer. Yes, sir.
Senator Casey. His duties as Deputy Treasurer include the
management of the 529 college savings program--programs,
plural, I should say--and, of course, the Pennsylvania ABLE
program. Jack was charged with planning for and implementing
the Pennsylvania ABLE program and oversaw the opening of the
program in April 2017. Through his leadership, the Pennsylvania
ABLE program has been the fastest growing ABLE program in the
country. The program is also one of the most heavily invested
in the country, with the average account balance over $6,000,
more than $1,000 higher than the national average.
In addition to his current duties, Jack has been a
dedicated public servant in our Commonwealth, serving as one of
the Assistant District Attorneys in Delaware County and then
also the Assistant United States Attorney for the Eastern
District of Pennsylvania. His current responsibilities in the
Treasurer's office include consumer programs and public
engagement.
Jack, thank you for being here today. Thanks for your
testimony.
The Chairman. Senator Tillis, I know that Mr. Wright is
your constituent as well, and I want to give you a few moments
to make any comments.
Senator Tillis. First, I want to welcome you all. It is
good to see you again. I ordered coffee, by the way, Senator
Burr, when I went to Bitty & Beau's. But I also ended up with
some Facebook friends as a result of that visit, and I was
paying attention to his opening comment, but I was taking a
picture of you and your family to post it on Facebook, so
hopefully some of my friends out there will see it. But thank
you for the work. And I think really the coming together of the
community, the facility that you are in, to make it work or
help you make the numbers work. But when we were out there, we
talked about what more we can do to really provide more
opportunities for a lot of people who want to work. They want
to work in part to make money. They want to work in part to
have independence. But, boy, I tell you what, if you are having
a down day and you can get down to North Carolina and visit
Bitty & Beau's, I guarantee you the rest of your day is going
to be fantastic. Just the joy and the optimism is palpable.
Thank you all for being here.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, and we will now start
with our witnesses. Dr. Nye-Lengerman, we will have you go
first.
STATEMENT OF KELLY NYE-LENGERMAN, PH.D., MSW, UNIVERSITY OF
MINNESOTA, INSTITUTE ON COMMUNITY INTEGRATION, RESEARCH AND
TRAINING CENTER ON COMMUNITY LIVING, MINNEAPOLIS, MINNESOTA
Dr. Nye-Lengerman. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman
Collins, Ranking Member Casey, and members of the Special
Committee on Aging, for the opportunity to speak with you
today. My name is Kelly Nye-Lengerman, and I am a researcher at
the University of Minnesota's Institute on Community
Integration and Research and Training Center on Community
Living.
Millions of individuals with disabilities and their
families do not access the American Dream in the same way that
others do. They do not have the same pathways to savings and to
earnings.
First, people with disabilities are more likely to be
unemployed, underemployed, and living in poverty. People with
disabilities are more than twice as likely to live in poverty,
and family units that include a member with a disability have
average household incomes nearly 45 percent less than the
average American household.
Second, the act of caregiving for a family member with a
disability creates challenges to families that prevent them
from having a regular income, accessing health care, or saving
for the future. Caregiving duties range from simple to complex,
such as helping someone go to the grocery store, transferring
someone from a wheelchair to the tub for daily bathing, or
administering complex interventions such as tube feeding or
suctioning. These responsibilities often increase as the family
member with a disability ages, and they become more difficult
to perform as family members who are caregivers age. And
estimates currently suggest that 25 percent of caregivers for
adults with disabilities are over the age of 60.
And, third, as individuals with disabilities and their
family members age, they can become more reliant on public
support programs. Our current policies often require that
individuals and families remain in poverty to maintain
eligibility for these programs.
As an addendum to my written testimony, I incorporated four
family profiles that included their perspectives on policies
that support economic security for families, and I would like
to use some of those family experiences to highlight some of
the research findings from our center.
First, we found that without paid employment, people with
disabilities do not retire nor have savings later in life. The
majority of people with intellectual and developmental
disabilities did not retire because they did not have paid
employment. The Hofer-Van Ness and Rigotti families have high
expectations for their adult children with disabilities to have
a job, and more importantly, their children, Andy and Nick,
want to work, too. Without the right supports, finding,
securing, maintaining, and succeeding in a job have been
incredibly difficult. Having a job and saving for their future
ensures that Nick and Andy have more economic security.
Strong employment policies such as the Workforce Innovation
and Opportunity Act improve public work force systems that
support people with disabilities, including youth, to have a
job and find a career. WIOA establishes competitive, integrated
employment for people with disabilities as a clear national
priority.
Our studies have also indicated that a family member who
supports an individual with a disability has drastically
reduced abilities to earn and save due to high caregiving
demands. In one study in partnership with the Arc of the United
States, we found that 90 percent of respondents reported that
they had out-of-pocket expenses, and of that group, nearly 40
percent of families spent between $5,000 and $20,000 annually.
All four families explained that they had out-of-pocket
expenses for their family member that included co-pays, medical
supplies, paid support, and transportation. While they have
been able to manage these expenses, these expenses can also
represent a significant economic burden to families. Policies
that support pathways to savings such as ABLE can potentially
offset the burdens of out-of-pocket expenses. The ability to
save without penalty or ineligibility for other support
programs opens new doors for families to financially be able to
provide more equitable footing from which to save in the
future.
Additionally, access to paid leave is recognized as a
critical component for being able to keep and maintain a job
when complications of a disability or family member needs
arise. Other benefits offered by employers such as flexible
work schedules, health care, flexible spending accounts, and
supportive supervisors have been identified as family
caregivers as essential to help keep them working when a family
member with a disability has needs.
Ms. Michele Hilgart shared an example of how her employer
customized a position with her so that she could meet her son
Ben's care needs, maintain her employment, and keep the
family's health insurance coverage.
We also know through research that supporting people with
disabilities to live in family homes or their own homes is
significantly less costly to society. Institutional settings
cost an average of $128,000 annually compared to $51,000
annually for care in family homes. Community settings save
money, and most people with disabilities and their families
prefer to live and be a part of their community.
But we also found that family caregivers are in urgent need
of relief and support. As family caregivers age, their need for
respite care increases. In one study, 92 percent of families
who use respite care reported that they were unable to find
respite staff or providers. Three of the four families profiled
have a family member living at home, and when asked, these
families would not have it any other way. Their family member
with a disability was an integral part of their family unit.
Ms. Debbi Harris said, ``We are not a family without Josh. And
if we did not have him, we would be broken.'' Josh's care
includes 24-hour skilled nursing, but is heavily supplemented
by his mother, his father, his two brothers, his 58-year-old
uncle, and his 85-year-old grandfather.
To keep people with disabilities in family homes or their
own homes, a strong direct support work force is needed. Direct
support professionals provide essential services to individuals
with disabilities and their families so they can live, work,
and participate in the community, as well as give family
caregivers much needed respite. The direct support work force
is one of the highest demand professions in the U.S. today and
a lifeline for people with disabilities and their families.
In closing, I urge the Senate to include policies that
address these three critical needs:
Continue to encourage savings and earnings, and ABLE is a
great pathway to savings as it should be extended to people
with disabilities beyond the age of 26 years of age, at the
same time removing barriers to earnings that people with
disabilities face, such as the substantial gainful activity
limit.
Support the development and retention of a strong direct
care work force, and without this work force, people with
disabilities will not be able to earn and save for the future.
And, last, enhance our meager family support system and
respite care. Without support, families earn less and multiple
generations are financially fragile. We need a support system
that makes it possible for families to earn and save for their
future and the future of their family members with
disabilities. Long-term investments in employment and
caregiving make it possible for people with disabilities and
their families to work, save, and plan for their older years.
Thank you most sincerely for the opportunity to share
testimony today and your interest in this topic.
The Chairman. Thank you very much for your statement.
Mr. Wright.
STATEMENT OF BENJAMIN WRIGHT, FATHER AND BUSINESS OWNER,
WILMINGTON, NORTH CAROLINA
Mr. Wright. Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Casey,
distinguished members of this Committee, thank you for inviting
me to testify this morning. It has been exciting over the past
few years to witness the passing of the ABLE Act, the ABLE to
Work Act, and the ABLE Financial Planning Act, spearheaded by
Senators Burr and Casey. While there is still much work to be
done, such as signing the TIME Act into law, I want to thank
everyone on this Committee for all that you have done and
continue to do for people and families living with intellectual
and developmental disabilities.
As the father of four children, I spend a lot of time
thinking about their futures, especially what life might look
like after high school for our two youngest children, Beau and
Bitty, who have Down syndrome. As most of you know, it is
estimated that over 70 percent of adults with I/DD are
unemployed. That is a staggeringly high unemployment rate that
should not be tolerated in this country. Imagine any other
group where seven of ten people did not have jobs, and I think
people might take to the streets. And yet in regards to this
group of unemployed people, there is no outrage from the
majority of the American citizenry, only bewilderment on the
faces of those who endure this discrimination and hopelessness
in the eyes of those who love and advocate for them.
It begs the question: Why the complacency? I believe what
we are really dealing with is not a classic unemployment
problem driven by the economy, but a bona fide social and
cultural problem. Doesn't it seem that people with I/DD are not
ascribed the same value in our society as those of us without
disabilities? What other group of law-abiding citizens can be
paid a sub-minimum wage just because of who they are?
And yet, paradoxically, before dinner tonight, every one of
us in this room could acquire the equivalent of an intellectual
or developmental disability due to an unforeseen event. And
then what? Having a disability is nothing to be ashamed of; it
is part of the human condition, so much so that the U.S. Census
reports that one in five Americans has a disability. And yet,
here we are--with an eye-popping 70-percent unemployment rate.
So what can we do? I believe if we can find ways to help
people without I/DD see the intrinsic value in people with I/
DD, accepting and including them should come more naturally.
My wife, Amy, and I have given this a lot of thought, so
much so that two-and-a-half years ago, we decided to open a
coffee shop called ``Bitty & Beau's Coffee,'' where we employ
almost 80 adults across three coffee shops and everyone earns
above minimum wage. Initially, we thought this was a great way
to reduce the unemployment rate. But what we quickly realized
was that the real power of the coffee shop was its ability to
show people without disabilities what is possible. The point of
Bitty & Beau's Coffee is not that people with I/DD can work in
coffee shops, but that people with and without disabilities
could and should be working together, shoulder to shoulder, in
almost every type of business.
People need a fresh perspective on this issue. They need to
know and understand that people with I/DD are not broken. What
is broken is the lens through which we view people with I/DD.
And Bitty & Beau's is a new lens, and it is changing the way
people see other people, offering a new perspective that, once
seen, cannot be unseen.
If the goal of this hearing is to support economic
stability and self-sufficiency as Americans and their families
with disabilities age, efforts such as ABLE and addressing
policies that inhibit work for people with disabilities are
critically important. But we must also resolve to help people
without disabilities see people with disabilities, like my
children, Beau and Bitty, as worthy of that charge.
Thank you for your time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much for your moving
testimony.
Mr. Mitchell.
STATEMENT OF EDWARD MITCHELL, INDEPENDENT LIVING SPECIALIST,
JACKSON, TENNESSEE
Mr. Mitchell. Hello, Chairman Collins, Ranking Member
Casey, and members of the Committee. My name is Edward
Mitchell. I come today as an individual with a spinal cord
disability.
Let me share a bit of background on myself. I have not
always lived with a disability. My disability occurred on March
29, 2003, in Jackson, Tennessee. On that ill-fated day, my life
was nearly destroyed when I decided to go for a bike ride with
my little brother before going to my first high school job at
Little Caesars under great owners, Kevin and Rachel Colbert. As
I rode my bike, I noticed a fast-moving truck coming from the
rear. After I gave my hand signals, I switched into the left-
bound lane where my life was changed. A truck crossed over the
double lines and clipped me from behind, throwing me into a
ditch. I landed on my back and my neck, and it caused an
incomplete fracture to my C5-C6 vertebrae.
From that point on, my life had taken a turn. I had become
a victim of a hit-and-run that continues to remain unsolved. As
it stands today, I get around with the use of a powered
wheelchair. I do not have feelings in my legs--I do have
feeling in my legs but no voluntary movement.
Since that time, I have graduated high school. I have
attended Lane College on a full ride, graduating magna cum
laude, and then went on to earn my MBA from Union University. I
currently work with the Jackson Generals minor league baseball
team going on four years, and I am also an independent living
specialist at the Jackson Center for Independent Living.
As they say, it is hard to keep a determined individual
down. But I still need nursing care assistance with my
nighttime routine and getting up and getting ready for the next
day. I also need assistance with home modifications as well as
vehicle modifications. I need to try to figure out what I can
do and what changes need to be done for my family to take care
of me and assist me, especially as we all grow older.
One of the consequences of my accident is my father lost
his job and had to dip into his savings. He used some of his
401(k) savings to help with expenses. He later took a job out-
of-state just to keep my family in a stable environment.
Now, I know you are probably wondering why do I keep taking
part-time jobs. I have been gaining experience. I have
completed my master's, but I cannot accept a full salary for
any significant amount of money because that would impact my
nursing care benefits. If I accept a full salary, I will make
too much and lose my disability benefits. But I would not make
enough directly to pay for nursing care, even if I gave my
whole salary to a nursing care agency.
When it comes to my support services, I am limited in
nursing hours through my Medicaid waiver. My mother still
assists me with about 35 hours of support weekly. As
demonstrated in these examples, living a life with a disability
in many circumstances has inherent financial challenges and
extra expenses that are typically not held by my able-bodied
peers. Luckily I have been able to take advantage of one tool
that has recently become available to individuals with
disabilities, and that is to open an ABLE account.
On one of these evenings, my mother was up late winding
herself down after helping me when she stumbled across the
Tennessee ABLE program. ABLE accounts are bank accounts that
allow people with special needs to save money without
jeopardizing their disability benefits. ABLE accounts are from
the ABLE (Achieving a Better Life Experience) Act, and they are
established and managed on a state level.
Once we stumbled upon ABLE, I received support from the
ABLE National Resource Center managed by the National
Disability Institute. We realized that this was a lifeline.
Money saved in a traditional bank account counts against the
ability to qualify for disability benefits or Medicaid waiver
programs.
As a result, individuals with special needs are not able to
build savings with the money they earn or that they receive
from an inheritance, gifts, or life insurance policies. This
means individuals must live with very little money if they want
to receive government aid or, as in my case, qualify for
Medicaid waiver programs that pay for nursing care.
I have tried to put away a little bit from each check since
opening my ABLE account. The ABLE program gives my parents
peace of mind because they are aging. My parents want to make
sure that I am able to take care of myself and be as
independent as possible, because the biggest life expenditures
I have are nursing care, housing, and especially wheelchair
transportation, which is extremely astronomical in my case,
also reaching up to $100,000. The ABLE program helps with being
self-sufficient.
That being said, ABLE accounts are only available to
individuals with disabilities that encountered their disability
before their 26th birthday. As I mentioned, my injury occurred
when I was a teenager; therefore, I am allowed to open an ABLE
savings account for my future. If something similar was to take
place after I was 26, I would not have the ability to open and
build for a financial future without having to forfeit my
nursing care supports.
I know that Senator Casey has introduced the ABLE
Adjustment Act which will begin to increase the age provision
by law. I would strongly encourage the members of this
Committee to support this piece of legislation. It would allow
millions more individuals with special needs a chance to build
a brighter economic future.
Additionally, I would like to make two more recommendations
about making it possible for people with disabilities to
economically be self-sufficient.
It is my wish that states will make it easier to transfer
waiver programs. If you receive a waiver in states, it is not
easy to transfer it to another state if you are looking to
relocate or take another job.
My second recommendation would be for individuals like
myself that are career-driven to have nursing care that we
would pay into a program which would be on a sliding scale, so
as we could take different advancements, we would pay back into
the system.
In closing, I want to be self-sufficient and continue to
climb the corporate ladder. I never wanted to start receiving
Social Security benefits, but my life changed in 2003. As my
path of my life is leading, it may be into a career in
politics, and with the help of ABLE and disability benefits, I
might be able to achieve that because ABLE has been a lifeline.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much for your testimony and
personal story.
Mr. Stollsteimer.
STATEMENT OF JACK STOLLSTEIMER, DEPUTY STATE TREASURER FOR
CONSUMER PROGRAMS, PENNSYLVANIA OFFICE OF THE STATE TREASURER,
HARRISBURG, PENNSYLVANIA
Mr. Stollsteimer. Thank you, Chairman. Good morning,
Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Casey, and other distinguished
members of the Committee. I am Jack Stollsteimer, Deputy State
Treasurer for Consumer Programs, and on behalf of Pennsylvania
Treasurer Joseph Torsella, I am grateful for the opportunity to
appear before you today to discuss our Department's ABLE
program and how it is improving the lives of people with
disabilities of all ages by helping them achieve economic self-
sufficiency.
The PA ABLE program was launched by Treasurer Torsella in
April 2017 after a bipartisan group of state legislators,
supported by a broad coalition of advocates for the disability
community, enacted strong enabling legislation in 2016. The
Pennsylvania ABLE Act includes provisions exempting ABLE
accounts from Medicaid paybacks and offering account holders
protection from creditors in state legal proceedings.
Since the implementation of the PA ABLE Act, our
Legislature has continued its strong support of the program by
creating a state tax deduction for contributions to ABLE
accounts and through an annual appropriation for Treasury to
market and administer the program.
In the 15 months since our program launch, we have seen a
surge of interest for the benefits offered by the ABLE program
from people with disabilities of all ages. We have a number of
account holders who are working adults with disabilities who
find the freedom for the first time to hold significant funds
in their own account without jeopardizing their access to
federal disability benefits truly liberating. We have parents
of young children with disabilities saving long term for their
children's future by making small but regular contributions
without paying the up-front fees required to open a special
needs trust. We have older adults using ABLE funds to purchase
adaptive technology to enable them to live more productive,
fuller lives. And we even have parents of account owners using
ABLE accounts as estate planning vehicles to ensure their
children's future financial security. Currently our ABLE
program has more than 1,400 account holders with $8.3 million
under management, and each of those account owners has their
own story as to why ABLE is the best option for them to save,
to pay bills, and to make debit card purchases through their
ABLE account. We have made so much progress, but we have so
much more work to do. There are over 60,000 children with
disabilities in Pennsylvania; with ongoing support from federal
and state policymakers, our goal is to reach as many of them as
we possibly can.
Over time the ABLE program can provide a means for people
with disabilities to achieve greater self-sufficiency as they
age as long as our federal partners continue to support the
program's promise. The ABLE program works for people by
allowing anyone with a qualifying disability a secure, tax-
advantaged way to save or invest without impacting their
government benefits. But it also works because the Internal
Revenue Service has broadly interpreted the definition of a
``Qualified Disability Expenses,'' thereby allowing people with
disabilities the flexibility to use the program throughout
their lives, since the nature of an individual's expenses
change to reflect their different stages in life. Simply put,
the qualified expense needs of a 25-year-old worker in many
respects are very different from the expenses of a 65-year-old
retiree.
Right now ABLE provides the flexibility to accommodate the
changing needs of people as they age, but we must ensure that
remains true in the years to come. And to that end, the
Pennsylvania Treasury would strongly encourage the Senate to
consider Senator Casey's bill, Senate bill 817, the ABLE
Adjustment Act. This bill would greatly increase the
utilization of the program by allowing individuals with
disabilities that started before age 46 to open ABLE accounts.
Increasing the number of people with disabilities who can open
accounts will strengthen the ABLE program from a fiscal
perspective while allowing older adults who become disabled
through accidents, chronic illness, or military service to use
this tool for their economic stability and self-sufficiency.
Senator, thank you very much for the opportunity.
The Chairman. Thank you for your testimony.
Since this hearing was requested by the Ranking Member, I
am going to defer to him for his questions first.
Senator Casey. Chairman Collins, thanks very much. And,
again, thank you for holding this hearing.
I want to start by reiterating some of the comments I made
in my opening about the work that Senator Burr did with me and
our staffs over many years, not only to get ABLE passed but to
continue to work together on several pieces of legislation to
improve it. So I want to commend and salute him for his work,
and I think I at least have to go to one coffee shop in North
Carolina because he has made a fulsome recommendation today, so
we are grateful for that opportunity.
I wanted to start with Deputy Treasurer Stollsteimer about
the uptake in Pennsylvania, the number of accounts. We know
that the dollar amount is higher than the average, and we are
grateful for that. We have some 1,400 account owners in just 15
months in Pennsylvania. I wanted to ask you, Deputy Treasurer
Stollsteimer, why you believe that is the case, why we are, at
least in Pennsylvania, moving at a faster rate maybe than some
other places.
Mr. Stollsteimer. Senator, thank you for the question. I do
not want to jinx ourselves. We are off to a good start, but the
program has a long way to go, as you know.
I think our success so far has really--we could chalk it up
to three factors.
One is the commitment Treasurer Torsella made to giving
every resource Treasury has to make this program a success from
the moment we took office.
The second factor, I think, is the support, the bipartisan
support we have gotten from the Pennsylvania Legislature.
Senator Baker from your area and Representative O'Neill have
been stalwart supporters of the program, and the resources that
we need at Treasury they have given us to market the program.
And the last thing, and probably most importantly, is the
engagement we have been able to do with the disability
community. What we have found is that we need validators in the
community to tell people that this new program is something
that is a benefit to them and that they should not fear. There
is still a lot of fear in the disability community over losing
their benefits by saving money in their own name, and we have
to overcome that. And you may find this shocking, but people do
not really want to take financial advice from Jack
Stollsteimer. They need somebody in their life that they trust
to tell them, yes, that program is trustworthy and you should
get involved with it. And I think that is why we are successful
thus far.
Senator Casey. I want to reiterate what you said about the
disability community. We could not have gotten ABLE passed nor
could we pass improvements. Senator Burr and I were blessed to
have that strong ally every step of the way.
I am also grateful to hear about the fact that it remains
bipartisan at the state level. And, of course, the advertising,
just like anything else in society, unless people know about
it, we will not have people opening accounts. So we hope the
General Assembly in Pennsylvania and in other states will
continue to provide resources for advertising.
I wanted to next move to Mr. Mitchell. First of all, I
commend you for not just being here today and your testimony,
but also commend you for your achievements. You are
accomplished by way of the degrees you have, a Bachelor of
Science in business with a minor in marketing, and you also
have an MBA, and we are grateful that you have worked so hard
to do that, to achieve those degrees, but also the work you are
doing in holding down two jobs and the work you do with others
that have a disability.
I guess one of the things I wanted to amplify which you
referred to in your oral testimony--your written testimony goes
into more detail--about the limitations that you have, legal
limitations by way of current policy where it is almost
impossible for you to earn more than $40,000. Tell us about
that and some of the barriers you have.
Mr. Mitchell. Thank you. Some of the limitations that I
have with not being able to earn more than $40,000 is with
different waiver programs you have these restrictions in money,
so you can only make, let us say, $2,500 this month. Social
Security has another limit. It is always an adjusting scale
where it is, you know, am I in compliance with Social Security?
Am I in compliance with the waiver program? And sometimes they
do not all talk to each other. Many times, you know, at least
once every three years, I have to prove to Social Security I am
disabled. I went eight months without a Social Security check
because they did not feel like I was a disabled because, you
know, of me being employed and the titles that I held.
Periodically I do attend National Black MBA conferences,
and one of the issues that came up was if I accepted a salary
of, let us say, $65,000 or $70,000, right now under my Medicaid
waiver, it says just for 27 hours, that is $53,000. So just
because, you know, let us say I brought in $70,000, subtract 53
from that, how do I continue to live? So I have almost been
forced to stay within the guidelines of Social Security and the
Medicaid waiver just so I do not put a financial burden, you
know, on my parents because I did not have my trial work
periods. I started working in high school before my accident
and returned after my accident, and, you know, I continued to
work in high school, and I used up my trial work periods. And
now when I have finished my MBA, if I was to take a new job, I
do not have those trial work periods to try to build a cushion
to come back. So right now I am kind of playing how do I get
ahead without falling behind.
Senator Casey. I appreciate that. Thanks for pointing that
out.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Stollsteimer, in the State of Maine, the poverty rate
for working-age people with disabilities is 30.5 percent, and
that is more than three times the poverty rate for the general
population in the State of Maine. I know that the ABLE program
has not been in effect that long, but do you have any
information that would suggest that ABLE accounts are helping
to lower that poverty rate among those living with
disabilities?
Mr. Stollsteimer. Yes, Senator, I think they are. Again, we
find people from all age groups who are starting to use ABLE
accounts for different purposes. It is one of the most flexible
programs possible. A working person can use it to pay their
daily expenses, to use a debit card feature, to have a checking
account for the first time in their own name. So it is helping
them financially, but it is also empowering them to be able to
make debit card purchases.
We just on Monday found a family in Pennsylvania, just to
give you an example, of working-age twin sisters, and they have
muscular dystrophy. And they love music, and they want to teach
music, and they were not able to do that. But they were able to
save money in an ABLE account to be able to put a down payment
on a vehicle that another government program is going to adapt
for them using adaptive technology to get them out and enrich
the community. They are going to teach children music, and they
are going to enrich their own life experience by earning a
living doing that.
I think this program is so flexible by allowing people both
to invest long term and also to use it to pay daily expenses
that it is the best vehicle to help the people you are talking
about. It is a disgrace that people with disabilities live in
poverty. But I think ABLE is a vehicle for them to get out of
that.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Doctor, given the work that you have done with families, I
am interested in your comments on what I call the ``sandwich
generation,'' and many others call it that as well, and that is
individuals who are both taking care of a child with a
disability and an aging parent who also has become disabled.
How do you see the ABLE Act assisting those individuals in
the very difficult role that they are playing as a caregiver?
And what other needs should we be looking at for them?
Dr. Nye-Lengerman. Thank you for your question. I think the
panel did a very nice job today talking about one of the key
ingredients of ABLE is that flexibility. And for that group of
compound caregivers that are sitting sort of in between a
younger family member with a disability and an aging parent,
what you need is more time, resources, and energy to be able to
meet your own needs and your family member's needs, and what
ABLE really does is a vehicle for that. So when you can use a
debit card, when you do not have an overly burdensome paperwork
process or a reimbursement process, it makes some of those life
decisions that we may take advantage of being as part of our
everyday practice, it makes it easier for families to live
their lives the same ways that everybody else does.
And I think the other thing is you cannot underestimate the
power of what peace of mind brings in reducing stress both on
the physical and mental health side of that when you have, if
you will, a space to save in a way without penalty, what that
can bring both for your younger son or daughter with a
disability or your older parent, that that can relieve some of
those other burdens that we really have a hard time sort of
figuring out how to best support families.
So I think, again, it is that flexibility piece and, again,
making sure that families know that it is available to them
from trusted sources, saying, yes, let us keep adding and
investing to our ABLE accounts.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Mitchell, I was struck when you talked about your
mother just stumbling onto the fact that ABLE accounts existed
in your state. What more, aside from this hearing, which I hope
will raise awareness, should we be doing to try to publicize
the availability of these accounts?
Mr. Mitchell. So far, what I think, you know, especially
working as an independent living specialist, it is just
publicizing it, getting it into vocational rehabilitation,
possibly having somebody at the Social Security offices, also
the independent living centers, just making sure everybody is
on board to know exactly what ABLE accounts are, you know, what
are the pros--you know, there are very few cons--because some
just do not understand. Some people are scared away because you
have so many misnomers out there, you know, about Medicaid
recoupment. You know, they will take this. You know, people
want to be in your business. And I am in a rural area. Jackson
is the biggest city in between Memphis and Nashville, and some
people are just scared, you know, by a new piece of legislation
that they do not understand and very few people have.
So I try to get as much information as possible. I was
recently selected to be a national spokesman for the ABLE
accounts, so I just try to get out there. I try to educate the
school system. Anybody I can talk to about ABLE, I try to do
that because I try to show them that this is a benefit, this is
something new. And, you know, why not do it?
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Cortez Masto?
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking
Member, for holding this hearing. And thank you to all of you
for being here and having this conversation.
Mr. Mitchell, let me start with you. Let me just ask you
this: I am from the State of Nevada, and there are almost
400,000 people with disabilities living in Nevada, and over
half of them have some type of physical disability. In your
position as an independent living specialist--and you work to
keep people with disabilities in their own homes--what type of
expenses would a person with a disability need to save to be
able to continue living in their home or their apartment or
with a parent or sibling? I think that is enlightening for
people to know because I am struck by the fact that it is not
just about getting the job and an income. I think people need
to understand the additional expenses that are incurred and why
you still need the support from Social Security or Medicaid or
Medicare. So if you could talk a little bit about that, that
would be helpful. Thank you.
Mr. Mitchell. Yes, ma'am. There are many expenses that go
into keeping someone independent and living in their home. For
me, transportation, a wheelchair modified van is almost in
excess of $100,000 with electronic hand controls modifying it.
Accessible bathrooms--an accessible bathroom, at least in rural
West Tennessee, is almost $12,000 for us to do just a generic
one.
Wheelchair ramps, people think they last forever. But
depending on the climate that you live in, dry rot, animals,
things can deteriorate that, and, you know, a 40-foot ramp in
West Tennessee is almost $4,000.
Medical supplies--myself, you know, I get assistance from
my mother and father, but I have catheter bags so I can use
that on the go, different other leg bag extensions to make sure
that I am able to stay proactive, going out with my peers. But
these are things that are not covered by insurance. So you can
ask--you know, supplies can run, for a 3-month supply it can be
$2,000 out of pocket. So if you can only earn $2,000 a month,
you know, under Social Security, where do you pull from? These
are things that people get, you know, every year. It is hard
for individuals with disabilities to stay in their home and
especially those that are cold in nature, because they will run
their heat higher at night.
So if they do not have, you know, transportation, a
wheelchair ramp, the accessible bathrooms, and even more so if
they need nursing care, it is hard for them to stay in the
home. So that is why, you know, people stay under Social
Security so then they are able to get those Medicaid waivers.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Let me just say I have a cousin, a first cousin who I grew
up with who is wheelchair-bound, has a disability, and my aunt
takes care of him. And I will tell you, it was not until they
were able to afford a van that accommodates my cousin being
able to actually use his wheelchair to ride up into the van, it
made them more mobile. Other than that, they could not get
around. I think people need to understand the additional costs
that come and the burden on persons with disabilities or people
with disabilities, that that is why these savings accounts are
key, and that is why I support the ABLE adjustment account. I
think we need to be doing more.
Mr. Wright, thank you. I think you are absolutely right,
there is some sort of stigma. I do not understand why, but
thank you for what you are doing, you and your wife. And I
think we should be doing more of this, and this brings me to
the next question I have. I am running out of time. But, Dr.
Nye-Lengerman, you have looked carefully at the issue of
employment and people with disabilities. In the State of
Nevada, we actually have a relatively high work force
participation rate for people with disabilities. It is, as of
2016, about 42 percent, and that is according to the University
of New Hampshire.
You know, have you looked at this across the country and
the rate of participation for the work force? And do you have
any reason why Nevada's work force participation might be
higher than others or other things that we can be doing in our
states?
Dr. Nye-Lengerman. Yes, thank you for your question. One of
the things that we find when we look at different types of
uptakes, policies and services, sort of the data that comes
from states, one of the strongest predictors of anything,
whether it comes to work force participation, to where people
are living, to how they are using their Medicaid dollars, is
the state in which they reside. And so state context is an
incredibly important factor in how services and systems play
out for people with disabilities. And so there really are these
economic features that occur within each State. There are sort
of the cultural features within state agencies, maybe your
state vocational rehabilitation program or your state
intellectual and developmental disability organizations, like a
Department of Human Services, and how they prioritize and
invest in certain things. And we definitely see that there is a
wide variation in how states choose to invest in funding and
supporting employment for people with disabilities. And there
really are really significant gaps.
And so my best guess for Nevada specifically without
digging in a little bit of those numbers is that some of your
state agencies, maybe some of your business partnerships, have
really invested and zeroed in on these issues as a priority for
that particular State. And what we often see as well, too, is
that these sort of--again, I said cultural context of a state
about what sort of brings that energy and attention to the
issue as well can have a really big deal, and that has a lot to
do with advocacy leaders, parent leaders in the State, as well
as state leadership within state agencies and at the federal
level as well.
So I think it is a really exciting and important finding to
highlight, and I would be very interested in digging into that
a little bit more. But thank you for sharing.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. I notice my time is up.
Thank you all again.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Tillis?
Senator Tillis. Thank you, Chair Collins and Ranking Member
Casey, for requesting the hearing.
Mr. Wright, I want to get to a question for Mr. Mitchell
about some of the economic challenges, but I would like to talk
about maybe some of the challenges that you all have faced as
an employer and what more we can do to encourage other
businesses to provide more workplace opportunities.
Mr. Wright. Senator Tillis, thank you for the question. We
have faced a number of challenges, and I think it revolves
around just the misunderstanding of what it means for people
with disabilities to work. A couple of ideas around that, you
know, making ABLE accounts a little bit more accessible, too. I
know everyone is doing their darnedest to make that happen, and
marketing obviously, as in all things, helps.
But I wonder if maybe during early intervention services if
ABLE accounts might be brought up to the families, at the least
an information sheet, a one-pager, maybe automatic enrollment.
I know there is some difficulty because every state--you know,
lots of states have them, so how do you choose which one? But
at least an information sheet.
Also, at IEP meetings, it might be brought up then, ABLE
accounts, a single-pager right there.
And then, last, if you are lucky enough to find someone who
will hire you, maybe you have an information sheet or auto
enrollment again when you are filling out your W-2, where
automatic enrollment, automatic direct deposit, away you go.
There might be some really practical ways to increase the
accessibility of the 529(a) accounts.
But, you know, specifically I really do think it is the
business community that has got to step up largely, you know,
and say there is this massive group of folks with disabilities
who can work, who want to work. I think research shows that
people with disabilities largely want jobs. So maybe
incentivizing business owners to look at hiring people with I/
DD. Are there some sensible tax credits that we could offer,
some payroll tax holidays for some amount of time, something.
Even SBA loans, might we work with the SBA to say, hey, look,
if you as a business are committed to hiring some percentage of
people with disabilities over the term of your loan, we will
discount your interest rate by 25, 50, 100, 200 basis points,
whatever it is, and monitor that using different agencies, or
however you can put it all together.
But I really think incentivizing businesses is the key to
this, because imagine if every small business in this country
hired one person with a disability for competitive, inclusive
employment, we would not have this unemployment problem.
Thank you, Senator.
Senator Tillis. Thank you.
Mr. Mitchell, so much of what you said makes no sense in
terms of providing a disincentive for you to continue to grow
and build on your career. Have you given much thought to how we
could figure out a way to kind of strike a balance? Because you
look to me like somebody that could be making a seven-figure
income if you wanted to go down that path versus a political
career. By the way, I have got a brother who is in the
Tennessee State Legislature, so if you all need some work over
there, we should connect you two together. But, you know, some
sort of a mechanism--clearly at some point you could be a
person of means who you could expect to defray some of the
expenses so that we have the resources for those who can. Have
you looked at that or have any opinion on that?
Mr. Mitchell. Yes, sir. I would say something such as a
sliding scale as to, let us say, when you hit plateaus, if you
start earning $45,000, you pay this much into your waiver
program for nursing; you get a boost and you get to $65,000, so
I would think more of a sliding scale. So as that person
climbs, you know, he climbs that corporate ladder, they are
able to contribute back into the system, but eventually they
will get to that income level to where they are able to buy a
house, they have enough savings to say, hey, I have figured out
a way to manage my nursing care, so I can come off this waiver
program because now I have succeeded in climbing in whatever
industry they try to get into and they are able to give back
and let somebody else try to climb as well.
Senator Tillis. And it seems to me there needs to be an
incentive as you move up this scale, the incentive to continue
to work, grow your income so that at some point perhaps you
become financially independent. I think that is something we
have to look more at.
Dr. Nye-Lengerman, I know states vary. You mentioned that
in a prior comment. Are there states that we should be looking
at as particularly best practices or better practices, some
that stand out as where we would like most of the other states
to be as a norm?
Dr. Nye-Lengerman. Well, I have some interesting states
that are maybe unique. One of those states is the State of
Washington that produces some of the best employment rates for
people with disabilities. Now, that was really a part of a
really meaningful and purposeful shift on the part of their
state intellectual and developmental disabilities agency to say
we are no longer going to be using public funds through
Medicaid to directly pay for segregated or sheltered work. And
so it is sort of saying we are going to close the doors and try
to create those spaces in our communities where people with
disabilities can work, and that was a really important step.
But in policy, as we know, we always have these unintended
consequences.
So one of the things that we see, for example, in the State
of Washington is that you do see higher rates of people with
disabilities working in competitive integrated employment. But
you also see--and I have heard it referred to as sort of
reverse segregation in the sense of whereas people might have
been going to programs and services during the course of a day,
they are now in their own homes alone not working. So while
they may be working 5, 10, 20 hours in the community,
previously they were 30 hours in a day program or employment
program with people, and now they may be at home more often
than not.
So I think it is sort of the right mix of incentives for
people to work, but also to have spaces to be a part of their
community. So if they are not working, how do we make sure that
people with disabilities are seen as valued and contributing
members of society--which they are--to say work is important
but also having support is important? So Washington is an
interesting state.
Then there are some other states, the State of Ohio, for
example, has really invested and really wrapped around this
idea of employment first, of competitive integrated employment
as being the priority for people with disabilities and the
expectation. And so they really have allowed a number of their
state agencies to sort of work to that end about how do we get
VR and our Departments of Health and Education and Human
Services to work together to that goal.
So those are two that kind of stand out that you sort of
see get a lot of attention at the moment.
Senator Tillis. Well, thank you.
Madam Chair, I have to go to a Judiciary Committee hearing
after this, but, Mr. Wright, we would love to see you and your
family in our office today. We are in the same building, down
on the first floor, so we would love to see you if you have
time later on. And thank you all for being here for this very
important topic.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Warren?
Senator Warren. Thank you, Madam Chair. And once again,
thank you for holding this hearing.
There are a lot of things we need to do to improve the
economic security of older Americans with disabilities, and my
colleagues have touched on a lot of them already: removing
barriers to employment, making it easier to save, safeguarding
health care coverage.
I want to talk about another very important program, one
that helps seniors and people with disabilities, who have very
low income and almost no assets. The Supplemental Security
Income program, or SSI, it is a part of Social Security. In
order to be eligible for benefits, a recipient has to have a
severe disability or be over the age of 65, cannot have more
than $2,000 in total assets. That is counting your bank
account, your life insurance, stocks, money under the mattress,
everything. And for these seniors and people with disabilities
who have very low amounts of assets and very little income, SSI
provides an average benefit of about $550 a month.
Now, Mr. Mitchell, I understand you work with people who
receive SSI and that you receive it yourself. I know there are
a lot of ways that we can improve this program, and I want to
talk about those. But before we do, I would just like you, if
you would, to say a word about the kinds of things you use
those SSI payments for.
Mr. Mitchell. Yes, ma'am. I use my SSI payments to defer
costs such as wheelchair repairs, because there are, you know,
so many miscellaneous things that come up, from a flat tire to
a malfunctioning joystick. Also, you know, there will be other
supplies such as, you know, I use suppositories, different
things like that, because these are all things that fall in
gray areas, and there are so many gray things--I mean things
that fall in gray areas that you need to be able to contribute
to and have the money to do so.
Just recently, you know, I had a consumer, he broke his
wheelchair charger. It was 9 o'clock at night. We had to make
sure that we found a way through JSCIL in order to make sure
that he got a wheelchair charger.
So I use my SSI benefits for that, and I know other
individuals and consumers I work with use theirs to cover those
necessities, because there are just some things, you know, that
you cannot get.
Senator Warren. Good. I really appreciate your just
explaining that to people, and I also want to say thank you for
your incredible work that you do for people with disabilities
in Tennessee. It really is remarkable work.
What worries me is that rather than strengthening this
important program, the White House has proposed billions of
dollars in cuts to SSI, breaking President Trump's promise not
to cut Social Security. Instead of cutting this crucial
lifeline for low-income seniors and people with disabilities,
we should be doing everything we can to improve this program.
The ABLE Act is an important step toward allowing SSI
recipients to buildup their savings, and I am very grateful for
the leadership from Senator Burr and Ranking Member Casey and
other members of this Committee that worked on this issue. But
there are also other ways that we could also improve SSI
itself.
So, Dr. Nye-Lengerman, you are an expert on poverty and
disability as well as on employment for people with
disabilities. Could you tell us about how SSI's limits on
recipients' income and assets affect their ability to buildup
any financial security?
Dr. Nye-Lengerman. Thank you for the question, Senator
Warren. I would be happy to explain that.
In a nutshell, SSI, the Supplemental Security Income
program, looks at a number of things. They first look at SGA,
which is called ``substantial gainful activity,'' and what that
does is it basically says this is the amount of money that is
OK to have in earned income over the course of a month. For a
non-blind individual--they use the binary blind or non-blind--
that SGA is $1,180. For an individual who is blind, that limit
is $1,970. So anytime you go over that SGA in that month, it
reduces your monthly benefit.
And so what we see is this sort of disincentive, if you
will, to work in the sense that you may be able to have a part-
time job and earn $2,000 a month. But if you do, your Social
Security is going to go down.
Now, there are some other incentives, and we talked about
trial work periods, really that are helpful, but that is one of
sort of the sticking points that makes it hard because people
are afraid when you count on something like SSI like that. But
the other component is the asset limit that you referenced as
well. For an individual that asset limit is $2,000, and for a
couple that is $3,000. And so, again, it really is difficult--
really impossible to move out of or beyond poverty because of
those limits.
Senator Warren. So people have both a disincentive to work,
have to live right on the edge of poverty. Can you tell me when
those numbers were last updated?
Dr. Nye-Lengerman. They were last updated in 1989, and they
have only been updated I think three times since the program
rolled out in the 1970's.
Senator Warren. Right. In fact, I understand some of the
numbers have never been updated since 1972.
Dr. Nye-Lengerman. That is correct.
Senator Warren. So that is where we are holding people. You
know, these outdated asset and income limits are barriers that
prevent SSI recipients from building a better future for
themselves and for their families.
I am glad to be a cosponsor of Senator Brown's SSI
Restoration Act which would allow recipients to save up for
emergencies, to earn a little more money for work and other
sources without being penalized, and to receive support like
food or shelter from friends and family members. These changes
will help ensure that the SSI program fulfills its promise and
better serves those who need it most.
Growing old or having a disability should not mean
struggling to put food on the table or worrying about keeping a
roof over your head. We should be a better country than that,
and we should make sure these programs live up to our values.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Senator Burr, you have been extremely patient
in listening through a lot of testimony and questions. I again
want to applaud you for your leadership and working with
Senator Casey in authoring a law, the ABLE Act, which is really
making a difference for so many families across this country.
Senator Burr. Well, Madam Chairman, let me thank you for
two things this morning. One is this is the longest period
uninterrupted I have had in 6 months.
[Laughter.]
Senator Burr. Actually being in here, and I think the fact
that you were doing this, the intelligence staff knew to stay
away. They only came one time.
But it has also given us an opportunity to highlight the
success of ABLE, and let me just requote some numbers. In the
first three months of this year, 2018, the number of accounts
has grown 19 percent; the amount of invested assets, 37
percent; and the average account size grew 15 percent. In the
past year, the number of accounts grew 177 percent; the
invested assets, 290 percent. All that in the last year. And I
think Senator Warren hits on a very important thing. Isn't it
time for us to update everything?
I remember when Bob and I started this--what, 10 years ago?
And, you know, it sort of gets bent at the question that
stumped you. Why doesn't everybody that is disabled have an
ABLE account? You know, that is mystifying. We created it, we
built it, it is there. And the fact is that things do not
happen overnight. It requires maybe incentivizing employers,
educating the disabled, convincing states--thank you for what
Pennsylvania has done--convincing states to set the accounts
up.
When Bob and I started in this, it was with the greatest
detail to flexibility. It was with an appetite that was every
bit as big as everybody has expressed up here, but with the
reality that we could only do certain things and get it
accomplished, and we had to pick and choose what was the most
important. And I think to some degree with the cooperation of
the disabled community, we have been masterful--and the support
of our colleagues--that we have not tried to bite too big a
bite of the apple, and had we, America was not ready for it.
American business was not ready to employ them. States were not
ready to set up accounts.
You know, I am not sure that the average person who is
disabled, Mr. Mitchell, and would like to have an ABLE account
understands that if they live in Tennessee, they can set their
ABLE account up in North Carolina. Since 2016, that ability has
existed. So if there is a state out there that does not have
one or you do not like the people, come to North Carolina. Set
your account up. We have made it as easy to participate as we
possibly can. Now we are getting to the tough part. How do you
expand it? And how do you expand it at rates that exceed--
probably if we had said could you grow it 190 percent in a
year's time, we would have said no way. But we started with a
very low bar.
And, Ben, I have got this question for you. What do you
think are some of the reasons that individuals who qualify for
ABLE accounts do not set them up?
Mr. Wright. Senator Burr, thanks for your comments and the
question. I think quite simply they are just not aware of them.
I think it is as simple as that. I know that there are a lot of
folks out there trying to get the word out, but, you know,
marketing is expensive. It takes some bucks to get the word
out, whether it is social media, whether it is printed
materials, word of mouth. I know in our own State of North
Carolina, folks go out to different groups and give speeches.
Well, that is great for the people who are in attendance, but
those who are not do not hear it, right?
So that is the main reason, and that is why I go back to
that notion of perhaps when people fill out a W-2, they are
filling out an ABLE account form at the same time, and then
back it up all the way to early intervention services, because
families will start talking about it.
Then I think it also goes back to Mr. Mitchell's--I think
it was your comment about they are afraid they are going to
lose those supports, you know? People say, ``No, you are not,''
but they are so afraid of it that they do not---it is almost
like they do not even want to read it. So we have got to get
people over that and really make it more ubiquitous. And maybe
it is, again, that piece of paper in front of them when they
are signing that W-2 or what have you.
Senator Burr. Is there more the disability community can
do--and I am not talking about the disabled; I am talking about
the advocacy groups that are out there. Are they selling to
people that they have their e-mail addresses, they have their
mailing addresses, they have monthly contact with these
individuals, are they selling ABLE like they should?
Mr. Wright. That is a great question. I do not know the
answer to that, so I might defer to somebody who has those
statistics or knowledge.
Mr. Stollsteimer. Senator, I can tell you from
Pennsylvania's perspective, you are exactly right. Ignorance of
the program is the first hurdle, and then fear is the second
part. People are terrified they are going to lose their federal
benefits if they sign up for this program. And it is not enough
for Treasury to tell them that this is a safe product. We have
a customer service staff who go out and make presentations. But
we need disability organizations, advocacy groups to start
answering some of those questions for us.
Just the other day I got a call from the Arc in my own home
county who had misinformation about what qualifies or is not a
qualified expense. And so they are going to call a meeting of
their members to have our staff come and explain to them in
detail. And it is a one-on-one kind of a thing. We really do
need to engage with individual families about this.
And then there is the whole financial literacy piece,
right? You have to be able to understand whether you want to be
an aggressive investor or a moderate investor or whether you
want to do the debit card feature and the checking feature.
So it is relatively easy. You could sign up online. But
there is all this fear that we still have to get over.
Going back to the ignorance for a minute, we have been in
the college savings business, thanks to Congress under the 529
section of the IRS Code, for 25 years in Pennsylvania.
Nationally only a third of people know about the 529 programs.
So we have been at this for 25 to 30 years, and we still have
to be able to break through to the families and let them know
that this great vehicle exists for them.
It is going to take a long time for ABLE, but it has to be
done, sir, it has to be engagement with the advocacy groups, or
it is not going to succeed.
Senator Burr. Mr. Mitchell?
Mr. Mitchell. Yes, sir, Senator Burr. I work for the Center
for Independent Living in Jackson, Tennessee, and we try to
push out ABLE to our consumers that come through the doors. But
I think it needs to be a three-pronged attack.
I think, one, we need to get the school system involved. As
parents get their kids in school, those counselors that know
that somebody is on an IEP or they have a disability, give them
the literature there.
But also the rehab facilities such as the Shepherd Center
or the Shriners Center, Le Bonheur, getting their social
workers on board, because if you can get the parents early or
if there should be an accident, they realize that this vehicle
is out there.
And, third, I would say also getting with NCIL, which will
be here in Washington next week, getting with that advocacy
group, and the independent living centers throughout the states
to really help push ABLE and show them that--you know, show
them success stories. That is one of the reasons why I was
chosen as an ABLE national spokesman to really get the word
out. But the more people we get signed up sharing their success
stories--you can be like, ``Oh, I know Paul. Paul down the
street has an ABLE account. I can go there.'' Or at school, you
may have a counselor that will say, ``Hey, remember Mr.
Mitchell graduated 5 years back? He is still in town. Let us
contact him. He has been successful with ABLE.''
So I think it is just a multi-tier attack that we need to
get it, not only from the disability side but also from the
school system side.
Senator Burr. Mr. Mitchell, thank you.
Chairman, you have been generous with time. Let me just say
I think we have learned a lot today. We have learned that the
majority of those with disabilities really want to work, but
for decades, for some of them, they have been penalized to do
it. And now we are beginning to change that stigma, and we need
to look at things that create a comfort on their part to work
and to contribute to ABLE. It is amazing to me that a high
school counselor--every student graduating knows about the
student loan program, but every disabled student in that school
probably is not told about an ABLE account. I think there are
simple things. This is not different for us to do.
I am not going to speak for Senator Casey, but I think he
would probably agree with this statement. When I leave this
institution and I am asked, ``What was the most important
legislation you did in your congressional career?'' I do not
think there is any question. In my case it would be the ABLE
Act. It is not the biggest, it is not the sexiest, it does not
affect the most people. But it affects the folks that have the
least amount of voice, and it is the community that really can
be benefited for life in what we do.
I thank the Chair.
The Chairman. Again, thank you for your leadership.
Senator Gillibrand, so glad you could join us.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman and Mr.
Ranking Member. I am really grateful we are having a hearing on
how we can talk about economic stability and self-sufficiency
for Americans with disabilities, and I am very grateful for the
leadership Senators on this Committee have shown in not only
putting the ABLE Act in place but having a hearing to talk
about its successes.
I want to talk about the area that it does not cover and
offer three ideas for you guys to think about as experts on
this issue.
We know that the ABLE Act does not cover you if your
disability accrues after the age of 26. We also know that the
parents of people who are disabled are not eligible to have
these savings accounts included as well. And we know that
because, as Senator Burr said, we have to make certain
decisions about what to cover and what to do quickly. So I have
three ideas I would like your thoughts on, and particularly
Kelly Nye-Lengerman, since you are an expert on poverty and
disability.
So the first idea is really simple: having a national paid
leave plan. We are the only industrialized country in the world
that does not have national paid leave, and most people do not
have access to it. Only about 15 percent of all workers have
access to paid leave. And you know as caregivers, if you do not
have time out to take care of the people in your family when
they need it most, it really disadvantages you or your ability
to earn long term, to be able to go in and out of the work
force quickly, not lose your spot at the job you have.
Typically for caregivers they have to start over on the bottom
rung if there is a family emergency. And we also know that a
lot of our caregivers are aging; 860,000 caregivers are over
the age of 60 nationwide and are providing care for some of the
disability. So it is really important that we think about paid
leave as a way to meet some of the needs that are not being
met.
I do not know if you have any expertise on this, but you
did mention it in your opening comments. Would you like to say
anything about it?
Dr. Nye-Lengerman. I would, and I think one of the positive
things about having a strong paid leave program nationally is
that it meets and can serve both caregivers and people with
disabilities. And so on the caregiving side, if a family member
needs to step away to provide some type of support or care for
a family member, they can, like you said, not losing their
employment or spot in line, if you will. But it also is
beneficial to people with disabilities because there are issues
related to health and disability that come up. They come up for
all of us. They may come up differently for people with
disabilities. And so having a paid leave plan really provides
that opportunity and safety net so people can stay in the work
force, because also what we are talking about today is it is
not just about savings, it is also about earnings. And so paid
leave for both people with and without disabilities and
caregivers is very important.
I would also say to your comment about making sure of
ABLE's accessibility to other groups or other populations, a
number of panelists--and I think we have talked today about
increasing that age when an individual acquires their
disability is another pathway that seems to make a lot of
sense.
Senator Gillibrand. The second idea, and this is something
Senator Burr talked about, he said people want to work, and I
thought that quote was really important. And I think people
with disabilities desperately want to work. But so few who are
disabled have access to employment and access to basic
training. In fact, the statistics say that the rate for persons
with a disability of unemployment is 9.2 percent for 2017. That
is double the national rate. So declaring victory at four-
percent is not so great if you happen to be disabled because
you are at 9 percent.
So my question is: What is your thinking about moving us
toward this notion that anybody who wants to be working full-
time should be able to have access to the training they need to
get that opportunity and really put the investment behind this
goal of full employment, this goal of actually getting us to a
place where training is guaranteed? Is that something that--and
all of you could talk about this issue--you would be willing to
think about and maybe testify about? Edward, if you want to go
first?
Mr. Mitchell. Actually, that falls in line with vocational
rehabilitation. Vocational rehabilitation, I can only speak
from Tennessee's part, they try to live that philosophy. But
they need to embrace it a little bit more because people you
want to say work, and there is nothing wrong with any job, but
people want gainful employment.
Senator Gillibrand. Right.
Mr. Mitchell. You do not want to be held back folding
towels. When I went through my brief--I was a former dean of
students, an academic monitor at a college. I went through a
brief spell of unemployment and got back involved with
vocational rehabilitation. And some of the jobs that they were
suggesting were not demeaning by any means, but you have to
have the job--you know, what their counselors are looking for,
you need to make sure that the job fits the individual, and not
taking away anything, just some jobs that they were proposing
just was like more of a step back.
Senator Gillibrand. Right. You want to earn at your fullest
potential.
Mr. Mitchell. Yes, ma'am. And also vocational
rehabilitation really needs to put, you know, I hate to say,
their money where their mouth is. They want you to be
employed--with me right now I am battling not having a vehicle.
I got one vehicle modification back in 2008, but that vehicle
has not lasted 10 years. I put over $30,000 in repairs, and now
it is a battle to get them to approve a second modification.
And without a vehicle, how do I stay gainfully employed at both
my jobs?
Senator Gillibrand. Right. The last issue, if Madam
Chairman does not mind me raising it, is this issue of access
to banking, because a lot of our disabled families and
individuals do not have access to banking. In fact, if you are
a head of household, your likelihood of being unbanked or
underbanked is--18.4 percent are unbanked and 28 percent are
underbanked. That is a huge number of people who do not have
access to banking.
So one idea to address that is this idea of postal banking
because we have so many post offices in every part of the
country, we have 30,000 locations. For a rural state like
Maine, it could be game-changing. For places around the country
where they do not have access to banks because they just do not
earn enough money. People who are disabled tend to be low-
income earners and do not have enough money to meet any
thresholds.
So I would love your thoughts, and you could do it in
writing if you want, but, Kelly, if you want to give your off-
the-cuff thoughts about whether access to banking would be
important to the disability community.
Dr. Nye-Lengerman. Again, thank you for the question. I do
feel a little stumped, so I will come back in a couple weeks
with some thoughts on that. But it is very interesting because
if you think about what supports people to access all kinds of
different benefits, accessibility is one of those huge
components. And, again, the post office is a very interesting
way to think about it because you are, like, yes, there are a
lot----
Senator Gillibrand. Well, they used to be able to provide
banking and did it for a very long time, decades and decades.
So it is for specific groups of people who have a certain
earning level, but just having access so you do not have to
rely on the payday lenders and other types of services that
tend to be very predatory on poor people. I think it would be
overwhelmingly helpful for the disability community.
So for all these issues, to the extent you want to think
about it, I would be grateful if you would submit letters to
the Committee on your thoughts of these three ideas as ways to
meet the needs that are not covered by the ABLE Act. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
I want to thank all of our witnesses today not only for
appearing here and your testimony, but for the very important
work that you are doing in your communities and states. It
really makes a huge difference.
As Chairman of this Committee, one of my top priorities has
been to improve the financial security of all older Americans,
including those with disabilities. Today's hearing builds on
previous work of our Committee. We have focused specifically
today on the unique challenges of attaining and maintaining
financial security for individuals aging with disabilities and
for their family caregivers who are also growing older.
While those with disabilities have the same rights as
everyone else, the data show that as a group they consistently
face disproportionate challenges in employment, housing, and
transportation, which makes it difficult for them to achieve
financial security. That is why I am so excited about the ABLE
Act. We are beginning to make progress. ABLE accounts have
already proven promising in nearly 40 states, and I cannot wait
for Maine to launch its own program, which will happen very
soon. I think we will be the 40th State. And I know we can
count on Pennsylvania to give us any tips that are needed.
Senator Burr is right that Mainers can go to other states
to set up the accounts, but it is a lot easier for people to do
it in their own State. So I am looking forward to the day when
we have all 50 states providing that service.
In addition to the ABLE Act, the RAISE Family Caregivers
Act, which was recently signed into law, will establish a
National Family Caregiving Strategy to guide our efforts moving
forward and I think can make real contributions in this area in
enabling individuals with disabilities and their families to
save and invest in their own future, improving their retirement
security, also giving caregivers some respite, which so many of
them could use.
I want to turn to Senator Casey for his final words.
Senator Casey. Chairman Collins, thank you again for
holding this hearing. I want to thank you for the work that
went into planning this hearing and obviously our witnesses for
their testimony.
Senator Burr, it is always great to be working with you on
these issues, and thank you for taking so much time. We are
glad you got a little bit of a break from the Intel Committee
and that important work that you do there.
I think we have heard some great stories today about
individuals with disabilities and their families and their
efforts to plan for the future and how we can encourage others
to improve their financial health. We know we have specific
recommendations, including passing the ABLE Age Adjustment Act,
and we will be working to do that. And Senator Burr and I have
been working on a number of bills to improve and strengthen
ABLE.
I would also, Madam Chair, ask unanimous consent to submit
some testimony for the record from Pennsylvanians about the
ABLE Act, if we could do that for the record.
The Chairman. Without objection.
Senator Casey. Thank you very much, and I will quote from
one of them. Elizabeth Bechtel from Boalsburg, Pennsylvania,
right in the middle of our state, she said, ``The ABLE program
is proving its worth every day, allowing people with
disabilities to build for a future that offers stability of
services, a safety net for protection against catastrophic
expenses, and the possibility of saving for a dream they might
otherwise never be able to afford.''
I think her words summarize how important this legislation
is, and we are grateful that we have the opportunity to talk
about it today.
Again, I want to thank our Chair, and I want to thank the
advocates who are in the room. I see Sara Weir, a great
advocate who helped us in those days leading up to the passage
of ABLE back in 2014, and I am grateful for all the work of the
disability community and those advocates who are with us today
and who I know will be with us on the road into the future.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Burr. Madam Chairman?
The Chairman. Senator Burr.
Senator Burr. Could I also mention that last night the
Virginia529 announced a partnership with the Capital Group,
which is going to get at the heart of some of the--this is the
first time we are seeing people put their money into marketing,
and not to say Pennsylvania has not, but this is huge, and
hopefully this will be an impetus that will get others out
there competing for the available accounts.
The Chairman. Thank you for that addition. And as always, I
want to recognize Senator Cortez Masto for her streak in
participating in every hearing and always offering such
insightful comments and questions. So thank you for being here.
And I want to thank our staff for their hard work.
Committee members will have until Friday, July 27th, to
submit any additional questions for the record. Again, my
thanks to our witnesses. This concludes the hearing.
[Whereupon, at 11:08 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
APPENDIX
=======================================================================
=======================================================================
Prepared Witness Statements and
Questions for the Record
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Prepared Statement of Benjamin Wright, Father and Business Owner,
Wilmington, NC
Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Casey, distinguished members of
this committee, thank you for inviting me to testify this morning. It
has been exciting over the past few years to witness the passing of the
ABLE Act, the ABLE to Work Act and the ABLE Financial Planning Act,
spearheaded by Senators Burr and Casey. While there is still much work
to be done, such as signing the TIME Act into law, I want to thank
everyone on this committee for all that you have done and continue to
do for people and families living with intellectual and developmental
disabilities (I/DD).
As the father of four children, I spend a lot of time thinking
about their futures, especially what life might look like after high
school for our two youngest children, Beau and Bitty, who have Down
syndrome. As most of you know, it is estimated that over 70 percent of
adults with I/DD are unemployed. That is a staggeringly high
unemployment rate that should not be tolerated in this country. Imagine
any other group where seven of ten people didn't have jobs, people
would take to the streets, and yet in regards to this group of
unemployed people, there is no outrage from the majority of the
American citizenry, only bewilderment on the faces of those who endure
this discrimination and hopelessness in the eyes of those who love and
advocate for them.
It begs the question: Why the complacency? I believe what we are
really dealing with is not a classic unemployment problem driven by the
economy, but a bona fide social and cultural problem. Doesn't it seem
that people with I/DD are not ascribed the same value in our society as
those of us without disabilities? What other group of law-abiding
citizens can be paid a sub-minimum wage just because of who they are?
And yet, paradoxically, before dinner tonight, every one of us in
this room could acquire the equivalent of an intellectual or
developmental disability due to an unforeseen event--and then what?
Having a disability is nothing to be ashamed of; it's part of the human
condition, so much so that the U.S. Census reports that one-in-five
Americans has a disability. Yet, here we are--with an eye-popping 70
percent unemployment rate.
So, what can we do? I believe if we can find ways to help people
without I/DD see the intrinsic value in people with I/DD accepting and
including them should come more naturally.
My wife Amy and I have given this a lot of thought. So much so that
two years ago, we decided to open a coffee shop called, Bitty & Beau's
Coffee, where we employ almost 80 adults with I/DD across three coffee
shops and everyone earns above minimum wage. Initially, we thought this
was a great way to reduce the unemployment rate. However, we quickly
realized that the real power of the coffee shop was its ability to show
people without I/DD what is possible. The point of Bitty & Beau's
Coffee is not that people with I/DD can work in coffee shops, but that
people with and without I/DD could and should be working together--
shoulder to shoulder--in almost every type of business.
People need a fresh perspective on this issue. They need to know
and understand that people with I/DD are not broken. What is broken is
the lens through which we view people with I/DD. Bitty & Beau's Coffee
is a new lens--and it is changing the way people see other people--
offering a new perspective that once seen--cannot be unseen.
If the goal of this hearing is to support economic stability and
self-sufficiency as Americans with disabilities and their families age,
efforts such as ABLE and addressing policies that inhibit work for
people with disabilities are important. However, we must also resolve
to help people without disabilities see people with disabilities, like
my children, Bitty & Beau, as worthy of that charge.
Thank you for your time.
Questions for the Record
To Benjamin Wright
From Senator Jones
Question:
What can we do to encourage other employers to hire individuals
with disabilities and to create accessible workplaces?
Answer:
My proposed solution is a 3-step hiring practice. The concept is to
make the solution so straightforward, unobtrusive and compelling that
business owners will see this hiring practice as one they must adopt--
because at a minimum, it's good for the bottom line. Once you give
business owners a business reason to hire people with disabilities,
they will find over time, that hiring people with disabilities is not
only good business practice that positively reshapes the culture of
their workforce, but one that also begins to solve the chronic epidemic
of unemployment for adults with disabilities.
If every small business in the United States hired just one adult
with a disability, about 50 percent of the roughly 60 million Americans
living with disabilities would find themselves hired, most of them for
the first time. While my proposal may not immediately result in a
living wage, it is a start. Most importantly, it provides people with
disabilities entry into the labor force and a shot at more hours,
development and responsibilities. While every hire may not be able to
earn a living wage, a supplemental wage can have a substantive,
positive impact on the lives of people living solely on SSI/SSDI, and
on the lives of their families.
Step 1--Offer business owners a tax credit for 1 year,
equal to the payroll for one employee with a disability. The employee
with a disability must be hired into competitive, integrated employment
(at or above minimum wage; working with non-disabled co-workers) for at
least 100 hours/year, on average. That's only 2 hours/week.
Step 2--After the first year, offer the business owner
the terms of ``Step 1'' on a second, additional hire of a person with a
disability. (Maximum: 3 hires over 3 years.)
Step 3--After the first 3 years, offer the business owner
a dollar-for-dollar tax credit on 50 percent of the payroll spent on
their employees with disabilities for the next 10 years.
Question:
How can we support small business owners who are doing right by
their employees with disabilities?
Answer:
Apply the same business incentives, as above described, retroactive
3 years.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Prepared Statement of Jack Stollsteimer, Deputy State Treasurer for
Consumer Programs, Pennsylvania Office of the State Treasurer,
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania
Good morning Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Casey, and other
distinguished members of the Committee. I am Jack Stollsteimer, Deputy
State Treasurer for Consumer Programs. On behalf of Pennsylvania
Treasurer Joseph Torsella, I am grateful for the opportunity to appear
before you today to discuss our department's ABLE (Achieving a Better
Life Experience) program and how it is improving the lives of people
with disabilities of all ages by helping them achieve economic self-
sufficiency.
The PA ABLE program was launched by Treasurer Torsella in April
2017 after a bipartisan group of state legislators, supported by a
broad coalition of advocates for the disability community, enacted
strong enabling legislation in 2016. The Pennsylvania ABLE Act includes
provisions exempting ABLE accounts from Medicaid paybacks and offering
account owners protection from creditors in state legal proceedings.
Since the implementation of the PA ABLE Act our Legislature has
continued its strong support of the program by creating a state tax
deduction for contributions to ABLE accounts and through an annual
appropriation for Treasury to market and administer the program.
In the fifteen months since our program launch, we have seen a
surge of interest for the benefits offered by the ABLE program from
people with disabilities of all ages. We have a number of account
owners who are working adults with disabilities who find the freedom
for the first time to hold significant funds in their own account
without jeopardizing their access to federal disability benefits truly
liberating. We have parents of young children with disabilities saving
long term for their child's future by making small but regular
contributions without paying the up front fees required to open a
special needs trust. We have older adults using ABLE funds to purchase
adaptive technology to enable them to live more productive, fuller
lives. We even have parents of account owners using ABLE accounts as
estate planning vehicles to ensure their children's future financial
security. Currently our ABLE program has more than 1,400 accountholders
with $8.3 million dollars under management, and each of those account
owners has their own story as to why ABLE is the best option for them
to save, pay bills, and make debit card purchases through their PA ABLE
account. We have made so much progress--but we have so much more work
to do. There are over 60,000 children with disabilities in
Pennsylvania; with ongoing support from federal and state policymakers,
our goal is to reach as many of them as we can.
Over time, the ABLE program can provide a means for people with
disabilities to achieve greater self-sufficiency as they age as long as
our federal partners continue to support the program's promise. The
ABLE program works for people by allowing anyone with a qualifying
disability a secure, tax-advantaged way to save or invest without
affecting their government benefits. It also works because the Internal
Revenue Service has broadly interpreted the definition of a ``Qualified
Disability Expenses'', thereby allowing people with disabilities the
flexibility to use the program throughout their lives, since the nature
of an individual's expenses change to reflect their different stages in
life. Simply put, the qualified expense needs of a 25-year-old worker
in many respects are very different from the expenses of a 65-year old
retiree.
Right now, ABLE provides the flexibility to accommodate the
changing needs of people as they age but we must ensure that remains
true in the years to come. To that end, the Pennsylvania Treasury would
strongly encourage the Senate to consider S.B. 817, the ABLE Adjustment
Act. This bill would greatly increase the utilization of the program by
allowing individuals with disabilities that started before age 46 to
open ABLE accounts. Increasing the number of people with disabilities
who can open accounts will strengthening the ABLE program from a fiscal
perspective while allowing older adults who become disabled through
accidents, chronic illness, or military service to use this tool for
their economic stability and self-sufficiency.
Questions for the Record Submitted to Jack Stollsteimer
From Senator Jones
Question:
Mr. Stollsteimer, you state in your testimony that Pennsylvania
currently has 1,400 ABLE accountholders, and that your goal is to reach
the more than 60,000 children with disabilities in your state who could
benefit from the program. Based on your respective expertise, what
recommendations do you have for growing the ABLE program nationwide and
increasing the accessibility of these accounts?
Answer:
Critical to growing the ABLE program nationwide is the passage of
the ABLE Adjustment Act, Senate Bill 817. Passage of S.B. 817 would
greatly increase the utilization of the program by allowing individuals
with disabilities that started before age 46 to open ABLE accounts.
Increasing the number of people with disabilities eligible to open
accounts will strengthening the ABLE program from a fiscal perspective
while allowing older adults who become disabled through accidents,
chronic illness, or military service to use this tool for their
economic stability and self-sufficiency.
=======================================================================
Additional Statements for the Record
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]