- THE STATE OF THE VA: A PROGRESS REPORT ON IMPLEMENTING 2017 VA REFORM LEGISLATION
[Senate Hearing 115-537]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-537
THE STATE OF THE VA: A PROGRESS REPORT ON IMPLEMENTING 2017 VA REFORM
LEGISLATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JANUARY 17, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-742 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).E-mail,
[email protected]
COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
Johnny Isakson, Georgia, Chairman
Jerry Moran, Kansas
Jon Tester, Montana, Ranking
John Boozman, Arkansas
Member
Dean Heller, Nevada
Patty Murray, Washington
Bill Cassidy, Louisiana
Bernard Sanders, (I) Vermont
Mike Rounds, South Dakota
Sherrod Brown, Ohio
Thom Tillis, North Carolina
Richard Blumenthal, Connecticut
Dan Sullivan, Alaska
Mazie K. Hirono, Hawaii
Joe Manchin III, West Virginia
Robert J. Henke, Staff Director
Tony McClain, Democratic Staff Director
Majority Professional Staff
Adam Reece
Gretchan Blum
Leslie Campbell
Maureen O'Neill
David Shearman
Jillian Workman
Minority Professional Staff
Dahlia Melendrez
Cassandra Byerly
Jon Coen
Steve Colley
Simon Coon
Michelle Dominguez
C O N T E N T S
----------
January 17, 2018
SENATORS
Page
Isakson, Hon. Johnny, Chairman, U.S. Senator from Georgia........
1
Tester, Hon. Jon, Ranking Member, U.S. Senator from Montana......
16
Prepared statement...........................................
17
Moran, Hon. Jerry, U.S. Senator from Kansas......................
13
Boozman, Hon. John, U.S. Senator from Arkansas...................
57
Manchin, Hon. Joe, III, U.S. Senator from West Virginia..........
60
Tillis, Hon. Thom, U.S. Senator from North Carolina..............
64
Blumenthal, Hon. Richard, U.S. Senator from Connecticut..........
66
Letter for the record........................................
67
Heller, Hon. Dean, U.S. Senator from Nevada......................
78
Hirono, Hon. Mazie K., U.S. Senator from Hawaii..................
80
Cassidy, Hon. Bill, U.S. Senator from Louisiana..................
83
Murray, Hon. Patty, U.S. Senator from Washington.................
88
Sullivan, Hon. Dan, U.S. Senator from Alaska.....................
90
WITNESSES
Shulkin, Hon. David J., M.D., Secretary, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs, accompanied by Peter Shelby, Assistant
Secretary for Human Resources Administration; Cheryl Mason,
Chairman of the Board of Veteran Appeals; Dr. Amy Fahrenkopf,
Acting Deputy Under Secretary for Health for Community Care;
Dave McLenachen, Director of Appeals Management; Peter
O'Rourke, Executive Director of the Office of Accountability
and Whistleblower Protection; and Robert Worley, Director of
Education Services.............................................
2
Prepared statement...........................................
4
Response to requests arising during the hearing by:
Hon. Jerry Moran........................................... 13,14
Hon. Jon Tester............................................ 57,78
Hon. John Boozman.......................................... 58,59
Hon. Richard Blumenthal....................................
71
Hon. Bill Cassidy


Response to posthearing questions submitted by:
Hon. Johnny Isakson........................................
97
Hon. Jon Tester............................................
101
Hon. Jerry Moran...........................................
109
Hon. Dean Heller...........................................
110
Hon. Bill Cassidy..........................................
111
Hon. Thom Tillis...........................................
112
Hon. Dan Sullivan..........................................
115
Hon. Patty Murray..........................................
116
Hon. Sherrod Brown.........................................
122
Hon. Mazie K. Hirono.......................................
125
Hon. Joe Manchin III.......................................
125
APPENDIX
National Organization of Veterans' Advocates, Inc. (NOVA);
prepared statement.............................................
129
Fuentes, Carlos, Director, National Legislative Service, Veterans
of Foreign Wars of the United States (VFW); prepared statement.
131
THE STATE OF THE VA: A PROGRESS REPORT ON IMPLEMENTING 2017 VA REFORM
LEGISLATION
----------
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 17, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 p.m., in room
418, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Johnny Isakson,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Isakson, Moran, Boozman, Heller, Cassidy,
Rounds, Tillis, Sullivan, Tester, Murray, Brown, Blumenthal,
Hirono, and Manchin.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHNNY ISAKSON, CHAIRMAN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM GEORGIA
Chairman Isakson. I call this meeting of the Senate
Veterans' Affairs Committee to order. I appreciate Secretary
Shulkin being here today and all his hard work.
The Ranking Member is on his way. I am going to start with
my brief opening statement, and by the time that is over
hopefully he will be here for his brief opening statement, upon
which we will immediately go to Secretary Shulkin and then to
the Members of the Committee for questions and answers.
Let me say, at the outset, that this meeting is not about
what has happened in the past. It is about what is happening
right now, to correct some of the things that have happened in
the past. This is an accountability hearing. I have told the
Secretary that we want to really take the legislation that we
passed last year on accountability, appeals, all the things
that we passed, and give the VA the tools to address the
significant problems confronting the veterans of America, the
VSOs of America, and this Committee. We want to begin moving
away from the problems of the past and toward the solutions of
the future, in particular on: appeals; accountability; the GI
Bill; all those things that are important to the veterans and
their families; plus the leadership of the VA, as well.
I also want to thank Secretary Shulkin. I have always been
complimentary of him. A lot of people say, ``You are too nice
to him.'' I am not too nice to him, as he has been good to the
veterans and I am going to be good to him. He has been a
forthright leader that the administration is lucky to have, I
believe the veterans are lucky to have, and I feel like this
Committee is lucky to have. Now, we are at the time where there
are no excuses. There are no excuses for why we do not correct
the problems we have had with hiring. There are no excuses for
why we do not correct the problems we have had with information
technology. There is no excuse for not correcting the problems
we have with veterans appeals, and other areas.
So, this is all about accountability. It is all about
standing forward. It is all about looking at the past and what
we did and looking for the results that are to come in the
future, so that we do a good job for the veterans of the United
States of America.
Mr. Secretary, I am going to swear you in for the purposes
of this hearing. If you will stand and raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give before the Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs
will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
Secretary Shulkin. I do.
Chairman Isakson. You may be seated.
Mr. Secretary, I am going to recognize you for your 5
minutes, when the Ranking Member shows.
Secretary Shulkin. OK.
Chairman Isakson. Welcome.
Secretary Shulkin. Thank you.
STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID J. SHULKIN, M.D., SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, ACCOMPANIED BY PETER SHELBY,
ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR HUMAN RESOURCES ADMINISTRATION; CHERYL
MASON, CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF VETERAN APPEALS; DR. AMY
FAHRENKOPF, ACTING DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY FOR HEALTH FOR
COMMUNITY CARE; DAVE MCLENACHEN, DIRECTOR OF APPEALS
MANAGEMENT; PETER O'ROURKE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF
ACCOUNTABILITY AND WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION; AND FINALLY,
ROBERT WORLEY, DIRECTOR OF EDUCATION SERVICES
Secretary Shulkin. Chairman Isakson, Senator Moran, Senator
Boozman, thanks for inviting me here to talk about VA's
program. More important, on behalf of the veterans the VA
serves and our employees who serve them, thank you for your
staff's tireless, bipartisan work. It is has been great.
We certainly appreciate and respect your leadership, Mr.
Chairman, and partnership in establishing those issues that we
are trying to tackle at the VA head-on. Some of them, as you
have said, we know have lingered for years. I have always said
I think we have the best committees in Congress and that is in
large part due to the leadership.
Chairman Isakson. We agree with that, by the way.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah. Well, I would not say it if it was
not true. I took an oath. So----
[Laughter.]
Joining me today, seated behind me--I just wanted to
introduce you in case I need a lifeline and get some help
today--Peter Shelby, who is our Assistant Secretary for Human
Resources Administration; Cheryl Mason, who is our Chairman of
the Board of Veteran Appeals; Dr. Amy Fahrenkopf, who is our
Acting Deputy Under Secretary for Health for Community Care;
Dave McLenachen, who is our Director of Appeals Management;
Peter O'Rourke, who is the Executive Director of the Office of
Accountability and Whistleblower Protection; and finally, Mr.
Robert Worley, who is our Director of Education Services.
A year ago, at my confirmation hearing before this
Committee, I testified that I would seek major reform and
transformation of VA. Today, to guide VA reform and
transformation we are focused on five priorities. The first,
which is to provide greater choice for veterans; second, to
modernize our systems; third, to focus our resources on what is
most important to veterans; fourth, to improve the timeliness
of how we deliver our services; and fifth, prevent veteran
suicide, which is our top clinical priority. The President's
Executive order last week, which supported transitioning
military members with mental health services during that first
critical year as veterans is an important step.
Thanks in large part to your leadership, which helped us
pass the legislation in 2017, the legislation I hope we will be
discussing today, we are making progress on all five of those
priorities. Appeals reform would be a good example. It is about
modernizing antiquated systems and focusing resources while
giving veterans more timely services and greater choice.
Accountability and whistleblower protection is essential to
our unwavering commitment to honoring veterans. It too is about
sensible response of modern systems that process and support
our people to make VA better. The Forever GI Bill gives
veterans greater choice. More profoundly, it is about greater
opportunity, especially for veterans returning to communities
to pursue careers and fulfill dreams.
Beyond these reforms, we have announced same-day services
for primary care and mental health at every VA facility across
the country. We have extended mental health to veterans with
other-than-honorable administrative discharges. So far, we have
disposed of 111 out of 430 vacant or underutilized buildings.
We published data publicly on wait time, quality data, customer
satisfaction data, and last week we published our opioid
prescription rates across the country. There are no other
health systems in the country that publish this type of data.
And, because of that--I hope it is because of that--we are
earning our veterans' trust back. At the end of this last year,
70 percent of veterans who responded to our survey said that
they felt like valued customers at VA. That is up from 46
percent in 2014.
Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee, we are deeply
grateful for your role in supporting all those changes and
others like them. They are immensely important. But, when I
look back over this year, we are still largely managing through
incrementalism, patching and repairing old systems and
processes and reacting to crises. VA still is far short of the
kind of bold transformational change that we need to serve
veterans in the decades ahead. From health care to benefits, we
have to fundamentally and holistically change our service
delivery paradigm.
My objective, when it comes to health care for our
veterans, is to have a fully-integrated, interoperable,
operationally-efficient health care system that is easy for
veterans, employees, and community partners to navigate. A full
spectrum of care for veterans that capitalizes on our
foundational services, delivering on our promise to provide
world-class services. We need a consistent, seamless experience
for veterans at every VA facility across the country. We need a
national network of modern facilities that meets the changing
needs of veterans locally. We need simple, convenient choice
for eligible veterans among a network of high-quality community
providers in a single consolidated program.
Mr. Chairman, I applaud your efforts to get this done. Your
draft legislation that passed out of this Committee is highly
responsive to the needs of veterans, and we are all grateful
for the work that you and the Committee have done so far to
make this a reality.
Benefits are a gateway to VA services and we need benefit
determinations to be simpler. Veterans should know what to
expect and have more predictability. They should not have to
endure the burden of filing claim after claim after claim.
Benefits should better enable lifetime of independence and
success for veterans, economic opportunity, physical and mental
well-being, and financial security for the severely disabled.
In short, we need to begin an earnest dialog with stakeholders
about veterans' benefits.
Mr. Chairman, in the days and months ahead, I invite and
welcome your support and leadership in helping us define and
then pursue the kind of worthy, transformational change the VA
needs so we can all achieve what we hope to achieve. I look
forward to your questions today.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Shulkin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary,
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
Good afternoon, Chairman Isakson, Ranking Member Tester, and
Distinguished Members of the Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today about the successes the
VA team is achieving for the Nation's Veterans, their families, and
advocates with the valuable legislative tools you provided to us in
2017.
accountability
The Department of Veterans Affairs took expedient action to
implement the Secretary's new authority to hold employees accountable
provided for in the Department of Veterans Affairs Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection Act of 2017. Within weeks of the enactment of
the law, the Secretary developed and effected guidance to ensure both
VA managers and employees are held to the highest standards of
performance, integrity, and conduct.
The Department developed four Human Resources Management Letters as
guidance to managers and Human Resources personnel on how to implement
several of the disciplinary provisions. Training was provided to
managers, H.R. personnel, and the Office of General Counsel on the
provisions of the Act, and how it would be implemented.
Additionally, the Department developed several resources to assist
H.R. personnel in understanding and applying disciplinary provisions of
the Act, such as flow charts outlining the requirements of the
accountability authorities available to the Department, comparison
guides between requirements under the Act and VA bargaining unit
obligations, and frequently asked question guides. The Department
continues to modify guidance and update Human Resources Letters as
needed and as adverse action cases are heard before the Merit Systems
Protection Board.
The VA's Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection
(OAWP) was established and the head of the OAWP was appointed on
May 12, 2017 under the authority of the President's Executive Order.
OAWP is currently being led by an SES executive director who reports to
the Secretary.
The executive director provides clarification and advice related to
accountability, whistleblower disclosures and retaliation issues to the
Secretary and other leadership throughout VA. OAWP sends a senior team
to raise awareness of accountability and whistleblower issues to
executive leadership councils and other leadership meetings at VA
facilities across the country.
On June 12, 2017, OAWP began receiving whistleblower disclosures
from employees into the Central Whistleblower Office authorized under
The Patient Protection Act of 2016 (PL 114-223). After enactment of the
Department of Veteran Affairs Accountability and Whistleblower
Protection Act of 2017 (PL 115-41), the OAWP enhanced its whistleblower
capabilities, developing a new Whistleblower Disclosure Form (VA Form
10177) to streamline the process and integrate disclosure intake into
the Office's new Triage Division. OAWP developed a triage, tracking,
and referral process to ensure all disclosures are managed and resolved
centrally. When appropriate, OAWP engages with the Office of Special
Counsel (OSC) and the Office of Inspector General to refer disclosures
and accept referrals for action. As of January 8, 2018 OAWP has
received and validated 1,029 disclosures since June 2017.
OAWP is protecting whistleblowers by utilizing its authority to
place a temporary hold on personnel actions in cases where
whistleblower retaliation is alleged or a disclosure is unresolved.
Working with the OSC, OAWP ensures that the ability to seek corrective
action is preserved. As of January 8, 2018 OAWP has held 72 actions.
On December 14, 2017, OAWP began discussions with the Department's
Executive Secretary to begin providing oversight of OSC's referred
disclosures. OAWP is working on value-added processes and procedures to
ensure all OSC disclosures are investigated and resolved appropriately.
OAWP is also working closely with OSC to ensure whistleblower
retaliation cases are investigated and employees are protected.
OAWP is evaluating methods, procedures, and information technology
solutions for the systematic recording, tracking, reviewing, and
confirming implementation of recommendations from audits and
investigations carried out by the Office of Inspector General, Medical
Inspector, Special Counsel, and the Comptroller General of the United
States. Also being evaluated are the technological requirements for
analyzing data produced by OAWP and the Office of Inspector General's
telephone hotlines and whistleblower disclosures in order to identify
trends and reports to the Secretary.
Since establishment, OAWP has been receiving, reviewing, and
investigating allegations of misconduct brought against senior
executives; employees in a confidential, policy-determining or policy-
advocating position; and supervisors; when the allegation involves
whistleblower retaliation. As of January 8, 2018 OAWP has completed 77
investigations involving 149 persons of interest. OAWP's current
inventory is 139 investigations involving 228 persons of interest.
appeals reform
The Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017,
enacted on August 23, 2017, is the most significant statutory change in
decades affecting VA claims in the appeals process. It provided much
needed reform for Veterans, and VA is committed to the law's full
implementation.
VA developed an implementation plan, which was collaboratively
prepared by the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) and the Veterans
Benefits Administration (VBA) with input from other components of VA
involved in the implementation of the Veterans Appeals Improvement and
Modernization Act. VA initiated this plan immediately after the law's
enactment, and fully expects to implement the new claims and appeals
process by February 2019. VA is utilizing the 18-month period to
promulgate regulations, establish procedures, hire and train personnel,
implement information technology system changes, conduct outreach in
order to train stakeholders on implementation of the new law, and
gather data for trends analyses and metrics reporting. Due to the
magnitude and scope of the statutory changes, VA is using a governance
structure to oversee and document appeals modernization implementation
and using dedicated project management experts to institute key project
management tools and deliverables. To track implementation progress,
the plan includes timelines, interim goals and milestones, risk
mitigation strategies, reporting requirements, and deadlines that were
established to ensure timely execution.
VA has also undertaken enterprise-wide efforts to modernize the
appeals process through improvements in technology. As part of this
effort, information technology funds were used to develop and optimize
paperless functionality in VA appeals processing. With Fiscal Year (FY)
2017 IT funding, VA began a multi-phase process of enhancing appeals
functionality in the paperless environment. Initial key appeals-
specific functionality in the paperless environment will focus on
seamless integration of systems, and key accountability and work
efficiency features. Digital Service at the VA (DSVA) launched Reader
at the Board in November 2017, is working with the Board to launch
enhanced appeals on Vets.gov appeals by March 2018, and will begin
testing Caseflow at the Board in the second quarter of 2018 with
subsequent BVA-related enhancements and additional user groups.
The Board is currently on pace to produce over 81,000 decisions
during FY 2018 which would represent a historic level of production. In
FY 2018, the Board will also gain efficiencies by issuing a new
decision template in February 2018, exploring new case review
techniques throughout the spring and summer of 2018 and allowing
delivery of decisions in close proximity to a Veteran's hearing
beginning in February 2018. The Board will begin to train all staff on
the new appeals process in April 2018, and outreach training with
Veterans Service Organizations in the summer of 2018.
The Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act will also
permit VA to test assumptions in the implementation of a new claims
appeals system. Accordingly, VA has decided to carry out a pilot
program during the implementation period, the Rapid Appeals
Modernization Program (RAMP). The program, which was launched on
November 1, 2017, allows eligible participants with pending disability
compensation appeals in VBA the voluntary option to have their
decisions reviewed in the higher-level or supplemental claim review
lanes outlined in the new law. RAMP provides Veterans early access to
the benefits of the new system, while also allowing VA to better
position itself for full implementation in February 2019. Since
disability compensation-related appeals account for the vast majority
of all pending appeals, the program allows most Veterans with pending
compensation benefit appeals to participate.
VA will use the data collected during RAMP to create a capacity
model based upon actual data. During this program, VA will gather data
and conduct trends analyses on aspects of Veterans' behavior, to
include their decision to opt--in to the new system, employee
productivity, processing timeliness, and inventory measures. VA will
use that data to assist in developing future resource requirements as
part of the annual budget process. VA intends to update the model when
actual data can be used to replace projected data, when assumptions are
shown to be no longer accurate, or based on any change in resources
resulting from annual budget appropriations.
With RAMP, VA has already made great strides toward implementing
the new process; for instance, DSVA was able to support VA to design
the Caseflow Intake application as a solution for managing Veterans'
elections to participate in the RAMP process using agile development
technology. In addition, after garnering input from Veterans Service
Organizations, VA deployed and is in the process of refining a more
detailed decision notice for compensation appeals, as well as the RAMP
election notice. Furthermore, with the implementation of RAMP, VA is
documenting enhancements to VBMS that allow higher-level adjudicators
to capture duty to assist error data.
forever gi bill
VA has taken significant steps in the five months since the Colmery
Act was enacted to implement thirteen provisions that were effective
immediately, so that Veterans and beneficiaries could take advantage of
their expanded benefits. In early November, VA notified nearly 8,000
beneficiaries that they may be potentially eligible for restoration of
entitlement under a Special Application provision. To date (as of
January 5, 2018), VA has received and processed close to 600
applications and restored over 3,500 months of entitlement to students,
granting them the opportunity to continue to pursue their academic and
education goals. VA is sending an explanatory letter and choice of
election form to almost 3,200 individuals who lost their eligibility to
the Reserve Educational Assistance Program (REAP), but now, because of
the Colmery Act, can elect to have their qualifying active duty service
periods credited toward establishing eligibility under the Post-9/11 GI
Bill Program.
The most notable and recognized change to the GI Bill benefit by
the Colmery Act is the removal of the 15-year time limitation for
Veterans who transitioned out of the military after January 1, 2013,
and eligible dependents, to use their Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits. As of
December 20, 2017, all newly issued GI Bill Certificates of Eligibility
and manually processed award letters are updated to notify eligible
beneficiaries that they no longer have an expiration date to use their
GI Bill benefit. By the end of January 2018, VA will have sent an email
notification to over half a million Post-9/11 GI Bill beneficiaries
informing them that they can now use their remaining entitlement when
the time is right for them and their families.
An extensive outreach and promotional campaign is well underway to
ensure that all Veterans and beneficiaries are aware of the Colmery
Act's enhancements to the GI Bill. VA's Facebook posts on the Colmery
Act including those related to the permanent authorization of the work-
study allowance have reached almost half a million individuals, a
Twitter Town Hall received 173,000 views and 1,800 engagements, and VA
has sent multiple mass emails to over 1 million recipients to amplify
its communications platform for the Colmery Act. During the
December 12, 2017, Forever GI Bill hearing by the House Committee on
Veterans' Affairs, Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity, VA live-
tweeted pertinent information to be transparent and share news in real
time. In late November 2017, VBA's Deputy Under Secretary for Economic
Opportunity conducted interviews with 23 radio and TV stations reaching
an audience of over 3.5 million. Additionally, VA has briefed
stakeholders ranging from School Certifying Officials to Veterans
Service Organizations to encourage their involvement and support in
getting the word out about the Forever GI Bill.
VA is working closely with State Approving Agencies (SAAs) on
changes that impact them because of the Colmery Act and has notified
SAAs that they may now authorize independent study programs at certain
educational institutions, like career and technical education schools.
SAAs and VA are collaborating to redesign compliance reviews for
oversight purposes, and VA has allocated increased SAA funding for FY
2018.
VA will deliver by March 1, 2018 to Congress an implementation plan
outlining IT system improvements to maximize the automation of
educational claims processing, and VA's Digital Services team has
partnered with Education Service to collect priority enrollment
information from schools for display on the GI Bill Comparison Tool.
A few provisions of the Colmery Act already aligned with policies
and procedures in effect. Examples include codification of the
VetSuccess on Campus program, allowing Veterans participating in the
Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment program to extend eligibility
if called to active duty in certain cases, and providing School
Certifying Officials additional flexibility when a course start date
does not align with that of an academic term.
A great deal of work remains to be done with 18 provisions slated
to go in effect on August 1, 2018, including sections 107 and 501.
These sections change the way VA pays monthly housing stipends by
aligning payment to the location where students physically attend the
majority of their classes and removing the exemption to the Department
of Defense's one percent reduction to housing allowance. While VA's
Office of Information and Technology has committed to implementing an
IT solution for these two critical sections, it is resource challenged
in balancing efforts related to the remaining 20 Colmery Act provisions
with IT needs and the overall goal to decommission the antiquated
Benefits Delivery Network, which is the system that currently handles
much of Education claims processing and payments. With this
consideration in mind, VA is optimistic that all 22 provisions with an
IT requirement will have an IT solution in place by the end of FY 2019.
To mitigate any impact to Veterans and beneficiaries using their
education benefits, by May 2018, VBA will have hired 200 temporary
field employees, and reallocated senior staff and experienced claims
processors to specialized teams to account for increased workload and
new programs related to the Colmery Act. VA will continue to regularly
assess workload demands and resource needs, and adjust its staffing
levels in order to properly deliver education benefits to Veterans and
beneficiaries.
In the coming months, VA will continue planning and working toward
finding IT solutions and revising and developing sensible policies and
procedures for implementation. VA will stay committed to its ambitious
outreach campaign to include targeted messaging and engagement to
thousands of Purple Heart recipients, who starting August 1, 2018 will
be entitled to Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits at the 100-percent benefit
level for up to 36 months, regardless of their time in service.
Additionally, VA will communicate to Reservists and National Guard
members their expanded access to GI Bill benefits as these individuals
will now be able to use time spent on authorized medical care and
certain orders as creditable toward GI Bill entitlement. VA remains
steadfast in its effort to raise awareness of the Colmery Act's broad
impact to Veterans and beneficiaries so they are given the opportunity
to take advantage of their expanded and enhanced benefits.
workforce improvements
VA is making progress in implementing the provisions of Title II
(Personnel Matters) of the VA Choice and Quality Employment Act of 2017
to improve hiring authorities of the Department. Two of the most
critical focal points of this title are: 1) Section 210--Plan to hire
directors of medical centers; and 2) Section 213--Expansion of direct-
hiring authority. We have developed and implemented a plan for hiring
highly qualified directors for each of our medical centers. As a
result, we continue to make progress in staffing these positions.
During calendar year 2017, we reduced the time to hire Medical Center
Directors (MCDs) by about 23%. Currently, 125 of 140 MCD positions are
filled. Of the remaining 15 positions under recruitment, 10 have a
potential hire identified and are either going through the OPM approval
process or have an established entrance on duty date.
Consistent with Section 213 of the Act, we are collaborating with
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) to expand direct-hire
authority (DHA). We have submitted a formal request to OPM to receive
DHA for 15 occupations because of our urgent critical hiring need to
meet mission requirements. This need is in direct support of the
Administration's charge to improve the quality of and access to care
for our Nation's Veterans and their dependents. We must use options
such as DHA to assist in meeting the unique recruitment challenges that
we face over the next few years.
community care and funding for choice
Demand for community care remains high, with over 32.7 million
outpatient medical care appointments completed in FY 2017. In FY 2017,
VA community care appointments for outpatient medical care were
approximately 36% of all such appointments provided through VA, a 4
percentage point increase from FY 2016.
Over 1.1 million Veterans utilized the Veterans Choice Program in
FY 2017, an increase of about 35,000 Veterans from FY 2016. Outpatient
appointments for VA medical care in the Choice Program comprised
approximately 50% of all such VA community care completed appointments
in FY 2017.
In August 2017, with Choice Program poised to run out of funding
and no successor program yet in place, Congress appropriated $2.1
billion in emergency funding to continue the Choice Program. In
December 2017, Congress included an additional $2.1 billion for the
Choice Program in the continuing resolution package while discussions
continue regarding the future of VA community care.
Although more still can be done, VA continues to make progress
toward business process improvements to streamline the delivery of
community care for Veterans. We have implemented tools to share health
information, when permitted by law, with community providers via
encrypted email, through a web-based application, as well as through
industry standard health information exchanges. We have introduced
tools for our staff to ensure standardized authorizations for community
care, including specification of the services to be provided. We
continue to work toward awarding new community care network contracts
to purchase community care.
Earlier this month, VA announced a series of immediate actions to
improve the timeliness of payments to community providers. The actions
will address the issue of delayed payments head-on and produce
sustainable fixes that solve ongoing payment issues that affect
Veterans, community providers and other VA partners.
On January 9, 2018, VA published a rulemaking that allows it to
process claims for reimbursement of the reasonable costs of emergency
treatment for non-service-connected conditions when only a portion of
those costs were paid by a Veteran's other health insurance. These
regulations will authorize VA to reimburse emergency treatment costs in
more instances.
In October and November 2017, VA submitted the Veteran Coordinated
Access & Rewarding Experiences (CARE) Bill to Congress. Veteran CARE is
Veteran-centric and focuses on Veteran clinical needs. VA appreciates
that Congress has developed legislation which includes many of the
provisions included in CARE. We need Congress to pass legislation to
give Veterans a system that works and that meets or exceeds the best
the private sector has to offer. This is about building a VA that
Veterans choose for their care--we want Veterans to Choose VA. The
Administration's bill included $4 billion in spending authority, fully
offset, to ensure a smooth transition to the new, consolidated
community care program when implemented in FY 2019. We continue to urge
the inclusion of offsets against any new mandatory spending to promote
fiscally responsible stewardship of the taxpayer dollar.
Consistent with the Administration's proposal, VA believes that the
future of community care should include the following tenets:
Improve Veterans' choice of community providers in meeting
their healthcare needs.
Simplify Veteran eligibility with a focus on Veterans'
clinical needs.
Pave the way for consolidation of all community care
programs.
Add convenient care benefits.
Set timely payment standards.
Include provider agreements with flexible payment rates
that streamline how we pay for care, including care in State Veterans
Homes.
Permit medical records sharing in the network when needed
for Veteran care.
And address clinical staffing shortages through expansion
of graduate medical education and by improving VA hiring and retention
of staff.
disability compensation claims backlog
VA is committed to providing Veterans with the care and services
they have earned and deserve. For the eighth consecutive year, VBA has
completed over a million disability claims and anticipates completing a
record number of claims in FY 2018.
The VBA's disability claims backlog continues to fluctuate at a
relatively steady state between approximately 70,000 and 85,000 claims.
VBA ended the calendar year with just over 80,000 backlog claims
pending and is committed to reducing the backlog further. In the past,
VBA focused claims processing resources on significant investments in
staffing and overtime, as our claims volume far exceeded the relative
timelines of claims actionability. However, as VBA has reduced the
pending claims inventory, we remain focused on continuous deployment of
incremental process improvements and technology initiatives to identify
actionable inventory which will help further reduce our backlog and
increase the timeliness of claims processing.
VBA's primary intent within backlog reduction is three-fold:
ensuring the current system works efficiently by evaluating throughput
metrics, ensuring efficient staff utilization by confirming appropriate
actions are completed, and identifying additional actionable workload
through process reviews. Our throughput metrics make sure our
workloads, especially backlog claims, are processed timely and
efficiently. Additionally, VBA has initiated focused quality reviews to
detect human errors, found potential system-wide and employee-level
improvements in initial claim actions, and identified procedural
improvements. We also continue to proactively deploy effective workload
management practices and explore other process enhancements.
VBA is similarly looking to reduce backlog via the expansion of
VBA's contracted medical exam authority. Beginning in FY 2017, Congress
granted VA the discretion to expand the Contract Medical Disability
Examination (MDE) program from 15 regional offices to as many as the
Secretary considers appropriate. The main purpose of this expanded
contract Compensation and Pension (C&P) exam authority is to provide
timely exams for Veterans residing in both the US and abroad. Contract
exam expansion enables VBA to supplement Veterans Health
Administration's (VHA's) internal C&P exam capacity to deliver faster
claims decisions to Veterans and reduce the number of claims pending
over 125 days.
decision ready claims
As part of VA's continued efforts to improve Veterans' experience
with the disability claims process, VA has developed the Decision Ready
Claims (DRC) initiative--an extension of Fully Developed Claims. DRCs
are claims for disability compensation submitted with the help of
accredited VSOs, who certify that all supporting evidence (e.g. medical
exam, military service records, etc.) is included with the claim at the
time of submission to VA. Veterans who choose to submit their claim
under DRC can expect to receive a decision within 30 days from the time
VA receives the formal claim. DRC enables VBA to focus resources on
reducing claims pending over 125 days as well as improving timeliness.
In addition to claims for increased disability compensation
(commonly known as claims for increase), as of December 2017, DRC was
expanded to certain claims for direct service connection, presumptive
service connection, secondary service connection, and Dependency and
Indemnity Compensation. Transitioning servicemembers can use the DRC
process to file pre-discharge claims less than 90 days from leaving the
military.
infrastructure-28 leases
VA is pleased to report that the 28 leases authorized in the 2017
Choice Act are moving forward expeditiously. VA is utilizing a
streamlined set of contract documents that more closely align with
General Services Administration (GSA's) model in procuring these
leases. VA is also adjusting its physical security, sustainability, and
construction standards to more closely align with other Federal
agencies, as well as private-sector healthcare, to increase speed to
market, and cost-savings. Finally, VA is leveraging an enhanced
partnership with GSA to procure 7 of the 28 leases.
The following seven (7) leases are being procured through the VA-
GSA partnership: Pittsburgh, PA; Hampton Roads, VA; Tampa-Lakeland FL;
Tampa, FL; Corpus Christi, TX, Denver, CO, and Rapid City, SD. GSA is
reviewing the requirements packages and is in the process of assigning
staff for execution of these projects.
The remaining 21 leases are being procured by VA through its Office
of Construction & Facilities Management, Office of Real Property, using
a delegation of GSA's leasing authority. All of these projects have
started in earnest. All advertisements for the Choice Act leases under
procurement by VA are slated for release by the end of Spring 2018,
with issuance of the VA Request for Lease Proposals in the Summer/Fall
2018, and award slated for Spring/Summer 2019.
electronic health record
On December 13, 2017, a strategic pause was announced in the
Electronic Health Record (EHR) acquisition process; the purpose of the
pause is to conduct an additional and external assessment of national
interoperability language contained in the Request for Proposal that
would ultimately support an EHR contract award.
MITRE Corporation was selected to coordinate and lead an
independent assessment of the aforementioned contract language. The
independent review was held on January 5, 2018, and consisted of a
diverse, distinguished and highly respected group of Clinicians, Chief
Information Officers and Executives, well-versed in national
interoperability challenges/issues, from across the healthcare
industry.
MITRE is in the process of capturing the recommendations and
comments provided during the January 5, 2018 interoperability forum and
will submit a final report to the VA Secretary and other stakeholders
for review by the end of January 2018.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to provide
you with VA's progress on implementing the legislation in these
important areas. This concludes my testimony, and I welcome any
questions that you or other Members of the Committee may have.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you, Secretary Shulkin. I
appreciate those remarks very much, and I hope the Ranking
Member is coming. Is he still coming? [Pause.]
He is. OK.
I will start--you can start the clock on me. Let me make
somewhat of what may appear to sound like an announcement at
the beginning of the hearing. The Secretary and I have been in
a lot of conversations over the past month or so, and I want to
thank him for his stated support for what the Committee passed
out of Committee. As we all know, we had a 14-to-1 vote, and as
we all know we had some differences of opinion on the Veteran's
Choice bill and the Care bill that we passed out of Committee.
I did everything I could to try to bring about unanimous common
ground, but I did not get that totally done.
So, I made a phone call to the White House and talked with
the President, and, I believe, if I am not mistaken, the
Secretary was on that phone call, as well as a number of other
people of interest. The President--and this is my repeating
what I remember him saying to me--he said, ``You are all good
guys. You have got good solutions on both sides. You all see if
you cannot work it out.'' We tried to get together a couple of
meetings to work it out, but that did not materialize for one
reason or another.
My goal, as Chairman of the Committee, is to find a
positive resolution no matter what problem I confront, and not
because it comes from my wisdom, but my persistence to see to
it we keep our eye on the goal. Of course, the goal is choice
for our veterans, better quality health care, and a more
accountable VA.
It is my understanding the President and the Administration
is going to send our Committee, in the next couple of days,
some suggestions that they are looking at, that might help us
bring about a resolution. I intend to work with Senator Moran,
the other Members of the Committee, and the full Committee, to
see if we cannot do that, so we can take to the floor a
unanimously-supported bill, or a bill that at least everybody
had their chance to support and can have their chance to amend
on the floor.
One way or another, it is time our veterans had a veterans'
policy that serve their choices, gave them the choices they
need, funded them so they were not subject to the last-minute
``we are out of money'' routines, which this bill does, by the
way. We consolidate the stovepipes from seven to one. Correct,
Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Chairman Isakson. To get those things done that we have to
do.
So, I want to announce up front that that is forthcoming.
When it gets here I will get it to the Committee, we will begin
work on it, and try and get ourselves in the regular order to
find a bill that we can unanimously get to the floor, one way
or another, and if we cannot, I then will have known I made
every effort to do so. I will do everything I can to take it in
regular order and have it debated and fully amended on the
floor, if that is necessary.
Whatever the case, our veterans deserve the best of us; the
best of us is to pass a bill that we can agree on, and the best
of us is to find the common ground to set up that meeting. So,
I intend to do that and I appreciated the input the
administration has given us, and I look forward to continuing
to work with them.
I am going to extend--and I have got a little time left.
You know, there are three or four things I want to talk about,
Mr. Secretary. One thing that concerns me deeply is the four
positions that remain unfilled at the Department. One is your
former position. We plucked you out of VA leadership to become
the leader of VA. That was a good idea. The bad idea is it
still does not have anybody in your place, where you were in
terms of Under Secretary of Health.
The Assistant Secretary of Accountability and Whistleblower
Protection is not in place. That person needs to be in place.
The Under Secretary for Benefits, which is a critical position
at the VA, needs to be in place. The Assistant Secretary for
Information Technology, which is absolutely critical,
particular with the Cerner technology coming in, has got to be
filled somewhere sooner rather than later.
I have asked these questions privately and have looked--and
I know you are trying. But this is one of those things where
we--A for effort is not good enough. We have got to find a way
to get the best people in the United States of America in these
disciplines, working for the Veterans Administration and
working for our veterans.
Can you tell us what progress you have made and what you
are doing on those four posts, in particular?
Secretary Shulkin. Yes. Let me give you a quick update on
that. For the CIO candidate, we have made a selection and that
person is now going through a vetting process at the White
House. Our indications are that that is moving along smoothly.
For the Under Secretary of Benefits we had a commission--as
you know, by law we need to form a commission. They selected
three candidates. We made our top choice. That person withdrew
and we have now gone on to our second choice--fortunately, all
three candidates are excellent candidates--and that person has
also gone through vetting at the White House, and they
understand the critical nature of this.
On the Under Secretary of Health, we have--this is now
going to be our third commission. We have had two commissions
prior that did not select a candidate. The third commission
will be chaired by Deputy Secretary Bowman on January 25 and
26. We have 11 candidates who have applied for that. We hope to
have a successful selection out of that third commission
process by January 26, of which we would then forward three
names on to the President for consideration, that would go
through vetting.
On the Assistant Secretary for Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection, Mr. O'Rourke is the executive in
charge of the Accountability and Whistleblower Protection
Office. He is here today.
Chairman Isakson. That prompts me to tell you what happened
this morning in the HELP Committee. We had testimony on
disasters and preparedness, and out of the blue one of the
chief people in charge of that for our country made a point to
compliment the Veterans Administration and what the veterans
hospitals and medical personnel did to help in the rescue of
senior citizens in Houston during the terrible flood that we
had, which magnified, for me, the importance of remembering
that the VA health care system is a huge delivery system that
serves, by the nature of its definition, our veterans, a more
senior population. I wanted to compliment you and the doctors
on what they did to earn that praise, because that is a real
good thing to have.
Secretary Shulkin. Thank you.
Chairman Isakson. From a standpoint of accountability, I
want to see some accountability with regard to the appeals
process. I read your report and I read your remarks. I know you
are working on a demonstration project on appeals. Is that
correct?
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Chairman Isakson. What timetable do you have, are you
working toward, to move away from a demonstration project to a
project that is fact-of-the-matter; exactly how we are going to
handle these appeals in the future, to stop the backlog from
growing and begin to dissipate the backlog?
Secretary Shulkin. Well, today the backlog stands at
470,000 appeals, so we have a lot of work to do. Because of
your legislation, we are now implementing a new process, of
course. That will be fully implemented in early 2019, but we
have actually started to make major improvements already.
This year, we are on track to do 81,000 appeals. That would
be 30,000 more than last year. At this period right now, of
this fiscal year, we are at 21,000 appeals. That is 10,000 more
than this time last year. So, we are getting better and faster,
and we have brought on new staff.
Second, we have begun--and this was actually because of the
feedback that we got the last time that we were together--we
have begun to offer veterans now the choice, in their legacy
appeals, to opt into the new process, so they do not have to
wait. We have had 3 percent of veterans opt in. These are
people with long appeals who opted into--this is the pilot
project--the new project. And, here is the good news. They are
getting their decisions within 30 days, and 75 percent of those
decisions are going in favor of the veteran.
So, it is actually a pretty good deal. Instead of waiting 5
or 6 years, if they opt in for a 30-day decision, 75 percent
approval rate, which is beginning to address those legacy
appeals. I am hoping, through our veteran service organizations
and through your offices, we will encourage more veterans to
consider--because this is an elective option--to choose to opt
into the new process. They will get faster decisions and we
hope accurate, good decisions for them.
Chairman Isakson. My time is up, but as it ends I want to
say this. I know our VSOs are represented here today. We did
not ask them to testify because this was Dr. Shulkin's day. The
VSOs are going to have their chance to address the entire House
and Senate Committees in a few weeks----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Chairman Isakson [continuing]. In the Dirksen Building, in
our annual report, and we look forward to their input.
Yet, I hope the VSOs and the agencies will do everything
they can to disseminate the fact that our veterans who have had
pending appeals are given the option to opt out and go into the
new, modernized program. Three percent of them have done so,
and those that have done so have gotten a response in 30 days.
That is a light-years improvement in terms of appeals, and I
commend you on what you started. Let us help him finish it by
getting our veterans a timely appeal answer.
Senator Moran.
STATEMENT OF HON. JERRY MORAN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM KANSAS
Senator Moran. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Let me
start with just a--well, let me first say that I am going to
depart our hearing as soon as my questions have been answered,
and I would pay honor in this setting to Senator Bob Dole, who
we will all be in the Capitol to honor today. In Kansas, and
perhaps the country, there is no more esteemed public servant,
but in my view, while his public service was tremendous, his
military service, and then his commitment to those with
disabilities and the veteran community is exemplary. No one
meets that standard, so I pay a tribute to Senator Dole.
Let me just raise a few points and I am going to make a
comment and ask a question, Mr. Secretary. First, I want to
note that your cancellation of the contract for Region 4, for
Community Care, troubles me. I understand that Senator Heller
is also going to raise this topic with you today. You have a
request from the Subcommittee on Appropriations to explain what
happened in that regard, and I look forward to that answer.
[The information requested during the hearing follows:]
Response to Request Arising During the Hearing by Hon. Jerry Moran and
Hon. Dean Heller to Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs
Please provide information regarding the reasoning for the
cancellation of the Region 4 CCN contract
Response. VA received proposals in response to the Community Care
Network (CCN) solicitation on June 30, 2017 and performed evaluations
in accordance with the criteria established in the solicitation. VA
took the following four factors into consideration for award decisions
for CCN Region 4: (1) Technical, (2) Past Performance, (3)
Socioeconomic Concerns, and (4) Price. The evaluations resulted in the
need to conduct negotiations. After negotiations were held, VA received
the final proposal revisions on December 14, 2017 and immediately began
conducting evaluations of these revisions. Award decisions must result
in a contract that represents the ``best value'' to VA. After
evaluations were completed, it was determined that final proposal
revisions for Region 4 did not provide the ``best value'' to VA, all
factors considered, or for our taxpayers. VA amended the solicitation
to remove Region 4 since a contract award was not possible.
Senator Moran. Second, I will be submitting several
questions for the record. I am interested in knowing the VA's
efforts in regard to full implementation of the Toxic Exposure
Research Act, something that Senator Blumenthal and I sponsored
and became law in December 2016.
[The information requested during the hearing follows:]
Response to Request Arising During the Hearing by Hon. Jerry Moran to
Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs
Please provide an update on VA's full implementation of the toxic
exposure research act (PL 114-315)
Response. VA, through the Post Deployment Health Services office,
has contracted with the National Academy of Science to meet the
requirements specified in section 632 of the law. This consensus report
is expected to be completed by NAM by early 2019. As to the research
oriented Federal Advisory Committee and accompanying research, as
outlined in section 633 and 634 respectively, VA has yet to form the
charter and begin work as these next steps would be contingent upon the
findings of the report.
Senator Moran. Finally, you have had conversations with me
about electronic health records, originally about a
reprogramming. Now I see that there are other reasons that you
are not proceeding, and I am concerned about what is taking
place here. I have sent you a letter which I would ask you to
respond to.
Then let me talk about the topic that the Chairman
mentioned, in regard to the bill that passed the Committee. I
want to direct this not to the Chairman but to you, Secretary
Shulkin. I have been working closely, in my view, with the
Chairman and the Ranking Member, other Members of this
Committee, and those in the VA that you designated for me to
work with, and with the White House, to make certain that the
future of Community Care for veterans works and works well for
veterans and the providers who serve those veterans.
It is of utmost importance to me to reform Choice and to
pass the right policies that will work for veterans in
accessing health care that they deserve. It is also critical
that Members of Congress continue to push for a change in the
VA culture and to promote implementation of policies directed
by Congress instead of the VA often narrowing the scope and
thwarting the intent of Congress. This is, in fact, the
conversation that you and I had, almost exclusively, during
your confirmation hearing in February 2017.
Pushing for a culture that transforms the VA, in my view,
we have to hold you and other VA leaders accountable, and in my
view too often commitments and pledges that are made to this
Committee and to individual Members regarding legislative
efforts on behalf of our veterans, the follow-up, the
experiences are typical of what I have found with
implementation of congressional past legislation. The VA
changes course and it thwarts the intent of Congress. You and I
had this conversation during your confirmation hearing.
On numerous occasions, you and I have met in my office, we
have had numerous telephone conversations, and in those
meetings, and in those telephone conversations, you expressed
support for access standards in the eligibility of Choice
reform. In every instance, in my view, you led me to believe
that you and I were on the same page. What I have--what I
remember you saying is this: the need for specificity in
legislation is there, and then I quote you, ``If it is left to
the reg process, nothing in the VA will change.'' You told me
that.
I learned, though, that you have said something quite
different to the Chairman and to the Ranking Member. I am of
the opinion that our inability to reach an agreement is, in
significant part, related to your ability to speak out of both
sides of your mouth--doubletalk. My understanding is that
others have had this experience and there is a shared
frustration about the circumstance.
So, Mr. Secretary, you have been sworn to give testimony
today. I am looking for a straightforward answer. A yes or no
would be good. Do you believe that the eligibility criteria to
determine if a veteran can receive care in their community
ought to be explicitly linked to the access standards? Yes or
no?
Secretary Shulkin. Of course, I believe that eligibility
criteria should be explicitly linked to access standards, and I
believe that those access standards need to be developed by the
VA.
Senator Moran. Mr. Chairman, let me ask the Secretary, do
you support the access standards that are in our bill? You have
told me that. True?
Secretary Shulkin. I support the access standards that are
in the bill that the Senate committee passed 14 to 1.
Senator Moran. Those access standards are very similar. The
issue is whether they are then tied to eligibility. Why would
you not tie the access standards to eligibility? Why have
access standards if they do not matter who is eligible for
Community Care?
Secretary Shulkin. Well, Senator Moran, first of all, I
applaud your efforts to get this right. I think it is grossly
unfair to make the characterizations that you have made of me,
and I am disappointed that you would do that. But, I think that
you have--I do not disagree with where you want to get to. I do
believe that it is our job to give veterans more choice about
how and where they get their health care.
I think the issue is that I am trying to do this in a way
that will work for veterans and work for VA. I have seen, as
you said before, Congress passed legislation that makes it more
complicated and that makes it not work for veterans, and what I
am trying to do is give you my best advice about how this
works. The best way that I know how to do it is the way that
the Committee, 14 to 1, passed their vote, and I do believe
that because of your efforts we can make those eligibility
criteria, those access standards, clearer to veterans so they
understand it--that should be our goal--and then make sure that
they do have choices based upon their clinical needs of their
condition. That is what you do in a health care system. That is
what I am driving to get at.
I do not believe that we are at a faraway position here. We
are now talking about the best way to implement what we all
want for veterans, which is the best care and giving them the
most choice that they can get in that care.
Senator Moran. Well, Mr. Secretary, I am sorry that you
take--you are disappointed in my approach to this hearing
today. I chose my words intentionally.
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Moran. I believe it to be the case. I think you
tell me one thing and you tell others something else, and that
is incompatible with our ability to reach an agreement and to
work together. I intend to be a Member of Congress who holds
you accountable for what you tell me.
I hope the next step is--the Chairman indicated that the
White House was sending language. I certainly would welcome a
conversation, a discussion among the Members of this Committee,
the Ranking Member and the Chairman, the White House, and you.
This is, as you say, not that difficult, but it is an important
issue. It is not one that is just a matter of a few words. It
matters in the result that we get for accountability at the VA.
Mr. Chairman, thank for the opportunity to question the
witness.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you for your attendance. I now want
to do two things. First of all, I want to echo your praise for
Senator Dole. A great American, a great American hero. A guy
whose campaign I ran in the Southeastern United States in 1988,
I might add. I have always been proud of it. I kind of got the
political itch because of it. He is a great humanitarian and a
great human being.
I appreciate the Secretary and Senator Moran's candor in
their feelings about what we are trying to do. What I am trying
to do, as Chairman, is get us to a point where our dirty
laundry is clean, it is folded, it is in the cabinets, and what
we are doing works for the veteran. You do that when everybody
gets their chance to have their say, when every fact is on the
table, and we are all willing to work together. That is what
this is all about, that is what we are going to do, and what I
hope comes from the White House will be a catalyst in the next
few days, which is why I wanted to tell everybody about that. I
found out about it today. You found out about it today. So,
when we get it in a couple of days you will get notice from me
as to when we have the hearing.
Thank you, Senator Moran, for your input.
Senator Moran. Mr. Chairman, I welcome that.
Chairman Isakson. Please tell the Dole family we all get
there if I shut my mouth. So----
Senator Moran. Thank you.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you.
Senator Tester, you have got a choice. You can answer
questions or you can go to opening statement, or, as big as you
are, you can do whatever you want. [Laughter.]
HON. JON TESTER, RANKING MEMBER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MONTANA
Senator Tester. No. That is all right. I will just ask some
questions. The opening statement will be for later, and I
apologize to the Members. I usually kick it over to you, but I
have another committee I have got to get to very quickly.
[The prepared statement of Senator Jon Tester follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Jon Tester, Ranking Member,
U.S. Senator from Montana
Secretary Shulkin, thank you for being here. Mr. Chairman, thank
you for your dedication to our Nation's veterans. Largely due to your
leadership, this Committee had a historic year in terms of the number
and scope of bills we've had signed into law. A great deal of credit
also goes to each member of Committee, as well as the tremendous
advocacy of the VSOs in attendance and across the country.
Mr. Secretary, last year, you came before this Committee and made a
dramatic and urgent appeal for us to modernize the appeals process. We
acted.
You came to us and said you needed more tools to hold bad actors at
the VA accountable, and to protect whistleblowers. We acted.
You came to us multiple times when the Choice Program was running
out of money. We acted. And then we acted again. And then we acted
again.
For months, you also came to us and pitched ideas about how to
scrap the Choice Program. And how to replace it with a community care
program that puts veterans and their doctors in charge of where to
receive care. We turned those ideas into a bill that passed this
Committee 14-1 and with the support of 26 VSOs. And I don't want to let
this moment pass without saying in the clearest terms how disappointed
I am that you did not publicly announce your support for a bill on
which we collaborated for months.
If VA is not going to publicly advocate for its legislative
priorities, you should not expect this Committee or this Senator to do
so.
Nevertheless, I am still committed to working with you and this
administration to address the continued challenges of veterans and
their families. Those challenges are daunting. They require action, not
words. And they require us all working together.
In recent months, the VA and the Administration have rolled out a
number of initiatives, most of which I have agreed with, but many of
which have included little or no substance. We can help you make them
successful, but there's little we can do if we're given no notice and
no information.
And I'm afraid VA will continue to spin its wheels until you
address the dramatic staffing vacancies that impact everything from the
delivery of health care to the safeguarding of veterans' personal
information. This is a fight I have waged for years. Nearly every time
we have spoken, or I have spoken with your predecessors of both
parties, I have asked for specific things that can be done to help
recruitment and retention efforts.
And nearly every time, I have delivered--whether it was more
flexibility, additional resources or additional authorities.
Yet here we are--somewhere between treading water and drowning. And
veterans in places like Montana can't access the timely care they need
and have earned.
These vacancies must be a higher priority for you and the
Department. Otherwise, VA won't be able to fulfill its mission, and
will setting itself up for failure as it moves forward on
implementation of the many reforms that have come out of this
Committee. We have a lot of ground to cover, and I look forward to
getting started. Thank you.
Senator Tester. First of all, welcome, Mr. Secretary. When
it came to the Caring for Our Veterans bill, we had consulted
with the VSOs, and, in fact, got support of 26 of the VSOs. We
actually consulted with you and the VA to make sure this stuff
would work, including Members on this Committee and members off
this Committee.
In your written testimony you said the VA believes that the
future of Community Care should include eight tenets. Those
tenets are: improve veterans' choice of community providers in
meeting their health care needs; to simplify veterans'
eligibility with a focus on veterans' clinical needs; to pave
the way for consolidation of all Community Care programs; add
convenient care benefits; set timely payment standards; include
provider agreements with flexible payment rates and streamline
how we pay for care, including care in State veterans' homes;
permit medical record-sharing in the network when needed for
veterans' care; and addresses clinical staffing shortages
through extension of graduate medical education and by
improving VA hiring and retention of staff.
I would just tell you that the Caring for Our Veterans Act
checks every one of those boxes, and it checks every one of
those boxes because when we drafted it we had those tenets in
mind. So, I would really look forward, and I think look forward
to a strong press release in support of this bill, and I will
tell you why--because there is a certain amount of frustration,
as you can tell----
Secretary Shulkin. Of course.
Senator Tester [continuing]. From Senator Moran, the
Chairman, myself, and others on this Committee, that you have
been silent. OK?
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Tester. So, thank you.
Section 211 of the Accountability Act requires the VA to
track the usage of new authorities granted, and we have given
you a lot of new authorities----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Tester [continuing]. Over the past year, thanks to
the good work of the Chairman. When will we see this report?
Secretary Shulkin. The report was due in December 2017, so
I apologize that it is not there. The staff has had extreme
difficulty tracking what you have required in that report,
prior to the implementation of the Accountability Act.
Senator Tester. So what----
Secretary Shulkin. I have instructed them to give whatever
data they have to you and tell you what data they cannot
collect.
Senator Tester. So, when can we expect it?
Secretary Shulkin. I am going to say, is it reasonable to
ask for 2 weeks?
Senator Tester. Two weeks it is. We will hold you to it.
[The information requested during the hearing follows:]
Response to Request Arising During the Hearing by Hon. Jon Tester to
Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs
Please provide, within two weeks, a report regarding the tracking
of new authorities granted as required in section 211 of the
accountability act.
Response. The Section 211 Report did not ask for any data post
implementation of the Act. It was all tied to the 3-year period prior
to the Act (which we included in the June 30 Report to Congress on the
1st anniversary of OAWP, attached). It was broken down by categories of
713 (senior leaders) and 714 (workforce).
Attached Report
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Tester. Your predecessors have testified that
leadership includes working with underperforming employees to
make them better at their jobs, rather than just firing them.
Is that your philosophy too?
Secretary Shulkin. Yes, it is, that every good manager
works with their employees to make them better, to give them
feedback. When an employee deviates from a professional, moral
standard, sometimes you cannot coach them. Sometimes you have
to help them find----
[Overlapping speakers.]
Senator Tester. Do you believe that your leadership is
doing that within the VA?
Secretary Shulkin. Yes. Well, I think that we have room for
improvement, because when you look at our employee engagement
scores, they are not improving the way that I believe that they
should. So, we are relooking at our efforts to do that better.
Senator Tester. OK. On the Choice Bill that was passed last
August, Congress expanded your direct hiring authority for
positions for which there was a shortage of highly qualified
candidates. Am I correct that the VA has still not used this
authority to hire?
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah. When you look at--my
understanding, Senator, is that the direct hire authority as
given to us----
Senator Tester. Yep.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. For medical center
directors and network directors----
Senator Tester. Yes.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. And I think,
unintentionally, it capped the salary that we are able to offer
at a salary that is lower than what we currently offer. So, we
have not been able to utilize----
Senator Tester. OK.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. The direct hire authority
in the way that I believe it was intended to be used.
Senator Tester. So, how can that--how can that be fixed?
Secretary Shulkin. It is a very small----
Senator Tester. You can do it by rule?
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. Technical fix.
Senator Tester. Can you do it by rule?
Secretary Shulkin. No. You are going to have to do it
legislatively, but it is a very small technical change that we
have given some technical----
Senator Tester. OK. And----
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. Advice.
Senator Tester. And it gave you authority on those
positions----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Tester [continuing]. But it also gave you authority
for employees that you would deem critical.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes, and we have gone to OPM with 15
different critical occupations that they have agreed to move
forward with us on direct hire authority that I believe we will
start to implement in the next several weeks.
Senator Tester. OK. We have had the conversation before. At
a town hall meeting in Great Falls, MT, Monday, I will tell you
the first question that came up was workforce vacancies. This
is just Montana----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Tester [continuing]. I'm sorry about being self-
centered on this. I just want to tell you that we are in a
crisis. We may be in a crisis in Alaska, and we may be in a
crisis in North Carolina, and every other State, too. I do not
know that, but I can tell you in Montana, we are in a crisis.
Let me give you an example. Billings, MT, is supposed to
have seven docs in that clinic; we have got four, and two of
those are looking for another position.
Secretary Shulkin. Yep.
Senator Tester. When you overwork employees, they tend to
hit the road.
Secretary Shulkin. Yep.
Senator Tester. So, my question is, what is the problem? I
have talked to you many times. I know you are committed to
this, yet it does not seem--it seems like it is getting worse.
In fact, it does not seem like it, in my State it is getting
worse.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah. Well, in Montana, as you know, you
have an 11.2 percent turnover rate of your employees, but for
physicians it is 23 percent. That is a problem. You have a 24
percent vacancy rate for practical nurses.
Senator Tester. I have got all that.
Secretary Shulkin. So----
Senator Tester. So, what can we do to fix it?
Secretary Shulkin. Here is what we----
Senator Tester. What are you doing to fix it?
Secretary Shulkin. Here is what we are doing. First of all,
we have to hire more staff and we have to make sure that we
keep them. We have announced, for Montana, an increase of up to
$120,000 for primary care physicians in educational debt
reduction----
Senator Tester. Yes.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. For nurses--I am sorry--for
psychologists and nurse practitioners, a $10,000 hiring bonus,
and for social workers a $5,000 hiring bonus. That is a
beginning to start to address people to look at the VA as a
place to come to work. Then we have to, as you said, if we
cannot fully staff the clinic, it puts more pressure on our
current staff that are there, and so it is a vicious cycle. So,
we are working to recruit.
Senator Tester. Thank you for that, but time is of the
essence. I do not speak for Senator Rounds; he will speak for
himself on this.
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Tester. But, as you well know, there was a House
bill that was going to have a Base Realignment and Closure
(BRAC) done. They could literally shut down damn near every
facility in Montana if they did a BRAC, because we have got no
staffing.
Secretary Shulkin. Right.
Senator Tester. This is really, really, really important.
Secretary Shulkin. It is.
Senator Tester. OK.
Secretary Shulkin. It is. It is. Absolutely.
[The information requested during the hearing follows:]
Response to Request Arising During the Hearing by Hon. Jon Tester to
Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs
Please provide a list of five specific things that VA is doing
above and beyond what is currently being done to address clinical
vacancies in Montana.
Response. Montana has taken the following actions address clinical
vacancies in Montana:
1. Participation in Hiring Fairs:
a. 12/15/17: Focused hiring fair for Medical Support Assistants in
Missoula. Included on the spot interviews and tentative offers on the
spot. Currently have made 23 offers.
b. 3/21/18: Participating in Billings Job Jamboree in partnership
with Sheridan VAMC.
c. 4/15/18: Kalispell Health Expo 2018.
2. Institutionalized use/increased emphasis for hiring incentives:
a. Emphasis on the following:
Use of Recruitment and Relocation incentives
Permanent Change of Station allowances
Student Loan Repayment Program
Increased Education Debt Reduction Program funds for 2018
3. Process improvement/Reduced Hiring Bureaucracy:
a. Speeds up hiring process when vacancy identified.
4. Authorized 3 new Human Resources positions and 1 lead specifically
dedicated to recruitment in foundational services.
Senator Tester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you, Senator Tester. Let me just
say, for the record, the Ranking Member's cooperation
throughout the process of working on the Choice legislation has
been stupendous. I appreciate his help very much, and we are
going to get to the finish line in large measure because of his
support and the support of the members of his caucus as well as
ours, for this good legislation, and I appreciate it very much.
Mr. Boozman. Senator Boozman.
HON. JOHN BOOZMAN, U.S. SENATOR FROM ARKANSAS
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary, for being here. We do appreciate your hard work.
I would like to talk to you a second about a bill, the VET
TEC Act, which we were able to include in the Forever GI Bill.
It is a technical education pilot. I know that we do not have a
Deputy Under Secretary for Economic Opportunity. He has
retired. I would like to know who is going to be responsible
for implementing it and how we are doing.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Boozman. Talk a little bit more about----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah. Well----
Senator Boozman [continuing]. Who is going to fill that
spot, and again, you might also elaborate even more about how
we can help you with these really key, you know, things that
are deficient in the sense of not being able to fill your
staff.
Secretary Shulkin. Right. Well, first of all, I think you
helped a great deal with the Forever GI Bill. I think this is a
great success story of what this Committee was able to do in
2017. As you know, of the GI Bill, the Forever GI Bill, we have
enacted already 13 of 34 of the provisions. But, the one that
you are talking about, the TEC Act, which is more the STEM, the
scientific, technical training, that is going to require--that
is one of the ones that we have not yet implemented because it
is going to require some IT solutions. What we are doing is, we
have a Request for Information out now to look to how we can
get private industry to help us implement that. Otherwise, we
are going to need to build that in-house, which is going to be
more expensive.
So, we are looking for the best way to get that implemented
and committed to getting it implemented. But, on many of these,
the 34, 22 of the provisions require IT assistance.
Senator Boozman. How will you determine the courses that
are eligible, such as coding, things like that?
Secretary Shulkin. Under the TEC Act? Well, you asked who
is responsible for it. Our Acting Under Secretary for Benefits,
Mr. Tom Murphy----
Senator Boozman. OK.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. Has accountability under
that area. Rob Worley, who is here with us today, is the
Director of Educational Benefits.
Senator Boozman. OK. So, we will follow up with them.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
[The information requested during the hearing follows:]
Response to Request Arising During the Hearing by Hon. John Boozman to
Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs
What challenges does VA face implementing the VET TEC program, how
does VA plan to overcome those challenges, and what will be the
timeline?
Response. Veterans Affairs (VA) requires a legal determination
regarding the need to award VET TEC via Federal acquisitions or if VA
is able to leverage its authority to approve via the normal process.
Both options provide timely awards to training programs for
participation in the 5-year pilot. VA is currently gathering necessary
information to assist VA's Office of General Counsel (OGC) with
finalizing their legal opinion.
VA estimates that as many as 50 percent of prospective applicants
may not meet necessary skills screening by training institutions.
Reputable IT training providers will conduct applicable screening
criteria to all applicants. We recognize that if a Veteran does not
meet initial screening they may benefit from various upskilling
opportunities in an effort to better position them for future
application windows. VA is working with a large coalition of partners
to establish a series of no-cost public-private partnerships that will
create a ``hope pathway'' for Veterans seeking to upskill. This pathway
will leverage existing services by the Department of Labor (DOL), in
addition to free community college programs and mentorship tools.
The VET TEC pilot program has not previously been attempted at this
scale; therefore the criteria for selection of prospective VET TEC
providers will require extensive market research prior to the
implementation of the pilot program. VA will evaluate programs using
industry best practices to ensure effective design, implementation and
evaluation of the pilot.
The requirement of 50 percent of vendor payment taking place upon a
Veteran's job placement is one of the more difficult aspects of
implementation and may deter providers from participating. VA plans to
establish ``employer coalitions'' in partnership with DOL, VA's
Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment, and the VET TEC training
institutions to ensure Veteran job placement satisfies criteria for
payment.
Timely hiring of staff is critical to proper implementation. VA is
in the process of making appropriate staffing determinations and
authorization of necessary staff hiring. We should complete hiring of
this staff by May 2018.
VA anticipates receiving a legal opinion from OGC within the next
60 days and expects to initiate or start the official pilot program by
February 2019.
Senator Boozman. Thank you. According to the VA OIG report
on the consolidated patient account centers, in 2015, the VA
billed third-party payers approximately $7.2 billion for
medical treatment. I think we collected about $2.5 billion. The
Department considers third-party collections as revenue in its
annual budget projections.
How does the VA project its expected collections for each
year, and how does that match up with what we are actually
collecting?
Secretary Shulkin. We do give our projected collections as
part of our budget request, because, as you have said, it is an
offset to essentially our--what is given to us in our budget.
Our finance team does the projections based upon actuals of
last year and then sets a target for improvement. This is
something that we have targeted, to improve collections. One of
the provisions that I think is being considered under the
current legislation is a requirement to disclose third-party
insurance, because that is part of the challenge that we have.
If we do not know a veteran has other insurance it is very hard
for us to go and to collect it. So, that is something that we
are working on.
Senator Boozman. Right. I believe we have a pilot program
going on in five areas----
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Boozman [continuing]. In relation to this. Do you
have any----
Secretary Shulkin. On the third-party collection efforts.
Senator Boozman. Exactly.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah, yeah.
Senator Boozman. I know that is not done. Do you have any
preliminary things that you can talk to us about?
Secretary Shulkin. I do not have an update and I do not
know if anybody behind me has an update on that. I do not think
there is an expert on that, but we can get you that update.
[The information requested during the hearing follows:]
Response to Request Arising During the Hearing by Hon. John Boozman to
Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs
Please provide preliminary data/information regarding the third-
party collection effort pilot program that is set up in five areas.
Response. As an effort to further improvements and accountability,
Section 201 of the Choice Act mandated a comprehensive examination of
Veteran Affairs (VA) ability to deliver accessible high-quality health
care to Veterans. These assessments evaluated the areas of staffing,
training, facilities, business processes, and leadership.
The focus of Revenue Transformation is to implement new or enhance
existing industry best practices and eliminate any inefficiency in VA's
business processes specific to the revenue cycle. As a result of
Revenue Transformation, VA has recognized an increase in collected
revenue and the protection of other revenue that would be impacted by
the changing healthcare landscape.
key accomplishments
Registration: The goal of the Registration portfolio is the
comprehensive and timely identification of Veteran insurance
information. Currently, the portfolio has increased education to
Veterans and VA staff on insurance capture which resulted in decrease
in front-end denials by over 75% at five test sites. It has also
improved Veteran education on the importance of providing insurance at
test sites, leading to the achievement of an insurance capture rate
that is 8% higher than the national average. The portfolio developed a
standardized dashboard to assist VA managers in monitoring the success
of VA's insurance capture efforts.
Clinical Documentation: The Clinical Documentation portfolio team
is improving accuracy and timeliness of clinical documentation through
streamlined processes and innovative solutions. The portfolio has
developed a dashboard to monitor third-party billings and collections
at the provider level to improve visibility and awareness.
Additionally, the portfolio developed two standardized interactive
templates (primary care and inpatient) focused on improving clinical
documentation accuracy.
Coding: The Coding portfolio is focused on reducing outpatient
revenue coding backlogs. Consolidation of resources and work assignment
has resulted in the coding of an additional 94,944 encounters,
resulting in a net reduction of 33,376 coding encounters pending at our
test sites. The Coding Portfolio team has assisted in reducing coding
pending volumes at test sites by 35% since January 2017.
Charge Capture: The Charge Capture portfolio is implementing
process improvements to enhance operational efficiency and improve
revenue collections. By developing enhanced billing methods for
Community Care the total number of claims submitted to Other Health
Insurance (OHI) has increased by 30,070, resulting in a $1,466,889
increase in total collections from May 2017 to December 2017. The
portfolio has also launched an initiative to capture and submit the
National Drug Codes for injectable procedures performed in an office
setting to OHI at test sites and has reduced denials for these
procedures by 10%.
Billing & Collections: The Billing & Collections portfolio is
identifying inefficiencies in the existing revenue cycle to implement
methods to improve overall collectability. The portfolio has developed
and deployed net collections performance to align with industry best
practice and replace collections to billing. The national net
collections rate for the last 3 months is as follows: October--95.9%;
November--96.2%; December--96.8%. A new function/process to increase
the efficiency of payer analysis reviews in facilities was implemented.
A contract to perform recovery audit services of collected and closed
claims was initiated and an award is anticipated in the third quarter
of Fiscal Year 2018.
Denials Management: The Denials Management portfolio is refining
the existing denials process through innovative technology, procedures,
and training materials for VA staff. Overall Enterprise Denials Rate,
based on First Run Yield, has gone down from
12% in January 2017 to
8% by December 2017.
Revenue Integration Portfolio: The Revenue Integration Portfolio is
consolidating functionality to streamline processes across the VA
revenue cycle. The team has completed a nationwide review of the clinic
set up for potential high dollar clinics. The review resulted in an
additional 351 Cardiology clinics and 518 Radiology clinics now being
designated high dollar, which drives 3rd party billing activities. This
has resulted in increased collections of $1,446,687 from July 2017 to
December 2017.
Senator Boozman. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you, Senator Boozman, and before I
go to Senator Manchin, let me just take the liberty, if I may,
of asking Gretchan Blum to stand up behind me. Gretchan?
Gretchan has been with the Committee since I came to the
Committee as Chairman 3 years ago. She is going to greener
pastures in Oregon, which is a beautiful coastline. Lots of
veterans, lots of good people. She has been a tremendous help
to our veterans and this Committee. We want to acknowledge and
thank you for your service.
[Applause.]
Chairman Isakson. Senator Manchin.
HON. JOE MANCHIN III, U.S. SENATOR FROM WEST VIRGINIA
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Dr. Shulkin, for being here.
I need to bring something of a local interest to your
attention. On December 20, a high-risk veteran contacted my
office after his bypass surgery was canceled while he was
laying on the operating table in the Clarksburg VA, which is
the Louis A. Johnson VA medical center. It is a great hospital.
The reason for cancellation being that spots were found on the
tools processed by the autoclave. That is the reason.
Now let me tell you how time elapsed.
We have been told that they have estimated it will be at
least 10 weeks before a temporary--just before a temporary--
sterilization unit will be operational, but it will also take a
whopping 16 to 18 months to replace the one that is deficient.
It has been reported--I understand up to what the Region 5, the
VISN 5 level. That is your region. I do not know if it has ever
gotten to you all. There has got to be something, doctor, when
something this egregious happens. We cannot do any--we are
done, and this is a big hospital, of course, so we need your
help.
Secretary Shulkin. Right.
Senator Manchin. Thank you for your help on that.
Next of all, I sent a letter last week, after reading the
New York Times story that reported that the Oregon VA medical
center has tried to improve their quality metrics. Well, we
start looking into this, how it affects us in our State, and,
for example, I have found that the emergency department medium
time for administering pain medication, statistic on the
HospitalCompare.gov website, it is listed as not available, and
is also footnoted as no cases met the criteria for this
measure. That seems unacceptable to me in emergency--for an
emergency department.
How are you equipping local VA medical center staff to
track and record these types of vital data, and who in West
Virginia VAs are responsible for collecting the data. We could
not find out----
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Manchin [continuing]. From my office.
Secretary Shulkin. On HospitalCompare.gov, which is run out
of the Department of Health and Human Services----
Senator Manchin. Are you all working with it? Try, OK.
Secretary Shulkin. VA used to have all its data up there--
--
Senator Manchin. Uh-huh.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. And due to contract issues
with the Department of Health and Human Services, not VA, they
lost the ability to take VA data. They are now actively working
to get it back up by the end of this year. They will have all
that data back up. We still collect and product all that data
and we publish the data ourselves on accesstocare.va.gov. So,
we do have that data, we do make our comparisons to local
hospitals. We would be glad to share that with you. We wish it
were up on the HospitalCompare site because we think it is a
great site, and by the end of the year HHS will have that back
up for us.
Senator Manchin. Opioid addiction. You know about opioid
addiction in my State, in West Virginia, but also throughout
the entire veterans' community. It is something of great
concern. The President basically declared a medical----
Secretary Shulkin. A public health emergency.
Senator Manchin [continuing]. Public health. I have told
him I am very appreciative of that. I wish it would have gone
farther, but I am very appreciative of what we are getting----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Manchin [continuing]. But we have not gotten
anything yet. I do not know how it is affecting you all, with
your fight on opioid addiction, or how that will help you if we
can get this money to start flowing. We are asking the money to
flow not based on population but based on need, where the
greatest occurrences are.
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Manchin. Have you seen any changes there? Have you
gotten any help whatsoever? Also, you all need to be--you need
to be recognized in an affirmative way for basically not
allowing your VA patients to dictate the dispensing as part of
the overall care they are getting and what quality of care,
which could penalize your hospitals. I thank you all to change
that.
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Manchin. You have helped that move all the way
through the whole----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Manchin [continuing]. Department of Human Services.
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm. Right. Well, first of all, I
participated in the President's commission.
Senator Manchin. Right.
Secretary Shulkin. I think it is important. We brought the
Members of the Committee to the Cleveland VA that has a 3
percent prescribing rate, the lowest in the country, to see the
best practices, and that did make it into the report.
Senator Manchin. Right.
Secretary Shulkin. Last week, we started to publish, at VA,
every medical center's prescribing rate for opioids. No other
system in the country, no other hospital in the country does
this. It is available now, so everybody can see.
Senator Manchin. It is on your website?
Secretary Shulkin. It is on our website, the opioid
posting.
Senator Manchin. OK.
Secretary Shulkin. Finally, let me just say, we have made a
41 percent reduction since our efforts began in 2010, with our
Opioid Safety Initiative.
Senator Manchin. Mm-hmm.
Secretary Shulkin. We have more work to do. What this
website says, it shows us where we have a lot more work to do.
But remember, the key is not just simply withdrawing opioids.
Senator Manchin. Sure.
Secretary Shulkin. These are patients who are in pain. The
question is----
Senator Manchin. We recognize that.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. Before we start opioids,
before you reach for it first, are there alternatives that you
can do to help relieve pain and not put your patient at risk of
addiction? So, that is what we are really focused on. A lot of
the veterans think this is about we have targets to withdraw
opioids. We do not. We want doctors to continue to eliminate
pain, but we want them to make smart choices, give veterans
informed choice.
Senator Manchin. Right. We are doing the same thing, and we
do not want any patient to think they are being penalized
whatsoever----
Secretary Shulkin. Right.
Senator Manchin [continuing]. Being without their other
alternative methods too, not the alternative drugs that are
being developed right now----
Secretary Shulkin. Absolutely.
Senator Manchin [continuing]. That are not addictive.
With that being said, the one that still haunts me and
bothers me more is homelessness----
Secretary Shulkin. Yep.
Senator Manchin [continuing]. Which we have had an increase
in homelessness----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Manchin [continuing]. From 2016 and 2017.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Manchin. I cannot even fathom how any veteran
should ever not have a roof over their head----
Secretary Shulkin. Right.
Senator Manchin [continuing]. And a place to sleep, for
what they have done for us.
Secretary Shulkin. Right.
Senator Manchin. What is happening there? Is it----
Secretary Shulkin. Right.
Senator Manchin. So, as you know, from 2010 until now, we
have had a 46 percent reduction in homeless veterans. We still
have 40,000 homeless veterans--way, way too many. Females have
gone up----
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Manchin [continuing]. Female veterans homelessness
is up 7 percent.
Secretary Shulkin. Last year their rate went up 2 percent--
--
Senator Manchin. Yeah.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. Which is going the wrong
direction.
Senator Manchin. Overall.
Secretary Shulkin. If you take a look, there are five major
cities in the country, but Los Angeles and Seattle are the two
that went up the most. So, what we are doing is we need a
reboot of our program. This is not less money in the program;
we actually want more in this program. We need to do this
better. We are focused and prioritizing doing this better. We
are going to target Seattle and Los Angeles, in particular, but
not give up on progress everywhere else. We are going to be
coming out with a new, improved approach, but it is not less
resources. It is going to be more resourced and more focused.
Senator Manchin. Let me just--I am so sorry. I just wanted
to follow up real quick.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Manchin. For us to know how many homeless veterans
we have, we have to have them in our records somewhere.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Manchin. There has to be contact.
Secretary Shulkin. Right.
Senator Manchin. With that--it is not like saying, well,
they just dropped off and they have fallen off the records.
Secretary Shulkin. We actually now know, by name, who most
of the homeless veterans are. We do, once a year, what is
called a Point In----
Senator Manchin. We have caseworkers with that----
Secretary Shulkin. Absolutely. We have caseworkers for our
homeless veterans. We do what is called a Point In Time Count--
--
Senator Manchin. Uh-huh.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. A PIT count. We are going
to do it here in Washington, January 28. I will be out there at
midnight----
Senator Manchin. OK.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. With other people, making
sure we accurately do that assessment. I did it in Los Angeles
2 years ago. Then, after we do our Point In Time counts, we
will be able to know what----
Senator Manchin. Uh-huh.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. The progress for, if there
are more veterans----
Senator Manchin. Right.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. Who are homeless. But, we
are committed to continuing to stay at this until we end
veteran homelessness.
Senator Manchin. Thank you.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you, Senator Manchin.
Senator Tillis.
HON. THOM TILLIS, U.S. SENATOR FROM NORTH CAROLINA
Senator Tillis. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you to
Secretary Shulkin.
One thing you mentioned in your opening comments I just
wanted to get a little bit more information on is--I knew, and
I was glad that the Department is showing some latitude in
providing services to veterans with other-than-honorable
discharge. Can you tell me a little bit about the scope of that
and maybe the numbers of people that have been served at this
point?
Secretary Shulkin. Yep. Yep. As you know, with trying to
decrease veteran suicide and doing the right thing for our
veterans, when you take a look at where our highest risk for
veteran suicide is, it is in several categories. Homelessness
and homeless veterans who do not have access to care, clearly,
which is why we are targeting an end to that. Our other-than-
honorable discharge veterans are very high risk as well,
because they do not have access to services. So, what we have
provided them with is an emergency mental health benefit, that
provides--all they have to do is show up. We are going to give
them 90 days' worth of emergency mental health care, make sure
we stabilize the crisis, and get them into longer-term
treatment, if that is what is required.
So far, we have treated, and have come to us for help,
3,200 veterans with other-than-honorable discharge. We were
actually hoping the numbers are higher.
Senator Tillis. Over what period of time?
Secretary Shulkin. Since we started this. I think it was
one of the early things I did as Secretary, so I would say 10
months ago, maybe.
Senator Tillis. OK.
Secretary Shulkin. We are actually hoping the numbers would
get higher, so we continue to get that message out, that if you
are a veteran with that type of other-than-honorable discharge
and you need help, please come; we are going to help you.
Senator Tillis. Now what happens if you get somebody to
maybe a stable----
Secretary Shulkin. Yep.
Senator Tillis [continuing]. Position, and you improve
their condition. This is emergency mental health benefit. What
next? Let us say they get sick, and it does not relate to the
mental health illness.
Secretary Shulkin. Right. Oh, when it does not relate to
the mental health illness.
Senator Tillis. Yeah.
Secretary Shulkin. Well, we have not extended a general
health benefit. That is something that we would be glad to work
with you or other Members of Congress on. That would be
something that we would have to work on legislatively. I do not
feel I have the authority to be able to do that.
Senator Tillis. I did not think you did.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Tillis. We had a hearing in the Personnel
Subcommittee for Senate Armed Services and it was focused on
concussions----
Senator Manchin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Tillis [continuing]. And more data that we are
getting, that at least could make you argue that perhaps
discharges, in some cases, for bad behavior, actually related
to----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Tillis [continuing]. Other circumstances. So, I
think this is a good step----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Tillis [continuing]. Because the first thing is to
try to stem any real tide of suicides----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Tillis [continuing]. Through the emergency mental
health service. But, I think we need to talk more about----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Tillis [continuing]. How we would manage this, and
consider the full life cycle. What we talked about, there are
the probabilities this sort of job that a man or woman did in
the military were exposed to events that now the science
suggests could have actually had an impact on their mental
faculties or perhaps behaviors that led to their discharge.
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Tillis. That would be something I would like to
talk with you more about.
And maybe you could just give me a quick update on--I know
the medical health record project is going to go through phases
and take a while to get done, but it looks like you are using a
template similar to the DOD, and you have got resources in
there. So, in that case, just tell me what we could do to help
you, because I think that is a very important project that we
want to see to conclusion. And you need to make sure you tell
us when we set a new priority that potentially taps your
ability to deliver on some of the commitments you are making.
But what about other--you mentioned in your opening
comments----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Tillis [continuing]. About, do you still feel like
you are making incremental----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Tillis [continuing]. Not breakthrough things. What
are we likely to see from you, to get from some of the
incremental that needs to be done? But, you know, what are the
breakthrough things that you are looking at that may actually
require our help to get it moving?
Secretary Shulkin. Well, I think what I am doing is trying
to put out there that we need those breakthrough ideas, and I
want to see an opportunity to get those ideas from you, as well
as our veteran advocacy groups, like veteran service
organizations and others who have those ideas. I think they can
come in many different ways. They could come technologically,
they could come through management practices, or they could
come through policy and legislation.
We have seen some of them, legislatively, that I think this
Committee has been in the lead during this past year, like
appeals modernization. That is going to make a difference. I
think--and I have said this--that we need to reorganize the way
that we do business at VA, from having a large central
bureaucracy to being able to give people in the field more
authority and accountability, which goes along that way. And,
we need to change some of our management practices that,
frankly, have grown stale.
What is happening in the private sector on health care and
technology is the type of transformation that I think needs to
happen within government as well, and we are going to need to
do that collaboratively.
Senator Tillis. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you, Senator Tillis.
Senator Blumenthal.
HON. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM CONNECTICUT
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Dr.
Shulkin, and thank you to the men and women of the VA for all
of their extraordinary, dedicated work.
I am going to be sending you, today, a letter that cites
the need for stronger protections to the post-9/11 veterans
under the Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits. I raised this issue with
you during your confirmation hearings in January of last year.
It has been almost a year--in fact, on February 13 it will
be a year since your confirmation--and, quite honestly, I am
deeply dissatisfied with the lack of action under existing
authority, 38 U.S. Code, Section 3696, to crack down on the
predatory practices of for-profit schools, like Corinthian and
ITT, that have exploited our veterans. This letter sets forth,
in detail, what those actions have been and why I think that
the lack of action by the VA has been troubling. I know that
you are sympathetic to this cause, but I would like to see good
words followed by action, and I will appreciate a response to
my letter. I ask that it be made part of the record, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Isakson. I am sorry.
Senator Blumenthal. I am asking that my letter to Secretary
Shulkin, of today, be made a part of the record.
Chairman Isakson. Without objection.
[The letter follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Blumenthal. I want to focus right now on a deeply
troubling, in fact, appalling incident in West Haven. I am sure
you are aware of it by now. The West Haven VA has been sued by
a veteran who is alleging apparently a truly egregious act of
malpractice. The veteran claims that a scalpel was left in his
abdomen during a 2013 surgery and it was discovered only after
years of pain and dizziness. It was removed in April 2017,
after an MRI by the VA.
On June 6, 2017, the veteran said that he initiated an
administrative claim under the Federal Tort Claims Act,
regarding this case of medical negligence. Over 6 months later,
the VA has still not responded, incredibly, to the claim,
beyond a simple acknowledgement of its receipt. So, the veteran
has now filed suit in Federal court.
My first question to you is, is the Department
investigating these specific allegations?
Secretary Shulkin. Yes. Yes. First, on this case, I think
the way that you characterized it is accurate. It is an event
that should never happen, and I am deeply sorry that any
veteran should have to undergo this.
Of course, this was inadvertent on the surgeon's part. When
the surgeon discovered this, he, who is extraordinarily well
trained, on the Yale faculty, practices not only at the VA but
at Yale New Haven Hospital, went to the veteran with the
Chairman of Surgery at the VA, and acknowledged their mistake
and apologized and takes responsibility for it.
While this is an extremely rare event, it happens in the
country 1,500 times a year. In the VA it does happen. It
happened 12 times in the VA. That is a rate, in the VA, much
less than what happens outside the VA. That is no excuse. This
should never happen. We are looking and a root cause analysis
has been done. It has actually been presented at the Yale New
Haven Mortality and Morbidity Conference so that this could be
evaluated by peers who are surgical peers across the Yale New
Haven system.
So we do acknowledge responsibility for this. This veteran
has suffered enough. Fortunately, his first surgery, which was
done, was a successful surgery, but he should not have to go
through any more hassle in being acknowledged for what
happened, and we will take responsibility for that.
Senator Blumenthal. Part of taking responsibility is to
acknowledge and act on his claim----
Secretary Shulkin. Absolutely.
Senator Blumenthal [continuing]. And to, in fact, respond
positively to the request that he made for relief, under the
Federal Tort Claims Act----
Secretary Shulkin. I agree with that.
Senator Blumenthal [continuing]. Administrative procedure.
It does not require any court proceeding.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Blumenthal. The VA has an administrative and moral
responsibility to respond, and I am disappointed that it has
not done so. Will you commit to doing so?
Secretary Shulkin. Everything you are saying, I share your
sentiments, and absolutely, we will commit to that.
Senator Blumenthal. I know, because of your own background,
professionally, as head of the University of Pennsylvania
medical system and other positions that you note, you are----
Secretary Shulkin. Sure.
Senator Blumenthal [continuing]. Very, very attentive to
the standards of professional responsibility. I would also like
a commitment that the VA protocol and practices will be
reviewed so that, in fact, this incident can be a teaching
moment.
Secretary Shulkin. You have that commitment. Patient safety
is my passion. I personally spoke to the Chairman of Surgery at
the West Haven VA. I know that she, and this surgeon, have
taken this extremely seriously and are using this for the way
that you and I both believe we should learn. The VA does have a
practice across the VA system for x-rays to be done in some
high-risk cases. We are re-evaluating whether we should be
doing more on top of that, because these events should never
happen. We are going to be committed to making it a safer
environment.
[The information requested during the hearing follows:]
Response to Request Arising During the Hearing by Hon. Richard
Blumenthal to Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary, U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Please act on the administrative claim from the Connecticut Veteran
who had a scalpel left in his abdomen after a surgery at VA.
Response. The Department has acted on the claim and it is currently
pending litigation.
Senator Blumenthal. I appreciate your being so
forthcoming----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Blumenthal [continuing]. And I am going to follow
up----
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Blumenthal [continuing]. And stay on it----
Secretary Shulkin. Thank you.
Senator Blumenthal [continuing]. Banking on you----
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Blumenthal [continuing]. Because I know you are
committed to it.
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Blumenthal. I have seen the x-ray----
Secretary Shulkin. Yes, so have I.
Senator Blumenthal [continuing]. Showing the scalpel, and,
frankly, I was appalled and stunned----
Secretary Shulkin. Sure.
Senator Blumenthal [continuing]. And surprised and grateful
that this veteran is still alive.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you for your responses to my
question.
Secretary Shulkin. OK. Thank you, sir.
[Information on operating room directives at VA follows:]
Response to Request Arising During the Hearing by Hon. Richard
Blumenthal to Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary, U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs
Please review the patient safety protocols as a result of a scalpel
left inside a Connecticut Veteran following a surgery at VA.
Response. Directive 1103, Prevention of Retained Surgical Items,
provides policy to prevent incidents of surgical items being retained
in a patient following surgery. It is VHA policy that the surgical team
must apply a standard approach to the prevention of retained surgical
items when the operative procedure being performed is one in which
there is any possibility for retention of a surgical item. This
standard approach/patient safety protocols have been reviewed. This
policy provides clear direction and guidance for Operating Room staff
regarding the required responsibilities and actions. A copy of the
directive is attached for your reference.
attachment
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you, Senator Blumenthal.
Senator Heller.
HON. DEAN HELLER, U.S. SENATOR FROM NEVADA
Senator Heller. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Thank you for
holding this hearing and I want to thank the Secretary for
being here also. I think this Committee has done a great job
and I want to thank both you and the Ranking Member. I think we
have passed out of Committee, I think, in this session, 10
pieces of legislation, some of which have been mine and all of
them have contained my priorities.
I just want to tell both of you I really do appreciate
being part of this Committee, and for the leadership that we
have this Committee has passed, legislation, for example, that
have already been mentioned, like the GI Bill for life, access
to STEM programs in education, which was also mentioned, also
the appeals process for faster disability claims efforts. I
want to thank you, Mr. Secretary, for your hard work and effort
on that, but clearly the work is not over. This Committee has
probably already shared that with you a few times.
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Heller. You are getting to your first-year
anniversary. I actually believe it is February 14. I do not
know what you will be doing on February 14, but that will be
your 1-year anniversary. How do you like the job? Tell me. We
have had several discussions and I know you have been with the
VA for a while, but not in the capacity as the Secretary. How
was your first year? How do you feel about the work that is
progressing?
Secretary Shulkin. You know, Senator, look. First of all,
it is an honor and a privilege to be able to serve our
veterans. That is why I am here. I am a tough grader. I am a
tough grader on myself and my staff, and I am impatient. I know
all of you are too. There is a lot of work to be done and we
have to make more progress, and we are going to stick with it
to be able to do that.
But, I do believe a lot of the credit goes to you and to
the House, who is also doing good work on their side, to be
able to make the progress that we are making, but I think we
can all do better.
Senator Heller. I appreciate your visits to my State, which
has been very, very helpful to the 300,000 veterans that we
have in the State of Nevada. Now I happened to be traveling
around a little bit last weekend----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Heller [continuing]. In some of the rural portions,
where they have expressed some concerns. Probably the one that
caught my attention the most--and, frankly, for that matter, my
staff--was the cancellation of the----
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Heller [continuing]. Community Care Network----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Heller [continuing]. For Region 4. For those who do
not know, Region 4 is quite a big region. The Ranking Member is
in that region, as is Nevada, but so is Alaska, Hawaii, and
California. We can go down the list but it is quite the region.
Can you explain to me----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Heller [continuing]. What the situation is and why
my staff and congressional offices did not hear about this? We
found out on Friday.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Heller. I do not know if it was out earlier than
that, but we found out on Friday.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah. Yeah. I also found out last week
too. The Federal contracting process is a complex process, one
that is difficult sometimes to understand. It is designed to
keep the people that run the business, like myself, out of
negotiating these contracts. That is why I found out the same
week that you did.
In this case, we divided the country up into four regions.
This was hopefully our first award in Region 4. So, I am
disappointed that we were not able to award it, as well.
I will tell you the reason why we were not able to award it
is because our contracting officers did not believe that it was
in the interest of taxpayers to proceed with that contract.
That means they did not believe that they should be paying the
price that was being bid out there. They did not feel it was
reasonable.
This is going to be rebid, and we hope--and we have spoken
to those that have bid--that they will bid again, because we
believe that the quality of the contractors were there. It just
was not--we were not able to reach something that made sense
for the taxpayers.
Senator Heller. So, it is my understanding that the
competitive process has been closed down. Is that correct?
Secretary Shulkin. Yes, we have put it--yes.
Senator Heller. So, what does it mean short term, for
someone who lives in Elko or Ely or Eureka, for these veterans
who have to travel long distances, of course, to get health
care if they are not provided in their communities?
Secretary Shulkin. Well, we are talking about, right now,
your veterans are being served by a third-party administrator
that runs many of the aspects of the Choice program, and that
will continue. We think that that contractor right now is doing
a good job, improving its service to your veterans. We have
been in direct contact about issues and they have been very
responsive about fixing them.
So, business as usual. It will continue to be to serve the
veterans. I know the contractor currently is committed to that.
We hope to have a competitive rebid process that will result in
a good outcome for veterans, contractors, but, importantly, the
taxpayers.
Senator Heller. Mr. Secretary, my time has run out but I
again want to thank you, again, for coming to the State----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Heller [continuing]. Spending time with our
veterans, your accessibility, your understanding of the issues
and problems we have, and willingness to work to improve the
issues that we have in front of us. I think this Community Care
contract is one of them----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Heller [continuing]. And I look forward to working
with you, trying to solve this particular problem.
Secretary Shulkin. Thank you.
Senator Heller. Thank you.
Secretary Shulkin. Thank you very much.
Senator Heller. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you, Senator Heller.
Senator Hirono.
HON. MAZIE K. HIRONO, U.S. SENATOR FROM HAWAII
Senator Hirono. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The fact that the
VA has a large number of vacancies throughout the country, and
not just in Montana but also in Hawaii, and you were given
tools--VA was given tools to make the hiring process work a lot
more efficiently, and yet we seem to be continuously behind the
8-ball.
So, have you put your finger on why it is so hard? I
realize there are, you know, a lack of certain kinds of medical
professionals, et cetera, if that is the overall problem. Are
there additional tools that we can give the VA to enable you to
hire the necessary people?
Secretary Shulkin. Well, yes, I do think that there is more
we can do, but let me--Senator, let me tell you. Last year, we
actually made progress. We have a net increase of 8,303
employees. We hired close to 40,000 but it is a net increase of
8,303.
Senator Hirono. Mm-hmm.
Secretary Shulkin. But, we know where we have critical
vacancies, and that is where we want to move toward a direct
hire authority that Senator Tester had talked about.
Senator Hirono. Mm-hmm.
Secretary Shulkin. OPM has been very helpful to us and
indicated their support in doing that. There is this technical
fix that we talked about, that will help us implement your
intent last year, when you gave us direct hire authority for
medical center directors and network directors.
Senator Hirono. Do you need additional tools?
Secretary Shulkin. We do. We do. We want to continue to--
right now we have three hiring authorities that we have to hire
employees under--it is complicated--Title 5, Title 38, and a
hybrid system. And the more that we can move, for our health
care employees, toward a Title 38, it makes the process faster
and more competitive with the private sector.
Senator Hirono. So, is that going to take legislation?
Secretary Shulkin. It is something that I think we have the
authority to do ourselves, and that is what we are moving
toward. But we have come to you in the past for help. You have
always helped us with that, and we will continue to ask you if
we need additional help.
Senator Hirono. Well, please let us know.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Hirono. Because I know, for a fact, that in Hawaii
we have something like 166 medical staff vacancies that need to
be addressed.
Last week, the White House released an Executive order
supporting our veterans during their transition to civilian
life, and ensuring access to mental health care and suicide
prevention, which you had talked about, as a priority. So, one
of the provisions calls for access for veterans to receive
mental health care, and I want to know whether you have enough
mental health care professionals. What do you plan to do to
devote additional resources to recruit and retain mental health
professionals, because I assume that is one of your shortage
categories.
Secretary Shulkin. Right. Right. Well, first of all, thank
you for acknowledging the Executive order, because if you look
at any group that is at high risk for suicide it is that 12-
month period from transition.
Senator Hirono. Yes.
Secretary Shulkin. So, this is targeted to providing every
single transitioning servicemember with a mental health
benefit. I think that is critically important.
In order to do that, VA does need more mental health
professionals. You know, Senator Tester certainly made this
point as well. We have identified a need for 1,000 mental
health professionals. Unfortunately, the country at large----
Senator Hirono. Yes.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. Has a shortage of mental
health professionals, so this is going to be difficult. But, we
are committed to increasing the number of trainees in mental
health residency programs. We work very hard with nurses,
social workers, as well as psychologists and psychiatrists, to
train as many as we can. We want to do more. We will continue
to use efforts like our recruitment bonuses and to acknowledge
that VA is actually a terrific place to work if you are a
mental health professional. Hawaii would be a great place to
be.
Senator Hirono. Yes. So----
Secretary Shulkin. So, we are going to do whatever we can.
Senator Hirono. Thank you. I want to discuss the IG report
that showed overpayments and payment errors in the Choice
program. Since I am running out of time, clearly, we need to be
assured that you are taking the appropriate steps to make sure
that you have processes in place so that these kinds of
overpayments and erroneous payments are not occurring.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Hirono. So, I need your assurance that you are
doing that.
Turning to homelessness, your predecessor made a commitment
that he would end veteran homelessness, and as mentioned by
Senator Manchin, we seem to be going in the wrong direction
here, particularly with regard to women veterans who are
homeless. Why is it that we are heading in the wrong direction
and what are you doing about it? By the way, where is ending
homelessness in your order of priorities for the VA?
Secretary Shulkin. Well, the commitment to ending veteran
homelessness I think you correctly said was made in 2010, and
we absolutely are committed to that. We will not back down from
that goal, and we will continue to drive to do everything we
can to end veteran homelessness. So, there is the same firm
commitment.
What I have said is because of this last year, where we
actually went up 2 percent, we have to rethink our effort. Any
good business looks at what they are doing and says ``if there
is a better way to do it, we should.'' So, we are going to come
out with a new approach that doubles down on the things that
are working and maybe uses resources from things that are not
working as well.
Here is what we know is working, and I will tell you what
is not working. When veterans get jobs, it keeps them in
sustainable housing.
Senator Hirono. Mm-hmm.
Secretary Shulkin. It helps in so many ways. So, we are
going to re-double down on working with employers around the
country to find our homeless veterans and train them and get
them jobs. Number 2, the HUD-VASH voucher program works really
well.
Senator Hirono. Mm-hmm.
Secretary Shulkin. We want to continue that partnership
with HUD, and we look toward areas--Hawaii is one, but Los
Angeles and Seattle too--where the--with the current value of
the HUD-VASH voucher, we cannot find people who want to rent us
apartments.
Senator Hirono. Yeah.
Secretary Shulkin. So, we have to continue to increase the
value of that, which we are working on.
We have a shortage of affordable housing units, so we need
to partner with construction people and landlords, and actually
create more inventory of low-inventory housing, so that is
going to work. We also need more community partnerships. We
just--because VA cannot do this alone. HUD cannot do this
alone. This is a country-wide commitment.
So, we are going to double down on the things that work and
we are going to come out with a fresh, new approach here. We
would like to work with you on this, because I am not satisfied
with the progress we are making.
Senator Hirono. Yeah, and let us know how that is going,
especially Hawaii which has, per capita, the highest number of
veteran homeless in the entire country.
Secretary Shulkin. The housing market there, you know, it
is so expensive. So, thank you.
Chairman Isakson. Senator Cassidy.
HON. BILL CASSIDY, U.S. SENATOR FROM LOUISIANA
Senator Cassidy. Hello, Secretary Shulkin, how are you?
Secretary Shulkin. Hey.
Senator Cassidy. A lot of what I am going to be asking you
today references a Newsweek article written in October of last
year, authored by Mr. Levine. Are you familiar with it?
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Cassidy [continuing]. The article is about how the
VA fueled the national opioid crisis and is killing thousands
of veterans.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Cassidy. As you might guess from the title, it is
critical of VA.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Cassidy. So, I heard today, or read, that you have
now published facility-specific statistics regarding those
prescriptions.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Cassidy. I have been interested in this data, in
terms of applying to the VA, and knowing facility specificity.
However, we have had challenges receiving the data requested
and expect to receive it shortly. The article addresses
Huntington, WV, where the local VA prescribes take-home opiates
to roughly 18 percent of its patients, a rate that is 230
percent higher than the national average, for all adult male
patients.
I have not looked at the statistics you referenced earlier,
but does this VA still prescribe a rate that exceeds the
national average by 230 percent?
Secretary Shulkin. What we published now, and, Senator
Cassidy, I hope you will appreciate this, no other system has
ever published this data. We are hoping that they will join us,
because we believe, like you, that this is how you get better,
by sharing your data and understanding it.
What you will see, for every single one of our VA
facilities, not only what the rate is now but what it was in
2012, and whether they have made improvements. Every single
site, except for one, has made improvements in their
prescribing rates in opioids. The one that did not may be
somewhat unique. It is in the Philippines. It is Manila. But
every domestic site in the VA has made improvements. Some made
a lot more than others, and that is where we hope that they are
going to learn from each other.
I do not recall Huntington, WV's, improvement rate but I
know it has improved.
[The information requested during the hearing follows:]
Response to Request Arising During the Hearing by Hon. Bill Cassidy to
Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs
Are 18 VA state programs not reporting prescribing data with PDMPs,
is this still the case?
Response. 48 states and the District of Columbia are activated for
PDMP data transmission, receiving data from the VA.
Missouri just recently established a statewide PDMP by executive
order. Nebraska's program has transitioned to Appriss Health's PMP
AWARxE and work is underway to initiate transmissions; the state is
working to implement FIPS 140-2 cryptography required for Federal data
sharing.
Senator Cassidy. Got it. Another issue which I asked about
last time is if the VA is sharing its prescribing data with the
PDMPs?
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Cassidy [continuing]. The article by Mr. Levine
states that by the end of last year, 2016, 18 State VA
healthcare programs were still not reporting to the State
PDMPs. Is that still the case, now that we are a year out from
this?
Secretary Shulkin. I do not believe that that is the case
anymore. I am going to want to confirm with you that we are in
100 percent compliance, because that is our commitment. If we
are not in 100 percent compliance, I am going to want to know
about that, because we have committed to that and we should be.
Senator Cassidy. Thank you. The article also suggests that
VistA, your electronic medical record program, is incapable of
flagging drug interactions between benzodiazepines like Valium,
and opioids, and details--gives anecdotes of people who are
given polypharmacy with Ritalin along with everything in every
class, as well as one patient who got 130 morphine tabs. Yes,
it is very disturbing. Why would a veteran patient get so much?
Is VistA capable of flagging this? Are the pharmacy
programs incapable of seeing these drug interactions and
flagging them?
Secretary Shulkin. We do measure and follow the statistics
on patients who are on both benzodiazepines and opioids,
because of the danger. I am not able to tell you right now. We
do have drug interactions that come up on VistA. I see them
when I use VistA. I am not able to tell you why we would not be
able to do that.
Senator Cassidy. The pharmacist is quoted in this article.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah. Yeah.
Senator Cassidy [continuing]. The pharmacist said that it,
VistA, does not flag it.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Cassidy. And he, apparently, testified to that
under oath.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes. Again, I just do not know the
answer to that. I would like to--and I would be glad to confirm
with you, very shortly, whether that is the case or not or
whether that has been fixed. I do not know a technological
reason why we would not be able to do it, but----
Senator Cassidy. OK.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. I may not understand it.
[The information requested during the hearing follows:]
Response to Request Arising During the Hearing by Hon. Bill Cassidy to
Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs
Is VISTA incapable of flagging drug interactions?
Response. VISTA is capable of generating drug interaction checks.
Senator Cassidy. Let me ask, you have mentioned how many
fewer patients are now prescribed opioids.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Cassidy [continuing]. If the opioid dosing is going
down, does the VA have any spot checks as to how many veterans
have gone from receiving prescription opioids to perhaps
seeking out illicit sources of opioids? Have we just had an
apparent victory or is it documented to be a real victory?
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah. I do not know what they are doing
illicitly. I mean, we just do not have a way of tracking that.
Senator Cassidy. Do we have, for example, drug screens of
patients that theoretically have been taken off of opioids, but
a drug screen might show that they are still taking?
Secretary Shulkin. Right. Those that return and had been
started on opioids sign a patient informed consent that says
that we will do the urine screening. We do the urine screenings
and we report on that, in terms of general statistics. But, if
a veteran does not return to us, we do not have any way of
tracking that.
Senator Cassidy. Do we have any sense of the number or the
percent of opioid overdoses in people whom, theoretically, are
no longer taking opioids?
Secretary Shulkin. That is a good question. I have never
seen the statistic reported that way. We do track Narcan use,
and we distribute a lot of Narcan. That hopefully would be a
measure of people who have overdosed that we have been able to
resuscitate. But, I have never seen the data broken down in the
way that you have asked.
Senator Cassidy. I think that would be helpful.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Cassidy. It would be helpful to the Committee,
because it would provide critical information----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Cassidy [continuing]. On whether or not we really
are making progress to end the opioid crisis.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Cassidy. We need to know whether it is more
apparent than real.
[The information requested during the hearing follows:]
Response to Requests Arising During the Hearing by Hon. Bill Cassidy to
Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs
1. Does VA screen those patients who were taken off of prescribed
opioids for illicit drug use?
Secretary Shulkin responded that there was screening and
that VA could provide a report on the results.
Response. Patients on opioid therapy for chronic pain receive
annual urine drug testing (OSI metric, 89 percent as of Q1fy18).
Patients on opioid agonist treatment for opioid use disorder receive
quarterly urine drug testing (sud 17 SAIL metric, currently 94.3%).
All other urine drug testing is at provider discretion based on
clinical presentation.
2. Does VA have statistics on opioid deaths from those Veterans who
were not prescribed opioids?
Response. The latest cause of death data available is FY 2014. The
following table includes the statistics related to Veteran overdose
deaths that year, and whether those patients received an outpatient VA
prescription for an opioid analgesic in the year of their death. Note
that overdoses were not restricted to overdoses involving opioids, but
instead include all accidental and intentional overdoses on any drug or
substance. The cohort of VHA users includes all persons using VHA
services since 2000; users may not have used VHA health care in FY
2014.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
VHA Users who did
VHA Users receiving
not receive an
an outpatient VA
outpatient VA opioid
Cause of death among VHA users that died in FY2014
All VHA users
opioid analgesic
analgesic
prescription in
prescription in
FY2014
FY2014
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Any overdose mentioned in cause of death information.
2,193
801
1,392
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senator Cassidy. Finally, is the VA using medication-
assisted therapy for those who are addicted?
Secretary Shulkin. Yes. Suboxone and other medication-
assisted treatment. We are seeing a rise in that, and certainly
we are keeping up with the contemporary literature on that.
Senator Cassidy. Correct. A rise could be from a very small
baseline----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Cassidy [continuing]. Which could still be very
small. Can you perhaps submit, for the record, the percent of
patients whom you think have opioid addictions----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Cassidy [continuing]. To include disuse orders, and
how many have been transitioned, et cetera?
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah. I would be glad to get you those
statistics. My impression is--although I have not looked at
this in detail recently--that your representation is probably
correct, starting from a small baseline, beginning to use it
more, probably still underutilized, and an opportunity for us
to do better.
[The information requested during the hearing follows:]
Response to Request Arising During the Hearing by Hon. Bill Cassidy to
Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs
Percentage of patients who were transitioned from opioids
Secretary Shulkin noted that this is done but that it was
probably ``underutilized''
Can VA provide what it currently is doing and/or what it
will do track this for the future?
Response. As of 4thQFy17, VA serves 6.29 million Unique Patients.
(Source: VSSC VHA Pocket Card https://securereports2.vssc.med.va.gov/
ReportServer/Pages/
ReportViewer.aspx?%2fMgmtReports%2fPocketCard%2fPocketCard&rs:Command=
Render)
A subset of the Unique Patient population is the number of Veterans
receiving opioid prescriptions dispensed through the VA pharmacies. As
of Q4Fy17, 418,895 patients are receiving opioids; this is 260,481
fewer patients or a 38 percent reduction than when the data was
benchmarked in Q4Fy17. The latest data for patients receiving opioids
is Q1FY 2018 in which 398,899 Veterans received opioids, a 41%
reduction. Both quarter's data are included to allow a comparison to
the VSSC data. These reductions represent the number of patients that
have been transitioned from opioids.
VA currently reports on the Opioid dispensing data on the website
https://www. data.va.gov/story/department-veterans-affairs-opioid-
prescribing-data. This data will continue to be tracked and updated on
the website semi-annually. The website additionally includes regional
comparison data to CMS reports on opioid prescribing rates by state.
additional information
After reviewing the hearing recording it appeared Senator Cassidy
(at time 1:17) was interested in Medication Assisted Treatment. Quote
from hearing ``he asks ``is the VA using medication assisted treatment
for addiction.'' In response to this question VHA is providing the
following additional information:
Medication Assisted Treatment for Opioid Use Disorders
VHA has responded to growing demand for opioid use disorder
treatment by increasing access to Medication-Assisted Treatment (MAT).
MAT includes counseling or psychotherapy, close patient monitoring, and
medication using buprenorphine/naloxone, methadone (administered
through an Opioid Treatment Program), or extended-release injectable
naltrexone. Buprenorphine/naloxone and extended-release injectable
naltrexone are on the VHA National formulary. These are available at
VHA facilities and through non-VA purchased care options in the
community. Methadone is administered and dispensed through 32 VHA
Opioid Treatment Programs across the Nation and through non-VA
purchased care options at many facilities.
VHA has been expanding access to MAT for patients with opioid use
disorders. In the year ending in FY17Q4, VA treated 24,069 patients
with MAT, up from 19,333 patients in the year ending in FY14Q4, a 24%
increase in patients treated in just 3 years. This expansion is the
result of a comprehensive and integrated approach. The Buprenorphine in
VA Initiative provides clinician education through monthly webinars,
newsletters, a SharePoint with educational resources, individual
consultations, and a national community of practice supported by an e-
mail group. The Psychotropic Drug Safety Initiative (PDSI) combines use
of informatics tools, action planning, and a national quality
improvement collaborative to improve the evidence-based use of
psychotropic medications. One of the PDSI program's many impacts has
been significantly increased rates of using medication assisted
treatment among Veterans with Opioid Use Disorder. In addition, VA
Pharmacy's Academic Detailing service is developing an Opioid Use
Disorder campaign using informatics tools and individual provider
support to increase Veteran access to MAT.
VHA offers several medication assisted treatments for opioid use
disorder. Opioid Agonist Treatment includes prescription of methadone
or buprenorphine delivered either in a licensed clinic or office-based
setting. Opioid Antagonist Treatment includes prescription of
injectable depot naltrexone. Only opioid agonist treatment was tracked
until FY 2014.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of
Number of
patients that
patients that
received Opioid
Year
received Opioid
Agonist or
Agonist
Antagonist
Treatment
Treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2006
8,091
NC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2007
8,581
NC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2008
9,694
NC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2009
10,564
NC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2010
11,887
NC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2011
13,493
NC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2012
14,412
NC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2013
16,306
NC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2014
17,575
19,333
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2015
19,971
21,915
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2016
22,103
22,606
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2017
23,406
24,069
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senator Cassidy. I yield back. I apologize for going over
my time.
Chairman Isakson. Senator Murray.
HON. PATTY MURRAY, U.S. SENATOR FROM WASHINGTON
Senator Murray. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Secretary, thank you for being here today.
Last year, the Department tried to quietly take money away
from some really essential programs--HUD-VASH, childcare,
treatment for women veterans--and move the money to general
purpose accounts where it could be spent on literally anything.
Meanwhile, over the last year, you have come to us repeatedly,
sometimes with just days or weeks left, saying VA will run out
of funding for the Choice program earlier than expected.
The Department has to start being transparent with
Congress--it has to--about its budget needs and not keep
raiding critical programs to cover these shortfalls; to give
us, finally, a realistic picture of Community Care spending.
Those are really basic expectations--how much you are spending
and to ask for what you really need.
I wanted to ask you today, will there be any changes in how
VA manages its business operations, or is it time to consider a
new approach to these functions?
Secretary Shulkin. Well, first of all, I think those are
fair criticisms, and I have to take responsibility for some of
the observations that you have. I will tell you that there is
no desire to do anything underhanded or hide things. This is a
system where we are trying to do so much so fast that we are
obviously making some mistakes, and we have to do better at
that.
So, let me just address things. First of all, the
projections on the Choice program, financial projections, are
very, very complex to do, largely because--not only, but
largely because of this issue that we hope to get fixed, with
your Committee's bill, that we have to obligate the money at
the time that we order the service, not when it was rendered.
So, it is a little bit of a guessing game that makes financial
projections hard.
But, we are doing better. We projected that the money which
was left in the Choice program before you renewed it, right
before the break, was going to run out the first or second week
in January. It ran out the first or second week in January. You
gave us $2.1 billion. Today we have $2 billion left, which
means we have spent $100 million already of what you gave us.
So, I think we are getting better. We have a brand-new CFO
who was just confirmed, thanks to you, in the last 2 weeks.
But, it is a hard job to do it, and we are never going to be
totally accurate unless we get some of these rules changed.
On this issue of us doing something like taking money away
from HUD-VASH vouchers or women's services, it was absolutely
never, never our intent to spend less money for women's
services or HUD-VASH or mental health, or anything else. Here
was our intent, which I stopped because of the reason that you
said--it was not accurately being rolled out or communicated.
So, it is not happening now. But, let me just tell you what my
intent was, because if you disagree with it, I would like to
talk to you.
Right now, everything is controlled out of Washington, out
of a central office. We tell people across the field, this is
how much you get and this is where you need to spend it. My
idea of management is, you let the people closer to where you
are serving the veteran be more involved in how they should
spend their money, and they have to be accountable for the
results--treating more women veterans, getting more homeless
veterans off the street. You allow them to understand what is
better in Seattle versus what is better in Honolulu.
I was trying to advocate a management philosophy that has
worked for me that I believe in. It was not rolled out well, so
I stopped it. But, we are going to think about how to make this
system work better--that was in my opening statement. We need
to do more. We need to do better, and I am going to continue to
try to do it. I am going to commit--we are going to do a better
job of being transparent and collaborative with you, because--
--
Senator Murray. OK. Well, that is what we will be watching.
Secretary Shulkin. I got it. That is fair.
Senator Murray. So, you know, we have had a rough year, but
that is what we will be watching for.
Secretary Shulkin. That is fair.
Senator Murray. Let me move to another topic. An Inspector
General report from December found in six of seven medical
centers it reviewed primary care provider panels were
significantly below required levels, and that VHA did not
provide oversight of that requirement. That resulted in
decreased access for our veterans, and hundreds of millions of
dollars of waste in appointments that were not filled.
That report also found, once again, that VA's reported wait
times are misleading, and in this case, by the IG's
calculation, more than half of the newly-enrolling veterans
waited longer than 30 days for their first appointment.
Another IG report found that the Eastern Colorado Health
Care System is still keeping secret waiting lists for group
mental health care therapy. And finally, according to VA data
from November, there are more than 35,500 vacancies in VHA.
Those are senior-level shortcomings across the system that
end up with reducing access to our veterans for care and
wasting taxpayer dollars. So, I just want to know, who is
accountable here?
Secretary Shulkin. Well, I am accountable, but--and there
is no but about the accountability--the statistics that you are
reporting--and this is not being defensive; I just want you to
understand what they are. The 35,000 vacancies. We have 370,000
employees. That makes a 9 percent vacancy rate, which is not
overly high. So, you are always going to have 40,000 vacancies
during the course of the year. The 35,000 are part of that
turnover rate, and as I already mentioned, we had a net gain of
8,303 employees last year. So, we are not only keeping up----
Senator Murray. OK. But we have got secret waiting lists
for group mental health care, wait times. This is all from the
IG. I am not making this up.
Secretary Shulkin. No. No, I have got it. We have a big
system. Secret wait times, we have clearly said to all of our
leadership are not to occur, not acceptable. If we find them,
there are disciplinary actions.
In Colorado, I think that this was one clinic, and it was--
I believe, and I may stand corrected--I believe that the
facility actually identified that and dealt with that issue.
So, that was there. It was dealt with. It was a deviation that
is not acceptable. This is not representative of what is
happening across the country.
Wait times we continue to struggle with. We have made
progress, there is no doubt, The data says we have made
progress, but we are not anywhere near where we need to be.
Senator Murray. No, we are not.
Secretary Shulkin. I agree. and we are working on it. We
are making progress every day. What we have indicated--our
progress in is in matching clinical urgency and need to access.
Senator Murray. OK, well----
Secretary Shulkin. But--yeah.
Senator Murray [continuing]. This goes back to my original
question. We need you to tell us how much you are spending----
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Murray [continuing]. And what you are asking us for
these veterans.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Murray. We need to know that.
Secretary Shulkin. Yep.
Senator Murray. OK.
Secretary Shulkin. Thank you.
Chairman Isakson. Senator Sullivan is recognized for the
patience-of-Job award.
HON. DAN SULLIVAN, U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
Senator Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
good to see you. I am going to start with just some thanks and
kudos to you and your team. We finally passed out of the
Committee here the Serving Our Rural Veterans Act, which was
Senator Tester and I's bill, but you were kind of the
brainstorm on that when you and I were in Alaska. So, your team
and I--we all worked together well on that. Hopefully we get
that across the Senate floor. So, I want to thank you for
really helping inspire the idea and having the team.
I also want to thank you, Dr. Ballard. Alaska is doing a
great job.
Secretary Shulkin. Good.
Senator Sullivan. We have added over 100 employees----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Sullivan [continuing]. Including two docs, at the
CBOC in the Mat-Su Valley----
Secretary Shulkin. Wow.
Senator Sullivan [continuing]. Which has been--we have not
had a doctor there in 5 years.
Secretary Shulkin. I am impressed. That is great.
Senator Sullivan. It was kind of the crisis situation that
Senator Tester was talking about. We filled it. I know you had
a focus on that, so I appreciate that.
I was in the Kenai Peninsula yesterday with some
constituents, actually having coffee; been doing a lot of that.
One of them asked me, ``Hey, what are we doing, Senator, on
suicide?'' From, you know, an older gentleman, just really
concerned. I talked about the Clay Hunt Suicide Prevention Act.
I talked about some of the other issues. So, could you
literally talk to this constituent right now and say, ``Hey,
here is what else we are focusing on?'' Because I know you are
focused a lot, but sometimes it does not always get out, and I
thought, you know, having the Secretary here to answer----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Sullivan [continuing]. A constituent of mine would
be beneficial.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah. Real briefly, last week the
President signed an Executive Order where 100 percent of
transitioning servicemembers are going to have a mental health
benefit for 12 months.
Senator Sullivan. Right.
Secretary Shulkin. We have expanded mental health services,
emergency services, for those that are other-than-honorable. We
are making sure our Veterans Crisis Line is being answered--now
less than 1 percent of dropped calls and the calls answered
within 11 seconds. We are adding 1,000 mental health
professionals. We have offered same-day services for mental
health in any one of our facilities where people present.
We are using predictive analytics, and a program called
Reach Vet to identify those at highest risk by going out and
actually contacting them, then bringing them in. We are using
community partnerships like Give an Hour and the Cohen Veterans
Network as a way to supplement the types of services available
to our veterans. Our Vet Centers are open for walk-in services.
We can see family members as well as veterans, to be able to
help them. We are also looking at a number of other things that
can help reduce this crisis, quite frankly.
Senator Sullivan. Well, thank you for that. I know the
Committee is very interested. We have a lot of bipartisan
support on that.
Let me ask another, you know, Senator Hirono talked about
homelessness, and I know we are all focused on it. Probably one
of the best ways to deal with homelessness is grow the economy,
and I think the administration deserves credit and a lot of
kudos on that, right? We are probably going to have a fourth
quarter of last year that is probably going to be another
really strong 3 percent, maybe even 4 percent GDP growth,
right?
Secretary Shulkin. Yep.
Senator Sullivan. I mean, we have not grown like that in
over a decade.
Secretary Shulkin. Yep.
Senator Sullivan. I mean, there is a lot the VA can do, but
if you do not have a strong economy, you are going to have more
homelessness. So, I commend the administration for its focus on
that.
Let me turn to an Alaska-specific issue. You know the
uniqueness of our State. You have been up there, and I look
forward to getting you up there again, as the Secretary. But,
the VA central office has made a policy call which would change
the reimbursement rates for military partnerships to be in line
with Medicare rates, and this would have a very negative impact
on our VA partnerships with some of our DOD partners, the 673rd
Medical Group there at Joint Base Elmendof-Richardson.
Can you commit to me to make sure that you are taking
feedback from all local VAs--you know how unique many of them
are throughout the State--and ensure that they understand the
kind of ramifications of this policy change? As you know, in
this country of ours, one size never fits all. What works in
Alaska does not work in Connecticut or other places, and vice
versa. So, can you just make sure--can I get your commitment on
this issue before there is some kind of big change? You will
look at it for the ramifications in Alaska and other places,
plus get feedback from leaders, like Dr. Ballard and others,
before you guys make kind of a one-size-fits-all call, which my
folks back home are saying would be very negative, at least in
terms of Alaska?
Secretary Shulkin. Absolutely. I think you have always been
effective at describing the situation in Alaska and other parts
of the country that need different types of programs in it, and
we certainly are open to that feedback. We will reach out to
you to make sure that we are connecting with the people you
think we should connect with.
[The information requested during the hearing follows:]
Response to Request Arising During the Hearing by Hon. Dan Sullivan to
Hon. David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs
Prior to making any changes please commit to receive feedback from
local VA facilities regarding the ramifications of the VACO policy that
would change the reimbursement rates of military partnerships to be in
line with Medicare rates.
Response. The Department will solicit feedback prior to making
changes.
Senator Sullivan. Great. I appreciate that.
This is just really more of a comment. I know, earlier in
the hearing, you talked about, and the Chairman asked about
making sure that we get the other Senate-appointed--or
Presidential-appointed, Senate-confirmed positions.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Sullivan. You know, we need to get those from you.
I would ask my colleagues on this side of the aisle, on the
other side of the aisle, though, none of the games, right? We
have had historic records of just holding up nominees for no
other reason than to just hold them up on the other side.
So, you guys get them out and I ask my colleagues here, no
footsies with these nominees. Let us get them confirmed, let us
get them going. We do not need 40 hours of debate on some of
these. They are not going to be controversial. Delays and
delays and delays on, you know, Senate, or Presidential-
appointed nominees, particularly as it relates to the VA----
Secretary Shulkin. Right.
Senator Sullivan [continuing]. Would be a shame. So, we
want to work with you on that, and I certainly hope everybody
on this Committee wants to do that.
Secretary Shulkin. Senator, yes. I do not think you were
here when I said I think we have the best Committee in the
Senate. We have not seen any of those games. You guys have done
everything that we have asked. We owe you the nominees, and
then I am sure----
Senator Sullivan. I agree with that.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. That you will do your job.
Senator Sullivan. Good point on the Committee.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah. Yeah.
Senator Sullivan. Those games do not occur on this
Committee.
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Sullivan. The games occur on the floor of the
Senate, where this administration's nominees----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Sullivan [continuing]. Have been----
[Overlapping speakers.]
Secretary Shulkin. Fortunately, not with VA.
Senator Sullivan [continuing]. Delayed in ways----
Secretary Shulkin. Right.
Senator Sullivan [continuing]. That have been unfortunately
historic----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Sullivan [continuing]. And should not happen at
all, but it definitely should not happen with nominees to go
fill senior VA positions.
Secretary Shulkin. That is right. Thank you.
Senator Sullivan. All right. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you very much for your service, and
thank you. By the way, I will point out our Secretary was the
only Cabinet member who was unanimously approved in his
nomination and confirmation, which is a testimony to him and
the job the VA is doing.
I think Senator Blumenthal and Senator Tester have another
question or two. I would ask that they be as brief as possible
and succinct, to get to the point.
Who wants to be first?
Senator Tester. Go ahead, Senator Blumenthal. Go ahead.
Chairman Isakson. Senator Blumenthal.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for spending the extra time with us and being so
forthcoming in your responses.
I want to come back to some of the questions that have been
asked about the vacancies----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Blumenthal [continuing]. And the 9 percent turnover
that you described.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Blumenthal. Has the composition of that turnover,
or the vacancies, changed at all? In other words, are there
more positions? Are they more psychiatrists? I know we have
talked about the difficulty of recruiting people, in
particular, specialty providers to the VA.
Secretary Shulkin. They do and they change by location. In
Montana, our biggest vacancy is physician assistants, a 36
percent vacancy rate. We have about 15 occupations that we see
as critically hard to hire right now. They are the ones that we
have gone to OPM, Office of Personnel Management, for direct
hire authority, that they are working with us on. We have
difficulty--we have 2,428 vacancies for physicians right now.
Last year we had a net gain of 266. So, while we are making an
improvement, it is only about 10 percent of the improvement we
need. We have 5,507 nurse vacancies right now. Last year we had
a gain of 1,494. Nursing assistants, we have 1,268 open, and
they vary by region.
So, that is how we recruit by region. We had a recruitment
problem in Little Rock last year, where we were desperately
short of nurses. We had a hiring fair where we hired 87 nurses
in a single day. So, we are approaching this by a regional
effort, but the most important part is for us to know where our
shortages are, and we do have that data.
Senator Blumenthal. I also want to ask about the education
issue that I mentioned.
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Senator Blumenthal. Could you give me some idea of what
action has been taken----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Blumenthal [continuing]. What is the plan, and so
forth?
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah. So, the biggest thing that we have
done--and I really think you got it right. I do want to do
something on this. I think that there is an issue, and I know
you believe that too. We have put caution flags up on our
comparison tool for veterans. Meaning when a veteran goes to
our education site and looks at what their options are, there
are actually caution flags for deceptive marketing and some of
the other practices. We do about 5,000 compliance visits a year
to these schools, and where we find concerns, the way that I
know you have them, we actually share that information with our
veterans.
Now a lot of veterans still go on and choose to enroll in
those schools, and as long as they have a State accreditation
our current policy is that we will continue to pay for that. We
have been battling, sometimes publicly, with schools that have
struggled with their State accreditations, and we are trying to
hold firm to protecting veterans and doing the right thing.
Do I think we can do more? I do, and would look forward to
working with you on that.
Senator Blumenthal. I would welcome that work.
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Blumenthal. To be absolutely frank, I have been
unhappy----
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Blumenthal [continuing]. With some of the laggard
and lacking action on the part of the Department of Education--
--
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Blumenthal [continuing]. Which has much bigger
impact on these practices and predatory actions of for-profit
schools around the country. So, I very much welcome your
dedication to this cause.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you.
Secretary Shulkin. Thank you.
Senator Blumenthal. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you. Senator Tester.
Senator Tester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
being here, Secretary Shulkin. I would just add on to Senator
Sullivan's comments that you continue to put forth good people,
some of which are behind you, that we have confirmed. We will
continue to get them out of this Committee as quickly as
possible. I will put pressure on my side of the aisle to get
them through the Senate as soon as possible. We have not done
that here, but you have put forth good candidates, which I
think is the key.
Look, I have an editorial comment very quickly. Timing for
the allocation of dollars for services for the new Community
Care program is in the Caring for Our Veterans Act. The fix to
the medical director hiring provision that we talked about----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Tester [continuing]. When they did the first round
is in the----
Secretary Shulkin. Yes, it is.
Senator Tester [continuing]. Caring for Our Veterans Act.
The Serving Rural Veterans Act that you worked hard on with
Senator Sullivan is in the Caring for Our Veterans Act. We
talked about the shortage of docs nationwide, the 1,500
residency slots are in the Caring for Our Veterans Act. Yet, a
number of another reasons why we hope to get your support of
this bill publicly, because I think this bill would have been
passed already----
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Tester [continuing]. If we could have gotten you on
board.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Tester. Look, I do not want to be hardcore about
this, but I am going to be hardcore about this. I would really
like to get a list of about five specific things that the VA
central office is going to do above and beyond what you are
currently doing to address the clinical vacancies in our State.
My staff says they wanted it done by the end of the week but it
is already Wednesday. Could you get that to me in a week?
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Tester. Perfect.
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Tester. You know, I sent out for online questions
for you----
Secretary Shulkin. Yeah.
Senator Tester [continuing]. And I think it is important.
Secretary Shulkin. Your Facebook page.
Senator Tester. Yes. We got a bunch of excellent questions,
but I just picked this one. What have you done to remove the
barriers for women's health care and how are you responding to
veterans with MST?
Secretary Shulkin. Well, I believe that we have done a lot
to remove barriers for women's health care, but we have a lot
more to do. One of the things that we are doing is we are
continuing to train more providers in specialty-specific
practices to care for women veterans, so that we can expand our
access. So, I believe we are holding a conference in the very
near future in Orlando to train another 332 VA providers in
women-specific care, in which they will be certified to be able
to go out to expand practices throughout the country. I think
that is critical. We continue to look at sites that are not
providing women's health care clinics, and making sure that
they are developing them as well.
Women are our fastest-growing demographic.
Senator Tester. Yep.
Secretary Shulkin. We know our culture has not
traditionally been as sensitive to them as needed. That is why
we have FACA, a Federal advisory committee, telling us how we
can do a better job for women veterans. We are listening to
their advice. We have a director at the Center for Women
Veterans and we are trying to do as much as we can. If you
think that there is more we can do, or you--anybody is making
suggestions, please let us know.
Senator Tester. We will do that, and thank you for that.
One last thing. We talked about opioids. It is a huge
problem, and we all know it is a huge problem. Within the VA,
outside the VA, it is a problem. I know that Attorney General
Sessions has said no more marijuana. It is going to be nowhere.
Montana is one of those States that said it would legalize it
for medical purposes.
Look, I am not enamored with the crap--I will just tell you
that--but the VA is a big dog, OK?
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Tester. If marijuana helps people that have chronic
pain, we ought to be doing research on it, and you guys do the
research.
Secretary Shulkin. Yep.
Senator Tester. I know you came out with a statement that
said no more research.
Secretary Shulkin. No. Actually, let me clarify that.
Senator Tester. Perfect. I want to hear the clarification.
Secretary Shulkin. OK. OK. What I said is that, first of
all, VA has done research on marijuana----
Senator Tester. Yeah.
Secretary Shulkin [continuing]. But it has not been
dispensing marijuana and testing its impact.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Secretary Shulkin. It has been observational, or, let us
say, for data analysis.
Senator Tester. Right.
Secretary Shulkin. VA can do research on marijuana, but I
said that we are restricted, because it is a Class 1 substance,
so we have to go through multiple agencies, and it is very
challenging to work our way through that process. We do have
the ability to do it. I have said I am in favor of exploring
anything that will help our veterans and be able to relieve
some of their suffering.
So, it is challenging to get through that process. Our
researchers are working through that process right now. If
Congress made it easier to go through the process it would
probably happen faster.
Senator Tester. Well, I would just tell you this. Look, I
do not have chronic pain. I know people that do. I do not care
if it is marijuana or sagebrush or thistle or cactus. I do not
give a damn so long as it helps them.
Secretary Shulkin. Mm-hmm.
Senator Tester. Especially when we are fighting the opioid
crisis----
Secretary Shulkin. Yes.
Senator Tester [continuing]. We are today, we ought to be
doing research to make sure it is real. That is all.
Secretary Shulkin. I agree.
Senator Tester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your
flexibility.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you, Senator Tester. I appreciate
your contribution and the contribution of all Committee
Members.
I want to wish Gretchan Blum the very best in her wishes,
and thank you very much for what you have done for the
Committee and our veterans.
I thank all of you who came here today, particularly our
VSO representatives who will be heard from at great length in
February, when we have the VSO meetings, which we appreciate.
The record will be kept open for 7 days for any Member who
would like to include their written statement or ask questions
for the record, or any other comments we might want to have.
We have a long to-do list, a lot of things to do. This is a
hearing to reflect on what we talked about and we wanted to do,
the bills we passed to cause it to happen, and now the
accountability phase, where, not just at this meeting, but
every year we want to analyze where we have been and where we
are going. Hopefully, we are always improving the services to
our veterans, lessening, wherever possible, the cost to our
taxpayers, but most importantly, making sure we pay back those
who have given so much to our country, the veterans of the
United States of America.
With that said, is there any other business to come before
the Committee? My staff--have I forgotten anything?
We are good. This meeting is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:46 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
Response to Posthearing Questions Submitted by Hon. Johnny Isakson to
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
Question 1. I have consistently said that efforts to overhaul VA's
appeals process must include efforts to address the over 470,000
existing appeals. In VA's Comprehensive Plan for Processing Legacy
Appeals and Implementing the Modernized Appeals System that was
submitted to Congress in November 2017, it states that VA plans to
allocate resources to establish ``timely processing in the new system
and will allocate all remaining appeals resources to address the
inventory of legacy appeals.''
a. What does ``timely processing'' mean and what are VA's specific
goals?
Response. VA has committed to an average processing time goal of
125 days to complete higher-level reviews and supplemental claims under
the new appeals process, and 365 days to complete appeals to the Board
of Veterans' Appeals (Board) in which there is no additional evidence
and no request for a hearing. The Board is working collaboratively with
the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA), VA Program Management
Professionals, and US Digital Service (USDS) on establishing timeliness
goals for the remaining two dockets in the new process. VA will
continue to gather data and conduct trend analyses on aspects of
Veterans' behavior, to include their decision to elect to participate
in the new process, the distribution of elections among the new process
lanes, claims processing timeliness, and individual employee
productivity. The Rapid Appeals Modernization Program (RAMP) test
program will provide better data and trend analysis for capacity
modeling the resources needed for these other dockets prior to the
implementation date. The Board will use the actual data obtained
regarding appellant behavior in the new system to assist in developing
future resource requirements as part of the annual budget process.
The 2017 Government Accountability Office report recommended that
VA conduct additional sensitivity analyses of its forecast modeling to
more accurately estimate future appeals inventories, timeliness, and
cost factors. VA has developed a more robust, scalable model that
allows for the recommended analysis. The model may serve several
specific purposes, to include:
Estimating the legacy inventory remaining as
implementation of appeals modernization approaches;
Determining the impact of the claim disagreement rate on
the new system inventory;
Determining the distribution of resources given Veterans'
choices among new system lanes;
Determining the efficiency of the new process and the
allocation of resources based on estimated employee productivity rates
across the various new system decision review and appeal lanes; and
Adjusting, as needed, resources required to eliminate the
legacy inventory as quickly as possible, while also meeting established
timeliness goals in the new system.
VA will continue to verify and validate the model to ensure the
accuracy of its outputs and its utility in VA's appeals modernization
forecasting.
Besides forecast modeling, the Board will also continue to refine
and improve its process model to capture additional changes aimed at
improving the timeliness of appeals under the new system.
b. Does VA have timeliness goals for the inventory of legacy
appeals?
Response. VA tracks appeals processing goals under certain cycle
measures. These measures track both inventory and timeliness at stages
in the appeals process. As noted in VA's May 2017 Annual Performance
Plan and Report, among the appeals measures that VA tracks are the
following: Notice of Disagreement (NODs) pending inventory, NODs
average days pending, Substantive Appeals to the Board (Form 9) pending
inventory, Substantive Appeals to the Board (Form 9) average days to
complete, and Substantive Appeals to the Board (Form 9) average days
pending. For a listing of all appeals measures, to include Board
measures, that VA tracks, please see the full report, available at
https://www.va.gov/budget/docs/VAapprFY2018.pdf.
While VA tracks appeals processing goals under certain cycle
measures, VA is unable to set a realistic and comprehensive timeliness
goal that measures legacy appeals processing from the date the appeal
is filed to when it is finally resolved. This is because appeals in the
current legacy process has no defined endpoint and can cycle through
various steps, several times, before moving to the next phase in the
process. The current multi-step process is too inefficient; splits
jurisdiction for processing appeals between the agency of original
jurisdiction and the Board; and features an open record and ongoing
duty to assist. As a result, the continuous evidence gathering and
readjudication prolong the ability to reach a final decision.
The rate at which the legacy appeals inventory can be resolved is
dependent on a number of factors and variables, including funding made
available to appeals processing through the annual budget
appropriations process in future years and the rate of election of
claimants with legacy appeals pending who opt-in to the new process.
The Board is working with program management staff and Digital
Service partners to develop milestones for the reduction of the legacy
inventory, considering such dependencies as the opt-in rate from RAMP
and statutory mechanisms, current resource levels, trends in
adjudication of legacy appeals at the agencies of original
jurisdiction, and increases in productivity resulting from the
strategies discussed above.
c. Does VA plan to prioritize new appeals over legacy appeals?
Response. No. VA's goal is to eliminate the inventory of legacy
appeals as quickly as possible while also maintaining timely processing
in the new system. The opt-in features, whereby Veterans with a pending
legacy appeal can elect to participate in the new process, will assist
VA in accomplishing that goal.
The Board is working with Digital Services partners to ensure that
Caseflow functionality includes the ability to continuously adjust the
case distribution ratio between all Board dockets based on actual data.
Adjusting the case distribution ratio will allow the Board to meet its
365-day average processing time goal for cases on the direct docket,
while ensuring fair treatment of legacy appeals and appeals on the new
system's hearing and evidence dockets by distributing cases from the
other dockets proportionate to the scale of each docket's inventory.
Question 2. VA began a Rapid Appeals Modernization Program (RAMP)
to pilot parts of the new Appeals system and to work on the existing
appeals backlog.
a. Under RAMP, what specific parts of the new appeals process is VA
testing?
Response. RAMP will assist the Department in testing a number of
elements of the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of
2017 (Modernization Act). The initiative, which was launched on
November 1, 2017, allows eligible participants with disability
compensation appeals pending with VBA the voluntary option to have
their decisions reviewed in the higher-level review or supplemental
claim lanes outlined in the Modernization Act. RAMP gives Veterans
early access to the benefits of the new system, while also allowing VA
to better position itself for full implementation in February 2019.
During RAMP, and with feedback from Veterans, Veterans Service
Organizations (VSOs), and congressional stakeholders, VA is testing the
new process from intake to issuance of a decision. This includes
testing the election opt-in notice, the new decision notice that meets
the requirements outlined in the statute, as well as internal standard
operating procedures. In addition, VA is testing information technology
solutions for managing Veterans' opt-in elections and capturing duty to
assist error data identified during higher-level reviews. During this
program, VA will gather data and conduct trend analyses on aspects of
Veterans' behavior, to include their decision to elect to participate
in the new process, the distribution of elections among the new process
lanes, and individual employee productivity. In addition, the data will
inform VA as to appropriate work credit, workload and resource capacity
estimates, as well as processing timeliness and quality metrics for the
new process.
b. What lessons have been learned so far?
Response. Although it is still too early in the process to glean
any meaningful lessons learned, to date, VA has seen lower than
expected opt-in rates from Veterans. That is in part because VA
initially extended the invitation to participate in RAMP to Veterans
who have the oldest appeals pending and may have reservations in
participating in the new process. As a result, VA is currently
reassessing its outreach and marketing campaign regarding RAMP. Also,
starting in February 2018, VA will open up the elections to newer
appeals, and will work with VSOs in reviewing processes that will allow
Veterans to opt-in at a faster rate.
c. When will this pilot program conclude?
Response. VA plans to invite most Veterans with pending legacy
appeals to participate in RAMP by February 2019 when it fully
implements the Modernization Act.
d. Why has VA decided to not pilot RAMP at the Board of Veterans
Appeals and test all aspects of the system?
Response. Currently, Veterans who receive a RAMP decision have the
option of appealing to the Board by filing a NOD. In October 2018, the
Board will begin adjudicating the first of these appeals in a phased
implementation to test processes and technology. Implementing RAMP will
allow the Board to identify and address potential issues and risks
relating to implementation of the new framework.
e. To date how many individuals with legacy appeals have opted in
to RAMP?
Response. As of May 14, 2018, 15,645 individuals, with a total of
19,208 legacy appeals pending, have opted to participate in RAMP.
f. Are there any concerns that RAMP may not be an adequate solution
to drive down the pending legacy appeal inventory?
Response. VA believes it is too early to conclude that RAMP is not
an adequate solution. Since the inception of RAMP, in November 2017,
15,645 individuals, with 19,208 appeals have decided to opt in to RAMP.
In addition, the earlier requirement that Veterans need to be
``invited'' into RAMP was removed on April 2, 2018, and now any
eligible Veteran with a pending disability compensation appeal can
choose to opt in to RAMP, and benefit from the faster review process.
RAMP allows Veterans and appellants with pending disability
compensation appeals not yet activated at the Board the choice for
early resolution of their appeals at VBA. RAMP provides Veterans and
appellants the choice to opt into the benefits of the new appeals
framework and will reduce the number of appeals under the current,
legacy system. Thus, VA is working closely with VSOs, and external
stakeholders to encourage participation in RAMP. VA's legacy reduction
plan includes RAMP and initiatives to improve appeals production.
g. Are there other solutions VA is looking at?
Response. VA is working with its VSO partners in assessing ways to
increase individual RAMP opt-in rates. In addition, VA is continuously
evaluating ways to increase efficiencies. For instance, VBA is
considering plans to consolidate processing of all remands at the
Appeals Resource Center. The Board is completing its hiring plan in
fiscal year (FY) 2018, seeking opportunities to enhance training and
employee engagement for all staff, and working with a VA Program
Management team and IT/Digital Service staff to re-engineer processes
and implement technological upgrades promoting increased decision
production. The Board is already seeing positive results from our
multi-faceted approach to reducing the pending legacy inventory. To
date in FY 2018, the Board has signed 24,468 decisions, which is an
increase of 13,073 signed decisions over the same time period in FY
2017. VA will consider recommendations of the Committee.
Question 3. Under the new Appeals Act, Congress deliberately gave
VA the flexibility to take the needed amount of time to get the new
system right, but also gave the Secretary the responsibility for
signing off that the new system is ready before it fully replaces the
existing system.
a. Although it is still early in the implementation process, does
VA anticipate launching the new system in February 2019 or taking more
time?
Response. VA anticipates launching the new appeals system in
February 2019.
b. What specific indicators will you look for when deciding to move
ahead or take more time?
Response. VA will look at the following indicators when assessing
its readiness for full implementation:
Status of the rulemaking: If public comments prompt
extensive revisions to draft regulations, VA may need more time to make
the revisions, gain stakeholder buy-in, and complete the approval
process.
Lessons learned from processing of higher-level reviews
and supplemental claims in RAMP: Should VA's experience in RAMP
indicate significant problems with the new processes and/or systems, VA
could potentially require more time to resolve these issues. However,
VA does not anticipate encountering any significant issues.
Status of IT systems development: If VA encounters
unanticipated delays in updating IT systems to support the new appeals
framework, VA may require more time to implement. However, at this
time, VA anticipates that the updates will be completed on time. The
Board has established timelines for development of necessary IT
systems, training and hiring of personnel, and publication of
regulations, among other dependencies. The Board is working with a VA
Program Manager to ensure that all dependencies are on track for full
implementation. In particular, the Board's progress in the areas of IT
systems, training, and publication of regulations will serve as strong
indicators as to VA's readiness to implement the new system.
Question 4. The Accountability and Whistleblower Protection Act
gave VA authority to remove unsuitable employees and authority for
direct hire of some critical positions.
a. What metric does VA use to determine how well it is doing at
removing unsuitable employees? What are those numbers currently?
Response. These are the two metrics that appear in the VA 2020-2024
Strategic Plan that will be used to measure VA compliance with the
Accountability and Whistleblower Protection Act. We have not performed
analysis based on these metrics. Performance-based action will be taken
against all proven poor performers within 90 days of substantiation of
poor performance. Appropriate disciplinary or adverse action will be
initiated against all employees within 90 days of substantiation of
misconduct.
b. How many employees has VA fired in 2017? How many of those were
allowed to retire or resign? How many were terminated during an initial
probationary period?
Response. There were 1,582 removals between June 23 and
December 31, 2017. Of these, 960 were removals of regular employees and
622 were terminations of probationary employees.
c. How many employees has VA hired under its new direct hire
authority for Veterans Integrated Service Networks (VISNs) and medical
center directors?
Response. In September 2017, VA hired one Medical Center Director
(Shreveport, Louisiana) using direct hire authority. No VISN Directors
were hired using the direct hire authority.
Question 5. What direct outreach has VA done to inform school
certifying officials about changes enacted in the Forever GI Bill? What
future plans does VA have for direct outreach to this group?
Response. On November 29, 2017, VA's Education Service conducted a
School Certifying Official (SCO) webinar on the Forever GI Bill and
provided information on our progress toward implementation. The webinar
also included a question and answer session in which Education Service
responded to questions from SCOs. VA sent targeted emails to SCOs on
the removal of the delimiting date for eligible beneficiaries and the
expansion of approvable Independent Study programs. In early
February 2018, Education Service held a focus group with stakeholders
including SCOs on its implementation plan for Section 107, and will
continue to engage with SCOs through regularly scheduled webinars,
targeted emails, state, regional, national conferences and serve as
resource to SCOs as they educate students at their facility on the
Forever GI Bill.
Question 6. How does VA plan to fill the role of Deputy Under
Secretary for Economic Opportunity in the Veterans Benefits
Administration and what is your timeline for noticing the position and
reviewing candidates?
Response. In response to Executive Order 13781 and the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) Directive M-17-22, VA has a comprehensive
modernization effort underway. While VA is continuing its efforts to
modernize its infrastructure and focus resources more efficiently, we
must evaluate the position and responsibilities of the Deputy Under
Secretary for Economic Opportunity (DUSEO) in accordance with our
modernization goals.
VBA has a newly appointed Under Secretary for Benefits, Dr. Paul R.
Lawrence. One of his top priorities is providing Veterans with the
benefits they have earned in a manner that honors their service. Under
his leadership, VBA is taking a comprehensive look at the layers of
oversight and organizational alignment to determine the most effective
and efficient manner to oversee the delivery of timely and accurate
benefits. To ensure continuity of operations and appropriate support,
the business lines that fall under the Office of Economic Opportunity
are reporting directly to the Principal Deputy Under Secretary for
Benefits.
Question 7. Do you expect any changes to the role of the Deputy
Under Secretary for Economic Opportunity or any significant changes to
the Office of Economic Opportunity?
Response. VBA is currently evaluating the role of the Deputy Under
Secretaries. As neither the Deputy Under Secretary for Economic
Opportunity or the Deputy Under Secretary for Disability Assistance are
encumbered at this time, all business lines that previously reported
those Deputy Under Secretaries are reporting directly to the Principal
Deputy Under Secretary for Benefits. This allows the business line
leaders direct access to top leadership. We will continue to assess if
this type of oversight is sustainable long-term and make adjustments to
positions and/or roles and responsibilities as necessary.
______
Response to Posthearing Questions Submitted by Hon. Jon Tester to
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
Question 8. I made it quite clear that I thought the Federal hiring
freeze was a bad decision for the President to make, but even after
that concluded, you've made the decision to continue a hiring freeze of
sorts at VA. Do you still believe that is the right decision, and do
you intend to continue it?
Response. Consistent with OMB Memorandum M-17-22, effective
April 26, 2017, VA removed hiring restrictions for field positions
located in the Veterans Health Administration's medical facilities (for
medical and non-medical positions), and for VBA regional and field
offices. The National Cemetery Administration had no restrictions, and
that remained unchanged. Hiring restrictions were also removed for the
following Executive level positions: Medical Center Directors; Network
Directors; Cemetery Directors; and VBA Regional Office Directors. This
allowed the Administrations to fill the positions they determined as
necessary to meet mission requirements.
Although the hiring freeze was lifted, the Secretary did direct
that managers be deliberative in the hiring actions taken to ensure VA
is postured for success as we implement overall Modernization efforts
and reform plans, in accordance with OMB Memorandum M-17-22, that
improve and ensure the more efficient and effective delivery of
services to Veterans, while identifying opportunities to reduce
duplication or overlap. To this end, VA maintains a process that
requires a thorough review before hiring all other positions outside of
those listed in the preceding paragraph. Hiring for all other positions
in the Administrations requires the appropriate Under Secretary level
approval. Recruitment for positions at VA's Central Office and all
other Executive level hiring requires approval by the VA Chief of
Staff.
Question 9. Last month, a VA official testified at HVAC that the
hiring freeze made it difficult for VA to keep up with purchasing
needed medical equipment. We also heard this month that the
administration's hiring freeze played a significant role in USDA
pulling out of the agreement to support VA's financial management
business transformation. In addition to these instances, do you believe
that veterans or programs serving veterans were harmed by the hiring
freeze?
Response. As referenced in the response to Question 8, VA leaders
are authorized to fill the positions they determine are necessary to
meet mission requirements. While hiring managers are expected to obtain
approval at the appropriate level in their chain of command prior to
filling certain positions (non-medical/clinical positions), this should
not have an adverse impact on the delivery of services to Veterans.
Question 10. The latest data from VA shows that in your continuing
hiring freeze, there are: 100 non-exempt vacancies in Human Resources,
and more than 2,700 non-exempt vacancies in VHA.
a. How many of those VHA vacancies are within VHA's workforce
management or human resources office?
Response. As referenced in the response to Question 8, VA leaders
are authorized to fill the positions they determine are necessary to
meet mission requirements. This includes H.R. positions across VHA.
While hiring managers are expected to obtain approval at the
appropriate level in their chain of command prior to filling certain
positions, VHA's Workforce Management and Consulting (WMC) Office has
been successful in getting approval to fill critical H.R. vacancies.
b. Do you believe addressing vacancies of positions that focus on
recruitment and retention would help address ongoing hiring challenges?
Response. Generally, the filling of H.R. vacancies can impact the
organization's ability to recruit and retain employees. It is
imperative that H.R. departments have the necessary staffing for its
organization in order to help mitigate overall hiring challenges. WMC
has submitted its vacancies for hiring exemption waivers and they have
been approved. As referenced in Question 8, the Under Secretary is
authorized to approve hiring for vacant positions that are necessary to
meet mission requirements. That includes vacant H.R. positions that are
required to support critical hiring needs.
Additionally, on January 24, 2018, the Office of Personnel
Management approved VA's request for Direct Hire Authority (DHA) for 15
occupations. H.R. Specialists (GS-201 series) and H.R. Assistants (GS-
203 series) are included on the list occupations approved for DHA. This
will assist the VA in filling these mission critical positions.
Question 11. Nearly two years ago, the National Academy of Medicine
released its final Agent Orange update, recommending three new
presumptions of service connection for Bladder Cancer, Hyperthyroidism,
and Parkinson-like conditions. I wrote to you in September with some
colleagues and asked for a decision from VA. In November you released a
statement stating your intent to ``explore new presumptive
conditions.'' Given the length of time since the National Academy of
Medicine released their recommendations, when can we expect these
veterans to be able to receive the health care and compensation they
earned?
Response. Once the President's nominee has been confirmed and sworn
in as Secretary, VA will examine the current policy, complete a full
review on this issue and provide new guidance on this issue as needed.
Question 12. Is there a treatment protocol in place at VA for
veterans with symptoms of Gulf War Illness? What is VA doing to advance
their care and treatment?
Response. VA has put considerable efforts into the diagnosis,
research and treatment of Gulf War Illness (GWI) also referred to as
Chronic Multi-symptom Illness. One of the most comprehensive documents
on treatment was a joint effort by VA and DOD entitled: The Management
of Chronic Multisymptom Illness (CMI) 2014. This Clinical Guideline
provides comprehensive evidence based recommendations incorporating
current information and practices for practitioners throughout the DOD
and VA Health Care systems. The guideline is intended to improve
patient outcomes and management of patients with CMI. The guideline is
available at: https://www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/MR/cmi/.
Post-Deployment Health Services/War Related Illness and Injury
Study Center (WRIISC) led the development of an extensive e-learning
module for clinicians on GWI available at: https://www.train.org/main/
course/1074205/. This e-learning module provides health care providers
with the knowledge needed to recognize, evaluate, manage and treat GWI
in Veterans and be able to apply the VA/DOD Clinical Practice Guideline
for Chronic Multi Symptom Illness. VA also oversees the Gulf War
Registry whereby thousands of Veterans get evaluated each year for
health conditions.
Recent research led by either the WRIISC and/or the Office of
Research and Development, focused on the treatments of GWI, has
included the topics of yoga, acupuncture, tai chi, dietary supplements
such as coenzyme Q10, cognitive behavioral therapy, light therapy,
exercise, inflammatory markers for diagnosis, and nasal continuous
pressure to alleviate sleep disorders in Gulf War Veterans.
VA also has a Research Advisory Committee (RAC) on Gulf War
Veterans' Illnesses that advises VA on studies that include potential
treatments. For more information, please visit https://www.va.gov/rac-
gwvi/. Gulf War RAC membership includes: Academics, Researchers,
Veterans, VA staff, VSOs and Scientists. For a list of members, please
visit https://www.va.gov/RAC-GWVI/Members_and_ Consultants.asp. There
is currently no accepted single clinical case definition for GWI/CMI.
VA contracted with the National Academy of Medicine (NAM) to evaluate
existing case definitions. In 2014, the NAM released a report noting it
was unable to find a single definition. VA has developed a plan to
create a single, validated case definition and will be initiating
research this year in execution of this plan.
Question 13. This summer, you stood with me in Montana and
announced that you would issue new regulations to help rural
communities build nursing homes for veterans. When will those be
released?
Response. VA is currently reviewing the proposed regulations. Upon
completion of the review, the regulations will be published as a
proposed rule, followed by a 60-day public comment period, and a final
rule that responds to public comments and makes the changes effective.
VA anticipates the proposed rule process may take 6 to 9 months.
Question 14. VA has nearly 1,000 open recommendations: 772 from the
OIG and 215 from GAO. Further, VA health care has been on the GAO High
Risk List for the past 3 years, and according to GAO, is not likely to
be removed any time soon.
a. What is your approach to addressing these open recommendations?
Response. VA is working to implement all open Government
Accountability Office (GAO) recommendations. Additionally, VA is
working with GAO to leverage GAO best practices to improve the
Department by the most effective and efficient means.
VA continuously works to address deficiencies identified by GAO
with an aim to resolve recommended actions within 3 years of report
publication.
Currently, 83 percent of VHA's open GAO recommendations were made
within that 3 year timeframe; 47 percent of them were made within the
past 12 months. VHA has requested GAO consider closure on 28 percent of
our open recommendations. In FY 2017 GAO closed 56 recommendations to
VHA and made 46 new recommendations.
Each Administration and Staff office within the Department is
responsible for providing the status on open Office of the Inspector
General (OIG) recommendations. The OIG process is to obtain updates
every 90 days until recommendations are closed. Each office works with
the OIG to close recommendations as quickly as possible.
b. Can you assure me that VA is using a strategic approach to
respond to these recommendations?
Response. Yes, the Department is using a strategic approach to
respond to recommendations. In FY 2017, for the first time, GAO
provided all Federal Agencies with a list of priority recommendations.
GAO identified 22 high-priority recommendations for VA, and the
Department is working to implement them. The Office of Enterprise
Integration considers open recommendations as they move to
strategically transform the Department.
Question 15. In response to a question after your confirmation
hearing, you agreed to provide quarterly briefings to staff on the
status of the Department's open recommendations from OIG, GAO, OSC and
others. When can we look forward to beginning those briefings?
Response. VA is in the process of analyzing various trends in GAO/
OIG/OSC reports and the Department looks forward to providing quarterly
briefings in the future.
Question 16. Do you have any data to demonstrate whether the
Department's removal actions under the new accountability law are
increasing across all grades, or whether you're seeing lower-level
employees disproportionately affected?
Response. The Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection
(OAWP) does not have visibility on all personnel actions. OAWP's scope
for actions are the Senior Executive Service (SES), SES equivalents,
and program managers at many levels that run major programs that have
an impact across VA. Actions taken with lower grade employees are
predominantly facility level actions.
Question 17. Mr. Secretary, in September the IG released a
memorandum detailing concerns with payment errors in the Choice
Program. The timeframe for the review of claims was November 1, 2014,
through September 30, 2016. Without yet getting into the December IG
report, my very narrow question for you is--what did you do in response
to that September memorandum?
Response. Through use of internal audit and assessment tools, VA
had identified overpayments to Third Party Administrators (TPAs)
through Veterans Choice Program prior to the issuance of the
September 2017 OIG memo and corrective actions were initiated before
its publication. Duplicate payments were identified to be a particular
area of vulnerability and, as a result, VA's Office of Community Care
implemented an automated internal control to identify and prevent
potential duplicate Choice payments prior to payment in the bulk
payment environment. Since implementation in July 2017, over $35
million in potential duplicate overpayments have been prevented.
As noted in the September 2017 memo, VA completed an extensive
analysis of prior Choice payments made in the bulk environment in the
summer of 2017 and identified more than $80 million dollars in
potential overpayments. This information was shared with the Choice
TPAs and VA OIG. VA continues to work closely with the VA OIG, VA OGC,
and other government stakeholders to ensure that overpayments through
the Choice program are identified and recovered.
Question 18. In December, a more exhaustive report was released by
the IG expanding on its earlier memorandum. My question for you is:
where are we today? If the IG's office were to knock on your door
today--would it find the same problems?
Response. The December 2017 OIG audit report focused on claims
processing using the Fee Basis Claims System (FBCS), a highly manual
claims processing system that is no longer utilized to process Choice
claims. The process that followed, known as bulk payments, involved
payments to TPAs in bulk form and was implemented to address delays in
payments to TPAs and maintain critical provider networks in the Choice
program. It was understood that this process would require post-payment
reviews and, as noted in response to Question 17, VA has since
implemented a process for preventing potential duplicate payments prior
to payment and has conducted, and will continue to conduct, post-
payment analyses to identify overpayments.
Starting in February 2017, VA's Financial Services Center (FSC)
began processing Choice claims and utilize an automated payment system
to conduct pre and post-payment analyses and to pay TPAs timely,
reducing the burden of manual work that previously was required using
the FBCS system. As of December 2017, more than 99 percent of clean
claims received by the FSC were paid within 30 days of receipt.
As noted in response to Question 17, VA continues to closely
collaborate with the VA OIG, VA OGC, and other government stakeholders
to ensure that overpayments made through the Choice program are
identified and recovered.
Looking forward, VA has incorporated many lessons learned from the
Choice Program into its Community Care Network request for proposal
(RFP) and future contracts will include stringent requirements for
timeliness and accuracy of claims payments by TPAs. In parallel, VA
will continue to strengthen its internal abilities to improve accuracy
of payments and detect and prevent fraud, waste, and abuse (FWA). VA's
Office of Community Care is currently working collaboratively with
other government agencies including CMS and the Department of Treasury
on joint initiatives to reduce FWA. In addition, a Federal Advisory
Committee consisting of national experts in FWA detection and
prevention is advising VA and VA's Office of Community Care is working
closely with this Committee to identify further opportunities to reduce
FWA in VA's Community Care Programs.
Question 19. I am pleased to see that after much prodding from
Congress the Department has finally decided to more aggressively
address delayed payments to community providers. What took so long for
VA to become more aggressive on this issue? What are the changes
community providers can expect?
Response. VA has been proceeding with individual solutions to
address individual provider needs as our teams become aware. We believe
that this more comprehensive approach is needed to ensure that VA is
committed to resolving the provider payment issues. VA is taking the
following multi-pronged approach to resolve these issues:
First, VA is optimizing staffing levels and labor mix to increase
claims output and enhancing Contact Center capabilities. Customer
service functions performed by the claims processors will be
transitioned to the Contact Center over the next year. This will allow
additional claims to be processed as the staff transition. The Contact
Center will also utilize email to increase the number of inquiries they
can field from providers
Focus on provider education on Vendor Inquiry System, which allows
providers direct access to claims status via a website.
Second, VA is increasing workload of claims processing vendors and
dedicating teams to resolving outstanding claims with major providers.
VA is shifting more claims to vendors over the next several months. The
target is to increase to 840,000 per month by March 2018. This
represents about 40 percent of incoming claims volume. VA has also
created rapid response teams to develop tailored resolutions working
with the top 20 providers. Outreach has begun with a target of
resolving outstanding issues by April 3, 2018. After this effort is
completed, the teams will move onto other providers.
The third prong is to continue to make implement IT solutions to
improve productivity. Existing claims processing systems has two
enhancements to reduce manual processing that will be implemented by
September 2018. We are also implementing a process to convert paper
claims to electronic, reducing manual entry of claims. In addition, a
new claims processing system will be in use at the end of 2019.
Question 20. We've received a lot of enthusiastic feedback from
veterans about the Edith Norse Rogers STEM scholarship, which provides
additional GI Bill benefits to students in programs of study that are
STEM or a field which the Secretary has identified as a national need.
Despite this enthusiasm we have not yet received any feedback on how
this benefit will be implemented, or how the Department will use this
new authority to identify fields of study which are a national need.
When can we expect to see VA's implementation plan for the Edith Norse
Rogers STEM Scholarship?
Response. VA is analyzing statutory requirements to develop
planning documents for the STEM scholarship, which does not go into
effect until August 1, 2019. The requirements for this provision do not
conform to VA's current technology and business rules for the Post-9/11
GI Bill; therefore, VA has identified the VA Regional Processing Office
in Buffalo, NY, as the sole site dedicated to processing and tracking
the STEM Scholarship. VA expects a more fully developed plan with
regulatory, communication and program requirements to be drafted by
December 2018.
Question 21. The Forever GI Bill appropriates $30 million to the
secretary for changes and improvements to the information technology
systems used to administer veterans education benefits. Please provide
us with a description of the IT requirements that VA has to improve
their IT systems and a detailed spending plan for that $30 million?
Response. Section 115 of the Colmery Act authorizes $30 million
specifically for the automation of the remaining supplemental claims
and original claims processing. To date, no funding has been
appropriated. Notwithstanding the absence of resources, the Office of
Information Technology (OIT) in coordination with Education Service has
committed to address those provisions of the Act that are most
critical. Those include Sections 107, 501 and 112. This work is being
absorbed into ongoing education systems modernization effort focused on
the retirement of the Benefits Delivery Network (BDN) that was already
underway.
Additionally, VBA's Education Service and OIT are partnering to
explore managed services opportunities to deliver all education
benefits. We are targeting FY 2019 (after the BDN decommissioning is
largely complete) for a potential managed services implementation.
If this approach is successful, we should be able to integrate the
remaining Forever GI Bill provisions needing an IT solution into
Education IT systems in FY 2019 through managed services. If a managed
services solution is deemed not feasible we will employ a traditional
development approach, subject to the availability of funding.
In summary, this approach, achieved through VBA/OIT partnership
ensures that all Forever GI Bill provisions are implemented on time for
Veterans, while enabling VA/OIT to best position the supporting IT
environment for the future.
Question 22. State Approving Agencies provide the on the ground
workforce that ensures VA education benefits are being used on quality
programs of study. The Forever GI Bill appropriated an additional $3
million to be provided to the State Approving Agencies for fiscal year
2019 and another $2 million for each fiscal year after that. Can you
provide details for the Committee on how you plan to work with the SAAs
to divide that money amongst each state? Will you ensure that states
which currently only receive enough funding to hire one full time
employee will be prioritized to ensure that no state is left with
funding for ``1.5'' full time employees?
Response. The Forever GI Bill authorized an additional $2 million
for FY 2018 for State Approving Agencies (SAA) funding, which increased
the funding from $19 million to $21 million. An additional $2 million
will be authorized in FY 2019, increasing the total funding from $21
million to $23 million and allowing for a cost of living allowance
increase.
Currently, VA is using an engineered model that distributes the SAA
funding based on workload, training, size and type of schools, and
approval and compliance requirements. VA will continue to work with the
Contract Committee of the National Association of State Approving
Agencies (NASAA) regarding the SAA allocation model and formulas. VA
anticipates a thorough review of the allocation model prior to FY 2019,
with potential contractor analysis, to ensure appropriate and equitable
funding distribution.
The current allocation model determines the individual SAA funding
based on the workload required and distributes the overall funding
(currently $21 million) based on the number of full-time employees
(FTE) needed to perform the work. The model may determine that a state
requires two FTE, and allocates $200,000 toward the staffing costs.
However, due to fluctuations in state salaries and benefits packages
that amount may be sufficient in one state to hire three FTEs; in
another state, two FTEs; and in another state, one FTE. VA does not
dictate to an SAA how they must utilize the funding provided; the SSA
determines how many FTEs they can hire with the funding provided.
Question 23. VA provided committee staff information on the number
of students who applied to have their benefits restored in the wake of
the ITT closure. VA stated that they received 441 applications, and
have restored benefits for 302 students. 441 students responding when
over 12,000 veterans attended ITT in the 2016-2017 school year alone is
not a good response rate. What outreach is VA using to reach impacted
students? What are examples of outreach they've done to reach them? And
finally, why have 140 veterans applied but not had their benefits
restored?
Response. During the week of November 9, 2017, VA provided
notification to 8,000 students identified as potentially eligible to
have benefits restored under the Special Application provision of
Section 109. Of those, approximately 80 percent received an email with
a letter, instructions, and a form to apply for restoration. The
remaining 20 percent received the same documentation via postal mail.
As of January 26, 2018, VA has received over 700 applications and
restored over 4500 months of entitlement to almost 450 individuals.
To reach the population of students impacted by this closure, VA
announced through its social media outlets instructions for restoring
entitlement, established a new webpage with additional information
(https://benefits.va.gov/gibill/fgib/ restoration.asp), and issued
three email missives to over 1.2 million individuals VA is committed to
restoring benefits to all eligible Veterans and will continue to
promote and encourage Veterans to apply for restoration through all
available outlets including Facebook and Twitter. VA plans a 90-day
follow-up communications effort.
VA was not able to restore benefits for all Veterans who applied as
they did not meet the criteria for restoration. In most instances, it
was because the beneficiary was not enrolled in the closed school
within 120 days of its closure, or the beneficiary transferred credits
to a comparable program at a new school thereby making them ineligible
for restored benefits.
Question 24. In a question taken for the record from your
confirmation hearing you committed to reporting back to this Committee
within three months with your recommendation for practical and
realistic steps VA can take to ensure student veterans are protected
from predatory and deceptive practices and given the information they
need to make an informed choice about their college. What is the status
of your report to the Committee?
Response. VA was asked to report on the steps used to actively
prevent and detect the utilization of predatory and deceptive practices
by institutions approved for GI Bill benefits. VA now completes a
three-step process to identify and remove predatory and deceptive
practices and ensure student Veterans are given the information they
need to make an informed choice about their college:
1. Program Approval: VA has been collaborating with SAAs to ensure
that advertising and recruiting materials are thoroughly vetted for
accuracy during the approval process. The SAA and VA complete initial
training and follow up training with the school officials and provide
continuous updates to ensure new laws and policies are implemented
timely for school enrollment certifications. Furthermore, the VA and
SAAs monitor and provide guidance as school's update or change their
academic programs.
2. Online Resources: VA has updated information, functionality, and
options to the GI Bill Comparison Tool (i.e., new types of ``caution
flags,'' to alert prospective students about judgments, settlements,
and lawsuits regarding such prohibited practices) to ensure Veterans
make informed choices about their benefits. In addition, VA continues
to use the GI Bill Feedback System to receive student feedback about
schools and to identify trends and risk indicators of ``bad actor''
schools to trigger targeted, Risk-Based Reviews. Finally, VA offers an
online tutorial called Choosing the Right School that educates users on
the steps to take to make sure they find a school that is the right
fit. The tutorial provides resources to gauge and evaluate interests,
pay scales, accreditation, and Veteran support.
3. Compliance Surveys: VA and SAAs conduct, on average, more than
5,000 compliance reviews per year, which includes examination of a
school's advertising and recruiting materials. VBA's Education Service
and NASAA recently established a Risk-Based Review Workgroup comprised
of VA and SAA staff to analyze and implement policy change and to
provide guidance regarding SAA coordination and completion of Risk-
Based Reviews, all aimed at preventing fraudulent and misleading
practices.
VA does not expect to complete a report at this time.
Question 25. HUD recently reported an increase in homeless veterans
last year and this month HUD will conduct a Point-in-Time count of
homeless veterans across the country. Likewise, the number of homeless
female veterans increased last year by 7 percent. A survey conducted by
the National Coalition for Homeless Veterans found that women veterans
are likely to access services from mainstream resources, instead of VA-
funded assistance resources. How are you going to specifically reach
out to women veterans at risk of, or currently experiencing,
homelessness?
Response. Local services and resource gaps may vary from site to
site. However, with the recent development and dissemination of VA
policy outlining specific expectations of VA medical centers (VAMCs)
regarding their participation in local coordinated entry systems, VA
homeless programs are required to coordinate with local community
providers. Such coordination is to conduct enhanced outreach efforts,
as well as facilitate VA services for female Veterans, regardless of
where they first seek services in that community. The outreach
activities, which will be coordinated with community partners, will be
conducted at programs, community centers, and specifically VAMCs as
well as other sites not typically identified as `homeless service
provider facilities. With the VAMC full participation in coordinated
entry in each community, our efforts will broaden engagement of
homeless women Veterans, or those at-risk for homelessness with VA
homeless services.
Question 26. Dr. Shulkin, the Nation and veterans are waiting
eagerly for VA to sign the EHR contract and begin the 8-year process to
fully deploy the new EHR. So, it's been 7 months since your
announcement, and a month since the procurement pause because of VA's
confusion about the contract's interoperability language. Can you
confirm whether your self-imposed December delay will lead to any price
increase?
Response. VA signed a contract with Cerner on May 17, 2018, to
modernize VA's legacy electronic health record (EHR) systems. The
Department is balancing the implementation timeline of the new EHR with
potential risks to cost, schedule, and performance minimizing potential
impacts to Veterans care. VA is also working closely with DOD to ensure
alignment with best practices from their commercial EHR implementation.
Question 27. Do you have the technical experts on-board to manage
the implementation of the contract?
Response. The terms and conditions of the 10-year Cerner contract
with VA calls for the delivery of all services and capabilities
necessary to successfully replace the disparate VistA EHR systems
across the entire VA enterprise over a 9-year and 6-month deployment/
implementation period. To ensure the field is represented and involved
in the management of the implementation, VHA is supporting the
Electronic Health Record Modernization (EHRM) by providing experts to
develop new workflow processes and using staff from the Office of Chief
Medical Officer. It is critical that we have engagement from frontline
staff (e.g. medical clinicians) in this process to ensure successful
implementation.
As an important cost control measure during the transition from the
VistA-based EHR solution to the Cerner product, VA will utilize
personnel transitioning from the legacy systems to train with, augment,
and then ultimately replace many of the Cerner contracted employees. We
believe this methodology enhances our integration posture and stability
of our workforce, which in turn enriches our overall change management
efforts. This transition will be a well-coordinated, documented,
controlled, and approved transition process with a clear understanding
that the quality of care to our Veterans must not be compromised. It is
anticipated these personnel would be transitioned in the out-years
(years 6 through 10).
VA is providing industry competitive compensation to attract highly
trained technical experts in the EHRM Program Management Office (PMO),
charged with providing oversight of Cerner contract. PMO employs highly
trained Government and Contractor personnel to provide this expert
oversight in a myriad of professional disciplines including: clinical,
technical, engineering, information assurance, security, testing,
acquisition, contracting, data migration, communication, independent
validation and verification, training, change management, governance
and many more. Together, these technical disciplines will manage the
contract's adherence to cost, schedule, and performance objectives, and
the corresponding management of associated project risks.
Additionally, functional and technology leads, and necessary
support staffs, were assigned by DOD at the inception of contract
negotiations to foster inclusion of the requisite lessons learned
throughout the VA contract negotiation process and will continue post-
contract award throughout EHR deployment/implementation.
Question 28. I think I speak for all of us in saying that we look
forward to you providing us more information on what the recent
Executive Order on mental health will mean for veterans in the long
run. There are news reports saying that VA will enroll all veterans for
a year. We also understand from press reports this effort will require
hundreds of millions of dollars.
a. Please provide information about how you are planning to handle
the strain on staff and your budget?
Response. VA estimates as much as $100 million from VA's existing
budget will be used to support implementation of the Executive Order
(EO), by realigning funds to support suicide prevention as one VA's
core priorities.
b. What initiatives will you NOT be able to complete due to
reallocation of dollars to this new effort?
Response. VHA is not setting aside any current initiatives in
attaining the full implementation of the EO.
Question 29. We are concerned about the risks faced by veterans who
received bad paper, many of whom received those discharges as a result
of conduct resulting from injuries they sustained in service. With
regard to the EO, what is the justification for excluding them from
this year of care?
Response. Currently, in some situations, VHA is bared by statute
from providing care, beyond emergency services/stabilization. With
respect to character of discharge, a transitioning Servicemember
generally is not eligible for VA benefits, to include mental health
care, if he or she is subject to a bar to benefits. Individuals bared
from receiving benefits include those who, unless considered insane,
were discharged or released as a conscientious objector or deserter, by
reason of general court-martial, or as a result of AWOL for a certain
period unless exempted. See 38 U.S.C. 5303(a), 38 C.F.R. 3.12(c). If
bared, VA may refer the individual to community resources (not at VA's
expense). For an individual ineligible for readjustment counseling
under 38 U.S.C. 1712A, VA provides referral services to assist the
individual in obtaining mental health care and services outside VA, and
if pertinent, advises the individual of his/her right to apply for a
review of the individual's discharge or release. See 38 U.S.C.1712A(c).
Question 30. The VA Choice and Quality Employment Act required VA
to establish a database that lists vacancies for critical, difficult-
to-fill, and mental health positions at VA.
a. What is the current status on implementing that system?
Response. VA has H.R. SMART, the VA's personnel data system, to
track vacancies for critical, difficult-to-fill, and mental health
positions at VA. We have also engaged in a VA-wide effort to validate
the data in the system. In February 2018, VA completed the Position
Vacancy Reconciliation Project, an extensive cleansing of vacant
position data in H.R. SMART. As a result, VA now has the ability to
identify vacancies for mission critical, including mental health,
positions.
b. Does the system ensure that folks who were qualified for, but
were not offered, a position are considered for other positions at VA?
Response. The system leverages USAJobs and USAStaffing in order to
generate a list of qualified candidates for positions. If a candidate
is qualified, but was not offered a position, the system does not
automatically allow the applicant to be considered for other positions
at VA. We are working with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on
system enhancements to USAStaffing to further improve/streamline this
process.
Question 31. Please provide a list of the 15 occupations that the
Department has submitted to OPM for consideration for use of the direct
hire authority.
VA Response:
15 Occupations included in VA's Request for Direct Hire Authority
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Geographic
Position Title
Occupational Series and Grade(s)
Location
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Accountant*
GS-0510-9/11/12/13/14/15
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biomedical Equipment Support Specialist
GS-1601-9/11/12
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boiler Plant Operator
WG-5402-9/10/11/12
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
General Engineer
GS-0801-5/7/9/11/12/13
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health Science Specialist (Veterans Crisis Line)
GS-0101-5/7/9/11/12
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health Technician
GS-0640-4/5/6/7
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Histopathology Technician
GS-0646-5/6/7/8/9
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Human Resources Assistant
GS-0203-5/6/7
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Human Resources Specialist
GS-0201-7/9/11
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Information Technology Specialist**
GS-2210-7/9/11/12/13/14/15
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Personnel Security Specialist
GS-0080-7/9/11/12/13
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Police Officer
GS-0083-5/7/9/11/12/13
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Realty Specialist
GS-1170-9/11/12/13/14
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Utility Systems Operator
WG-5406-8/9/10/11
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Utility Systems Repair
WG-4742-9/10/11
Nationwide
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Accountant Specialty Areas--General, Accounting Officer, Cost, Staff, and System.
** Information Technology Specialty Areas--Network Services, Enterprise Architecture, Data Management, Systems
Administration, Operating Systems, Application Software, Systems Analysis, Customer Support, Internet, Policy
and Planning, and Project Management.
______
Response to Posthearing Questions Submitted by Hon. Jerry Moran to
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
Dr. Shulkin, the Committee and I need clarity on one of your
answers provided in the hearing January 17, 2018. When asked whether
eligibility criteria to determine if a veteran can receive care in
their community ought to be explicitly linked to the access standards,
you stated, ``of course I believe that eligibility criteria should be
explicitly linked to access standards.'' However, you present a
different and conflicting position with the follow-on statement, ``I
support the access standards that are in the bill that the Senate
committee passed 14-1.''
As you know, the bill that the Senate committee passed (S. 2193)
would establish access ``guidelines'' versus ``standards,'' which is
different than your support for access standards. In addition, the bill
passed by the Committee would ``establish localized benchmarking
guidelines that can inform provider and veteran clinical
decisionmaking.''
Question 32. Do you believe ``benchmarking guidelines that can
inform provider and veteran clinical decisionmaking'' constitutes a
requirement for providers to use such guidelines to determine if a
veteran can receive care in their community?
Response. Benchmarking guidelines do not constitute a requirement
that providers must use. Future VA policy will require providers to
refer to the guidelines, but as part of one of many pieces of
information that will be used to make clinical decisions (unless
otherwise stated).
Question 33. How will you oversee the community care program with
guidelines that ``can inform'' decisions but does not guarantee the
guidelines will be used?
Response. VA will provide criteria for eligibility, and guidelines
to inform decisionmaking by both VA medical facilities and providers.
VA will closely monitor utilization patterns of community care as well
as wait times and access standards at VA medical facilities to provide
proper oversight.
Question 34. How will you prevent inconsistent experiences for
veterans without strong, data driven standards that are required to be
used by providers when determining if a veteran receives care in the
community?
Response. We believe there is even more we can do for our Veterans,
through internal VA policies and guidelines, such as:
Provide increased transparency to Veterans regarding
eligibility, access, and quality guidelines, through both the Federal
Register and public websites.
Provide clarity to Veterans around how they can start the
process of pursuing community care as well as explain the appeals
process.
Provide additional eligibility triggers for certain types
of care (urgent care, routine x-rays) as long as they are clinically
necessary.
______
Response to Posthearing Questions Submitted by Hon. Dean Heller to
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
Question 35. A few months ago, a Nevadan came into my office from a
military aviators group known as the River Rats. Over the years, many
of these fighter pilots have been diagnosed with varying forms of
cancer.
They have begun studying the high rate of cancer in fighter pilots,
potentially due to toxic exposure.
We know that toxic exposure severely impacts our veterans and can
harm their children and grandchildren. The U.S. has a responsibility to
investigate these issues and determine whether there is a link between
their service and these diseases.
This issue needs to be looked at by the VA and the appropriate
health agency.
How will you make that happen? What is the process for veterans to
address concerns about exposure and its connection to cancer?
Response. Veterans who have concerns about potential toxic
exposures during service and the possible connection to development of
cancer are advised to speak with their primary care provider. They may
also contact and the Environmental Health Clinician and Coordinator at
their local VAMC. The Environmental Health Coordinators can help make
the connection to care; the state by state index with contact
information for Coordinators is found at https://
www.publichealth.va.gov/ exposures/coordinators.asp.
However, for many Veterans, particularly those of the Vietnam and
the Persian Gulf Wars, it appears that reliable occupational and
environmental health surveillance data just do not exist. To the extent
that such data are available, DOD shares them with VA as needed. DOD
has much better surveillance data available for more recent conflicts
and events.
A major emphasis of the DOD/VA Deployment Health Work Group (DHWG)
is on Servicemembers with military environmental exposures. DHWG also
coordinates initiatives related to Veterans of all eras. Joint efforts
continue to increase sharing of health surveillance information and
review of relevant literature on hazardous environmental exposures.
DHWG analyzes complex clinical medicine, toxicology, and policy aspects
to develop synchronized DOD and VA actions. DHWG provides ongoing
oversight of the development of the Individual Longitudinal Exposure
Record (ILER) project. The goal of ILER is to create a complete record
of every Servicemember's occupational and environmental exposures over
the course of their career. ILER will mine several existing DOD data
systems that contain in-garrison and deployment exposure-related
information. It will link career, location, and year with exposure data
and will be available to DOD and VA health care providers to help
inform diagnosis and treatment, and to VBA claims adjudicators to help
establish service connection.
In addition, VA conducts ongoing surveillance of VA health care
utilization through systematic reviews and investigation of diseases
treated. This surveillance drives in-depth investigation of areas of
special concern. These studies enable VA to identify potential adverse
health effects associated with deployment, including cancer, and follow
them over time.
With regard to the health of descendants, VA has contracted with
the National Academy of Medicine (NAM) to assess areas requiring
further scientific study on the descendants of Veterans with toxic
exposures. Formally the Committee is charged with producing the report
titled ``Gulf War and Health, volume 11.'' The NAM committee will
further assess the scope and methodology required to conduct research
on such descendants to identify current or possible health effects in
the Veterans' descendants. The resulting plan and recommendations
should help to identify for VA the way forward to best address the
issue of intergenerational concerns. The NAM report is expected to be
completed by early 2019.
Additionally, VA has an additional contract with NAM, whose
committee is studying a broad range of conditions that Agent Orange
might have affected the health of Veterans. NAM's report is due to VA
by January 2019. The Committee's charge includes looking at descendant
health and in particular, the Committee was asked to pay special
attention to the potential risk of parental transmission of disease
conditions to descendants.
Question 36. Under the new Rapid Appeals Modernization Program
(RAMP), what are the criteria used by VA to determine which veterans
will receive an ``invitation'' to participate in this quicker appeals
process?
Response. Eligible Veterans have a pending compensation appeal in
one of the following stages of the legacy appeals process:
Notice of Disagreement;
Substantive appeal to the Board (Form 9);
Certified to the Board (not activated); and
Remand from the Board.
While VA had initially provided the invitations to appellants with
the oldest appeals pending in these stages, as VA has received some
initial data from RAMP elections, it has begun to test various
assumptions on Veteran behavior. As of February 2018, VA continued to
mail invitations to the oldest appellants in each of the stages
identified above, but also sent approximately 12,000 invitations to
Veterans with newly established appeals. This allows VA to test the
assumption whether the age and stage of a pending appeal impacts the
election rate.
a. How many Nevada veterans have been invited to participate?
Response. As of May 15, 2018, VA has mailed 1,239 invitations to
Veterans with an appeal pending under the jurisdiction of the Reno
Regional Office. Of that number, 109 Veterans have opted into the
program. Additionally, the earlier requirement that Veterans need to be
``invited'' into RAMP was removed on April 2, 2018, and now any Veteran
with an eligible pending disability compensation appeal can choose to
opt in to RAMP, and benefit from the faster review process. As of
May 15, 2018, VA has identified 2,479 Nevada Veterans that are eligible
to opt into RAMP.
b. Will you start expanding this program to ensure veterans from
Nevada have the option to participate?
Response. The earlier requirement that Veterans need to be
``invited'' into RAMP was removed on April 2, 2018, and now any Veteran
with an eligible pending disability compensation appeal can choose to
opt in to RAMP, and benefit from the faster review process.
c. Under the new program, how long has it taken to decide an appeal
on average?
Response. As of May 15, 2018, VA processed higher-level reviews in
an average of 69.1 days and supplemental claims in an average of 53.9
days. VA's response pertains to all RAMP completed claims as of May 15,
2018, and is not specific to Nevada residents.
______
Response to Posthearing Questions Submitted by Hon. Bill Cassidy to
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
Question 37. On January 18th the National Governor's Association
noted its recommendations on how the Nation can address the opioid
crisis. The National Governor's Association recommended the need to
ensure that electronic health records and state prescriptions drug
monitoring programs are interoperable. Is VA committed to ensuring that
this will be a component in VA's future solutions to interoperability?
Response. VA is committed to finding better ways to manage pain in
Veterans, while limiting the risk of long-term opioid therapies. VA
pharmacy currently participates in State Prescription Monitoring Data
bases by transmitting (sharing/sending) data on controlled substance
prescriptions dispensed from VA pharmacies as indicated by several
legislative requirements, most recently Public Law No: 115-86. This
data originates from our current EHR, or more specifically, the VistA
Outpatient Pharmacy application package. The requirement to share data,
similar to any network of pharmacies, remains in place regardless of
the pharmacy system being used to process and dispense these
prescriptions. The technical requirements for VA's future EHRM Platform
will be interoperable with State Prescription Monitoring Programs.
______
Response to Posthearing Questions Submitted by Hon. Thom Tillis to
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
forever gi bill implementation
Question 38. Mr. Secretary, most of us here understand the critical
role that State Approving Agencies (SAA) play in protecting and
enhancing Veterans' education benefits. I understand that the GAO is
presently conducting a study into the role of SAAs and how the VA
partners with them to protect veterans. Can you share with us your
ideas and plans pertaining to SAAs, particularly in regard to their
funding level and their role in the oversight of institutions through
conducting risk based surveys, as mandated and updated by the Colmery
Act?
Response. Strong oversight by SAAs helps protect Veterans in
several ways. First, oversight ensures that the approved programs
continue to meet all the statutory criteria in 38 U.S.C. Chapter 36, as
well as any individual state requirements the SAAs used in their
assessment to initially approve a course for Veteran's training.
Second, SAAs are familiar with the responsibilities of SCOs. SCOs
are responsible for certifying students' enrollments to VA, to ensure
proper payment to individuals in receipt of VA benefits. Through
oversight, SAAs can identify out-of-line situations that require
additional training that VA or SAAs can provide; ensuring VA students
are certified properly for payment, are in courses necessary for
completion of their program, and that appropriate credit has been
granted for their prior training. In this oversight review, the SAA may
identify violations that could result in disapproval of programs.
Finally, using information VA obtains from students through VA's GI
Bill complaint system, SAAs can conduct an immediate risk-based
unscheduled visit to the school to resolve issues, or to determine if
there are violations that require disapproval of the program or
suspension of enrollment. The following are areas of focus in the
complaint system:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recruiting/Marketing Practices
Quality of Education
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Accreditation
Grade Policy
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Financial Issues (e.g. Tuition/Fee charges
Release of transcripts
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Student Loans
Transfer of Credits
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Post-Graduation Job Opportunities
Refund Issues
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Change in Degree Plan/Requirements
Other (as identified by student)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prior to the Colmery Act, as part of VA's strong partnership with
SAAs in our mutual oversight and compliance responsibilities, SAAs
conducted approximately 30 percent of the targeted risk-based
compliance reviews at schools where special risk indicators were
discovered. These mutual efforts help ensure schools are held
accountable and VA students are in proper programs for their
educational objective, and are receiving proper payments.
Regarding funding please see the response to Question 22 above.
procurement
Question 39. How is clinical input from VHA incorporated in the
contracting and procurement processes for healthcare acquisitions? Do
you see areas in VA procurement where that input is particularly useful
yet not fully incorporated?
Response. The VHA Procurement and Logistics Office (P&LO) involves
clinician subject matter experts throughout the acquisition process,
from inception through award and performance monitoring. Clinicians are
Integrated Project Team (IPT) co-chairs together with assigned Project
Managers as requirements are developed. Clinicians remain fully engaged
through technical product reviews to determine whether or not the
vendor's proposal truly meets their requirements.
VHA has initiated a process for Clinician Driven Strategic Sourcing
(CDSS) that further codifies the clinical role in sourcing commodities,
equipment and services. CDSS, once fully realized, will involve
physicians and other clinicians in the strategic sourcing process to
improve quality, outcomes and cost. These improvements will support
identification of high quality preferred items, and reduce variation in
products and clinical protocols. The CDSS program also facilitates
better pricing, and streamlines the procurement and delivery of
clinical equipment, and medical/surgical supplies and services
throughout VHA. VHA's Clinical Program Offices will validate the
requirements for their clinical specialties, and take the lead in
managing the catalog of items and services available to their
colleagues.
Question 40. Is VA currently exploring ways to increase
transparency, define the term ``best value,'' and eliminate contracting
and administrative delays for healthcare acquisitions, notably high
tech medical equipment?
Response. VA continues to develop methods to increase transparency
to industry. For each consolidation, VA develops milestones with
planned execution dates, dependent on the number of requirements
included in each consolidation, and provides these milestones to
industry via public posting to the Federal Business Opportunities
website. Although these dates are estimates and are subject to change,
VA strives to meet all milestones. When necessary, VA provides updated
milestones to reflect any changes, to keep industry informed on where
VA is in the procurement process. VA has developed standard evaluation
factors for High Tech Medical Equipment (HTME) requirements including
1) Availability of Features (Technical and Functional), 2) Availability
of Service, 3) Past Performance, and 4) Price, with all non-price
factors when combined being significantly more important than price. By
assigning significantly more weight to the non-price factors, VA
ensures we can achieve the best technical solution via tradeoff in
order to meet the needs of the customer. The contracting office is
consistently striving to improve contracting processes, train
personnel, and engage in open dialog with industry in order to minimize
administrative delays, provide clarity on VA requirements, and maximize
efficiency in the HTME procurement process.
Question 41. How does the Department interpret the Kingdomware
decision when considering whether or not to exercise option years in
contracts that predate the Supreme Court decision? How is this
information disseminated to local contracting officers to ensure
consistency throughout VA?
Response. VA has department-level policy, procedures, guidance, and
instruction regarding the Veterans First Contracting Program. Policy as
it relates to Exercising Contract Options is as follows:
A single award contract is considered non-competitive.
Therefore, the Rule of Two does not apply.
Prior to exercising an option on existing multiple award
Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity contracts, the Contracting
Officer (CO) will determine if there are two or more verified Veteran-
Owned Small Businesses (VOSB) awardees on the contract. If there are 2
or more, the options for the verified Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned
Small Business (SDVOSB)/VOSB contracts will be exercised, if
appropriate. If the number of SDVOSBs/VOSBs is not sufficient to meet
the needs of the agency, the CO will apply the Rule of Two to identify
other SDVOSBs/VOSBs. If no additional SDVOSBs/VOSBs exist, the options
for the other contracts may be exercised if it is in the best interest
of the agency to do so.
All contracting personnel were required to attend the 38 U.S.C.
8127 implementation training. In addition, guidance on options was
provided during the Acquisition Workforce Innovation Symposium in
November 2016 and March 2017. Finally, a refresher webinar was held in
December 2016 specifically for supervisors which also addressed options
during this training session.
electronic health record (ehr)
In the context of the ``strategic pause'' in awarding the EHR
contract to study interoperability.
Question 42. Do you view interoperability among and between VA
facilities to be the chief objective? What about interoperability with
DOD? What about interoperability with the Community Care Network?
Response. VA will employ a multi-pronged strategy to achieve
interoperability within VA, between VA and DOD, and amongst our
contracted community care providers, and will leverage a technical
solution that supports nationwide interoperability and enables data to
be shared amongst healthcare facilities and providers.
More specifically our approach consists of four stages that run in
parallel:
1. VA to VA Interoperability;
2. VA to DOD Interoperability;
3. Community Care Partner Interoperability; and
4. National Interoperability.
The EHRM Program Executive Office (PEO) is focused on and
accomplishing 1-3, and a portion of 4. Therefore, (1) VA to VA
Interoperability and (2) VA to DOD Interoperability are completely
solved through EHRM and served as the basis for Seamless Care to the
Veteran. (3) VA to Community Care Partners is provided by EHRM and
works off the first two objectives so VA can provide Seamless Care for
the Veteran. VA currently plans on completing the remaining portions of
(4) with its upcoming Digital Veteran's Platform (DVP), where we expect
participation of other commercial EHR providers (i.e., Epic,
Allscripts, etc.) to contribute to the development of a national health
information exchange platform and related Application Programming
Interface (API) gateways in support of interoperability across the
entire healthcare information exchange continuum. The adoption of open
standards for information exchange such as SMART on FHIR (Fast
Healthcare Interoperability Resource) framework by all EHR providers
will be a key to national success. Aggressive interoperability-based
terms and conditions will be included in any contract with Cerner to
lead the advancement of this national interoperability objective as
well as to align fully with the DVP and its respective API gateway
requirements.
Although the focus of VA's EHRM program is to establish intra-VA
interoperability, VA/DOD interoperability, and VA-Community Care
interoperability, each of these phases of interoperability allows VA to
incrementally build toward and support nationwide EHR interoperability.
Nationwide EHR interoperability amongst all healthcare providers will
empower Servicemembers and Veterans to utilize their electronic health
records to the fullest extent and equip providers to deliver safer and
more efficient seamless care.
Question 43. When looking at the full EHR ``software stack,'' are
you considering Commercial Off the Shelf interoperability solutions
that are separate from or in addition to the larger EHR contract?
Response. For the EHRM Program, the only Commercial solutions which
are planned for use are the D&F authorized Cerner Platform and its
Interoperability software, and VA's Enterprise InterSystems HealthShare
software. Separately, VA's API gateways plan to utilize commercial
systems per the Secretary's direction for VA to get out of the software
development business.
The selection of Cerner Millennium does not eliminate VA's need to
continue to assess the commercial market to identify additional
software tools and products that may further enhance our overall
interoperability and seamless care objectives. VA will be using the
reciprocity process to fully leverage successful testing practices and
results already solidified as part of the DOD deployment effort.
However, under EHRM, there will be a comprehensive Test & Evaluation
department reporting to the EHRM Program Executive that will be fully
leveraging the breath of existing VA and Cerner test facilities to
continue to not only test the 30 percent more capabilities being
delivered under the VA contract, but also to stimulate introduction of
more efficient/effective functional and technological industry
advancements into the VA healthcare environment.
office of accountability and whistleblower protection
Question 44. Can you please provide an update on the vacancy of the
Assistant Secretary for Accountability and Whistleblower Protection?
Can you please highlight any challenges you are facing in sending
Congress a nominee?
Response. Once the President's nominee has been confirmed and sworn
in as Secretary, VA will complete an assessment and provide a
recommendation for a nominee as Assistant Secretary for Accountability
and Whistleblower Protection.
va innovation
Question 45. With respect to VA's ability to innovate and
modernize, do you feel that the department currently has sufficient
authority to proactively test out new approaches to care and payment
that could increase efficiency and optimize care?
Response. The Center for Compassionate Innovation was created to
explore emerging therapies that are safe and ethical to enhance Veteran
physical and mental well-being when other treatments have not been
successful. The Center specifically evaluates innovations for special
populations of Veterans who have not achieved optimal outcomes with
traditional, evidence-based medicine including developing partnerships
and collaborations with community-based organizations to optimize
access to safe, innovative treatment.
The Department has sufficient authority to proactively test out new
approaches to care and payment that could increase efficiency and
optimize care. As an example, for the first time in VA history,
Veterans may receive hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) to treat Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) symptoms. HBOT treatment for PTSD is
considered off label use by the Food and Drug Administration and,
therefore, is not a standard of care treatment option.
The Center is not only using sharing and provider agreements for
payment, it is also leveraging telehealth for care where feasible for
certain treatments.
Question 46. How would authorities contained in Section 402 of VA's
CARE Proposal (Authority for VA Center for Innovation for Care and
Payment) affect VA's ability to pursue these new and innovative
approaches?
Response. Section 402 would allow VA, with Congressional approval,
to waive certain authorities found in Sections 1701-1730A of title 38
that could otherwise limit VA's ability to identify and test new and
innovative approaches to care and payment. We also note that section
401 would allow for a pilot project to improve how VA and DOD furnish
care to Veterans and Servicemembers. If this section were enacted, the
VA and DOD Secretaries could determine the feasibility and advisability
of sharing health care resources without entering into reimbursement
agreements for such services.
Question 47. What sorts of approaches would you pursue using this
new authority?
Response. Innovations would be focused on testing payment and
service delivery models to determine whether such models improve the
access to and quality, timeliness, and patient satisfaction of such
care and services, as well as the cost savings associated with such
models. VA would be able to consider changes to collections,
copayments, payment rates, and contracting authorities.
______
Response to Posthearing Questions Submitted by Hon. Dan Sullivan to
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
Question 48. Regarding the recent decision on the Community Care
Network Acquisition for Region 4,
a. What were the contributing factors that led to the decision to
not grant an award under the current solicitation?
Response. VA received proposals in response to the Community Care
Network (CCN) solicitation on June 30, 2017, and performed evaluations
in accordance with the criteria established in the solicitation. VA
took the following four factors into consideration for award decisions
for CCN Region 4: (1) Technical, (2) Past Performance, (3)
Socioeconomic Concerns, and (4) Price. The evaluations resulted in the
need to conduct negotiations. After negotiations were held, VA received
the final revised proposals on December 14, 2017, and immediately began
conducting evaluations of revised proposals. After evaluations were
completed, it was determined that final proposal revisions for Region 4
did not provide the ``best value'' to VA, all factors considered, or
for our taxpayers. VA amended the solicitation to remove Region 4 since
a contract award was not made.
b. What will the VA's new acquisition strategy for Region 4 be?
Response. VA's Office of Community Care (OCC) is currently
reviewing the requirements that were included in the CCN Performance
Work Statement for Region 4. VA intends to issue a new solicitation,
which will include revised requirements for Region 4. Once the
contracting office has received the complete revised requirements, a
detailed timeline concerning the re-procurement will be developed.
c. What is the timeline for reopening competition?
Response. Competition will be reopened in the next 2 to 3 months.
d. Will you be proactive in notifying Members whose states are a
part of this region on process and decisions regarding the acquisition
moving forward?
Response. Yes, VA will notify Members of Congress whose states are
a part of this region on the process and decisions regarding the
acquisition.
Question 49. Regarding the VA/DOD National Resource Sharing
Agreement (dated 12/16), the AK VA/DOD joint venture recently requested
an exemption from the exchange rate citing adverse budgetary and
staffing impacts due to variabilities among localities for CMS and
CMAC--especially in Alaska that would negatively affect their
partnership and Veteran healthcare. Will you commit to communicate with
Alaska's VA leadership to fully understand the VA/DOD landscape in
Alaska and possible impacts before implementing this change in my
state?
Response. VA and DOD have been committed to working with local VA
and DOD facilities on this recent (December 2016) joint policy decision
to standardize the VA/DOD sharing reimbursement rate. We are currently
testing the methodology with the help of local VA/DOD partners to
gather input prior to a phased National roll out. We recently learned
of Alaska's concerns and requested the local VA/DOD sharing partners
provide a briefing to the VA/DOD Health Executive Committees, Shared
Resources Work Group (SRWG) for further consideration. SRWG is
collaborating with various VHA and Air Force Surgeon General staff
office experts to review Alaska's concerns and provide guidance as
applicable.
Question 50. What has the VA done regarding negotiations of new
reimbursement rates for VA-IHS tribal sharing agreements in Alaska
since current rates were last extended?
Response. VA held a tribal consultation in September 2016 and a
round table discussion in August 2017. During those meetings, VA and
Tribal leaders discussed the future of Tribal Health Agreements in
Alaska and the lower 48 states. This included potentially changing
reimbursement rates to Performance Based Rates rather than the current
rates, which are primarily based upon all-inclusive rates published by
Indian Health Service annually. The tribes expressed major concerns
about implementing new rates which are more complex to assess.
Therefore, VA agreed to extend all current agreements through June 30,
2019, while continued discussions with Tribes will take place to
enhance care coordination and potentially negotiate rates that are
based on the quality of care provided.
______
Response to Posthearing Questions Submitted by Hon. Patty Murray to
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
mental health
Question 51. Many critical details, and much of the major policy
provisions, were left out of President Trump's recently signed
executive order dealing with mental health for veterans. Please provide
a comprehensive description of the changes that will be made pursuant
to the executive order, especially--
a. What veterans will be eligible, and for what type of care?
Response. There are several legal authorities under which VA can
provide mental health care, to include outpatient, inpatient, and
residential services, to transitioning Servicemembers and Veterans.
These authorities include:
Emergency circumstances. If a transitioning Servicemember
or Veteran presents to a VA medical facility with an emergency mental
health need, VA may provide the treatment while the emergent health
care need persists. Unless otherwise eligible, the emergency care would
be provided to the individual on a humanitarian basis (38 U.S.C. 1784),
or possibly under tentative eligibility (38 CFR 17.34(a)) if a former
Servicemember presents at a VA facility seeking care for a mental
health condition he or she asserts is related to military service. For
emergency care provided on a humanitarian basis, and for emergency care
provided to a former Servicemember under tentative eligibility who is
later determined to be ineligible for VA health care, VA will bill for
the care at a cost-based rate.
Medical benefits package. Veterans enrolled in VA's system
of patient enrollment, established under 38 U.S.C. 1705, may receive
mental health care under the medical benefits package (38 CFR 17.38).
VA encourages all former Servicemembers who may be eligible to apply
for enrollment. Additionally, Veterans who have a service-connected
disability or disabilities rated 50 percent or more can receive mental
health care under the medical benefits package (38 CFR 17.38) without
respect to enrollment. See 38 U.S.C. 1705(c)(2), 38 CFR 17.37(a).
Other treatment authorities and bars to benefits.
Transitioning Servicemembers and Veterans not eligible for enrollment
or who elect not to enroll may still be eligible for mental health care
through VA. Generally, to be eligible for enrollment in VA health care,
a person must have been discharged or released from active military,
naval, or air service under conditions other than dishonorable and,
unless an exception applies, satisfy minimum active duty service
requirement. Some Veterans may also be ineligible for enrollment
because their income is over the applicable threshold.
With respect to character of discharge, a transitioning
Servicemember generally is not eligible for VA benefits, to include
mental health care, if he or she is subject to a bar to benefits.
Individuals barred from receiving benefits include those who, unless
considered insane, were discharged or released as a conscientious
objector or deserter, by reason of general court-martial, or as a
result of AWOL for a certain period unless exempted. See 38 U.S.C.
5303(a), 38 C.F.R. 3.12(c). If barred, VA may refer the individual to
community resources (not at VA expense). For example, for an individual
ineligible for readjustment counseling under 38 U.S.C. 1712A, VA (1)
provides referral services to assist the individual in obtaining mental
health care and services outside VA, and (2) if pertinent, advises the
individual of his/her right to apply for a review of the individual's
discharge or release. See 38 U.S.C.1712A(c).
Authorities under which VA may provide mental health care
to recently transitioned Servicemembers and Veterans who are not
otherwise eligible include: 38 U.S.C. 1705(c)(2) (for service-connected
and presumptive service-connected disabilities); 38 U.S.C. 1702 and 38
CFR 17.109 (presumptive eligibility for psychosis and other mental
illness); 38 U.S.C. Sec. 1720D (related to military sexual trauma); and
38 U.S.C. Sec. 1712A and 38 CFR Sec. 17.2000 (readjustment counseling).
These authorities are discussed below, along with a discussion of
eligibility for former Servicemembers with other than honorable
administrative discharges.
Service-connected and presumptive service-connected
disabilities. Under 38 U.S.C. 1705(c)(2), VA is required to provide
hospital care and medical services without respect to enrollment for
(1) Veterans seeking care for a service-connected disability, and (2)
for the 12-month period following their discharge or release from
service, Veterans whose discharge or release from active military,
naval, or air service was for a disability that was incurred or
aggravated in the line of duty for that disability. This means that VA
must provide mental health care to any Veterans seeking mental health
care for a service-connected disability. Additionally, as may be more
applicable to the EO, Veterans whose discharge or release from active
military, naval, or air service was for a disability that was incurred
or aggravated in the line of duty may receive VA mental health care for
that disability, without respect to enrollment, for the 12-month period
following their discharge or release from service.
Presumptive eligibility for Veterans with psychosis and
other mental illness. In general, VA can provide treatment for an
active psychosis or other active mental illness without copayments for
recently-discharged or released Veterans who developed such psychosis
or mental illness within 2 years after discharge or release from the
active military, naval, or air service. See 38 U.S.C. 1702, 38 CFR
17.109. Such treatment is available without respect to enrollment or
eligibility for enrollment (38 CFR 17.37(k)), without respect to
whether the Veteran served in combat, and without regard to the
Veteran's length of active duty service. These Veterans do not have to
file a claim for service-connection or have received a formal grant of
service-connection from VBA to receive treatment under this authority.
Military sexual trauma. VA provides counseling and
appropriate care and services under 38 U.S.C. 1720D to Veterans who VA
determines require such counseling and care and services to overcome
psychological trauma, which in the judgment of a VA mental health
professional, resulted from a physical assault of a sexual nature,
battery of a sexual nature, or sexual harassment which occurred while
the Veteran was serving on active duty, active duty for training, or
inactive duty training. VA refers to these experiences as military
sexual trauma (MST). Care for MST-related mental and physical health
conditions is provided without copayments. Veterans are not required to
enroll in VA's system of patient enrollment, file a disability claim,
be service-connected, or provide evidence of the sexual trauma to
receive MST-related care.
Readjustment counseling. VA provides readjustment
counseling to eligible Veterans and certain members of the Armed Forces
under 38 U.S.C. Sec. 1712A and 38 CFR Sec. 17.2000 through its Vet
Centers. The specific categories of individuals eligible for
readjustment counseling are set forth in law, and include Veterans and
members of the Armed Forces who served on active duty in a theater of
combat operations or an area at a time during which hostilities
occurred in that area. Vet Centers maintain confidential records
independent from any other VA or DOD medical records; Vet Centers will
not disclose such records without a voluntary, signed authorization, or
a specific exception permitting their release. Readjustment counseling
is available without respect to enrollment and without copayment
requirements. For more information or to find a Vet Center near you, go
to https://www.vetcenter.va.gov or call 1-877-WAR-VETS
(1.877.927.8387).
Other than honorable administrative discharges. Former
Servicemembers with other than honorable (OTH) administrative
discharges who present to VA seeking mental health care may be eligible
for mental health services under the OTH initiative, which is based on
VA's authority in section 2 of Public Law 95-126 (38 U.S.C. 5303 NOTE)
and 38 CFR 3.360 (service-connected health care); 38 U.S.C. 1702 and 38
CFR 17.109 (psychosis and mental illness presumptions); and 38 CFR
17.34 (tentative eligibility). Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, VA provides former Servicemembers with other than honorable
administrative discharges the type of health care and related benefits
authorized to be provided under chapter 17 of title 38, U.S.C., for any
disability incurred or aggravated during active military, naval, or air
service in line of duty, with the exception of (1) any disability
incurred or aggravated during a period of service terminated by a bad
conduct discharge, or (2) when a bar to benefits (discussed above)
applies. See 38 U.S.C. 5303 NOTE, 38 CFR 3.360. Additional information
is available on the OTH Fact Sheet (external link).
b. Does VA have the excess capacity in mental health care to
provide this treatment?
Response. VHA continues to evaluate capacity and the regional
impact the EO may have. VHA is continuing the Mental Health Hiring
Initiative requested by Secretary Shulkin to add 1,000 net providers to
the current workforce.
c. What happens at the end of the year for veterans who still need
treatment?
Response. This will depend upon the legal authority for providing
treatment. For example, if the Veteran is eligible under the Presumed
Eligibility for Psychosis or Other Mental Illness, this care does not
have maximum limit, and care will continue beyond 12 months. In other
situations, where care is to be terminated, all mental health providers
have the ethical responsibility to ensure a transfer of care is
completed to a community provider. This transfer of care is completed
as part of the patient-provider agreement, ensuring there is no Veteran
left without clinically appropriate follow-up.
d. Will VA request additional funds to cover the hundreds of
millions of dollars a year the Administration estimates this will cost?
Response. It was not VA's intention to request additional funding
when the OTH Initiative was implemented. As VA expands healthcare
eligibility, we will continue to work with Congressional partners in
addressing fiscal impact as appropriate.
hud-vash
Question 52. Data from the Department of Housing and Urban
Development showed that there was an increase in veteran homelessness
this year, and a significant increase in my home state of Washington.
You stated before the Committee that VA will be implementing a new plan
to address this issue in Seattle. Please provide a full description of
what additional resources will be made available, any proposed
programmatic changes, and a timeline for implementation.
Response. The state of Washington saw an increase of over 600
homeless Veterans in the 2017 Point in Time Count; an increase of 41
percent over 2016. This statewide increase was caused almost entirely
by increases in the Seattle/King County Continuum of Care, which saw an
increase of 673 homeless Veterans; an increase of over 100 percent
compared to 2016. The rest of the state actually saw a small net
decrease.
VA's Homeless Program Office (HPO) is actively engaged with the
Puget Sound VAMC and with city, county and state officials to develop a
comprehensive plan to address the increasing numbers of homeless
Veterans in Seattle and King County. Planning sessions have included
the following: a) VAMC-specific calls focused on internal operational
challenges such as rapidly filling vacant homeless program positions,
and maximizing available beds and vouchers; b) calls between HPO, the
VAMC, and city and county officials focused on refining the ``By Name
List'' and getting consensus across agencies on the current number of
homeless and at-risk Veterans as well as understanding inflow rates in
order to best address current and projected demand for resources; and
c) calls between HPO, the Network Homeless Coordinator, and officials
from the State Department of Veterans Affairs and the Governor's Office
focused on strategies for development of additional beds and units to
increase the stock of available housing.
VA will continue to work with the VAMC and city, county and state
officials to finalize a plan to decrease the number of homeless and at-
risk Veterans in Seattle/King County, and we will be happy to share the
details of that plan once finalized.
The Grant and Per Diem (GPD) program made the Seattle/King County
Continuum of Care area a priority for funding in the current GPD Notice
of Funding Availability.
Question 53. I have received reports that at least one VA medical
center in my state is proceeding with the redesignation of Specific
Purpose funds to General Purpose funds, despite your statement that no
changes would be made.
a. Is there an effort underway to redesignate any Specific Purpose
funds?
Response. On February 6, 2018, a memo was issued to all Network
Directors, Network Homeless Coordinators, and Medical Center Directors
stating that there will be no conversion of Department of Housing and
Urban Development--VA Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH) Program Specific
Purpose funding to General Purpose funding during FY 2018. The memo
goes on to clarify that HPO is currently disbursing HUD-VASH program
Specific Purpose funding to VISNs and VAMCs based on the FY 2018 budget
requests submitted by each VISN while adhering to the funding provided
under the Advanced Appropriation. Once Congress passes the FY 2018
budget the remaining annual funding will be disbursed. All HUD-VASH
program requirements remain in place, including staffing, reporting,
and program metrics.
b. What directives or instructions have been issued to VISNs
regarding changes in funding designation, including instructions not to
move forward with redesignation? Please provide a copy of any
information or instructions distributed within VA on this topic.
Response. As requested, enclosed please find the January 8, 2018,
memo regarding the delay transitioning Special Purpose non-core funds
to General Purpose. Also enclosed is the February 6, 2018, memo
referenced in the previous paragraph, noting that there will be no
conversion of HUD-VASH program Specific Purpose funding to General
Purpose funding during FY 2018.
vet centers
Question 54. Vet Centers are one of the most important parts of
VA's mental health service system. They provide care in a unique
setting, and often see veterans who would not seek care from a
traditional clinic. So preserving their unique culture and autonomy is
very important.
a. Does the Readjustment Counseling Service have all the resources
and authorities they need to meet demand from veterans and successfully
implement new initiatives?
Response. Readjustment Counseling Service (RCS) is in the final
stages of implementing single points of service for our Human Resource
and Fiscal functions. This consolidation has allowed RCS to improve all
budgeting projection processes. Subsequently, RCS has asked for
increases in the FY 2018 and future FY budget submissions to meet
current demand and projected demand through increasing access to
services.
In addition, RCS is in the 7th year (with extensions) of a pilot
program to provide recently returning Women Veterans readjustment
counseling through retreats. This has been accomplished utilizing the
existing RCS Specific Purpose budget, with no request for additional
funding. Those who have participated in these retreats have seen
reduction in their symptoms associated with PTSD and increases in their
coping abilities.
There are currently three Bills pending in Congress that address
readjustment counseling in a retreat setting:
H.R. 91 Building Supportive Networks for Women Veterans
Act (Sec. 2): This bill makes permanent the requirement for the
Department of Veterans Affairs to carry out, through the Readjustment
Counseling Service of the Veterans Health Administration, a program to
provide reintegration and readjustment services in group retreat
settings to women veterans who are recently separated from service
after a prolonged deployment.
S. 681 Deborah Sampson Act (Section 103): Provision of
Reintegration and Readjustment Services to Veterans and Family Members
in Group Retreat Settings. (Similar to H.R. 2452)
H.R. 2452 Deborah Sampson Act (Section 103): Provision of
Reintegration and Readjustment Services to Veterans and Family Members
in Group Retreat Settings. (Similar to S. 681)
RCS supports all three Bills, however firmly believes that all
cohorts of combat Veterans and their families would benefit greatly
from this modality.
data sharing
Question 55. The IG has testified before this Committee previously
regarding barriers to VA having access to the DOD suicide database that
would help VA better design and target suicide prevention efforts. It
is unacceptable to me that this data is not routinely provided to VA. I
understand the Departments are working on an agreement to fix that
problem.
Response. VA has received data from DOD partners and DOD regularly
shares summarized data analyses on an as needed basis with VA. The DOD
and VA data sharing Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) will allow more
timely sharing of Department of Defense Suicide Event Report data and
enable broader VA utilization. The MoA is fully developed, and is going
through VA and DOD privacy clearance prior to DHA and VA signature.
Question 56. When will that agreement be completed and VA will
start receiving the DOD suicide data?
Response. The MoA is currently going through VA and DOD privacy
clearance prior to DHA and VA signature. Once signed, the MoA will be
complete and VA will start receiving DOD suicide data.
forever gi bill
Question 57. Many student veterans who could benefit from
provisions in the Forever GI Bill are still unaware of the changes that
were made. How does VA plan to ensure veterans who are now eligible for
expanded educational opportunities are properly informed of these
recent changes and making decisions in their best interest?
Response. VA has taken a multi-pronged approach to highlight and
promote the Colmery Act to Veterans and beneficiaries. This includes an
extensive social media campaign with regular posts on Facebook, a
Twitter Town Hall, a satellite media tour that reached an audience of
over 3 million, new websites, and posting Frequently Asked Questions
for provisions with the most immediate impact on Veterans and
beneficiaries.
VA sent targeted emails and mail to individuals identified as
eligible for Sections 109 and 106 of the Forever GI Bill, and sent an
email to over 500,000 individuals who may no longer have a time limit
to use their Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits. VA has briefed VSOs, attended
the Student Veterans of America National Conference, and sent
notifications to internal and external stakeholders on Forever GI Bill
changes and impacts. As VA moves forward with implementing other
provisions and making changes because of Forever GI Bill, it will
continue to send out targeted notifications, and regularly and
aggressively promote Forever GI Bill through all available mediums.
Question 58. School Certifying Officials also tell my staff that
they have not received any information from VA on recent changes from
the Forever GI Bill. School certifying officials are the first persons
student veterans turn to for information regarding their benefits.
Without proper outreach from VA, school certifying officials are
relying on other unverified sources for information on recent or
pending changes. I am worried this could lead to misinformation and
confusing messaging to student veterans. Mandatory training for school
certifying officials is crucial, when will VA start implementing
curriculum on the Forever GI Bill?
Response. On November 29, 2017, the VA's Education Service
conducted a SCO webinar on the Forever GI Bill and provided information
on our progress toward implementation. The webinar also included a
question and answer session in which Education Service responded to
questions from SCOs. VA sent targeted emails to SCOs on the removal of
the delimiting date for eligible beneficiaries and the expansion of
approvable Independent Study programs. In early February 2018, the
Education Service held a focus group with stakeholders including SCOs
on its implementation plan for Section 107, and will continue to engage
with SCOs through regularly scheduled webinars, targeted emails, state,
regional, national conferences and serve as resource to SCOs as they
educate students at their facility on the Forever GI Bill.
VA is also meeting regularly with members and leaders from the
NASAA and other internal and external stakeholders to discuss training
development and implementation planning for Section 305.
Question 59. Regarding the Forever GI Bill, a December memo from VA
notes that VA has processed 600 applications out of potentially 8000
beneficiaries (7.5 percent of those eligible) for the restoration of
entitlement from former students of ITT Tech and Corinthian Colleges.
How did VA conclude that there were only 8000 potential beneficiaries,
and what type of notices is VA considering to ensure the benefits
restoration reaches 100 percent of those eligible?
Response. Through data analysis, VA identified approximately 8,000
beneficiaries who attended a facility that met the school closure
criteria between January 1, 2015, and August 16, 2017. During the week
of November 9, 2017, VA provided notification to 8,000 students
identified as potentially eligible to have benefits restored under the
Special Application provision of Section 109. Of those, approximately
80 percent received an email with a letter, instructions, and a form to
apply for restoration. The remaining 20 percent received the same
documentation via postal mail. As of January 26, 2018, VA has received
over 700 applications and restored over 4,500 months of entitlement to
almost 450 individuals.
VA plans a 90-day follow-up via postal mail to those individuals
that were sent an email, but not applied for restoration. Additionally,
we will call a sample of those who have not applied to understand their
choice and to verify receipt of the initial notification. VA will use
this information to improve its communication efforts and continue to
regularly post updates and notices across its social media platforms,
website, and leverage its partners to ensure impacted students are
aware that VA can restore lost entitlement.
Question 60. Has VA placed any outbound calls to potential
beneficiaries of the entitlement restoration who have not yet applied
or been approved to notify them of their eligibility?
Response. Please see our response to question 59 above.
Question 61. Regarding the Forever GI Bill, the December update
from VA notes that VA is ``collaborating with SAAs to redesign
compliance reviews'' per the requirement to include risk-based surveys
in State Approving Agency oversight activities. What guidance is VA
providing on the potential risk factors that SAAs might use in their
reviews?
Response. VA partnered with SAAs to conduct targeted risk-based
compliance reviews over the last 3 years, and has continued to examine
and evaluate our compliance regimen. VA recently completed a year-long
study of our compliance and liaison processes, organizational
structure, and stakeholder engagement. Additionally, VA and NASAA
constituted a working group to consider the findings from this study
and section 310 of the Colmery Act. Among many other aspects, we will
be collaborating on the issue of risk factors and resultant oversight
and compliance actions.
Question 62. What is VA's timeline for completing the collaboration
with SAAs and seeing risk-based reviews implemented as required by the
Forever GI Bill?
Response. As the VA-NASAA joint working group was just implemented,
no specific timeline has been established. VBA expects to begin
implementing potential changes from this workgroup in FY 2019.
Question 63. Regarding the Forever GI Bill, the updated provided by
VA notes that VA is ``establishing IPT to develop requirements and
processes'' for the High Technology Pilot Program. The Senate Committee
report accompanying S. 1598 emphasized that ``the Committee seeks to
ensure that veterans are protected against programs that will not allow
them to obtain sustainable employment in the technology sector''
particularly given the closure of other technology programs, including
coding ``boot camp'' locations, and listed specific indicators of risk
for VA to consider when entering into contracts with providers of these
programs, including financial stability and alignment to industry-
recognized certifications and credentials. How is VA planning to
incorporate these defined outcome and quality expectations into its
initial design of the High Technology Pilot Program?
Response. The statutory requirements for the High Technology Pilot
Program outline approval criteria and a payment schedule for
contractors based on targeted milestones. VA will look to further
expand on the approval criteria in consultation with SAAs, and will
further clarify payment schedule milestones in the agreements it enters
into with providers. These agreements will also include termination
clauses and oversight measures for VA to perform compliance reviews.
Question 64. Regarding the Forever GI Bill, the December update
notes that VA is ``reviewing statutory requirements to develop
appropriate safeguards and processes'' for the Edith Nourse Rogers STEM
Scholarship. When does VA expect to conclude its review of the
requirements, and what actions does it anticipate taking at the
conclusion of this review?
Response. VA is analyzing statutory requirements to develop
planning documents for the STEM scholarship, which does not go into
effect until August 1, 2019. The requirements for this provision do not
conform to VA's current technology and business rules for the Post-9/11
GI Bill; therefore, VA has identified the VA Regional Processing Office
in Buffalo, NY, as the sole site dedicated to processing and tracking
the STEM Scholarship. VA expects a more fully developed plan with
regulatory, communication and program requirements to be drafted by
December 2018.
Question 65. The Senate Committee report on the Forever GI Bill
specified that safeguards for the Edith Nourse Rogers STEM Scholarship
should include a mechanism to ensure that schools or programs are not
expanding the number of credit hours needed to complete a STEM program
so they can receive additional tuition and fee payments from the Edith
Nourse Rogers STEM Scholarship. Is VA capable of monitoring for changes
in credit hour requirements and will VA ensure that it will examine
whether additional semester or quarter hours are being required in non-
STEM fields or for non-GI bill beneficiaries?
Response. VA has had preliminary discussions with SAAs regarding
requirements of the STEM provision and will engage other appropriate
stakeholders as we further develop the implementation plan.
Question 66. Has VA communicated with accrediting agencies or SAAs
requiring their ability to assist in gathering information regarding
program length for those programs which may become eligible for the
Edith Nourse Rogers STEM Scholarship?
Response. Please see our response to question 65 above.
______
Response to Posthearing Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown to
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
Question 67. How many student veterans has VA identified as
eligible for restoration of benefits established in the Forever GI
Bill? Please provide my office with updated numbers, disaggregated by
institution, of veterans and their families from Ohio or attended for-
profit schools in Ohio who are eligible for GI Bill benefits
restoration in light of the Forever GI bill.
Response. For the Special Application provision we have identified
three Ohio schools whose students would be eligible for restoration:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of
Name of School
students
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brown Mackie College-North Canton.....................
12
Miami-Jacobs Career College-Sharonville...............
1
Sanford Brown College.................................
3
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Please note, this number does not include beneficiaries who may have
resided in Ohio, and attended a school that closed out of state or
online.
a. What have you done to ensure that students impacted by the
closure of ITT and Corinthian Colleges have the benefits that they have
earned restored?
Response. VA notified approximately 8,000 individuals, regarding
their potential eligibility for entitlement restoration, of which,
nearly 6,000 were ITT Tech or Corinthian students. VA created a
dedicated webpage, https://benefits.va.gov/gibill/fgib/restoration.asp,
which addresses restoration of entitlement and includes the form that
beneficiaries can use to apply for benefit restoration. VA is using
social media including Facebook and Twitter to let beneficiaries know
that VA can now restore entitlement and encourage those potentially
eligible to apply.
b. What communication via phone, mail, email, and social media has
VA sent to these veterans? What additional communication do you have
planned?
Response. Through data analysis, VA identified approximately 8,000
beneficiaries who attended a facility that met the school closure
criteria between January 1, 2015, and August 16, 2017. During the week
of November 9, 2017, VA provided notification to 8,000 students
identified as potentially eligible to have benefits restored under the
Special Application provision of Section 109. Of those, approximately
80 percent received an email with a letter, instructions, and a form to
apply for restoration. The remaining 20 percent received the same
documentation via postal mail. As of January 26, 2018, VA has received
over 700 applications and restored over 4,500 months of entitlement to
almost 450 individuals.
c. What tools and resources are being expended to ensure all
students who are eligible to have their benefits restored are fully
informed and able to reclaim these benefits and continue their
education?
Response. VA is continuously looking to push its communications
through new platforms and leveraging its partners to help get its
message out. To that end, VA plans to host a Facebook Live event in
partnership with a National Military Family Association and using
Medium to publish blogs on the Forever GI Bill.
d. Would student veterans happen if a for-profit college or
university shuttered their doors abruptly tomorrow have the ability to
get their GI Bill benefits restored?
Response. The Forever GI Bill sections in Section 109 also allow
restoration of entitlement for VA students if a school closes. This
means that VA will not make a charge against students' entitlement for
the portion of the period that the students did not receive credit
toward their programs (or lost training time toward the completion of
their program). For example, if a student was enrolled in a semester
full-time, and the school closed 60 days after the semester started,
the student would have used 2 months of their entitlement. VA will
restore those two months back to the student and the student will have
those 2 months available to use at another time.
Additionally, for school closings on or after August 16, 2017 (date
of bill enactment), VA may continue the housing allowance for Post-9/11
GI Bill students beyond the date of closure up to the end of the term,
quarter or semester, not to exceed 120 days. The law requires that VA
begin making these payments of housing allowance on August 1, 2018. No
charge to a student's entitlement will be made for the extended period
of eligibility for housing allowance.
Question 68. In addition to restoring GI Bill benefit eligibility
to student veterans harmed by the precipitous closure of ITT Tech and
Corinthian Colleges, this bill gives VA additional tools to provide
oversight of programs to ensure that student veterans are using their
benefits at reputable programs and institutions. State Approving
Agencies approve, review, and monitor training and education programs
that have access to VA education benefits. The Forever GI Bill
authorized additional funding for State Approving Agencies (SAAs) and
expanded SAA's oversight duties by charging SAAs to conduct risk-based
program reviews.
a. How has VA worked with SAAs on including risk-based reviews as
part of their oversight efforts?
Response. Over the last 3 years and well prior to the Colmery Act,
as part of VA's strong partnership with SAAs in our mutual oversight
and compliance responsibilities, SAAs conducted approximately 30
percent of the targeted risk-based compliance reviews at schools where
special risk indicators were discovered. The Executive Director of
VBA's Education Service and the President of the National Association
of State Approving Agency have constituted a Risk-based Review
Workgroup comprised of VA and SAA staff to analyze and implement
potential policy and procedural changes with respect to Risk-Based
Reviews.
b. How has VA worked to strengthen SAAs' ability to evaluate and
monitor programs receiving GI Bill funds?
Response. VA reduced the number of compliance surveys required for
the majority of SAAs for FY 2017 and FY 2018 in order to ensure SAAs
have the time and resources to focus on school and facility approvals,
as well as referrals made to SAAs regarding school concerns and student
complaints.
Question 69. As you know Ashford University, the large for-profit
school, was found to be out of compliance in November 2017. The school
had 60 days to get in compliance. Earlier this month, Ashford announced
it would seek approval from the California SAA to receive VA
educational benefits and VA announced Ashford would continue to receive
GI Bill dollars as the school pursues approval from the California SAA.
Please outline statutory requirements and VA procedure for
communicating with student veterans if their program is found to be out
of compliance. Detail the communication VA had with student veterans
since Ashford was found to be out of compliance last fall. Should the
California SAA not approve Ashford's programs, what steps would VA take
to protect student veterans and taxpayer investment in higher education
and how would VA communicate that information with student veterans?
Response. Section 3690(b)(3)(B)(iii) of title 38, United States
Code, requires VA to notify beneficiaries enrolled in an affected
program at least 30 days prior to suspending or disapproving benefits
for failure to meet approval, recordkeeping or reporting requirements.
Student notification requirements are also codified in VA regulations
in section 21.4210(e)(2) of title 38, Code of Federal Regulations. In
fulfillment of these statutory and regulatory notification
requirements, VA identified current or recent GI Bill beneficiaries
enrolled in Ashford University's online programs and notified them by
email, or by letter if no email address was found, of the situation and
of the fact that benefit payments for enrollment in Ashford's online
programs could be discontinued in 30 days if corrective action was not
taken by Ashford.
Since Ashford University's online programs were approved by the
Arizona SAA, VA has provided information and status updates on three
separate occasions.
November 10, 2017: Students were informed of VA's
correspondence to Ashford University and the Arizona State Approving
Agency that GI Bill benefits could potentially end in 60 days if
corrective actions are not taken.
December 13, 2017: Students were informed that GI Bill
benefits could potentially end in 30 days if Ashford does not submit an
application for approval to the California SAA by January 8, 2018, and
support the approval process in good faith.
January 23, 2018: VA sent an email informing beneficiaries
that Ashford submitted a timely application to the California SAA, and
that benefits would not be interrupted as long as Ashford continues to
make a good faith effort to support the approval process in California.
Unless Ashford University is determined to be fully compliant with
program approval requirements, Federal law mandates that VA must
ultimately discontinue benefits for enrollment in the school's online
programs. Since June 2016, VA has notified GI Bill beneficiaries of the
potential for disruption of benefits due to program approval issues at
Ashford University on nine separate occasions in order to ensure that
they are informed consumers and understand the potential risks of
continued enrollment. In the event that VA is forced to discontinue
benefits, we will work with schools, State Approving Agencies, and
Veterans Service Organizations to identify educational alternatives and
additional resources that can assist our beneficiaries in continuing
their educational pursuits, and we will provide that information to
affected students.
Question 70. What kind of oversight efforts has VA anticipated
needing to ensure that new offerings from Forever GI, including the
STEM Scholarship and the High Tech pilot program, are actually serving
veterans? Please provide a status update on those oversight efforts.
Response. VA is currently analyzing the statutory requirements for
both these provisions and developing planning documents for
implementation. Both programs will require oversight and compliance
efforts to ensure proper program administration and protection for both
the taxpayer and beneficiary. To accomplish this task, VA is
establishing specialized teams located at the VA Regional Processing
Office in Buffalo, NY.
Question 71. What is the timeline for the interagency to make a
determination regarding Agent Orange presumptive conditions including
bladder cancer, hypothyroidism, and Parkinson's-like symptoms?
Response. Once the President's nominee has been confirmed and sworn
in as Secretary, VA will examine the current policy, complete a full
review on this issue and provide new guidance on this issue as needed.
Question 72. What is the status of the National Academy of Medicine
study regarding Agent Orange exposure on descendants? I know they held
a meeting in November 2017, when do you anticipate a report to VA?
Response. VA has a current contract with the National Academy of
Medicine (NAM) to investigate the broad range of conditions possibility
associated with exposure to Agent Orange. Included in this review is a
review of the potential that Agent Orange may have affected the health
of Veterans' descendants. The NAM's report is due to VA by
January 2019. The Committee's charge includes looking at descendant
health and in particular, the Committee was asked to pay special
attention to the potential risk of parental transmission of disease
conditions to descendants.
Question 73. I support the recent executive action to provide
mental health care for transitioning servicemembers. However, I am
concerned that VA does not have the resources it will need to meet the
additional demand.
a. What steps are you taking to ensure that medical facilities
staff mental health professional shortages?
b. What additional resources-funding or personnel- are needed to
meet this growing need, and how will propose bridging the gap?
Response (73 a & b). VA has a Mental Health Hiring Initiative goal
of hiring 1,000 providers by December 31, 2018, to enhance VHA's
ability to provide mental health services. There is a nationwide
shortage of psychiatrists and psychologists. Psychiatrists have been
identified as the top hard to recruit and retain VHA physician
specialty in FY 2016 and FY 2017. Psychologists have been identified as
the fourth hardest to recruit and retain VHA occupation in FY 2016 and
FY 2017.
Despite national shortages in mental health providers, VHA
outpatient mental health demand is anticipated to grow by 12 percent by
2021. The recent Executive Order requires all new Veterans to receive
mental health care for at least 1 year following their separation from
service. Veterans choose to get more of their mental health care from
VA than the private sector, so there is an expectation the demand will
exceed the previous 12 percent estimate.
VA is expanding the use of tele-mental health to reach areas of the
country with a shortage of providers and working with community
partners to provide care in the community. VA has increased the number
of graduate medical education physician residency positions in mental
health by 167.55 since 2014, with the newest cohort expected to begin
training this July. However, VA needs additional resources such as
funding for recruitment and retention incentives, Education Debt
Reduction Program, and the Student Loan Repayment Program in order to
aggressively compete with the private sector for this limited pool of
mental health providers.
Question 74. As of the hearing there were 1,321 vacancies in Ohio,
with the following breakdown: Veteran Health Administration 1,204
exempt 55 nonexempt, Veteran Benefit Administration 48 exempt 9
nonexempt, Human Resources and Administration 2 nonexempt, Office of
Information and Technology 3 exempt.
a. Of those exempted positions, what is the average time to fill a
vacancy?
Response. The following Time to Hire (T2H) data is based on the
data utilized for hiring metrics during the 1st quarter of FY 2018. The
data provided represents hiring actions made via a job announcement and
does not include hires made via the noncompetitive hiring process.
T2H Overview:
The T2H metric is measured from the date the hiring need is
validated to the actual start date. OPM's recommended T2H is 80 days.
VA-wide average T2H: 73 days.
VHA average T2H: 79 days.
VBA average T2H: 44 days.
NCA average T2H: 64 days.
b. What is the breakdown of the VHA exempted vacancies by VAMC and
specialty?
Response. The Secretary removed the hiring freeze on VHA medical
centers within days after expiration of the Federal hiring freeze.
Medical centers are able to hire for all positions and occupations.
Question 75. Does the Department support the SVAC-passed
comprehensive health care bill?
Response. VA finds much of value in S. 2193, as approved by the
Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee on November 29, 2017, but an
Administration position has not been established on the legislation. We
look forward to continuing work with the Committee on this important
effort.
______
Response to Posthearing Questions Submitted by Hon. Mazie K. Hirono to
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
gi bill eligibility for former corinthian colleges students
With the passage of the Harry W. Colmery Act, also known as the
``Forever GI Bill,'' VA has been given authority and resources to
restore education benefits to student veterans who lost them following
the closure of for-profit institutions like Heald College which
operated in many states including Hawaii and approximately enrolled 192
veterans at the time of its closure.
Question 76. Secretary Shulkin, could you provide the Committee
with an update on the number of affected student veterans VA has
restored benefits for those who attended Corinthian Colleges in Hawaii
and the total number across the country who attended for-profit
institutions that closed down?
Response. As of January 26, 2018, VA has received over 700
applications and restored over 4,500 months of entitlement to almost
450 individuals. Heald College, which operated in many states including
Hawaii, had enrolled 192 Veterans at the time of its closure. Since the
new passage of the law, 67 beneficiaries that attended a school in
Hawaii could apply for restoration. Of those, only 7 students have
applied. Six students were found ineligible and 1 student benefits was
restored for 11 months and 12 days.
______
Response to Posthearing Questions Submitted by Hon. Joe Manchin III to
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
Question 77. In a January 5th interview with Federal News Radio,
Secretary Shulkin proposed that a review and closure process of
underutilized and vacant facilities, like the Department of Defense has
with BRAC, would free up resources and do maintenance on its newer
facilities.
a. How does VA define `underutilized' in this context?
Response. VA kicked off an initiative in June 2017 to reduce the
burden of vacant buildings within its inventory. At the time, VA had
430 vacant buildings that cost approximately $7 million a year to
maintain. To date, VA has reused or disposed of 131 (30 percent) of the
430 assets identified as vacant and is on track to meet its goal of
initiating disposal or reuse actions for all 430 buildings by
June 2019. On an annual basis, VA reports the number of underutilized
buildings in its inventory. An underutilized building is defined as an
individual building that is occupied and in use, but the function(s)
housed there do not require the full amount of space in the building to
operate. Essentially, the building is too big and not right-sized for
the functions housed in it. While an underutilized building is not as
efficient as it could be, the functions currently housed in it are
still needed. VA is not reviewing or closing any underutilized
facilities at this time. nor is VA initiating a Base Realignment and
Closure (BRAC)-like process for these buildings.
b. What criteria would be used in the evaluation process for
determining which facilities would be susceptible to a BRAC?
Response. The Department is neither planning, initiating, nor
undergoing a BRAC-like process. VA has developed the methodology for
completing market area health system optimization assessments in each
of the 96 health care markets around the country, with the goal of
assessing the current and future Veteran demand for health care,
assessing the available Federal and non-Federal assets available to
meet that demand in each market, and planning to match that capacity to
the demand in modernized high performing networks using a data-driven
approach. The primary drivers for decisionmaking in each market would
be better access, better quality of care, and higher levels of Veterans
satisfaction in each market, at a sustainable cost.
These networks will be well-connected, comprehensive coalitions,
led by experienced VA managers who will coordinate VA health care
services, complemented where appropriate by DOD providers, VHA's
academic affiliates, and other high quality private sector providers
with competence in caring for veterans with service-connected
conditions. Once the market assessments are complete and VA has market
level, VISN level and regional or national level plans, the needs for
capital investments for modernization, access, quality and Veteran
satisfaction will be known. Similarly, the need for divestments of
underutilized facilities may become apparent, where plans for the high
performing local network would render an underutilized facility vacant.
Until this process is completed in some VISNs, the facilities
susceptible to renovation, modernization, repurposing or divestment
will not be fully known.
The VA MISSION Act of 2018, Section 203 requires the development of
Criteria on the ``modernization or realignment of VHA Facilities.'' VHA
will work with the Office of Asset Enterprise Management, which has
existing criteria that has been used, most recently, in development of
the list of vacant and underutilized buildings that was referenced by
former Secretary Shulkin in January. Additionally, VHA Operations will
also be included in the discussion to insure broad understanding and
field impact to follow the requirements of this section of the MISSION
Act.
Question 78. In terms of the 110 quality metrics posted on VA
webpages--
a. How are you equipping local VA Medical Center staff to track and
record these metrics?
Response. These metrics are available to all VA staff through the
Strategic Analytics for Information and Learning (SAIL) reporting
system via the agency's intranet. SAIL includes drill-down tools that
allow more detailed trending of individual metrics and access to
diagnostic tools that can help facilities improve their performance.
Employees with authorization to view Social Security Number-level data
for their facility will also be able to identify the specific Veterans
records that contributed to the quality measure.
b. Who in the West Virginia VAMCs are responsible for collecting
this data?
Response. Data are collected via a centralized process for all
VAMCs and are not dependent on local data collection efforts. This
ensures the reliability of the data and reduces the likelihood of
manipulation or ``gaming.'' The exact process of collecting data vary
by the specific measure domain. For instance, patient experience data
is collected via a survey mailed by an outside contractor to Veterans
who have recently used VA inpatient services. That contractor conducts
the survey, collates, analyzes, and reports results according to
standard protocols established by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS). Health outcomes data are calculated using CMS
algorithms from electronic data derived from our EHR. Measures for
timely and effective care are collected via standardized processes for
medical record abstraction through VA's External Peer Review Program.
c. In your hearing, you cited that an HHS contract issues resulted
in VA data not being able to update information on Hospital Compare
website. Can you please elaborate on the contract issues and what VA
and HHS are doing to mediate this in the near term?
Response. VA and CMS have been working together to include quality
measure data on the Hospital Compare website. Revisions to an
Interagency Agreement (IAA) with CMS were completed, and the new VA-CMS
IAA was signed in April 2017. Subsequent to that, CMS has been updating
its processes to incorporate VA data in the calculation of measures for
the different domains of performance such as Outcomes, Safety,
Timeliness and Effectiveness, and Patient Experience. Many quality
measures for VA hospitals have been updated and are posted on Hospital
Compare, such as hospital survey data and readmissions and mortality
measure data. CMS is also working with the VA on additional measures
that can be added to the website.
Question 79. In light of President Trump's declaration of a public
health emergency, what additional resources or authorities does VA need
to more effectively combat the opioid crisis?
Response. Action steps if new budget dollars were identified within
VHA's budget:
Enhanced Pain Management Teams with multi-modality
approaches and increased consultative opportunities through SCAN-ECHO
and Telehealth.
Expand education opportunities and collaborations between
VA, other Federal Agencies and private providers.
Provide Academic Detailers and other VA developed training
to private providers, especially those providing care to Veterans in
the community.
Increased capacity for high functioning primary care teams
with timely access to pain specialty care for the most complex pain
patients (stepped care).
Fully integrated bidirectional State Prescription Drug
Monitoring Programs (PDMP) and data storage allowing automated checks
and data retrieval reducing the provider burden.
National media campaign for STOP PAIN to enhance the
awareness, availability, and utilization of VA developed best practices
in the private section to include:
- Stepped Care Model;
- Treatment alternatives/complimentary care;
- Ongoing monitoring of usage;
- Practice Guidelines;
- Prescription monitoring;
- Academic Detailing ;
- Informed consent for patients; and
- Naloxone distribution.
Question 80. In your written testimony, you cite that the
December 2017 strategic pause of the Electronic Health Record
Acquisition occurred so that additional and external assessments of
national interoperability language contained in the request for
proposal (RFP) would ultimately support an EHR contract award.
a. Please describe specifically what assessments were done before
the Cerner award was announced.
Response. The MITRE Corporation was selected to coordinate and lead
an independent assessment utilizing external clinical, technical, and
executive-level interoperability experts to evaluate the contract
language related to interoperability. After reviewing the assessment,
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) adjudicated/reconciled each of
MITRE's comments into the updated request for proposal (RFP).
VA took an additional step utilizing a myriad of key leaders from
the private sector (e.g., Johns Hopkins, Mayo Clinic, Intermountain,
Cleveland Clinic, among others), who recently implemented a new
electronic health record solution, to ensure there were no gaps in the
RFP and lessons learned were captured from the private sector. The
comments submitted were primarily high-level lessons learned from their
own past experiences. VA effectively re-validated the RFP language
based on these inputs.
b. How much will this additional MITRE Corporation assessment cost?
Response. The MITRE Corporation Interoperability Assessment (Task
1) was awarded for $396,581.
c. In the meantime, what are you doing to undergird the current EHR
system to ensure patient care presently?
Response. VA is committed to maintaining high-quality connections
through health information exchanges. These connections, in turn, push
further cooperation among the three dominant exchanges (CareQuality,
CommonWell, eHealthExchange) and with regional health information
exchanges.
A P P E N D I X
----------
Prepared Statement by National Organization of Veterans' Advocates,
Inc.
Chairman Isakson, Ranking Member Tester, and Members of the
Committee, The National Organization of Veterans' Advocates (NOVA)
would like to thank you for the opportunity to provide a statement in
response to Secretary Shulkin's testimony regarding VA reform
legislation passed in 2017. Our statement will focus on implementation
of the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017.
NOVA is a not-for-profit 501(c)(6) educational membership
organization incorporated in the District of Columbia in 1993. NOVA
represents nearly 600 attorneys and agents assisting tens of thousands
of our Nation's military veterans, their widows, and their families
seeking to obtain their earned benefits from VA. NOVA works to develop
and encourage high standards of service and representation for all
persons seeking VA benefits. NOVA members represent veterans before all
levels of VA's disability claims process, and handle appeals before the
U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) and U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit). In 2000, the CAVC
recognized NOVA's work on behalf of veterans with the Hart T. Mankin
Distinguished Service Award. NOVA operates a full-time office in
Washington, DC.
Attorneys and agents handle a considerable volume and growing
number of appeals at the Board of Veterans' Appeals (BVA). In FY 2015,
for example, attorneys and agents handled 14.9% of appeals before BVA.
This number was fourth only behind Disabled American Veterans (28.1%),
State Service Officers (16.5%), and American Legion (15%). U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs, Board of Veterans' Appeals Annual
Report Fiscal Year 2015 at 27. In FY 2016, this number grew to 15.9%,
third only to Disabled American Veterans (28.1%) and American Legion
(19.6%). U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Board of Veterans'
Appeals Annual Report Fiscal Year 2016 at 26. Similar statistics are
available for FY 2017, with attorneys and agents representing
appellants in 17% of cases, again third behind Disabled American
Veterans (31%) and American Legion (18%).
NOVA members have been responsible for significant precedential
decisions at the CAVC and Federal Circuit. In addition, as an
organization, NOVA has advanced important cases and filed amicus briefs
in others. See, e.g., Henderson v. Shinseki, 562 U.S. 428
(2011)(amicus); NOVA v. Secretary of Veterans Affairs, 710 F.3d 1328
(Fed. Cir. 2013)(addressing VA's failure to honor its commitment to
stop applying an invalid rule); Gray v. Secretary of Veterans Affairs,
No. 16-1782 (Jan. 3, 2018)(amicus in support of petition for rehearing
before the Federal Circuit); Robinson v. McDonald, No. 15-0715
(July 14, 2016)(CAVC amicus).
We detail below concerns that should be addressed to ensure
implementation of the appeals reform legislation preserves the long-
standing intent of Congress: that the VA benefits adjudication and
appeals process be veteran friendly and nonadversarial.
overview
NOVA appreciated the opportunity to participate in the discussion
of appeals reform that led to the passage of the Veterans Appeals
Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017. We also applaud VA's ongoing
inclusion of stakeholders in the discussion of its implementation
plans, which has included opportunities to review draft regulations and
documents related to its Rapid Appeals Modernization Program. NOVA
remains committed to providing constructive feedback in response to
these opportunities, and urges VA to consider and implement the
recommendations of the stakeholder community.
As we have previously noted, successful implementation will be key
if appeals reform is truly to be the positive change veterans deserve
and VA promises. Successful execution of VA's proposed process hinges
on its ability to consistently meet its goals of adjudicating and
issuing decisions in the 125-day window identified for supplemental
claims and deciding appeals within the one-year period before BVA. As
demonstrated with the prior backlog of original claims and scheduling
of medical appointments, VA often struggles to meet its own internal
goals to the detriment of veterans.
rapid appeals modernization program (ramp)
Relying on section 4 of Public Law 115-55, VA implemented the Rapid
Appeals Modernization Program (RAMP) in November 2017. According to the
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) designed for RAMP, the Veterans
Benefits Administration (VBA) ``will administer this pilot during the
18-month period after enactment allowed for full implementation of the
new process and continue processing elections by Veterans as long as
necessary thereafter to continue to accelerate resolution of legacy
appeals.'' SOP at 1. Based on VA's proposed rollout of this program, as
of January 1, 2018, VA sent approximately 15,500 letters to veterans
with appeals eligible for acceptance into RAMP. Secretary Shulkin
testified that, to date, three percent of invited veterans have elected
to opt into RAMP, and 75 percent of those decided have received a
grant.
As an initial matter, stakeholders need information and statistics
on a regular basis to understand the current status of RAMP. How many
appeals have been withdrawn from the legacy system and moved into RAMP,
and what option was selected? What constitutes a grant? Have the 25
percent who received denials chosen to take any additional action? We
realize it is still early in the process and some statistics might not
yet be available. However, such data is important to stakeholders to
understand the current state of the program and provide the best advice
to veterans and their families. Data is also a critical component of
any true pilot program to measure its success, and VA must commit to
regular updates so stakeholders can gauge progress and suggest
improvements. Furthermore, VA should ensure its field staff is
receiving regular communications and training on RAMP operations, as
well as updates on its progress.
From NOVA's perspective, there are a few reasons why there is a low
opt-in rate to RAMP. First, VA chose not to extend the program through
to BVA. Therefore, a veteran who withdraws his or her pending appeals
(with no opportunity to return to the legacy system), is denied after
either a higher-level review or supplemental claim, and wishes to
appeal to BVA must now wait until the system is fully implemented--at
the earliest in February 2019--to obtain BVA review. While VA has
stated those veterans will be first in line for BVA review upon full
implementation of the system, many representatives are reluctant to
counsel an appellant to move into a program that does not extend to BVA
and does not provide a full understanding of how the procedure will
ultimately operate at BVA. Furthermore, VA's recently submitted
implementation plan indicates that the ``average processing time goal
for appeals under Sec. 7107 does not apply to appeals submitted to the
Board in response to a decision under VBA's RAMP.'' U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs, Comprehensive Plan for Processing Legacy Appeals and
Implementing the Modernized Appeals System 8 (November 2017).
Second, VA is targeting the oldest appeals. While we understand
this strategy is designed to be fair to those who have been waiting the
longest, many veterans currently receiving invitations are close enough
to a BVA decision that they do not wish to move into something new,
particularly in light of Secretary Shulkin's welcome statement that BVA
intends to decide 81,000 appeals in FY 2018.
In addition, veterans with cases in remand status may be more
likely to stay in the legacy system because BVA will retain
jurisdiction over the appeal. The veteran will be entitled to expedited
consideration upon return to BVA if he or she is not satisfied with the
action taken on remand, as well as enforcement of the prior order.
Finally, although NOVA appreciates VA efforts to ensure attorneys
and agents receive copies of RAMP correspondence sent to veterans
(required under its M21-1 Adjudication Procedures Manual for all
correspondence), VA's mailing systems remain seriously flawed both for
RAMP and overall adjudication procedures. NOVA receives nearly daily
complaints from members that copies of correspondence are not being
received. While VA has stated it plans to launch a centralized outgoing
mailing system to rectify these issues, far too much correspondence has
gone unmailed and unreceived. When VA fails to properly notify,
important deadlines are missed and additional claims and appeals must
be pursued to address VA's failures, resulting in yet more delay in the
process.
It is clear that VA is not fulfilling its responsibilities in this
regard. In July 2017, the Government Accountability Office (GAO)
completed a report addressing VA's outgoing mail deficiencies. U.S.
Government Accountability Office, Report to the Chairman, Committee on
Veterans Affairs, House of Representatives, Veterans Affairs: Actions
Needed to More Effectively Manage Outgoing Mail, GAO-17-581
(July 2017). In addition to finding VA has an outdated mail management
policy directive and handbook, it noted that ``VA cannot ensure
consistent mailing practices in its administrations and facilities
because it has not provided mail managers with appropriate authority
and responsibilities to oversee mail operations across the agency.''
GAO Report at 7; see also GAO Report at 15. VA must improve its mailing
practices, so veterans and their representatives receive proper notice
of claims and appeals processing.
implementation of the veterans appeals improvement and
modernization act of 2017
As part of the reporting requirements imposed under Public Law 115-
55, in November 2017, VA submitted its first report, Comprehensive Plan
for Processing Legacy Appeals and Implementing the Modernized Appeals
System (hereinafter Comprehensive Plan). VA does not provide sufficient
details for how it will handle legacy appeals in relation to modernized
appeals once the new system is implemented. Based on several statements
made in the report, it appears VA intends to devote resources first to
modernized appeals and allocate ``leftovers'' to legacy appeals. See,
e.g., Comprehensive Plan at 4 (``VA will allocate available resources
to meet the timely processing goals in the new system, as outlined in
section 3(a)(3), and remaining resources are then employed to process
legacy appeals.''); Comprehensive Plan at 9 (``VA intends to allocate
resources in an efficient manner that will establish timely processing
in the new process and will allocate all remaining appeals resources to
address the inventory of legacy appeals.''); Comprehensive Plan at 10
(``VBA intends to allocate field resources in an efficient manner that
will establish timely processing in the new process and will allocate
all remaining resources to address the inventory of legacy appeals.'').
VA needs to provide more details about how it will continue to process
legacy appeals in a fair and timely manner while fulfilling its
obligations under the new legislation, to include how it will address
the substantial backlog of BVA hearing requests.
Furthermore, in its implementation plan, VA stated it needs
enhancements to the Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS) to meet
the statute's specifications. Comprehensive Plan at 15. Secretary
Shulkin also testified to VA's ``enterprise-wide efforts to modernize
the appeals process through improvements in technology.'' Statement of
the Honorable David J. Shulkin, M.D., Secretary of Veterans Affairs,
for Presentation Before the Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs, The
State of VA: Progress Report on Implementing 2017 VA Reform Legislation
3 (January 17, 2018). Congress must ensure VBA and BVA continue to
receive sufficient resources to implement necessary technological
upgrades to its systems, particularly VBMS and Caseflow. VBMS was not
designed with appeals processing in mind, and it lacks many features
that would make work for VBA employees, BVA employees, and
representatives easier and more efficient. VA should ensure VBMS
enhancements continue, Caseflow is fully operational, and all
representatives have access to as many features as appropriate to help
them represent veterans as effectively as possible.
conclusion
NOVA is committed to continue working with this Committee, VA, and
fellow stakeholders to ensure the appeals process for veterans is fair,
timely, and preserves veterans' due process rights. We again thank the
Committee for allowing us to provide our views on implementation of
appeals reform.
______
Prepared Statement of Carlos Fuentes, Director, National Legislative
Service, Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States
Chairman Isakson, Ranking Member Tester, and Members of the
Committee, On behalf of the men and women of the Veterans of Foreign
Wars of the United States (VFW) and its Auxiliary, it is a great
pleasure to submit a statement for the record in response to Secretary
of Veterans Affairs David J. Shulkin's state of the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) testimony.
First and foremost, the VFW would like to thank the Committee and
VA for all the accomplishments in 2017. Thanks to the bipartisan
leadership of this Committee, Congress passed ten important veterans
bills to improve benefits and service for those who have worn our
Nation's uniform and their families. While the VFW lauds the
Committee's efforts, Congress still has a long list of unfinished
business. The VFW looks forward to highlighting those topics when the
VFW presents its legislative priorities before the Committee on
March 7, 2018.
community care
One item which should not be on the unfinished business list is
S. 2193, the Caring for our Veterans Act of 2017, which was approved by
committee nearly unanimously. This important bill would make much
needed improvements to the way VA provides community and internal care
to America's veterans. Furthermore, this important bill would also
correct a serious inequity between veterans who served before
September 11, 2001 (9/11) and their pre-9/11 brothers and sisters by
expanding caregiver benefits to veterans of all eras.
The VFW implores the Committee to move this important bill as soon
as possible. A recent continuing resolution provided VA with additional
Choice Program funding, which is estimated to last up to five months,
but veterans cannot afford for Congress to wait until the 11th hour to
act. Veterans who rely on the Choice Program for their care are
directly impacted by Congress' inability to act swiftly on community
care legislation. As we have seen in the past when funds were close to
being depleted, when the Choice Program faces an immediate uncertainty
veterans who are unable to receive VA care are forced to wait or travel
long distances for the care they have earned and deserve simply because
Congress has failed to act on comprehensive and permanent community
care legislation.
The VFW urges Congress to quickly pass the Caring for our Veterans
Act of 2017, so we can finally put an end to the constant fear of
budget shortfalls that leave veterans without timely access to the high
quality and veteran-centric care they have earned.
forever gi bill
The historic, bipartisan, and bicameral Forever GI Bill is the most
significant improvement to veterans' educational benefits in nearly a
decade. Thanks to the hard work of the Committee and its staff, the
Forever GI Bill tiger team, and a broad coalition of veterans,
military, and educational organizations, more veterans and their
survivors have an opportunity to pursue their educational goals.
Thanks to the Forever GI Bill, all Purple Heart recipients will
have full access to their GI Bill benefits; veterans attending schools
that close abruptly through no fault of the veterans will be able to
complete their degrees; thousands of involuntarily activated Reservists
and Guardsmen will finally receive their well-deserved GI Bill
benefits; surviving family members will be able to accomplish their
educational goals with having to incur crippling educational debt; and
veterans will no longer have a 15-year limitation on their earned
educational benefits, which means veterans truly have a lifetime to use
their GI Bill.
The VFW is pleased to hear VA has implemented 13 provisions of the
Forever GI Bill and that it is committed to ensuring all veterans
impacted by changes are fully informed of their new benefits. However,
the VFW has received mixed feedback on VA's outreach efforts. VA has
published informative websites and releases on the changes to VA
education benefits. Yet, the veterans who are impacted tell us they
have not been informed by VA about recent changes. Specifically, the
VFW reached out to veterans who were impacted by recent school
closures, and reported knowing they knew about the Forever GI Bill but
had not been contacted by VA to have their educational benefits
restored.
Similarly, school certifying officials tell the VFW that they have
not received any information from VA on recent changes to the GI Bill.
School certifying officials are the first people student veterans turn
to for information regarding their benefits. Without proper outreach
from VA, school certifying officials are having to turn to other
sources for information on impending changes. Doing so could lead to
misinformation and confusing messaging to student veterans. VA must
improve its outreach efforts and work with veterans organizations to
make certain a uniform message is delivered to impacted veterans.
appeals modernization
When the negotiation process began for what would become Public Law
115-55, the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017,
it was made clear that the input and support of veterans service
organization (VSO) was paramount to the enactment of the legislation.
The VFW's goal with appeals modernization was to build a process
that placed the veteran first, was easy to navigate, and protected a
veteran's rights every step of the way. The VFW, along with several
other organizations, has long advocated for appeals reform, and were
honored to be a part of the process with the assurance that the level
of engagement that existed during the bills development would be
sustained when implemented.
However, once the legislation was passed, we began having concerns
almost about VA's implementation plans. As a result, in September, the
VFW and DAV (Disabled American Veterans) sent a letter to Deputy
Secretary of Veterans Affairs Thomas Bowman expressing our concerns
with the speed of the roll out; the language used in the initial opt-in
notification letter and phone script; and the overall lack of
engagement that we, and other VSOs have been afforded up to that point.
While VA has addressed of the issues identified on the joint
letter, the VFW still has lingering concerns with regard to how VA is
implementing these changes and communicating with VSOs regarding the
progress that has or has not been made, and the data that supports that
narrative.
As an organization that represents a large portion of appellants
with cases pending before the Board of Veterans Appeals (BVA), our
clients depend on us to provide the most accurate advice in order to
increase their chances of a successful appeal. We have been
representing veterans for decades and have a good understanding of how
the system works. Having researched the possible impact of the program
on our clients, we have found that there are circumstances where
opting-in may actually be detrimental to the veteran.
Many of our clients have been waiting for years to have their cases
heard at BVA. They have invested time and energy into appealing their
claims, and many of them are appealing denials for extremely complex
issues. For our organization to recommend that they opt-in to a program
that is potentially faster, and may lead to their case being decided
more quickly, but may also lead to them losing their place in line at
BVA if they are denied would be reckless.
As of this submission, we have not yet been shown concrete evidence
from VA, or any of our clients that would suggest that Rapid Appeals
Modernization Program (RAMP) will actually improve a veteran's chance
of a favorable outcome. During the hearing, Secretary Shulkin reported
that 75 percent of RAMP decisions ``are going in favor of the
veteran.'' While 75 percent may seem to indicate RAMP is a good option
for veterans, VA's testimony does not clarify how many appeals were
adjudicated and what VA defines as favorable. To VA, issuing a zero
percent service-connection may qualify as favorable. A veteran would
disagree if the decision is for a debilitating condition that merits a
higher rating. As a result, we have declined to recommend to veterans
we serve that have received eligibility notices to participate in the
program, and will continue to do so until we are provided with more
thorough data from VA.
The VFW urges Congress and VA to properly resource Veterans
Benefits Administration (VBA) and the Board of Veterans Appeals to
ensure they are able to timely adjudicate legacy appeals from veterans
who do not opt into the new appeals process, and the potential influx
of supplemental claims and higher level review requests at VA Regional
Offices. VA must be empowered to manage its workload, and stakeholders
must be properly informed if the new framework is expected to succeed.
accountability and whistleblower protections
The VFW strongly believes that proper accountability is vital to
ensuring VA fulfills its mission to care for those who have borne the
battle. VFW members across the country have firsthand experience with
VA's inability to quickly discipline wrongdoers. That is why the VFW
praised the enactment of S. 1094, the VA Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection Act of 2017.
The VFW is pleased VA has taken steps toward improving
accountability and transparency by implementing S. 1094 and publically
releasing accountability reports. However, VA still has a long way to
go. The VFW continues to hear reports of employees who are allowed to
disrespect veterans or provide poor customer service. VFW members also
report that whistleblower protections are not working because both
patients and employees continue to fear they will be retaliated against
if they report malfeasances. One VA employee tells the VFW that he
fears the enhanced accountability measures have worsened nepotism at VA
medical facilities. The VFW urges Congress to closely monitor
implementation of S. 1094 to ensure wrongdoers are swiftly held
accountable, whistleblowers are protected, and nepotism is eliminated.
However, Congress cannot simply focus on firing bad employees. It
must also ensure VA is able to quickly hire high quality employees. If
VA is not able to replace wrongdoers with high quality employees, it
will lack the staff needed to accomplish its mission. The VFW urges the
Committee to work with VA to address barriers in recruiting and
retention of high quality professionals, who are willing to work at VA
medical facilities.
Specifically, the VFW continues to hear that VA's licensing and
credentialing process is excessively long and should be modified to
make certain VA is able hire high quality doctors on a timely basis.
The VFW also heard from providers who work at VA that they face delays
transferring to underserved areas because they are required to undergo
credentialing procedures again even though VA policy authorizes
transfers between VA medical facilities without having to undergo
credentialing. Veterans want more doctors at their VA medical
facilities, but requiring doctors who want to serve veterans to jump
through hoops prevents this from happening.
Congress must also ensure VA has the authority to timely hire front
line staff. Due to the lack of support staff, many VA providers are
required to spend time on administrative tasks instead of treating
patients or spending more time with their patients. VA is in the
process of streamlining its hiring process for medical scheduling
assistants (MSAs) and has set the goal of hiring MSAs within 30 days,
which is half the time it takes, on average, to hire support staff
today. The VFW commends VA for its efforts, but it is time Congress
expands direct hire authorities to all Veterans Health Administration
staff, not just doctors and nurses. We fear that VA's workforce
productivity could decline due to staffing shortages and low employee
morale if Congress does not reform VA's hiring authorities.
homeless veterans programs
The nearly 50 percent reduction in veteran homelessness is laudable
and the holistic partnerships and approaches taken by VA, the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and the Department of
Labor (DOL) are absolutely critical to that success. Success, however,
could be diminished if funding fails to keep pace with demand. Congress
cannot allow VA to stymie its homeless veterans by reducing much needed
funding.
Specifically, the VFW has great concerns with VA's decision to
realign specific-purpose funds allocated for homeless programs as a
means to provide VA health care facility directors with more individual
control over their location's general funding needs. In theory, this
could be a successful idea. But this theory will undoubtingly be a
failure without the transparency and desire to work with VSOs and
Congress, and that cost should most certainly not come at the expense
of homeless veterans.
After receiving negative feedback from VSOs, and a letter from the
Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Military Construction, Veterans
Affairs, and Related Agencies, VA chose to put a temporary halt on this
initiative. We ask that this Committee join us in closely monitoring
VA's attempts to handicap its successful homeless veterans programs.
Taking away the guaranteed specific-purpose funding for homeless
veteran programs, such as the massive cut initially suggested by VA to
HUD- Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (VASH), would result in a
guaranteed failure of the program. The specific funding for HUD-VASH is
crucial to the ability of case managers within VA to properly perform
their jobs and assist homeless veterans in all the ways they are
intended to help. These case managers are like life coaches for
homeless veterans getting their feet back on the ground. This program's
case management is the embodiment of the holistic approach and the
answer to successfully overcoming homelessness.
Since VA has reconsidered and postponed the timeline to readjust
this funding, the VFW has eagerly awaited the opportunity to have a
transparent and open conversation with VA about the intent and how to
responsibly move forward. Yet, just because the decision was put on
hold for now does not mean there were no repercussions. The VFW's
Department of California's Homeless Service Providers have found that
VA's attempts to reallocate HUD-VASH funding has negatively impacted
the program.
The two primary concerns they have found thus far include
employment rates of HUD-VASH case managers as well as individual state-
funded programs for homeless veterans. In communities across
California, such as Kerr County, VA has not been able to hire enough
HUD-VASH case managers even with current funding. This results in case
managers taking on an average of 50 homeless veterans instead of VA's
suggestion of 25 homeless veterans per case manager. While managing
twice as many veterans as suggested, and with the travel requirements
of case management, locations such as these are not able to utilize all
the vouchers they receive. With a massive cut in funding, there is a
major fear that employment rates for case managers will only get worse.
It has also been rumored that voucher distribution will be halted in
some communities, out of fear that they will run out.
Also, various states that rely on HUD-VASH funding have implemented
their own programs to assist in combating veteran homelessness. For
example, California's Proposition 41, Veterans Housing and Homeless
Prevention Bond, is heavily dependent on VA's Supportive Housing as a
subsidy for the bonds used to provide for homeless veterans and their
families. This serves as an example of how cutting HUD-VASH funding
could have even more worrisome and unintended consequences that cut
deeper than originally thought.
pre-discharge claims
As the Nation's oldest major VSO, the VFW serves 24 military
installations to help veterans navigate and understand their earned VA
benefits. To the VFW, filing claims prior to separation from the
military is one of the most important processes that a servicemember
can complete during the transition process. Not only does this ensure
timely delivery of benefits after discharge, but it also increases the
likelihood of granting benefits, setting veterans up for future
success.
As transition programs evolve, Congress, the Department of Defense
(DOD), and VA all seek to make changes to better suit the transition
experience. Many times these changes result in improved service for the
transitioning servicemember, such as the Transition Assistance Program
mandate included in the VOW to Hire Heroes Act; DOD's deployment of the
military lifecycle model for transition; VA's establishment of the pre-
discharge claims program; or the joint DOD/VA commitment to develop a
single medical record for servicemembers and veterans.
Unfortunately, sometimes changes have unintended consequences that
may result in a degraded transition experience for the servicemember.
This is where the VFW takes its responsibility as a veterans' advocate
to inform the agencies of jurisdiction and the Committee of our
concerns. Recently, VA made two significant changes to its pre-
discharge claims programs that make the VFW concerned about the future
of this critical interaction and the professional services we provide
to our transitioning military members. First, VA shifted its timelines
for the Benefits Delivery at Discharge (BDD) program, only allowing
servicemembers to submit BDD claims from 180-90 days prior to
discharge. Second, VA eliminated the Quick Start (QS) claims program
entirely, meaning veterans with 89 days or fewer left on active duty no
longer have an option tailored to their unique circumstances to easily
access their earned benefits.
The VFW understands why VA wanted to shift the timeline for BDD to
90 days. We understand that this allows VA to complete exams and
propose rating decisions to deliver benefits as close to a
servicemember's date of discharge as possible. In a vacuum, this is a
positive step. However, coupled with the elimination of QS and the
military's cumbersome transition timelines, the VFW believes this
change would disqualify most servicemembers the VFW serves from easily
accessing their benefits on their way out of the military.
According to VA, the VFW's claimants on military installations who
filed QS claims fluctuated between 33 and 50 percent over the past
year. In visiting with our pre-discharge claims sites, we hear that
most clients visit our offices with far fewer than 90 days left on
active duty, meaning most of our past BDD clients would no longer be
qualified for the program. Yes, VA still accepts these claims, but they
are no longer processed expediently while the veteran still serves on
active duty, and they are no longer tracked with a unique end product
(EP) code specific to QS claims, formerly EP code 337.
In the past, this EP code allowed the VFW to track pre-discharge
claims work to perform rating reviews and ensure the best possible
outcome for our transitioning servicemembers. Now, with the elimination
of the QS EP code, claims we submit on behalf of transitioning
servicemembers are assigned as any other claim in VA's National Work
Queue. VA will argue that this is not a big deal and that VFW-
accredited representatives anywhere can conduct these rating reviews.
While this is technically true, we lose optics on these claims and can
no longer properly track and report how well VA is serving the
transitioning servicemember population. If we cannot identify problems
this early in the process, we are not setting up the servicemember for
post-military success.
As of this hearing, the VFW has six personnel stationed at the VA
regional offices (VARO) responsible for pre-discharge claims
adjudication whose sole responsibility is to review rating decisions
and correct any possible errors. Our most recent data indicates that
our rating review specialists catch VA adjudication errors in up to 20
percent of pre-discharge claims and are able to resolve such errors
prior to promulgation of the award.
Several years ago, recognizing the unique needs of transitioning
servicemembers, VA committed not to broker work from the consolidated
pre-discharge claims worksites at the VAROs in Winston-Salem, Salt Lake
City, and San Diego. VA reneged on this promise last year with its
across-the-board implementation of the National Work Queue, as we have
testified in the past, and we do not expect VA will go back to its old
workflows since this has seemed to increase productivity and efficiency
for VA. However, through unique EP codes and Station of Origination
filtering in the Veterans Benefits Management System, our pre-discharge
quality control team was able to track and review work regardless of
the VARO of jurisdiction for adjudication. This was a satisfactory
middle ground to meet both the needs of VA to broker its work and the
VFW's need to maintain optics on transitioning servicemembers' claims
for quality control purposes. However, with the elimination of the QS
EP code, we lose optics on this work and can no longer fulfill our
commitment to transitioning servicemembers to perform the proper
quality controls on their claims.
Moreover, VA exacerbated an already tenuous situation by notifying
transitioning servicemembers with fewer than 90 days on active duty
that they were ``disqualified'' from filing BDD claims. Since the
change went into effect October 1, 2017, we have heard from all of our
pre-discharge claims sites and several of our VARO worksites that
veterans have called or visited the offices, concerned that something
went wrong with their claim. We even have one report from our office at
Walter Reed National Military Medical Center that a retiree received a
BDD disqualification letter 92 days prior to separation.
This is a situation where language is critical. When the VFW was
first presented with this letter, we vehemently disagreed with VA's
decision to send it as worded. This concern was ignored until the
recent House Veterans' Affairs Disability Assistance and Memorial
Affairs Subcommittee hearing, after which VA has agreed to review these
notification letters with VSOs.
The VFW calls on VA to put veterans, not appearances, first. It
must accept claims prior to separation, instead of punishing
transitioning servicemembers whose chain of command does not permit
them the opportunity to begin their transition process 90 days before
they separate from military service. At the very least, VA must
reestablish an EP code for transitioning servicemembers who file a
claim within 90 days of separation to ensure the VFW and other veterans
organizations are able to assist veterans in successfully transitioning
from military service back to civilian life, regardless of where they
choose to call home.
VA must also rework the disqualification letters to simply notify
the veterans that their claims have been received, but cannot be worked
until they separate from service and submit their DD-214 paperwork.
These simple steps will once again ensure that the VFW and similarly-
structured organizations can continue to provide the advocacy our
clients expect, and transitioning servicemembers will once again have
peace of mind that VA is responsibly handling their pending benefits
claims.
Unfortunately, the VFW worries there is a larger objective with the
recent changes to VA's pre-discharge claims programs. While VA asserts
that moving the window to 90 days results in better claims service, the
elimination of the QS EP code and the rapid deployment of programs like
the Decision-Ready Claims process indicate to the VFW that VA's primary
objective is to obfuscate the total pending workload.
Based on the VFW's estimates, we would lose optics on up to 50
percent of our pre-discharge workload simply by VA shuffling the BDD
timelines and eliminating the QS EP code. The problem is not only that
we lose optics on the claims, but VA will not formally establish the
BDD-excluded claims until veterans formally submit their DD-214s after
they separate from service. This means that any time from 89 days to
the time of the veteran's submission does not count as pending work as
it formerly counted when the claim was established under a QS EP code.
To the VFW, the time when servicemembers transition off of active
duty is one of the most significant changes they will experience in
their lives. This Congress and the VSO community have dedicated
substantial resources to make sure that we get this right. The VFW
values the role that we are allowed to play in the process through both
VA and DOD, and we are always looking for ways to improve. Our goal is
that we can move forward together to ensure that our transitioning
servicemembers have access to the programs, information, and services
they need for a successful transition out of military life.
[all]