- ASIA'S DIPLOMATIC AND SECURITY STRUCTURE: PLANNING U.S. ENGAGEMENT
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
ASIA'S DIPLOMATIC AND SECURITY STRUCTURE: PLANNING U.S. ENGAGEMENT
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MAY 23, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-152
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-177 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
Amy Porter, Chief of Staff
Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director
Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------
Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific
TED S. YOHO, Florida, Chairman
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
AMI BERA, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DINA TITUS, Nevada
MO BROOKS, Alabama
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
WITNESSES
Amy Searight, Ph.D., senior adviser and director, Southeast Asia
Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies........
7
Aparna Pande, Ph.D., director, Initiative on the Future of India
and South Asia, The Hudson Institute...........................
18
Michael D. Swaine, Ph.D., senior fellow, Asia Program, Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace..............................
30
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
The Honorable Ted S. Yoho, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida, and chairman, Subcommittee on Asia and the
Pacific: Prepared statement....................................
3
Amy Searight, Ph.D.: Prepared statement..........................
10
Aparna Pande, Ph.D.: Prepared statement..........................
20
Michael D. Swaine, Ph.D.: Prepared statement.....................
33
APPENDIX
Hearing notice...................................................
52
Hearing minutes..................................................
53
Questions submitted for the record by the Honorable Ann Wagner, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Missouri, and
written responses from:
Amy Searight, Ph.D.............................................
54
Aparna Pande, Ph.D.............................................
56
Michael D. Swaine, Ph.D........................................
57
ASIA'S DIPLOMATIC AND SECURITY STRUCTURE: PLANNING U.S. ENGAGEMENT
----------
WEDNESDAY, MAY 23, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:33 p.m., in
room 2200, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ted Yoho
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Yoho. Let the hearing come to order.
Good afternoon, and thank you for being here today, and
sorry for the delay. Sometimes that voting schedule does get in
the way.
Members present will be permitted to submit written
statements to be included in the official hearing record.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for 5
calendar days to allow statements, questions, and extraneous
materials for the record subject to length limitations and the
rules. And the witnesses' written statements will be entered
into the hearing.
As my colleagues on the Asia-Pacific Subcommittee, the
world's strategic and economic gravity is shifting eastward.
Asia has already become the essential arena where the United
States must compete to advance our economic interests and
defend the American-led order that has underwritten global
security and prosperity for decades.
Moreover, we need a game plan. The United States won't be a
credible competitor in this high-stakes arena without a long-
term national strategy, and that is one of the goals we are
focusing on in this committee and the Foreign Affairs Committee
is to help map a long-term strategy that doesn't change with
each administration as easily as we have seen in the past so
that we have a long-term vision.
Our main adversary in this competition, the People's
Republic of China, is the master of generational strategies.
When Xi Jinping came to power in 2012, China's Communist Party
laid down two centenary goals, objectives for the 100th
anniversary of the party in 2021 and the 100th anniversary of
the PRC in 2049. Xi has followed this roadmap ever since.
It has been nearly 500 days since President Trump's
inauguration. Over the last several months, his administration
has begun to lay out a body of work containing a long-term
national strategy for the United States with significant
attention to the Asia-Pacific region. This committee has a role
to play in the strategic planning process, as I said earlier,
which is why we have convened today's hearing.
In December, the White House released a new U.S. National
Security Strategy that reflects a return to great power
competition, acknowledging a U.S-China relationship that is
fundamentally competitive. Taking up a more honest vision of
China's regional global role, the National Security Strategy
casts aside decades of wishful thinking. It says policies based
on the assumption that engagement with rivals and their
inclusion in the international institutions in global commerce
would turn them into benign actors and trustworthy partners.
Turned out to be false.
This view is an emerging consensus in and outside of
government and across partisan lines. And I also would like to
add that it is across different nations, because we are seeing
this as other countries come in and talk to us, that they are
saying the same thing. It will likely define Asia for years to
come.
The administration has begun to lay out a free and open
Indo-Pacific strategy specific to Asia, which emphasizes the
strategic interconnection of the Western Pacific and the Indian
Ocean. The strategy promotes nations' freedom from coercion and
the ability to defend their sovereignty and freedom internally
in terms of good governance, human rights, and fundamental
liberties. It also promotes openness, freedom of the sea,
peaceful dispute resolution, and open trade in investments.
These strategies go a long way toward defining a structure
for U.S. engagement, a framework that our diplomats and the
Armed Forces will operate within to advance not just U.S.
national interests but those of our regional partners, and, you
know, the alliances that we have. You know, a lot of people,
you know, they think we have pivoted away from the Asia
Pacific. Nothing could be further from the truth.
But this work is far from over. There have been scant
details on how the executive branch will operationalize its
strategy for Asia. It is still unclear what role emerging
mechanisms like the Quad will play in our Indo-Pacific
strategy. Questions remain about how the U.S. strategy will
integrate with those of our close partners like India, which is
a major pillar of the Indo-Pacific vision the administration
has laid down. Some experts are concerned that such a strategy
would marginalize ASEAN, which has always been a core component
of U.S. engagement in Asia, and it will continue into the
future.
Today, with the help of our expert panel, we will work
toward some of these answers. We will discuss these strategies
and their implication from an oversight perspective, and to
inform our upcoming East and South Asia budget hearing with
administration officials.
I thank the witnesses for being here today, and again
apologize for the delay. And I now turn to our ranking member,
Mr. Brad Sherman, from California.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Yoho follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Sherman. This is a broad hearing with many things to
discuss. I will mention a few.
As to democracy and human rights, we see strong democracies
in Japan, Taiwan, Mongolia, South Korea, and India, yet
Southeast Asia is lagging. In general, it has an average score
from Freedom House of 4.8, halfway between the 1 and the 7, the
1 being the best. Burma's transition to democracy has now
morphed into this terrible ethnic cleansing of the Rohingya
with 600,000 refugees fleeing into Bangladesh. And China,
hardly a democracy, oppresses its Uighur and Tibetan
minorities, but more to the point--but even perhaps more
significant--its government has no theoretical basis for its
own legitimacy.
Democracy, you know, can be accepted as legitimate.
Theocracy or monarchy, where there is a culture that accepts
that, might explain why they are running things. Communism was
a theology perhaps or a theocracy, but Xi is not the vanguard
of the proletariat. So the only answer they have to the
question as to why they are running things is because they have
provided a high level of economic growth, and at some point
they won't. And we will test to see whether the Chinese people
accept the Communist Party that isn't a Communist Party but is
in power because they are doing such a great job at running the
economy when they are not doing a great job at running the
economy. We will see what happens.
We see with India some $15 billion of arms sales, and naval
exercises. We see India developing its ties with Southeast
Asia, but only 2 or 3 percent of Southeast Asia's trade is with
India. And it would be good if India presses Southeast Asia to
move in the direction of democracy, we are reviving the
quadrilateral group involving the U.S., Japan, Australia, and
India. And where it is conducting maritime patrols or where it
is working for development and democracy, this could be a
useful working group.
As to trade, we have a larger trade deficit with China in
2017 than 2016. We have conducted talks in which the other side
has refused to commit itself to any quantifiable reduction in
the trade deficit, and we have caved. There isn't a term for
this that Beijing will understand. It is called paper tiger,
and it describes an approach where you scream about a trade
deficit and then settle for no change, except that we eliminate
our sanctions or roll them back with regard to ZTE. So that on
the one hand, the President says he is going to create a new
coalition to bring Iran to its knees and force them to make
concessions that President Obama couldn't even dream of or
chose not to. And at the same time the message goes out to
companies around the world we don't really impose sanctions on
big companies, we will pick a few small ones now and then. And
so Iran will be deprived of a few small trading partners.
There is one area where I think we need a more dovish
approach, and that is the so-called islands. They are really
islets, some of them rocks, off the coast of China, sometimes
hundreds of miles off the coast of China. They are located off
the shores of the most populated continent, yet for millennia,
no one has ever chosen to live on them. That is how valuable
they are.
It is said that whoever controlled these islets would stand
astride major trade routes with trillions of trade. All of that
trillions is in and out of Chinese ports, so if China can
control these islets, they could blockade their own ports.
There are also some oil tankers that get close to some of these
islets that could easily change their route and be far from
these islets. So let us hope that neither in Beijing nor in
Washington is a dispute over these islets a reason to fan the
flames of war or fan the flames of increased military
expenditure. We should work something out without allowing
those in both countries that want to raise tensions to justify
military expenditures to be successful.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you.
Do you want to have an opening statement, Dr. Bera?
Mr. Bera. May I?
Mr. Yoho. Yes, sir, you can.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Obviously, a very timely hearing. And, you know, I think
both the chairman and the ranking member touched on a number of
issues that are of key importance to the region. I am going to
add one more.
When we think about some of the tensions in the South China
Sea that continue and actually are escalating as you start to
see the Chinese deploy missile systems on the Spratlys as they
have had their first bomber landing on the Spratlys, and yet I
know the administration has withdrawn their invitation to
RIMPAC as a first step. What we can anticipate, you know, if we
just think about how the Chinese respond, you know, if you give
them an inch, they are going to ask for a foot, and then
unfortunately we should have stopped them, you know, several
years ago when it would have been less complicated.
At this juncture, though, we have to send a strong message
that militarization of the South China Sea, you know, claiming
disputed territories is not acceptable, and we're going to be
very interested, and I think in a bipartisan way, Members of
Congress would be very supportive of the administration
continuing to send a strong message that, you know, we have to
keep these waterways open. We do not, you know, accept China's
claims that this is their territory, and we have to stand in
partnership with the nations in that region, the Philippines,
Vietnam, and others to send that strong message and keep those
waterways open.
In addition, just, you know, sticking to kind of the
maritime conversation, we are seeing that increased cooperation
and partnership between the United States and India, and
trilaterally or quadrilaterally with Japan, the United States,
India, and Australia. And, you know, again, I think I speak for
members of this committee--subcommittee as well as the full
committee that we do think that from a strategic direction it
is an incredibly important partnership, both bilaterally but
also trilaterally and quadrilaterally, and certainly support
continued movement and partnership in that direction. So I am
very interested in hearing the witnesses' take on some of this.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Dr. Bera. I appreciate it.
I am going to say something I say often. You are probably
going hear it more than once today. The world is going through
a tectonic shift in world powers we haven't seen since World
War II. You know, we went through a World War II powers emerge
from that, and we are going through that today in a different
fashion. I am 63 years old, and I have not ever seen the type
of rivalry that we have seen. And I think what it comes down to
is countries that have free and open thinking and democracies
and things like that versus socialism with Chinese
characteristics, which China is proposing or out there
promoting. They can call it whatever they want. It is still
communism, and we are seeing these two forces come together.
You have got democracies and you have got that forum that Xi
Jinping and the Communist Party is promoting.
And so as you guys do your statements and the questions,
that is where my focus is on how do we balance that to avoid
conflict in the future, that we focus on economics, trade
cultural exchanges and the advancement of all of us and not go
into these conflicts that we have seen too much of.
And so with that, let me introduce our speakers: Dr. Amy
Searight, the senior adviser and director of the Southeast Asia
Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies;
Dr. Pande--did I say that right, Pande?--director of the
Initiative on the Future of India and South Asia at the Hudson
Institute; and Dr. Michael Swaine, senior fellow in the Asia
Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
I assume you all have testified before a committee before.
You have got the little timer clock up there. Green light comes
on when you have a lot of time. Yellow light is you start to
slow down or finish. And then the red light. We are not
crunched for time. I think you will be able to freely speak.
So if you would, Dr. Searight, give your testimony. Thank
you.
STATEMENT OF AMY SEARIGHT, PH.D., SENIOR ADVISER AND DIRECTOR,
SOUTHEAST ASIA PROGRAM, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES
Ms. Searight. Thank you, Chairman Yoho and Ranking Member
Sherman. Thank you for inviting me to testify today on this
really timely and important topic.
As the United States and much of the world really
intensifies its focus on North Korea and resolving the tensions
there, it is important for us to maintain a broader and long-
term view on key regional dynamics that are shaping Asia's
diplomatic and security structure in ways that will impact the
United States and the region for years to come.
For countries in the Indo-Pacific, and in Southeast Asia in
particular, this is a time of strategic flux and uncertainty.
Many in the region are wondering if we are nearing an
inflection point where Chinese engagement and influence will
outstrip America's traditional leadership in the region. The
United States has tremendous reserves of hard and soft power in
the Indo-Pacific, but there is a growing sense that U.S.
strategy and focus is adrift at a time when China is
demonstrating laser-sharp focus on regional priorities. So as
you said, Mr. Chairman, the United States really needs a game
plan, a long-term strategy for the region.
Southeast Asia is at the crossroads of the Indo-Pacific.
The countries in the region are critically important to the
United States in their own right, both in strategic and
economic terms, but more broadly, the region of Southeast Asia
represents the chessboard on which the great power rivalry
between the United States and China is being contested.
China's efforts to win over friends in Southeast Asia and
pacify ASEAN as a counterbalance to its own actions has been
formidable. The United States has upped its game in Southeast
Asia in recent years as well, leading to some substantial gains
on security partnerships and capacity building, yet questions
remain about U.S. commitment and staying power.
For the United States to craft a compelling and enduring
strategy for the Indo-Pacific that resonates in Southeast Asia,
we have to first consider the key priorities and concerns of
countries in the region. And there are three I want to point
to.
The first is their interest in managing great power
rivalry. As the strategic environment of Southeast Asia and the
broader Indo-Pacific grows increasingly contested, countries
are seeking ways to both engage and hedge against closer ties
with China, while not being forced to choose between China and
the United States.
The second priority that we have to keep in mind is that in
Southeast Asia economics remains paramount. For the governing
elites of Southeast Asia, economics is the foundation of
security. Whereas the United States has traditionally led
regional efforts to foster economic openness and integration
that has been critical to the region's economic success for
decades, the U.S. withdrawal from the Trans-Pacific Partnership
and the lack of a viable economic engagement strategy to
replace it has created a strategic void at a time when China
has been ramping up its highly ambitious Belt and Road
Initiative.
The third priority for the region is ASEAN centrality.
ASEAN has been the central driver of regional cooperation and
stability among its Southeast Asia member nations for over half
a century, and has developed a remarkable track record of
averting conflict and coercion among its members and building
trust and cooperation through dialogue and adherence to norms
of noninterference and peaceful resolution of disputes.
Southeast Asian countries put great stock into ASEAN and ASEAN
centrality since they know that ASEAN-led mechanisms are the
best way for the collective interests of these countries to be
taken into account.
And here I also want to make the case for why ASEAN
centrality matters for the United States. ASEAN-led frameworks
from the ASEAN Regional Forum to the East Asia Summit to the
ADMM-Plus provide a venue for the United States to work with
like-minded partners to help define issues and shape regional
goals and expectations. But ASEAN's primary value to U.S.
strategic interests lies in its ability to shape the normative
environment, and at times--at certain times, to a limited
extent, speak with one voice.
The norms-based regional architecture that ASEAN has
created remains critical to a strategy of promoting a rules-
based order that imposes some degree of normative pressure on
countries seeking to subvert collective norms, as China has
sought to do in unilaterally changing the status quo in the
South China Sea.
In my written testimony, I discuss at some length the
reasons why the conception of the Indo-Pacific is a welcome
shift in our geostrategic framing of the region because it
highlights the important maritime challenges that have come to
the fore as key priorities for the United States and our
partners in the region, and it also highlights the increasingly
important role that India is playing in the regional security
order. But since my time is short, let me turn to the Trump
administration's free and open Pacific strategy. And in
particular, I want to point to two shortcomings in the strategy
and the way it has been rolled out from the perspective of
Southeast Asia.
The first is the heavy security focus without a parallel
economic approach. Most Southeast Asian countries welcome
security cooperation with the United States, but they grow
nervous about a United States that only appears engaged on the
security front. The U.S. withdrawal from TPP sent shock waves
across the region, and offering to replace TPP with a set of
bilateral trade agreements premised on the notion that the
primary goal is to erase bilateral trade deficits with the
United States holds little appeal for countries in Southeast
Asia.
The second problem has been the conflation of the free and
open Indo-Pacific with the Quad. The Quad met as a grouping for
the first time in over a decade at the assistant secretary
level on the sidelines of the East Asia Summit days after
President Trump rolled out his free and open Indo-Pacific
vision in his Da Nang APEC speech. The news media latched on to
this development and overhyped the significance of the meeting.
To be clear, I think that the Quad is a useful framework
that holds long-term strategic potential and should be
encouraged, but it will take some time before the Quad amounts
to much in the way of substantive cooperation and strategic
significance. It is still in its very early days. So all of the
talk of the Quad has crowded out discussion of the role of
Southeast Asia in a free and open Indo-Pacific and--in a free
and open Indo-Pacific strategy.
There has been no clear message of how Southeast Asia fits
into this vision that has been conveyed to the region. This has
led many to question whether the quad is the preferred
strategic framework for the Trump administration and whether it
will displace ASEAN unity.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Searight follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Yoho. Okay. Thank you, ma'am. I appreciate it.
Dr. Pande.
STATEMENT OF APARNA PANDE, PH.D., DIRECTOR, INITIATIVE ON THE
FUTURE OF INDIA AND SOUTH ASIA, THE HUDSON INSTITUTE
Ms. Pande. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member----
Mr. Yoho. Turn your mic on.
Ms. Pande. Okay. Sorry.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member. I would like
to thank you for inviting me to speak here today.
American grand strategy for Asia and the Pacific, since the
end of the second World War, has centered on creating an Asian
diplomatic and security architecture that ensured stability and
security in the region. American preeminence ensured the rules-
based order, which opposed notions of idealogical dominance or
arbitrary assertions of territorial claims and disputes. The
post-World War Asian security structure has rested on American
economic and military might, combined with a network of
partners and allies across the region.
The economic and military rise of China over the last two
decades poses a challenge to American preeminence. China is
gradually creating a new Asian order with Chinese primacy at
its heart. U.S. strategy needs to be one of renewed engagement
with its partners and allies across the region--India, Japan,
Southeast Asia--to construct a configuration that will be able
to counter the Chinese march.
Currently, China's economic and military rise faces no
structured challenge. Japan's military role is inhibited by its
constitution, while many in Australia and the United States
have, for years, assumed China to be a benign power and have
invested in an economic relationship favoring their potential
challenger.
Among Asian countries, India has consistently viewed
China's expanding influence with suspicion. This is partly a
function of historical experience. India had engaged Communist
China as an Asian brother from 1949 to 1962, only to become
victim of its military aggression over a border dispute. Since
1962, India has noted China's efforts to build close ties with
countries on India's periphery, thereby trying to possibly
encircle India, as well as China's efforts, to lay the
groundwork for military and naval bases throughout the Indian
Ocean.
With a population of more than one billion, India is also
the country with sufficient manpower to match that of China.
Thus, India would have to be central to any security
architecture designed to contain China or aimed at ensuring
that China does not transform its considerable economic clout
into threatening military muscle in the Asia Pacific.
India's growing economic and security relationships and
interest in the Indo-Pacific region are aligned with its
deepening partnership with the United States. However, India is
different from traditional American allies, whether in Europe,
Latin America, or Asia, for whom the United States was the key
security provider.
India wants to maintain its own security capabilities, does
not wish to become a burden on the American taxpayer. It seeks
a relationship that helps build India's resources and
capabilities so that India can play a bigger role in the Indo-
Pacific.
U.S. policy toward the Indo-Pacific would, therefore,
benefit by bearing the following in mind: India would never
want a relationship of dependence or one in which the U.S. has
to incur all costs. Treating India as a country critical to
U.S. interests, the United States could think about a special
partnership with India, whereby India could be exempt from many
of the export control regulations that govern military sales.
Thus, India would be able to deliver military capabilities
without adding to America's burden of cost. Any attempts to
balance ties between India and other South Asian states should
be abandoned to enhance India's capacity to confront China.
On the economic front, both India and the U.S. would
benefit if U.S. trade policies were adjusted to enable the rise
of India as a strategic competitor to China. Any short-term
loss in dollars and cents would be offset by the immense
benefit to the U.S. of having a major, 1-billion strong nation
standing by its side to ensure that China and its closed system
do not emerge dominant in the Asia Pacific for years to come.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Pande follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Dr. Pande.
Dr. Michael Swaine. Thank you.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL D. SWAINE, PH.D., SENIOR FELLOW, ASIA
PROGRAM, CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE
Mr. Swaine. Thank you very much, Chairman Yoho, Ranking
Member Sherman. It is a pleasure to be in front of your
committee again. I am a security expert, so I will talk about
security-related issues and the question of avoiding conflict
in Asia.
Right now, we are in a period of enormous transition in the
Asia Pacific, as you know, away from a 70-year long period of
American strategic clarity, economic strength, and military
predominance to a much more unclear and potentially tumultuous
period driven, above all else, by the changing power
relationship between the United States and its major allies,
particularly Japan, and a continually rising China.
Although the United States remains the top maritime power
and economic investor alongside Japan, across the region, and
as in many ways expanding--and is in many ways expanding its
absolute capabilities over time, it nonetheless is declining in
relative terms compared with China. Beijing is now the major
trader across the region, rapidly increasing its level of
investments and deploying a formidable set of naval, air, and
missile capabilities that clearly call into question the
capacity of the United States and its allies to exercise
freedom of action and prevail in a crisis or conflict along
China's maritime periphery.
In confronting this changing environment, Beijing and
Washington currently hold fundamentally different notions about
the best means of preserving stability and prosperity over the
long term. The United States favors a continuation of American
maritime military predominance and overall leadership. This
includes the clear of capacity to prevail in any potential
serious conflict with China, extending up to at least China's
12-nautical mile territorial waters. This viewpoint is
expressed or implied in current and past national security and
national defense strategy documents.
In contrast, Beijing favors, at the very least, something
approaching a multipolar power structure or, at most, a Sino-
centric structure. Either way, China is pursuing a more secure
and preferential environment along its maritime periphery. This
by implication or design means that American military
predominance is clearly under threat.
In fact, looking forward, it is my view that far from--and
it is far from clear that U.S. and allied military predominance
within the first and second island chains, that is to say out
to approximately 1,500 nautical miles from the Chinese
mainland, can be sustained on a consistent basis over the long
term, just as it is virtually impossible for China to establish
its own predominance in that region due to U.S. and allied
strengths.
Changing relative economic capabilities, military capital
stocks, and advances in military technologies all call such
developments into question. And studies have been done both at
Carnegie and by the RAND Corporation that reinforce this
notion. In the absence of stabilizing measures, the near-
inevitable emergence of a clear level of Sino-U.S. allied
parity in the Western Pacific will almost certainly increase
the likelihood of crises and possibly even conflict over the
handling of volatile issues, such as Taiwan and maritime
disputes in the East and South China Seas.
What is the primary danger here? The danger is that a
rising China will overestimate its growing leverage and opt for
various forms of pressure or coercion to greatly alarm others,
and that the United States will overreact to such behavior in
an effort to compensate for what is, in fact, its declining
relative capabilities, thus threatening to make each disputed
policy area into an unstable test of relative influence. We are
already seeing this dynamic at work in the South China Sea and
elsewhere.
Given these considerations, it is my view that the best
optimal outcome for both nations is the development of a stable
and cooperative balance of power in the Western Pacific in
which the most vital interests of both the U.S. and its allies
and the Chinese are protected, and neither side enjoys the
clear capacity to dominate the other militarily within at least
the first island chain.
In addition, the U.S., its allies, and China must also work
to build a more integrated and dynamic regional economic
network of benefit to all as a bulwark to a stable military
balance. For the U.S., the security balance should center on
retaining a robust yet defense-oriented U.S.-Japan alliance,
supplemented by an expanding set of mutually verifiable
understandings with Beijing and other Asian powers.
Such understandings would be aimed at stabilizing the
military balance with China at a level that both sides can live
with. This level could be conceived as one in which each side
possesses capabilities sufficient to deter the other from using
force to resolve serious differences, but with each lacking the
clear superiority that could in the eyes of the other foster
aggressive intentions. Such a balance is most compatible with
what is called a mutual denial strategy.
Such understandings must also aim at diffusing and
demilitarizing the most contentious issues in the region, from
the Korean peninsula to Taiwan and maritime disputes. This can
be attained most optimally in the context of a defense-based
regional military balance.
The goal of a more integrated and dynamic economic region
would require the U.S., China, and other Asian economies to
strengthen their domestic economic growth and deepen their
commitment to free trade. Most importantly, successful, long-
term integration will depend on getting Beijing and Washington
to join a common trade architecture. That is why we need a TPP
so much. The Chinese eventually would probably have been
compelled to join TPP over time.
The creation of a stable balance of power in the Western
Pacific will require American initiative and strength, not
passivity and certainly not one-sided concessions.
Conditionality, reciprocity, and a willingness and ability to
suspend or reverse actions taken or contemplated if China fails
to cooperate are central to this process. It will also require
the development of domestic consensus, allied and friendly
support, sustained U.S.-China dialogue, and interlinked changes
in several existing regional security policies.
Maintaining prosperity and stability in Asia and within the
U.S.-China relationship more broadly will require new ways of
thinking, new approaches, and some risk taking. But in my view,
the alternatives are far less attractive.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Swaine follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Yoho. Thank you. I appreciate that and very compelling.
And, again, I just can't overemphasize the significance of
the Southeast Asia. We met with Admiral Harris, Harry Harris,
back a couple months ago, and he was saying that within 50
years, there will be more people living in that region in the
world than outside of that region, and people want to know why
is it important that we focus on that. I think that is a pretty
good indicator of why. And these are things that we are very
cognizant of.
And I agree with all of you in that we didn't have a clear
plan, and it hasn't been just over the last 8 years or the last
16 years. I think we have been distracted as a Nation, and we
need to focus where we are going to be 50 years from now or 100
years from now, and we should have the policies in place of
where we are going as a Nation. And that is what I see has been
lacking in Washington, and I know the ranking member and
myself, we have talked about this as building tools within the
Foreign Affairs Committee, that we can use--the administration
can use with our direction.
The thing with TPP, when we first--when President Trump got
in and he pulled out of that immediately, I know that ruffled a
lot of feathers, but I think it was the right thing to do. It
was a very decisive action, and then you have got to deal with
the fallout. And I say it was the right thing to do, being
decisive, number one. Number two, even candidate Clinton said
she wasn't going to support that. We were told there wasn't the
support here in the House. I wasn't supporting it, not that we
get to vote on it, but it was one of those things you brought
finality to it so now we can move on. And we have talked to a
lot of those countries, and they talked about their distaste
for us pulling out of that, and I fully understand that. And we
also understand the window it opened up for China.
Our goal is to focus on economics, trade, and national
security. And when we talk about ASEAN, and we all know what
ASEAN is, the 10 nations that account for 653 million people,
$2.5 trillion worth of trade. And we know their neutrality
rules of not interfering with other nations. We have brought up
to the Prime Minister in ASEAN nations of why this is probably
a good time to bring that group together, because we see what
China is going to do. You saw what the Philippines did when
they challenged China at the Court of Arbitration in The Hague
and the Court ruled in the Philippines' favor, but yet China
ignored it.
Xi Jinping told President Obama in 2015 they would not
militarize those islands, and so now they are militarized. They
are landing bombers on there. And if we don't--I think one of
you brought up if we don't stop it now, it is not going to be
easier 3 years from now.
We have got to come to a consensus and have that block of
countries, not just ASEAN, we saw Canada weigh in and says
China can't continue to claim territory that the rest of the
world disputes. And if we don't stand up now, it is going to be
harder and it is going to destabilize that area.
And I think where it is all clear where Xi Jinping is going
in the 19th party, Communist Party Congress, he said it was
time for the--the era of China has come. No longer will China
be made to swallow their interests around the world. It is time
for China to take the world's center stage. I don't know about
you, but I find that very threatening, and it is unacceptable.
This is something, again, we as members of--with a lot of
interest around the world, we have to stand up.
And when I talked to the ASEAN nations and asked them why
has it been so successful, and this is what we hear over and
over again: American leadership, honoring of contracts, the
rule of law. IP protection. All those things that we bring to
the table that we know the other parties that are offering an
alternative don't, and we have seen that over and over again.
And, yes, they have got a very aggressive One Belt, One Road
initiative, and that is why we introduced the BUILD Act that is
bipartisan in the House, bipartisan in the Senate. In fact, we
had Secretary Pompeo today talking about why this is such an
important strategy or tool for the United States Government.
And, again, we want to create the tools and craft the tools
that an administration can use. And I challenged him or he
challenged me saying that I didn't think we could compete
dollar-for-dollar, nor do I want to with China. But he says, I
think this tool will do that because we bring in the expertise
and the funding of outside corporations, and we can partner up
with other countries.
So with that, let me get back to a question. What does the
United States need to do operationally--to operationalize the
free and open Indo-Pacific strategy? And what should be an
immediate priority, and what should we consider long-term
goals? Dr. Searight?
Ms. Searight. Yes. I think the first priority is to more
clearly articulate the vision, and make it more clear how
Southeast Asia fits into it, how even the security side which
is, you know, there has been a lot of talk about our security
partnerships with countries like Vietnam, India and many
others. There hasn't been a real articulation of how different
lines of effort on the security side, economic side, et cetera,
add up to a vision of, you know, a coherent strategy that the
United States is really bringing to the table. So that is
number one. I think that has been a little lackluster, although
it is early. You know, it has only been 6 months since
President Trump gave his speech, so there is room for other
senior officials to lay that out.
Secondly, I would go right to economics. And I agree with
you, Mr. Chairman, that the BUILD Act, the proposed reforms of
our development finance institutions would be a very welcome
thing to pass, even though, you know, it is not large in terms
of resources, but on the margins, it really can make a
difference. And there is real interest, as you know, with
countries like Japan and Australia, perhaps India, working with
us in various ways to really promote a more responsible
approach, high-standard approach to lending and infrastructure
development. So forming a sort of loose coalition where we are
all bringing our tools to the table and working with the
private sector to help promote infrastructure development in
the region would be very welcome. And in particular, I think
there is a lot of potential for a U.S.-Japanese partnership on
that.
And finally, I would say--I have to say that I think that
the United States should consider coming back to TPP. It was a
real disappointment, not just because the United States decided
not to join in, but it was--the reason why it was so shocking
was that the countries in the region could not conceptualize
that the United States would really walk away from an
initiative where it had provided such leadership and such a
clear vision for where the regional economic architecture
should go. So if there was an alternative on the table that
would be a similar vehicle for promoting high standards,
rulemaking on key issues like digital trade, et cetera, if
there was a vehicle like that, I would be fully supportive of
that, but honestly, I don't see any alternative out there.
And with TPP-11 launched, you have officials from Thailand
and Indonesia taking a look, you know, talking about they want
to come onboard at some point in time. It is still the defining
discussion in the region on economics, and we are just not in
the game.
Mr. Yoho. I agree with you, and I am going to hold off on
any other comments from you, the other two witnesses, so
Ranking Member Sherman can weigh in.
Mr. Sherman. Our foreign policy establishment promoted
trade deals that have decimated America and sucked the marrow
out of the middle of this country. Many were so destructive to
the United States that in desperation our people reached out to
elect Donald Trump President of the United States. And now we
are told that we can be consistent and clear, have a clear
vision if only we return to those policies again. The trade
deficits don't matter. The jobs don't matter. What matters is
staying true to the pro-Wall Street positions that have guided
our policy in the past, and therefore, must be the true epitome
of American patriotism.
It is not the fault of the Midwest for voting for Donald
Trump, it is the fault of the foreign policy establishment for
giving us trade deals, such as those who urge,
quote, deg. ``economic engagement.'' Wonderful slogan, I love
it. And said, therefore, if we give MFN for China, our trade
deficit will grow with China by only $1 billion per year. They
were off. It is about a $300 billion increase. You know, I deal
with numbers here in Washington all the time. Now they are off
by 5 percent, they are off by 2 percent, they are off by 8
percent. This estimate was off by 30,000 percent, because the
people making the estimate had no care as to whether they were
accurate.
To turn to the people, I know it has been put forward that
the idea of a new trade relationship with Southeast Asia has no
appeal for Southeast Asia. I agree. If they can keep the status
quo, they love that. The only way a new trade relationship with
any of the areas of Asia will be appealing is if the
alternative is a complete lack of access to the U.S. market.
Then a fair trade relationship might start looking good. But as
long as Asia hears from us that substantial power in Washington
wants to continue the huge trade deficits, why should they
agree to anything else, except maybe something that increases
the trade deficit even more.
But aside from trade, I have got a question for Dr. Pande,
completely different angle. I made a statement on Sri Lanka's
Remembrance Day to remember the tens of thousands of lives lost
in Sri Lanka's civil war. Should we halt ties, security ties,
with Sri Lanka until it makes progress on human rights issues,
especially accounting for the disappeared and missing persons,
and providing some degree of political autonomy to the Tamil
minority?
Ms. Pande. Ranking Member, while human rights are
important, I understand your perspective. India did try this
policy a decade ago, and India did try and use pressure on Sri
Lanka and disengage slightly with Sri Lanka. The problem, China
walked in and Hambantota, the port was built by China in Sri
Lanka, almost 90 percent of Sri Lanka's debt is owned by China.
So we have to have a policy which is balanced.
Mr. Sherman. Excuse me. Usually, countries feel they have
to pay their debt or they will be blacklisted by the western
capital markets. If it is up to 90 percent, why don't we just
issue a rule for the SEC that says a default on all the debt of
Sri Lanka to China isn't a black mark against them in selling
their debt to the west, and then China would learn not to own
90 percent of a country's debt.
Go on.
Ms. Pande. So I believe it has to be balanced where you
sort of--you remain engaged with the country, and China does
not walk in, otherwise China is in Sri Lanka, China is in
Maldives, China owns a large part of the debt in Bangladesh and
Nepal. So a number of----
Mr. Sherman. Not to mention the naval facilities in
Pakistan.
Ms. Pande. Yes, Pakistan.
Mr. Sherman. I want to go on to Dr. Swaine. You have talked
about an alliance that we have with Japan. NATO is a mutual
defense alliance. We urge countries there to spend 2 percent of
their GDP on their national defense. That is ridiculously low,
since we spend 6 percent, then we lie to our people and say it
is only 5 percent, by telling them not to notice that veterans
are a cost of maintaining a defense capacity. But anyway, we
settle for 2 percent. But it is a mutual defense. Every country
has to defend the others.
With Japan, we don't have a mutual defense. Japan has not
been attacked in the last 50 years militarily. The United
States was attacked on 9/11. The major NATO powers sent troops
on the ground in Afghanistan. Japan sent none. How do we
explain what kind of relationship we have with Japan?
We can't call them our dependency. At the same time, it is
not a mutual defense treaty. It is as if we are unpaid
mercenaries? I don't know what the term would be. How do we
turn our defense relationship with Japan into something that is
mutual, instead of them claiming that because Douglas MacArthur
thought that they shouldn't--they should have a clause in their
constitution. They are responsible for their own constitution.
It is not like there is a provision in it that said--you know,
that they are a dependency of the United States, they can't
change their constitution without the permission of the
descendants of Douglas MacArthur.
How do we get a mutual defense agreement with Japan instead
of a one-sided one where we have to defend them, and they don't
do anything for us, except help defend themselves?
Mr. Swaine. Well, Representative Sherman, I am not somebody
who believes that the U.S.-Japan alliance is an unfair
alliance. I think the Japanese----
Mr. Sherman. Well, we were attacked on 9/11. How many
Japanese soldiers were put in harm's way to defend the United
States after that attack?
Mr. Swaine. I think you have to ask--you have to measure
this in terms of to what degree was Japan prepared to provide
assistance both in supporting U.S. forces in the Asia Pacific,
which they were. Their support for U.S. forces in the Asia
Pacific is a very vital one. It is absolutely essential.
Mr. Sherman. They help us defend their region, but we were
attacked by forces from Afghanistan. We died. Europe sent
forces to Afghanistan. Japan sent none. So you have got NATO--
--
Mr. Swaine. No combat forces.
Mr. Sherman. No combat forces, yes, people on the ground
risking their lives. Britain did that. France did that. Germany
did that. And they are inadequate. So if inadequate describes
the European contribution to mutual defense, what term do I use
for Japan that sent zero?
Mr. Swaine. Well, I think the term for Japan is that they
are committed to providing for defense of their interests in
the Western Pacific, the interests of the United States----
Mr. Sherman. I have gone way over time, but I think you
have capsulized it. They are dedicated to protecting their
interests.
Mr. Swaine. Well, it is not just their interests, though,
Member.
Mr. Sherman. We have an interest in them. They have an
interest in us. They defend their interests. They don't defend
our interests, except if our interests and their interests are
being defended. Obviously, the world is better because Japan is
in it, and Japan is willing to contribute to the world the
continued existence of Japan. But when we were attacked, not a
single Japanese soldier was put in harm's way, and yet I am
told every day that Americans have to be ready to die by the
tens of thousands, if necessary, to defend our allies in
Northeast Asia, and that every day our soldiers and sailors
have to wake up and say, I might die today for that defense. It
is not an exactly parallel relationship.
I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. I appreciate your thoughts and your comments on
that.
Mr. Sherman. And I have been able to overcome my shyness.
Mr. Yoho. You have. I have even seen you laugh a few times
on the committee. That is good.
Moving forward. You know, we have got the serious problem
going into the 21st century. All right. Good enough. Thank you.
Thank you for being here.
To set a strategy for the United States of America to let
people in the Southeast Asia, all over the world, all of our
allies, our trading partners know that America is committed,
you know, pulling out of TPP, I know we lost some political
clout there, there is no doubt about that, but I am of the camp
that it wasn't going to pass, and the best thing is pull the
Band-Aid off quick and move on.
What would you recommend for the ASEAN nations, for our
Indian partners, what would be the best move forward to show
that America is committed? We have got the military presence we
have there. So since you have already spoke, Dr. Searight, Dr.
Pande, if you would go.
Ms. Pande. India is onboard with the Indo-Pacific strategy.
I agree with Dr. Searight that maybe a little more
clarification of the strategy would help. However, from India's
point of view, the Indian Ocean region is its sphere of
influence, it is its backyard, and so India will remain
engaged. It has started to engage more with ASEAN countries:
India and Singapore, India and Vietnam, India and Indonesia.
Recently, India will lease a port of Indonesia, Sabang, which
is near the Malacca Straits. India has also built a lot of
relationships with Oman where India is going to lease port of
Duqm. So India has started to build its relationships, but it
will need a little more help.
You had mentioned earlier about where the U.S. is investing
in the BUILD Act. There is also something like the MCC, the
Millennium Challenge, and India, the U.S., and Japan are
cooperating in Nepal. There is an India-U.S.-Japan
infrastructure project for South and Southeast Asia. The three
countries will collaborate on building ports, providing energy,
and industrial parts.
And so while it is not going to be dollar-for-dollar
competition with OBOR, it is going to be qualitatively much
better, and it is going to provide a sort of another
alternative to countries like Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal, and
countries in the broader Indo-Pacific.
And finally, messaging. Just as disinviting China from
RIMPAC sent a message and Quad sends a message, I believe
signaling and messaging at periodic intervals does play a big
role as well.
Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you.
Dr. Swaine, what are your thoughts? I know you are not
bashful either.
Mr. Swaine. I have a somewhat different view on all this
from what people have been saying. I think, on the one hand, it
is very essential for the United States to have a strategic
plan, as you say. It is absolutely essential. But that
strategic plan has to include both efforts to strengthen the
position of the United States and the region and that of its
friends and allies, and efforts to engage the Chinese in ways
that will reassure them about the ultimate objectives of the
United States.
The free and open Indo-Pacific strategy, as currently
conceived and as reflected in the National Security Strategy
and National Defense Strategy, is not that strategy. It is a
very clear, in my view, zero sum, highly adversarial document
unprecedented for the United States to have ever issued with
regard to Asia and with regard to China, and I think it will
eventually, unless there is some engagement effort to it that
has to do with cooperation and reassurance in both directions,
it will end up polarizing the region. It will end up forcing
countries in the region to make decisions about whether they
lean more to the United States or they lean more to the
Chinese.
And in many respects, the Chinese position in Asia, as I
said in my remarks, is increasingly that of they are growing in
their level, their relative level of influence. So people will
not easily leap to supporting the United States for this
strategy. So it is going to have to be adjusted in ways that
are not so focused on two diametrically opposed world views,
the revisionist world order of China and the free and
democratic world order of the United States and its allies,
because that is a recipe for the Cold War.
Mr. Yoho. Right. No, I agree with you.
Mr. Swaine. We will end up in a Cold War.
Mr. Yoho. Yes. We have been through that, and I don't want
to go through that again. I remember those years.
And I think you brought up a very good point, very salient,
of how do you incorporate China in this? You know, what I see
is China is being the aggressor. You know, we have seen what
they have done, just their actions, what they are doing in
India now with the mining. They are going to divert all the
water and those tunnels, a 1,000 kilometer tunnel I think it
is. And they are just marching on, marching on. We see them in
the Western hemisphere with the $10.3 billion they lent to
Haiti, knowing that they won't be able to pay that back. They
will have another strategic port in our hemisphere right off
our coast, and these are things that I think are disconcerting
all over.
And then you see them going after the democracies, giving
people alternatives, the pressure they put on Hong Kong, and
then what they are doing with Taiwan. If we don't come to terms
with them--and, you know, what I saw the initiative coming out
of the White House is a strong stance, like stop. And I agree
with you that we have to get to a point where what is
acceptable? There is plenty of room on the world stage.
But it can't be one over the other one, and it has to be
mutually beneficial.
Do you guys have any thoughts how the best way to proceed
with that, if you were to negotiate with China and India and
the regional partners in that?
I think I made our stance pretty clear where we stand with
ASEAN. You know, we are here. We have done our phone ops, we
have increased that through this committee, the recommendations
for that, the foreign military sales. Like with Vietnam, we are
trying to expedite some of those things. But I don't want it to
be confrontational. And I agree, you know, we have seen enough
war and death and destruction. And it doesn't advance us very
much. So in the end result of all those is we always wind up
trading, so let's just focus on the trade and what we can do
diplomatically.
What are your thoughts of the best way to engage China on
this?
Mr. Swaine. Well, I've written an entire report on this
subject called Creating a Stable Asia.
Mr. Yoho. Trading with what?
Mr. Swaine. Creating a Stable Asia.
Mr. Yoho. Okay.
Mr. Swaine. It is a Carnegie report. It came out about 2
years ago, and it systematically lays out some of the arguments
that I presented in very abbreviated form here.
I think the first step here has to be a recognition and a
discussion within the United States about where we want to be
in 20 or 30 years in Asia. We haven't had that discussion.
Mr. Yoho. We haven't.
Mr. Swaine. But that discussion cannot rest on a common
assumption that all will be right as long as United States
retains its dominance. In my view, that is a futile and likely
self-destructive argument. It has limits to it.
Mr. Yoho. I would agree with you.
Mr. Swaine. There are people who believe that that is
exactly what needs to be done, and so they call for a vast
increase in U.S. defense spending, for example, all kinds of
economic initiatives, and they don't explain how exactly we are
supposed to acquire these resources to do all these things. $50
billion over 10 years, which is what the Trump administration
has said they want to increase spending, is, relatively
speaking, a drop the bucket in Asia. And the United States is
not going to have the resources to leap ahead.
So what it has to do, it has to get smarter about this. It
has to think, if it is going to establish a balance of power in
Asia that is a genuine balance, it has to start talking about
where you can reach certain accommodations that are mutual on
the most hot-button issues. First and foremost is Taiwan.
Taiwan is still a very tumultuous and very volatile issue for
the United States and China.
Mr. Yoho. Absolutely.
Mr. Swaine. The Chinese right now are very concerned about
where things are going, as is the United States. I believe
there needs to be some kind of understanding there.
Now, we are prohibited from talking to the Chinese about
anything that relates to restraint on either side because of
the Six Assurances. We have a document I am sure you are
familiar with.
Mr. Yoho. Sure.
Mr. Swaine. I believe that elements of that document are
fast becoming obsolete.
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Mr. Swaine. If we don't establish some kind of
understanding with the Chinese about limits on systems and
limits on policies and assurances about nonuse of force, the
Chinese are, ultimately, as they grow in their increase in
power in that local regional area and they see domestic
developments in Taiwan moving further away from them, they're
going to be more inclined to use coercion----
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Mr. Swaine [continuing]. In this situation. And we have to
have a set of policies in place that can deal with that
eventuality if it occurs. And that's not one of declaring
Taiwan as a strategic bastion for the United States, which is
what some people are now arguing. That is a recipe for war with
the Chinese.
Mr. Yoho. Now, that is a well-made point.
Dr. Searight?
Ms. Searight. Yeah, I would just add, you know, I have
mentioned already that the region wants to manage great power
relations. They want the United States and China to figure out
a modus vivendi to more or less get along. They don't want to
be drawn into a big trade war, for example, between the United
States and China.
At the same time, they don't want to see, you know, what is
sometimes referred to as a G2. So they don't want to see too
much accommodation between the United States and China that
will circumvent their priorities. So that is why ASEAN
centrality is so important. They don't want to see the United
States and China go off in a corner and decide how they are
going to manage all kinds of regional issues and who gets what
and not have their interests, you know, be fully represented.
So I think, you know, the United States has basically been
doing this, but you have got to walk that line in the middle.
You have got to stand up--you know, the United States is
welcome in the region. It is known what the United States
stands for, and standing up for those principles is really
important. So showing up is really important and standing up
for the principles that we have all been talking about,
everything from freedom and navigation and open economics to
democracy, rule of law, human rights, good governance. And
there is still a lot of--even though we have seen a lot of
democratic backsliding in the region, and that is very
concerning----
Mr. Yoho. Yeah.
Ms. Searight [continuing]. There are some bright signs too.
You know, Malaysia's election was a stunning result, and it
shows that the people of Malaysia, you know, at a certain
point, they pushed back and demanded accountability from their
government, demanded anticorruption and better governance, and
made history. And I think that affirms kind of the values that
we have long stood for in the region, and that is a real
opening for us to embrace.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you.
Dr.Pande?
Ms. Pande. I echo Dr. Searight in some ways. One,
consistency of American policy. The allies need to know where
the U.S. stands on different issues, on China, what it plans to
do, sort of the economic or military so that they can also plan
their strategies.
Two, India sort of feels a G2 or a movement toward the G2,
because India would not like China to be one of the countries
or China to be the country which is responsible for South Asia
or Southeast Asia.
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Ms. Pande. And finally, allow the regional partners like
Japan, India, Southeast Asia, to play a role in the region, to
do what they can do with this infrastructure, trade, building
relationships, but let them build their own relationships,
which in the end will benefit U.S. interests long term.
Mr. Yoho. Now, I think you all touched on the same thing.
You know, we can't do it alone. We are at a point where we
can't. You know, we are an aging country. We have got a lot of
debt. We are spread out throughout the world. But we have got
great allies, we have got great partners, and we have got the
rule of law that I think works well for us, and that other
people respect.
I have spoken to a lot of the ASEAN nations, a lot of the,
you know, different associations. And it always comes up, we
depend on American leadership. The world depends on American
leadership. So we have those things that we can depend on. And
I think the biggest thing is to work out a game plan on how we
balance that power. You know, I am hoping that period of time
where one nation conquering another nation is a bygone in
history, but sometimes you wonder with what is going with a
rising China. And like I said, to be supplanted from the world
stage as a superpower won't be tolerated by us or any other
country.
Let me just go back, because you guys brought up Taiwan,
and this is something I think is a very urgent hotbed. I think
North Korea is very urgent, very serious, but I think what is
going on in the Asia-Pacific theater is much more than that,
and long term.
The Tsai administration has established the new southbound
policy. The free part of the free and open Indo-Pacific is
about keeping nations free from coercion. This is very relevant
for Taiwan, which is facing increased coercion from the PRC.
How should Taiwan be prioritizing this Indo-Pacific
strategy, in your thoughts? And this will be the last question,
and we will all get out of here.
Dr. Searight, you want to go first?
Ms. Searight. I think Taiwan is important. I think, again,
it is a question of standing up for our principles and standing
up for, you know, being consistent in our policy. The
Southbound Policy by the Tsai government is one that the United
States should find ways to support. It is a very sort of
economic and diplomatic-focused policy, and there are a lot of
ways, I think, that the United States can help through
Ambassadors in the region and think tank linkages and
everything else, to help put the Taiwanese and Southeast Asians
together. Because there is a business relationship there. There
is a lot of Taiwanese investment in the region, but there is
somewhat a lack of familiarity about, you know, what Taiwan's
diplomacy is all about, what Taiwan stands for. So I think we
can play a supportive role there.
But I will let Dr.Swaine address the how to deal with China
on Taiwan issue. That is more his lane.
Mr. Yoho. We are just going to go right down the lane here,
then we will go to you.
Dr.Pande.
Ms. Pande. India's relationship with Taiwan is primarily
economic and trade. However, India's Act East Policy in the
last few years has increased economic relationship with
Southeast Asia and with Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. And so
the Act East, the southbound Indo-Pacific, I believe, sort of
are in some ways coming together and that will benefit the
region. But purely Taiwan question, I will leave to Mr. Swaine.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you.
Dr.Swaine, the pressure is on.
Mr. Swaine. I believe the essential, the fundamental
elements of U.S.-Taiwan policy should be held in place. I don't
think there is any alternative to the United States
acknowledging that there is the statement, basically, in the
original communique with the Chinese and then the statements
that accompany that in the Taiwan Relations Act. And that is a
balancing act for the United States.
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Mr. Swaine. You know that. I think we have to continue with
that balancing act for the time being. I think the Taiwan
Travel Act jeopardizes that. It has the potential for shifting
the understanding that we have had with Beijing now for 40
years about what is the central basis for stability in the
Taiwan Strait.
The Chinese have maintained a commitment to seeking a
peaceful resolution of the issue as a priority. It is in their
formal statements. In return for that, the United States
pledged that it did not challenge the Chinese view that there
is one China. That is the basis of the understanding between
the United States and China about Taiwan. If either one of
those two things change in an unambiguous way, there are going
to be real problems.
The Chinese, I believe, are concerned now that Taiwan is
engaged in what is called soft independence. I think they are
overly alarmed about aspects of this, but their concern really
focuses on the change in the domestic political environment on
Taiwan.
The Kuomintang, the nationalist party, is in considerable
disarray. The idea of eventual unification is becoming more
problematic.
Mr. Yoho. It is.
Mr. Swaine. The Taiwan people themselves vacillate on this.
Growing numbers have been more identified as Taiwanese, but it
reached the kind of height during the Ma Ying-jeou period, and
it is actually going down somewhat now.
Chinese are very pragmatic. The Chinese on Taiwan, they
don't want to make declarations and support moves that would be
really dangerous for themselves. I think they want more
diversification in their economic relationships, which is why
Tsai Ing-wen has the policy of looking in other areas. But they
also recognize that their relationship with the mainland is
essential to their development. It remains essential to their
development.
So what do you do in this kind of circumstance? You have
got to be able to establish some kind of understanding that
puts a lid on the impact of escalating military capabilities in
this area. And that means you have got to have to talk about
what is a basis for restraint in the deployment of forces or
the development of forces that are specifically relevant to
Taiwan.
It is a challenging issue because a lot of these forces are
dual-use, and they are not just focused on Taiwan. But it is
one where I think there needs to be more dialogue about what is
the basis for a stable floor in terms of the military
deployments that both sides would have that would be relevant
to Taiwan, and then how do you reassure each side that this
basic pact is not going to be altered fundamentally?
Mr. Yoho. If you have time, I would like to challenge you
on--or I don't know if it is a challenge, just question you on
it.
Essential to their development, the relationship Taiwan has
with China; I see it more as essential to their survival to
maintain that relationship. But you were talking about the----
Mr. Swaine. I would agree with that.
Mr. Yoho [continuing]. The U.S. and China have an agreement
from 40 years ago. You know, hands off here, we know where we
stand. And you said--I think you said that China was honoring
that. Yet when you look at the coercion that China has done
against Taiwan: Going after them in the World Health Assembly,
getting them uninvited, going after their diplomatic ties,
getting them uninvited, breaking those ties, going to the
Dominican Republic and offering them $3.1 billion to have them
break ties with Taiwan, what they have done with American
businesses because they recognize Taiwan as a destination
country.
Mr. Swaine. Right.
Mr. Yoho. And they go after them and they keep going after
them. So I don't see them being passive in this relationship. I
see them being very aggressive, and it is putting the squeeze
on them.
And so at some point, you either decide to let it be
consumed by China--Taiwan--or you say, we are going to honor
the agreement we had of providing them with defensive
mechanisms. And if we don't stand up today, as we have talked
about the South China Sea, it is going to be harder in 3 years.
And I think this is where I think we need to implore all
the nations in the South China Sea that enough is enough. You
know, I would ultimately like to see them demilitarize those
islands. Is that possible? I don't know. But I know it will be
easier today than 5 years from now. And I think we just need
to--who do we want to align with? And the world is going to
have to decide. You either align with people that are going to
follow the rule of law and honor contracts or people that are
going to tell you I am not militarizing the South China Sea,
yet they turn around and do it. And they have told those lies
over and over and over and over again.
So I think the world will have to decide that. I'm going to
side with the good guys.
I thank you for your time to be here. I thank you for your
statements and your patience while we had to go vote. And, you
know, normally members are here, but when we start late, they
kind of scatter like--well, when you turn the light on with
some creatures.
Anyway, thank you, and this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:43 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]