- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-64] - Department of Defense Update On The Financial Improvement and Audit Remediation Plan
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.A.S.C. No. 115-64]
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE UPDATE ON
THE FINANCIAL IMPROVEMENT AND AUDIT REMEDIATION PLAN
__________
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
JANUARY 10, 2018
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-967
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Fifteenth Congress
WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, Texas, Chairman
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina
ADAM SMITH, Washington
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey
SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
ROB BISHOP, Utah
JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
RICK LARSEN, Washington
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama
JIM COOPER, Tennessee
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania
MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California
JACKIE SPEIER, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
MO BROOKS, Alabama
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
PAUL COOK, California
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio
COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama
CAROL SHEA-PORTER, New Hampshire
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
RO KHANNA, California
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
JIMMY PANETTA, California
MATT GAETZ, Florida
DON BACON, Nebraska
JIM BANKS, Indiana
LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
(Vacancy)
Jen Stewart, Staff Director
Jack Schuler, Professional Staff Member
Brian Greer, Professional Staff Member
Britton Burkett, Clerk
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................
2
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac,'' a Representative from Texas,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..........................
1
WITNESSES
Norquist, David L., Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) and
Chief Financial Officer, Department of Defense.................
2
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Norquist, David L............................................
41
Smith, Hon. Adam.............................................
40
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac''..........................
39
Documents Submitted for the Record:
[There were no Documents submitted.]
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
Mr. Conaway..................................................
53
Mr. Langevin.................................................
53
.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE UPDATE ON THE FINANCIAL IMPROVEMENT AND AUDIT
REMEDIATION PLAN
----------
House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, January 10, 2018.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William M. ``Mac''
Thornberry (chairman of the committee) presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES
Chairman Thornberry. The committee will come to order.
The committee welcomes Mr. David Norquist, the Under
Secretary of Defense, Comptroller, and Chief Financial Officer
as our witness today. The topic is the audit of the Department
of Defense which, by law, begins this fiscal year. And I would
just say it is not by accident that the committee will start
our year on this topic.
Requiring that the Department conduct an audit has been a
bipartisan priority of this committee for some time. The Chief
Financial Officer Act of 1990 required all Federal departments
conduct an annual financial audit, and partly out of
frustration with the lack of progress toward that end at the
Department of Defense, the 2010 NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act] required the financial statements of the
Department be ready for audit by September 30, 2017.
This committee's Panel on Defense Financial Management and
Auditability Reform put close scrutiny on the Department's
efforts and issued a number of recommendations that have
enabled us to arrive at this point. The 2014 NDAA again
required a full audit be conducted of the Department's fiscal
year 2018 financial statements, the results of which are to be
delivered next year.
I want to commend Chairman Conaway for his expertise and
his persistence on this issue, as well as Mr. Courtney, who was
also a member of the audit panel several years ago. They will
both be glad to know that we have had additional members join
this committee in recent years, who can also contribute their
background and experience to this issue as it moves ahead.
This issue is important. Members of this committee hear
evidence every week that we are not providing our military with
the funding they need to carry out the missions they have been
assigned. We must spend more. At the same time, we have a
responsibility to the American people to see that each of their
tax dollars being spent to protect them is being spent in a
transparent way with appropriate accountability.
We should never assume that an audit will solve all the
problems of waste and inefficiency, but it seems to me that an
essential requirement of spending money smarter is knowing with
certainty how it is being spent.
It is likely that the result of the first audit will not be
pretty. But those results will help direct us all, Congress and
the Department, on where we need to apply our efforts to
improve.
This issue is important. And this committee will continue
to pursue it. The ranking member is recognized.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thornberry can be found in
the Appendix on page 39.]
STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And by and large, I would simply repeat word for word the
opening statement of the chairman, so in the interest of time I
will not do that. And will simplify it by saying that this is
enormously important. There are a lot of concerns at the
Pentagon, and there are really two big issues here. One, as the
chairman mentioned, we are in a time of very tight resources
and very great needs. And that means we have to get everything
we can out of every dollar we spend. There are many, many
issues that this committee has covered to make that clear.
And second, if we cannot explain where we spend the money
in the Pentagon, we are failing in that first mission. I know
it is a lot of money. I know it is a big bureaucracy. I know
there is a lot going on, but we ought to be able to do an audit
that tells us where we are spending the money. It is just that
simple. And, you know, that is your mission. That is the
Pentagon's mission.
I too want to specifically thank Mr. Conaway for his great
leadership on this issue. Who knew having an accountant on the
committee would be critical. Well, actually, most people should
have known that. But he has done a great job on this issue, and
appreciate his leadership. And I just hope that--you know, I
think everybody on this committee would just feel great if at
some point this year we can say the Pentagon has been audited.
It has happened some 20 years after we started trying to make
it happen. I think we are close. I think we can get there.
I look forward to hearing your testimony about how we are
progressing in that. And I thank the chairman for his
leadership on this very important issue.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith can be found in the
Appendix on page 40.]
Chairman Thornberry. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Norquist, welcome. Without objection, your full written
statement will be made part of the record, and you are
recognized to make any oral comments you wish to make.
STATEMENT OF DAVID L. NORQUIST, UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
(COMPTROLLER) AND CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE
Secretary Norquist. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thornberry, Ranking Member Smith, and members of
the committee, thank you for the opportunity to provide an
overview of the Department's financial statement audit progress
and plans. I appreciate your committee's long and unwavering
support for this effort. I also want to thank Congressman
Conaway for his leadership over the years related to the audit.
His direction of the committee's 2011 Panel on Financial
Management and Auditability helped the Department maintain its
focus on audit.
When the President made a promise to the American people to
rebuild the U.S. Armed Forces, he also made a commitment to
start the audit. Inside the Department of Defense, Secretary
Mattis and Deputy Secretary Shanahan have set a tone from the
top that embraces the audit as part of their vision to bring
business reform to the Department of Defense. I know you have
had many hearings where witnesses have told you that they
support the start of an audit eventually. This hearing is
different. We have started the audit.
But we are only able to have today's hearing with the
Department of Defense under its first full financial statement
audit because of this committee's continued support. I should
note that audits themselves are not new to the Department of
Defense. Numerous audits covering program performance and
contract costs are completed each year by the Government
Accountability Office, the Defense Contract Audit Agency
[DCAA], the Department of Defense Office of the Inspector
General, and the service audit agencies.
For example, DCAA employs over 4,000 auditors to perform
contract audits that are focused on identifying inappropriate
charges by contractors to the government. However, this is the
first time that the Department is undergoing a full financial
statement audit. A financial statement audit is comprehensive,
it occurs annually, and it covers more than financial
management.
For example, financial statement audits include verifying
count, location, and condition of military equipment, real
property, and inventory. It tests the security vulnerabilities
of our business systems, and it validates the accuracy of
personnel records and actions, such as promotions and
separations.
The Department of Defense anticipates that this spring and
early summer we will have approximately 1,200 financial
statement auditors assessing whether our books and records
present a true and accurate picture of our financial condition
and results of our operations in accordance with accounting
standards. These financial statement audits complement but are
distinct from program performance or contract audits.
Based on my experience at the Department of Homeland
Security, it will take time to implement all the processes and
system changes necessary to pass the audit. It took the
Department of Homeland Security, a relatively new and smaller
enterprise, about 10 years to get its first clean opinion. But
we do not have to wait for a clean opinion to see the benefits
of the audit. The financial statement audit helps drive
enterprise-wide improvements to standardize our business
processes and improve the quality of our data.
Just like private sector companies and other Federal
agencies, the Department of Defense [DOD] prepares financial
statements every year to report its assets, liabilities,
revenues, and expenses. Though not a corporation, DOD owes
accountability to the American people. The taxpayers deserve
the same level of confidence as a shareholder that DOD's
financial statements present a true and accurate position--
picture of its financial condition and operations.
Transparency, accountability, and business process reform are
some of the benefits of a financial statement audit.
Regarding transparency, the audit improves the quality of
our financial statements and the underlying data that we make
available to the public, including a reliable picture of our
assets, liabilities, and spending. And DOD's progress towards a
positive audit opinion will also directly contribute to an
audit opinion on the entire Federal Government's assets and
liabilities.
With regard to accounting, the audit will highlight areas
where we need to improve our accountability over assets and
resources. For example, during initial audit, the Army found 39
Black Hawk helicopters that had not been properly recorded in
its property system. The Air Force identified 478 buildings and
structures at 12 installations that were not in its real
property system. By fixing the property records, we can help
demonstrate the accountability of our assets.
In other cases, as the Department invests in new business
systems, we will be able to obtain independent auditor feedback
on that system's compliance so we can better hold those vendors
accountable for their solutions.
Third, the combination of better data, business process
reengineering, and the use of modern data analytics directly
supports Congress' vision of the chief management officer
position and the Department's effort to bring business reforms
to its operations. These reforms will lead to business
operation savings that can be reinvested in lethality.
The cost of performing the audit will be about $367 million
in fiscal year 2018. This amount covers the audit fees to the
independent public accounting firms, about $181 million, and
the infrastructure, including the cost of the government
salaries of the people supporting the audit of about $186
million. The $181 million in audit contract costs is 1/30th of
1 percent of the DOD budget. And as a percentage of revenue, it
is equal to or less than what a Fortune 100 company such as
General Electric, Procter & Gamble, or IBM [International
Business Machines] pays for their auditors. In addition, we
anticipate spending about $551 million in 2018 fixing problems
identified by the auditors.
The DOD consolidated audit will likely be one of the
largest audits ever undertaken, and comprises more than 24
standalone audits and an overarching, consolidated audit. DOD
is currently sustaining clean opinions for nine standalone
audits. Our audits are conducted by IPA [independent public
accounting] firms with the DOD IG [Department of Defense
Inspector General] performing the consolidated audit, and all
the contract audits have been awarded and the auditors have
begun to arrive.
In order to track progress, the Department has established
a tool and a process to capture, prioritize, assign
responsibility for, and develop corrective actions for audit
findings. Each year, the auditors will assess and report on
whether the Department has successfully addressed the findings.
Going forward, we will measure progress and report on it
towards achieving a positive opinion by using the number of
findings resolved.
In closing, I want to thank this committee for its
continued focus on the importance of a DOD audit. Your insight
through the years has been--your oversight through the years
has been a catalyst, and we appreciate the partnership we enjoy
with you and with the committee staff on this important
process. With your oversight and under this administration's
leadership, we are now and will continue to be a department
that is not only under audit, but improving year after year.
As we move forward, your continued support for budget
stability, related information technology and funding to
remediate audit findings remains critical in moving the
Department towards achieving a positive opinion. I thank you
and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Norquist can be found
in the Appendix on page 41.]
Chairman Thornberry. Thank you, sir. And I appreciate your
differentiating what we are talking about here, a full
financial audit with contract audits. I might just highlight
that we had a number of provisions to reform the contract audit
process in the last year's defense authorization bill, and
hopefully that will improve as well.
I just want to ask you one question. I was interested to
read where a retired general says basically this audit is not
worth doing.
Secretary Norquist. Uh-huh.
Chairman Thornberry. As you highlight, it requires going
and checking the real property, you have got to check and see
whether all the weapons and equipment are accounted for, the
various records and so forth, it is going to be expensive. And
as--his point basically is it is not worth the cost.
Now, you are doing it because the law requires you to, I
understand. But what would be your response to the argument
that the cost is more than the benefit of doing a full
financial audit of the Department?
Secretary Norquist. Sure. I would first respond, he noted
that the--referred to the audit as costing over $800 to $900
million. The amount we are paying the IPAs, $181 million, is 1/
30th of 1 percent of the budget. This is not a significant--I
mean, any number then in the millions is a large number, but on
the scale of the enterprise, that type of money for
accountability is money well spent.
The additional money, the $500 to $600 million we have
talked about, is to fix problems that we find. Now, this is
always a choice going forward. If we can live with the problem,
we can fix it. But I do not think operating in ignorance of the
problem is the right way forward.
I fully support the committee and the legislative
direction. Conduct the audit, do the findings. Some of the
things I will point out is the article said that it is
expensive because it covers so much. And the answer is, yes,
that is the point.
You know, one of the things that the law requires is that
we do information security of our business systems. This is the
FISMA [Federal Information Security Management Act] and FISCAM
[Federal Information System Controls Audit Manual] standards.
The audits are done to those. We will be able to understand the
weaknesses and do more to hold people accountable for closing
cybersecurity vulnerabilities in our systems. You would want
that anyhow. You would want that done under any circumstance.
And when we find those, you will want the Department to be
closing them.
The other comment that he talked about, there are other
ways to do this. Yes, there are. And you talked about contract
audits. While the defense financial statement is large, 1,200
auditors, we have 4,000 who look at contractors. So on the
scale of what we spend looking at contractors, the size of the
team that will be looking at the government is appropriate and
proportionate.
Lastly, I think the biggest concern I have is the statement
that they make that the Department is not a corporation and
does not need to undergo a strict financial audit. Well, first
of all, the law requires a financial audit. And more
importantly, I think the taxpayers deserve at least the same
level of confidence as a shareholder in the use of their money.
Chairman Thornberry. Thank you.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. I do not have a question. I just want to totally
agree with your remarks that you just made. You know, to say
that it is not worth doing is like saying, hey, we have screwed
it up so bad for so long that, you know, the cost of fixing it
has just become overwhelming, so just let us keep screwing it
up. And I get that the upfront cost is going to be enormous.
Secretary Norquist. Uh-huh.
Mr. Smith. But long term, the benefits are exactly as you
described. You know, if we got to sort of suck it up for a
couple of years and absorb some cost to get back on track, it
is going to make significant improvements. All of the work on
acquisition reform that I know the chairman and I and many
others have done can be so much better informed if we have this
information. All right. We can say, well, gosh, here is an area
that we--instead of--so when we pass legislation aimed at
making the acquisition process better, if we have this full
audit, that legislation has a much better chance of actually
accomplishing that task.
So, yeah, it is pretty bad, and in some ways you would like
to just sort of close your eyes and say, let us just not deal
with it. But it is just too important for all the reasons you
stated.
Secretary Norquist. Uh-huh.
Mr. Smith. So I completely agree with that statement. I
applaud your commitment to doing this, and stand ready to have
the committee help you in any way we can.
So I will yield back my time. If you have a comment, you
may, but I have nothing further.
Secretary Norquist. My only comment is to reinforce your
point about the better data to support information. I mean, the
primary thing an audit promises is better data accuracy and
accountability. And when many of the other reforms depend on
the accuracy of that data, not having it complicates those
efforts.
Chairman Thornberry. Mr. Jones.
Mr. Jones. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
I have been here 22 years, and this is the best news of
hoping for something good to come from this effort. And I
commend my friends on my side and other side who worked with
the chairman and ranking member to put this effort together.
I never will forget Donald Rumsfeld, the former Secretary
of State--excuse me, Defense, Defense--sitting where you are
telling this committee that he will account for every dollar of
the taxpayer and how it is going to be spent at the Department
of Defense. He might have meant well, but it never happened,
obviously, because that is why you are here today. Because we
have never been able to do anything to take a problem and even
in a small way make it better.
I got one question. It does deal not directly with you, but
because of your position and your oversight. Of all the
articles I have seen about waste----
Secretary Norquist. Uh-huh.
Mr. Jones [continuing]. In the 22 years I have been here,
probably this is in the top four or five. It is from 2 years
ago. ``U.S. Army fudged its accounts by trillions of dollars,
auditors found.'' ``The Defense Department Inspector General in
a June report [2 years ago] said the Army made a $2.8 trillion
in wrongful adjustments to accounting entries in one quarter
alone in 2015, and $6.5 trillion for the year. Yet the Army
lacked receipts and invoices to support these numbers or simply
made them up.''
This would be something, I would think, would be under your
department's jurisdiction, if it happened within the system.
This is one of those things that I would like to ask you, how
in the world do you fix a problem when you keep funding the
problem?
And there has got to be--you fellows, CPAs [certified
public accountants] and accountants, can give me some assurance
that when stories like this go public and the taxpayer reads
it, Mr. Norquist, that is why they are so frustrated with
Congress and why we have an 18 percent approval rating.
So I would hope that this would be a kind of a situation
that you can, in a short period of time, give me some hope that
this would be dealt with, and somebody--instead of saying that,
well, this happened and that happened, but we keep funding it.
I just do not know how you catch up when you keep funding the
problem.
Secretary Norquist. So let me address that, because that is
a very important one. One of the issues you are talking about
relates to journal vouchers, which occurs after the money is
spent. So when you see an article that says trillions of
dollars, and you realize we only receive about $600 billion in
a year, there is something--there is a mismatch in the story.
And what this refers to is, we have systems that do not
automatically pass data from one to the other. So the Army goes
in, and others, at the end of their financial statements, finds
the number from their property book, and writes it into their
general ledger. That is called a journal voucher entry.
Depending on the amount of property, that can be hundreds of
billions of dollars.
Because they do not have adequate support for that journal
voucher, the whole entry is considered unsupported. Now, from a
management point of view, this is bad. It is not the same thing
as not being able to account for money that Congress has given
you to spend, but it is still a problem that needs to be fixed.
And part of that relates to systems that were built as
stovepipes. In the private sector, they would all talk to each
other. You would not let them field the system that did not
automatically pass up its data. So we are addressing exactly
that type of challenge.
And one of my concerns is, only by eliminating the types of
ones that are just an entry issue can you find underlying
issues that are hidden among inaccurate data. So it is
important. I would not want the taxpayer to confuse that with
not--with a loss of something like a trillion dollars. That
would not be accurate. But it is an accounting problem that
does need to be solved because it can help hide other
underlying issues.
Mr. Jones. Thank you very much. I am going to tell you that
I might not be here when you resolve the problem, but I will
still be reading the paper. I wish you and your staff the very
best. Thank you.
Secretary Norquist. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Thornberry. Mr. Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Norquist, for being here today. You know,
this is my first year in Congress, and I will tell you that
oftentimes I am asked for my observations. I served in local
government for over 24 years. And the most shocking thing about
being in Congress is that there has never been a comprehensive
audit of the DOD.
Secretary Norquist. Uh-huh.
Mr. Carbajal. It is just outright ridiculous. There is no
other way of putting it. And it has been said that if you
cannot measure it, you cannot evaluate it.
Secretary Norquist. Uh-huh.
Mr. Carbajal. And I think this is one of the most
significant issues facing the American people and having trust
in our being able to adequately fund our military and our
Department of Defense. I think if we do not get it together, we
are going to lose the American people's trust in what we are
trying to do here.
There is no question as to how daunting this task is going
to be. The stakes are high. Last year, Congress approved almost
$700 billion for the Department of Defense, and we owe it to
the taxpayers to provide oversight and accountability over
their tax dollars.
Mr. Norquist, in your written testimony, you mentioned that
for years, the Department has received disclaimer of opinion on
DOD-wide financial statements because it was not able to
provide the evidence to support its financial information, and
that these disclaimers were based on management's assertions
and not based on independent audit testing.
Can you provide some clarification and detail on this
issue? What do you mean when you say it was based on management
assertions and not independent audit testing? Because, it is my
understanding, audits such as the one conducted for fiscal year
2015 was conducted by independent public accountants. If you
could shed some light on that I would greatly appreciate it.
Secretary Norquist. Sure, I would be happy to. There are a
number of parts of the Department of Defense that have been
under audit for a number of years, Defense Finance and
Accounting Service, the commissaries, our pension plan and so
forth, and many of those receive clean audit opinions, but it
is not the entire Department. It is not even the majority of
the Department. And so when you do not have an auditor's
opinion, management is not able to represent that everything is
in order. And so the IG [Inspector General] does not even begin
the testing. They just said, then you failed.
This is one of the reasons why I have been a strong
advocate and supporter of the audit. When I was at the
Department of Homeland Security, when I arrived as a CFO [chief
financial officer] there, they had actually already had the
audit the first year. With the amount of information you
received from the audit as management in order to fix things
was tremendous. And so I understand your concern of, you know,
an entity that does not have an audit, that will provide a lot
of useful information. And I think operating without it, there
is a limit to how much you can reform and fix without that
independent check validating that what was done was done
correctly and effectively. And I think that is the biggest
transition that we are going to see from this year to previous
years.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. Once we see a Department of
Defense audit for fiscal year 2018, how will DOD track its
process for correcting errors? Specifically, how will the audit
remediation process be executed? And what is the timeline for
analysis, execution, and implementation of lessons learned from
the audit?
Secretary Norquist. So here is how we will do that. We have
set up a dataset where every time there is a finding by the
auditor, what they call an NFR, notice of finding and
recommendations, and it is made up of several conditions, the
auditors will enter that into the database. So we will have
their view for every entity of each of the findings. And they
will have codes according to the type. Was it against an IT
[information technology] system? Was it related to property? We
will then have an organization or individual associated with
that NFR and the responsibility to correct it.
This is important because it gets us past the habit of
saying, does the Department have a clean opinion? No. And then
no one feeling that they individually are accountable. Here,
all these findings will be associated with an organization,
office, or individual who will be responsible for the
corrective action plan. And I will be able to come back and
report to you each year which of those were closed and which of
those were not, who we should write to and say, well done, good
job, and who either needs more help or more encouragement to
get their piece of it done. But we will be able to track it
finding by finding and hold accountable over time. And this is,
again, one of the tools that the audit gives us.
As we move from the higher level, it is hard to solve to
very specific things. One of the things I like about that is
you may have a large number of findings, and somebody says,
well, why do I need to fix my piece, look at how big the
problem is. And this is--yes, but there are two assigned to
you. If you can fix those two, that is all that you need to do.
And then as more people do that, the whole organization moves
in the right direction. So we will have that information for
you, sir.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Thornberry. Mr. LoBiondo.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to join with my colleagues in saying how much
we look forward to your efforts and wish you good luck.
Secretary Norquist. Thank you.
Mr. LoBiondo. It is certainly long overdue. And I want to
take the opportunity to thank and applaud Mr. Conaway for being
so dogged in this with his hard work.
And with that, I yield my time to Mr. Conaway.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Frank.
David, please pass on to your team a thank you for where
you have gotten us to today. The thousands and thousands of
man-hours, people-hours, however you want to refer to it, that
got you to--however flawed we are at this point, we are far,
far better off than when I first took up this task, and I for
one have seen that progress. And so thank your team for it. Got
a long, long way to go.
We do not want to overpromise and under-deliver. The 2018
audit is unlikely to be a clean opinion, given the scope of
what all has to be done, but we are so much further along based
on the leadership that you and your team have provided and the
hard work of the folks who every day get up and go to work to
face this daunting problem that does not--it is like Sisyphus,
trying to push that rock up the hill every day and you get up
the next morning and it is all the way back down at the bottom.
So please tell--thank you.
Secretary Norquist. Sure.
Mr. Conaway. Part of what we will try to do is to keep that
process moving forward and not, you know, do anything that
hampers, from a legislative standpoint, because we are
frustrated that it had not gotten done sooner. We just have to
recognize that it is getting done.
Would you--you talked about findings, and that has got a
certain definition to you. Would you explain to the committee
what a finding really is, what that means from an auditor's
standpoint and why that is important that those get fixed?
Secretary Norquist. Sure. So what the auditor does is, they
are holding the Department accountable against certain well-
recognized standards. And so the finding can consist of, you
were unable to produce the records to support this transaction.
Or we looked at your property system and it indicated you
should have 100 of these, and when we walked the floor and
looked at inventory, there were 95. They are basically things
that are wrong in the way that either we are accounting for our
assets or recording. And so then those are items that are
priorities for us to fix.
Mr. Conaway. So would those also include weaknesses in
internal controls? You mentioned a circumstance where you had
trillions of dollars of journal entries going back and forth.
That is typically a failure of internal controls. So the
auditors are looking at your internal control system. Those
findings would include weaknesses or failures within the
internal control system?
Secretary Norquist. Correct.
Mr. Conaway. All right. While we are not going to get all
the way to a clean opinion soon----
Secretary Norquist. Uh-huh.
Mr. Conaway [continuing]. You mentioned a couple of reasons
why we have made--why it was important that we do this add
value along the way. Can you expand on the 39 helicopters or
the 400 buildings and----
Secretary Norquist. Sure.
Mr. Conaway [continuing]. And why not knowing--I mean, we
obviously knew--the pilots that were flying those 39
helicopters knew they were there, but somewhere further up the
management chain they disappeared from the inventory and may
not have been known that they were there. Four hundred
buildings may not seem like a big deal because they were not
moving, but at some point in time we have to address, you know,
a BRAC [base realignment and closure] or something of that
nature.
Can you talk to us about value added along this path over
the next couple of years that we will get as a result of doing
these audits?
Secretary Norquist. Absolutely. You know, in order to get a
clean opinion, there is a number of steps you have to solve.
But even along the way, fixing the pieces along the way produce
a tremendous benefit. So if you think of the inventory in a
warehouse of how many spare parts or munitions that you have,
or the helicopters. Those had been delivered by the vendor but
had not been recorded in the property system, which meant folks
who were anticipating using them were waiting to take advantage
of it. Or if you have, the case of the buildings, the person on
the base may know they are there, but somebody at headquarters
trying to figure out do we have enough square footage where we
need to do things, is operating with incomplete information. So
as the leadership mentioned at the beginning, accurate data
helps drive more accurate decision making.
There is a couple other benefits. For example, DISA
[Defense Information System Agency], one of the agencies that
received a clean opinion on one of its funds, a modified on the
other, was able to return $230 million to the services. It
lowered its bills to them and allowed them to spend that money
on operations and readiness, because it had a more accurate
understanding and better management of its finances.
Likewise, in terms of identifying errors, the Navy changed
its process of how it handed information to DFAS [Defense
Finance and Accounting Services] to be more automated, reducing
how much work DFAS had to do for them. That saved them $65
million.
So while we are focused primarily on data accuracy, there
are financial savings that come, and then there are other
things, which is just a benefit for the men and women of the
Armed Forces.
The Air Force, when they were doing a walk-through,
discovered their enlistment records were being set up
incorrectly for new recruits, as to whether they were 6- or 4-
year enlistment. So they were updating, manually, hundreds of
records every year as people arrived basically because the
entry was done incorrectly at the beginning.
They went back into the system change to try--to make sure
that did not happen, freed up a lot of labor hours, reduced by
80 percent the manpower accuracy issues. So it benefits the
troops in better pay and benefits accuracy.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Thornberry. Mr. O'Halleran.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I want to thank all those that have worked on
this over the past decades. And as a new person, just like Mr.
Carbajal and all us front row people, I am kind of--after
having read the information on this, I am kind of shocked.
Secretary Norquist. Uh-huh.
Mr. O'Halleran. You know, as a new person here, to look at
decade after decade and trillions of dollars after trillions of
dollars, and apparently no real rush to get to the point where
we have an audit, a meaningful audit, is disturbing. But I do
want to thank you for being here today to discuss this critical
issue for our warfighters and American taxpayers, and thank you
for your service.
I want to echo my colleagues who have rightfully stated
that proper financial oversight is long overdue at DOD. Waste,
fraud, abuse have no place in any agency, especially not when
it comes to guaranteeing our national security and readiness.
Every dollar wasted or fraudulently spent is a dollar lost to
our warfighters. They deserve better. And I look forward to
working with you and the rest of this committee to increase
transparency and financial integrity.
I also share concerns about what we can expect from this
process. As you know, the GAO [Government Accountability
Office] has stated DOD has not yet demonstrated that its
leadership has the ability to achieve effective financial
management reform. The DOD lacks a sufficient cadre of
financial managers with qualifications and level of expertise
needed to lead reform throughout the Department.
Additionally, having looked at what occurred in the
financial industry over time----
Secretary Norquist. Uh-huh.
Mr. O'Halleran [continuing]. I have concerns about how we
are going about--go about guaranteeing that this marriage
between the DOD and the different auditors is one that is going
to be transparent enough for us to understand that the taxpayer
is getting the appropriate audits that we should be getting.
Because, as you know, what occurred in the financial industry
was that, basically, the auditors did what the people being
audited wanted them to do so that they can get the next
contract the next time it was around or keep that contract. I
really want to know how we are going to watch that issue.
And, Mr. Norquist, has DOD developed not only a process to
guarantee that we are getting what we say we are going to get,
but brought on additional personnel who demonstrated financial
management experience? What barriers continue to impact DOD's
ability to attract, retain, and develop qualified personnel?
And retain is a very important issue when it comes to these
types of things. And how will we verify the audits in the long
term?
Secretary Norquist. So let me cover a couple of points that
you brought up, and I will start first with the independence of
the auditors, because that is a central one that we had to
address at the very beginning. The auditors do not report to
the Army, the Navy, Air Force. They do not report to me. They
report to the IG. The IG is the contracting officer, oversees
them, and makes the decisions about what they do, and so they
have the same protected independence of the IG.
But it is also a reason why we split the audit into lots of
pieces. One is an auditor cannot audit an agency if they have
consulting work there. And so finding an audit firm who had no
consulting work anywhere in the Department of Defense would be
somewhat limited. But if you break it Army, Navy, Air Force,
DISA, Working Capital Fund, so forth, you will find firms that
are, and you will find multiple ones so you can have
competition.
So part of the having the 24 or more separate audits is,
first, you get people who are independent. And second, we have
sustained the competition, that if there is an auditor who is
not performing, the IG has multiple other auditors with DOD
audit experience that they can go look to. So we thought
through--because there was the question, why do you not just
use one large audit? And my answer is, you have created a
monopoly. We would never, after they learned our business
process, be able to find another auditor who could compete, and
then I would be explaining to you why the audit costs went
through the ceiling.
So I think we tried to pay attention to the concerns that
you have raised, and I think the IG function is a tremendous
help for us in maintaining that independence.
Mr. O'Halleran. Just to that point, because my time is
running short. I appreciate the IG and its independence, but in
the long run, the IG has been around for a long time.
Secretary Norquist. Uh-huh.
Mr. O'Halleran. And a lot of things have been going on for
a long time, whether it is fraud or abuse or just lack of
information.
Secretary Norquist. Uh-huh.
Mr. O'Halleran. And it has not come to anybody's attention
of how to correct that. And so just the idea that the IG is
going to be the independent evaluator of the process does not
guarantee the taxpayer of America that this relationship is not
going to be one that is controlled by those that know and can
manipulate the system versus those that are responsible for
making sure that we get what we are paying for, and it is
verifiable. So I would like to talk to you a little bit more in
depth about just where that goes.
And I yield back.
Chairman Thornberry. Chairman Conaway.
Mr. Conaway. So thank you.
David, DFAS is an integral part of several of the
accounting systems. Can you talk to the committee about the
audit of DFAS per se, but also the conflict between the
services that DFAS provided to the Army, Navy, Marine Corps,
that on a standalone basis, if those were audited separately
going into DFAS, to audit that service that was provided would
be really disruptive and inefficient? Can you talk to the
committee about how the team is looking at solving that issue
with respect to DFAS?
Secretary Norquist. Sure. So we have a number of places
where an audit of one of our entities would extend into
another. So if you think of the Army, Navy, and the Air Force
have financial management processes that extend into the
Defense Finance and Accounting Service. So the way that we
address that is we have what--the acronym is SSAE [Statement on
Standards for Attestation Engagements] 16. It is basically an
audit of that organization's support to the others that
external auditors can rely on. Otherwise, we would be paying
for the three or four different auditors to all show up and re-
audit a single step.
It is interesting it shows up in DFAS. It also shows up
with ammunition storage where the--several different services'
ammunition are held in one place, and the answer is rather than
each auditor coming in, we will do a similar thing over
ammunition storage and say, you can all rely on this audit
piece so you do not have duplication of work.
Mr. Conaway. So you talked about the accountability that
you are going to create with this database findings that are
out there. Can you talk to us about the accountability piece?
You have got two groups of folks that will be responsible for
correcting or addressing the findings. You have got civilian
folks as well as uniform people. Can you talk to us about the
carrots and sticks that you have got available to you to hold
people accountable within your system for getting those
findings resolved to the satisfaction of the auditor?
Secretary Norquist. Absolutely. I think there is a limit to
them, and we may need to work with this committee on
alternatives and additions going forward. But this is actually
one of the first things that the Secretary of Defense brought
up with me, even before I was nominated, to say, ``How do you
motivate people in a Federal agency to stay focused on fixing
things when you lack some of the incentives and controls you
have in the private sector?''
So I think there is a couple things. One is being able to
clearly identify who is accountable is one of the first steps,
and so that is the part of it that the database gives us so the
people know who it is on. The second is audit support shows up
in people's performance evaluations, so there is no way around
that comment being made about your contribution or your
success. So that helps to drive it. Both the civilian and the
military will have--there are limits to how far we can go,
compared to a private sector, but I think the transparency and
the accountability, knowing--one of your biggest challenges, no
one thinks it is their responsibility. And so fixing that and
being very clear whose responsibility it is helps to drive that
performance improvement. But there are limits to this that I
recognize.
Mr. Conaway. Well, it is a--that database has been--is a
big improvement from where we have been in the past, because
sometimes the tasks are just so daunting that you could get
away with not addressing it. But having it broken down into,
relatively speaking, bite-size pieces, I think we will see
progress over the coming future.
To Mr. O'Halleran's issue. These CPA firms that provide the
audit are held to professional standards by their own industry
and by the very State boards of accountancy. So it is not like
you have got a group of folks out there who are not without
oversight from professional standards that they would have to
ascribe to if they working in a private secretary audit as
well?
Secretary Norquist. Correct. And they are, in fact, audited
on whether or not they met those audit standards. And they will
have to produce, to an external firm, evidence that they did
their audits to an acceptable standard.
Mr. Conaway. So while not perfect, we are all humans and
there have been some audit failures in the past. Nevertheless,
there are professionals and professional standards that those
folks are held to?
Secretary Norquist. Correct.
Mr. Conaway. Just a quick anecdote. Part of the issue has
been over this timeframe is making sure you had the right tone
from the top. Leon Panetta started that, and I think it has
been transitioned to the new administration this time really,
really well.
I was encouraged by the experience I had in Hawaii awhile
back. I was at a--touring the USS Texas, which is a submarine.
We were in the galley doing a townhall meeting for the enlisted
guys, and somewhere during that conversation one of the petty
officers asked me, he said, Congressman, how is the audit going
of the Department of Defense? Which I thought was--two things:
you guys planted that guy down there because you knew I was
going to be onboard that ship, or you have got some really
bright enlisted guys who are paying attention to conversations
that are going on throughout the food chain of the Department
of Defense. And if the issue of auditability has gotten all the
way down to a petty officer in the bowels of the USS Texas,
then we must be making some progress.
So, with that, I yield back.
Chairman Thornberry. Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you very much, Chairman. And thank you as
well, Mr. Norquist, in the efforts that are going in there. It
has been a longstanding problem, and we all know that.
I wanted you to just speak a little bit, and I think we
have addressed a few of the process issues, but particularly
the concerns around cultural resistance to change. And if you
could, I think one of the things that we are very aware of
right now in any large bureaucracy, that there are a lot of
issues, retribution for people who are trying to do the right
thing and other people do not want them to is a concern. Sexual
harassment at the Pentagon is a big concern, as you have
probably noticed through numerous reports.
So I wonder if you could just speak to--you know, there are
all these issues that go on in people's workplaces, and that
cultural resistance to change is one that really has to be
monitored closely. And how are you dealing with that? How are
you expecting to be able to bring everybody to the table on
these issues and get the kind of buy-in that is necessary
without individuals picking one another off.
Secretary Norquist. The cultural resistance--I mean, no one
wants to be audited. I do not know how many witnesses you have
had come excitedly, tell you, hey, I am under audit today. But
it is also that in order to fix the findings, we are taking
systems and processes that were built to maximize support to
one thing and requiring them to pay attention to the functions
around them that they work with. And that can be a challenge
because somebody says, well, this is how it disrupts it.
So there is a couple of factors that go into this. The
first is the tone from the top, and that comes from the
Secretary and the Deputy Secretary who are unambiguously clear,
this is about accountability, and they have sent letters to the
workforce that emphasize, this is about doing your job the way
you are supposed to. These are what the accounting standards
and the property standards and everything come from. You are
responsible for this. So it is very clear, running up your
chain, to say, I do not want to do this is not going to run
into success.
The other one is Congress has been very clear. Because the
other place you go is to say, tell them to make them stop,
right? And the likelihood of someone coming to Congress and
saying, please make them stop the audit, and getting a warm and
fuzzy hearing is pretty limited. So those two things help
create the realization that the organization will need to
change.
The second part of that process is explaining to them the
benefit of the change. In many cases, we have labor-intensive
processes where data is transferred from one place to the
other, and you have to fix errors because it was not done right
at the beginning. Or it was only filled in with the fields the
people at the beginning needed. Well, if you can explain that
when you get that fixed, you are going to spend less time doing
this and more time on the things that you believe is your core
mission.
So, yes, it is a little bit of work, and certainly the
first year of an audit, when you are asked for records you do
not necessarily have easy access to and you have to spend some
time finding them, is a challenge. But over time, this will
make your life easier. And we have to work that office by
office and organization by organization. But, as you pointed
out, this is as much changing people's views about how to do
things so that they understand the importance.
The third factor is the audit is annual. You know, if you
did this once and came back in 10 years, I do not know you have
the same incentive to cultural change as the realization is
they are coming back in 6 to 9 months. So you can make the
change or you can watch them find the same things again. So
that third factor--what makes the financial statement a lot
different is it repeats. And they are not going to change the
questions; they are just expecting you to change your ability
to provide an answer.
Mrs. Davis. Do you anticipate any need for a feedback
system so everyone who is engaged in this can be giving their
input all along the way, and some of that may be anonymous?
Secretary Norquist. Yes. We need a feedback. And one of the
things that I have tried to draw attention to is, because the
audit is going to repeat, what is important is that we be able
to sustain this. So if you are given a task where the
resistance is this is just way too labor intensive, stop. Let
us figure out why answering that auditor request is labor
intensive and fix the way we store the data or do the check so
we can answer them efficiently every year. I would rather take
the finding the first year than do some Herculean expensive
effort that I am going to have to repeat the next year.
So if we are not able to find the records efficiently, let
us create a data warehouse, let us put the records where they
can be easily searched so next year it is a very quick process.
We want to make this efficient over time, and that is another
way of reducing some of the resistance so it is not--you know,
the people have a way of saying, hey, I do not understand why
this is happening this way. And the answer is maybe we can do
it differently. But we are still going to have to meet the
standards of the audit.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you. And just speaking of the auditors--
and obviously you are going to be using a lot of different ways
of responding to some of the concerns that have been existing
for some time. Is there anything in the training or preparation
as you move forward that needs to be changed and that you are
addressing as it relates to the way that people are approaching
it?
Secretary Norquist. So there has been a lot of effort on
that. My predecessor, Bob Hale, set up a relatively robust
training program for the financial management community that
has been focused on introducing audits and audit readiness as a
result of the input from committees and others. Extending that
thoroughly through the logistics and the other organizations is
probably one of our challenges. There has been some training,
but those areas are as equally affected.
Chairman Thornberry. Mrs. Hartzler.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Norquist. This is a very encouraging day. It
is a day that we have been waiting on for a long time. I
certainly want to commend the chairman and ranking member and
certainly my colleague, Representative Conaway, for his
leadership on this, because certainly we are facing so many
threats around the world, and we need more dollars to modernize
and to increase our readiness. But at the same time, I hear
back home concerns about waste. And any time there is waste, we
need to make sure that it is rooted out, and that we are
investing our precious defense dollars where they need to go.
And so this process that you are leading is critical in this
effort.
And so you noted that one of the chief benefits of the
audit process is improved accountability of the assets and
resources. So I was wondering, are classified assets part of
the audit process?
Secretary Norquist. Yes. Classified programs are included.
I will also tell you that--all of the intelligence, defense
intelligence agencies, have standalone full-scope audits, and
most of them have been under audit for 3 years. But being a
classified program does not exempt you from the scope of the
audit.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. And then will there be a separate
addendum then that we in Congress will be able to access to
look at that portion or how will that--how will there be
accountability for the classified side?
Secretary Norquist. Sure. So for the standalone audits,
those are classified, the ones of an intelligence organization.
For the others, how that shows up, I would rather talk to you
in a closed forum.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay.
Secretary Norquist. But we address all of the classified
programs as they are in the scope of the audit.
Mrs. Hartzler. How about OCO [overseas contingency
operations]?
Secretary Norquist. OCO would be in the scope of the audit,
yes.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. Very good. In your testimony, you said
something here that caught my attention, and of course, the
cost you anticipate is $367 million, which we have already
talked about the long-term benefit of that investment in
getting this--a handle on everything. But you go on to say, you
anticipate spending about $551 million this year, in fiscal
year 2018, fixing problems identified.
So could you expound on what problems you anticipate and
what the presumptions were to come up with that figure? Where
do you get $551 [million] for fixing problems?
Secretary Norquist. Sure. So the number comes from talking
to the services about what funding they have planned for this
year and what did they have in the budget to address these
requirements. And the types of requirements we are talking
about is systems that have been already fielded for whom the--
either they are not storing the data properly or they are not
transmitting it properly, reducing manual passages between
systems. So some of those changes are in there. Improvements in
the way they inventory or store things.
One of the steps that is involved, the accuracy of the
property records. So each one of those places where they are
improving their process or changing the underlying system or
clearing up old records so that--those are the things that are
driving those types of costs.
Mrs. Hartzler. So it sounds like the services already have
a handle on what they know are problems?
Secretary Norquist. Correct.
Mrs. Hartzler. And then they put a price tag to that. So
most of that, it sounds like, is computer software?
Secretary Norquist. Not most of it. That is just a piece of
it.
Mrs. Hartzler. What?
Secretary Norquist. It is a piece of it. It is not most of
it, but the systems are certainly a piece of it.
Mrs. Hartzler. Can you give a more specific breakdown on
that? So you anticipate you are going to have to purchase so
many more computer systems that talk to each other, and you say
record management. So are you putting man-hours? Do you
anticipate additional personnel to create written records? I
mean, get more specific, please.
Secretary Norquist. Sure. So I may have to give you some of
this for the record, but I will try and talk you through what I
can at this level.
So when you are going through the audit and you--for many
of them, they have either done some work in advance or, in some
cases, the auditors have done preliminary work on their
statement of budget activities, other pieces, before we got to
the full scope audit. So they have some indication of the types
of challenges they face, and they have developed corrective
action plans for those.
Some of those corrective action plans include modifying one
system to allow them to be audit compliant and allow them to
turn off systems that are not. So there are financial system
costs that improve the accuracy of the data, and in the long
term may save us money as we turn off the legacy systems.
The second is improving their processes that allow them to
be more accountable for their property. And so they may be
changing the way they store the information or they store the
assets to support the accountability, depending on some of them
may be switching to barcoding things that were not, so that
they can have clearer accountability of the status of each
asset, where they know where they are. Some of it is the
documentation behind it, making sure that is centralized in a
way that they can respond and make sure it is complete.
If you need it broken down further, I will probably have to
go back and get the details behind it, but that is the types
of--at a high level, the changes they are doing.
Mrs. Hartzler. My time is almost gone. I would just say we
need to watch this.
Secretary Norquist. Uh-huh.
Mrs. Hartzler. And do not let them get more money for
something that simply should be their job--doing their job.
Secretary Norquist. Correct. Uh-huh.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Thornberry. Ms. Shea-Porter.
Ms. Shea-Porter. Thank you.
And I also want to thank you, Mr. Norquist. I am very
excited about this. We have hoped this and--for this for years,
and I wanted to ask you a couple of questions about it. In, I
think it was 2007 maybe, I was sitting here on this committee,
and we had found out that a lot of the weapons, the guns, that
had been sent to Iraq were not traceable anymore. I remember
the person, I cannot recall his name, but saying, well, we did
not have enough auditors. And I said something along the lines
of, well, should we not have auditors in order--when we are
spending this kind of money? So this sounds familiar to you, I
am sure.
So how did you decide on the number of auditors, and what
will you do if you discover that you need more?
Secretary Norquist. Sure. So the number of auditors is our
estimate based on what the contractors have proposed to do.
They were given the scope of it. Those contracts, I believe,
allow for them to make adjustments over time so that if there
is a requirement for more. One of the things we want to do is
make the best use of their time and their benefit to the
taxpayer.
So unlike some audits where as soon as they run into a
problem they get to stop and say, there is a problem, I am
done, the IG can say, hey, you know, it would be useful to us
if you dug deeper into the root cause behind it, and that way
we make sure we are not just fixing the symptoms and so they
can drill down.
And so my view is, the auditor piece of this is like the
reconnaissance; it is the guys who go out front and find you
the issues, and that is a tremendous value to us. So if we need
additional ones, I am not hesitant to make sure we can get
access to that.
Ms. Shea-Porter. So they will not be constrained
financially if they need that. You will not run up against a
wall where there is just no money left in the budget for them
to put more people in if they need to?
Secretary Norquist. It would have to be something in the
way that the contract had been written, but we would realign
funds if we needed to. If the IG said they needed additional
resources, I will help the IG.
Ms. Shea-Porter. Okay. That is pretty essential, because I
have a feeling it is going to be deeper and longer than you
think.
Secretary Norquist. Absolutely. Correct.
Ms. Shea-Porter. Now, my understanding is, right now, you
are talking about $870 million, and that is just for 2018?
Secretary Norquist. That is for 2018.
Ms. Shea-Porter. Okay. So how is the CR [continuing
resolution] going to be impacting that?
Secretary Norquist. So the CR creates pressure on us
funding-wise. And so I am not going to stand in front of you
and say if I do not get it, we are going to stop the audits. We
will not. We are going to go ahead with the audit.
What it does, disruption-wise, is many of the people that I
need focused on audit remediation are focused on trying to
split contracts to accommodate the funding levels of the CR and
the next increment. And so many of the people that we need to
have focusing on this are the ones who are also affected by the
incremental nature of a CR. It also creates pressure more on
the remediation side than the audit because we are
significantly below either what this committee recommended or
the President, and we have to make tradeoffs within that space.
But we will still proceed with the audit.
Ms. Shea-Porter. Okay. And then the other question I had is
you talked about contractors having growing pains. Now--and I
think this article, you also said, that we should not be
looking for like billions of savings, but there has always been
kind of one of those understandings that if we actually did
monitor these contracts over time, that the waste and fraud and
et cetera, delays, actually does add up to billions.
So how will they experience growing pains? And why do you
not think that ultimately, over a period of time, we actually
could save really significant numbers?
Secretary Norquist. Okay. Are you talking about saving
numbers by auditing contractors or----
Ms. Shea-Porter. If we do this work now. And so what will
you be doing to make sure, for example, that contractors come
in on time, we do not have cost delays?
Secretary Norquist. Okay.
Ms. Shea-Porter. I know that we have our work to do for the
oversight, but I just want to know how you think your role will
play out.
Secretary Norquist. Sure. So let me break that into three
parts. First is the piece, which is the program manager
overseeing it. That is not in the scope of the financial
statement audit, but we support them with better quality data.
The second, not inside this audit, but we have the Defense
Contract Audit Agency that looks directly at billing. And they
recovered in 2016, I think, like $3.6 billion by looking at
billings that were coming in and questioning charges. That
keeps up. That we will continue to do.
The third is the financial statement audit, which focuses
really on the Department and indirectly on the contractors, but
it is our payments to them. That one I think the place you are
going to see the biggest opportunity reform over time is by
allowing us to operate more like a business.
And so you think about improvements and the accuracy and
the completeness of financial systems and the role of the chief
management officer [CMO] in trying to bring business reforms,
being able to put in front of the CMO information closer to
what their commercial counterpart would have, allows them to
make decisions. You are a $600 billion enterprise, better
decision making can make you make better use of the dollars on
a very large scale.
So I think you will see that type of advantage in driving
reform within the organization as we are able to do more in
estimating costs or reforming the way we do something
internally. So I think those are some of the three. There will
be some cost avoidance when you have better security of your
systems against intrusion. You will avoid costs that you
otherwise would have inflicted.
Ms. Shea-Porter. I am hoping that we will have more clarity
when we have to make decisions. We will have more data to help
us, right?
Secretary Norquist. Yes, yes.
Ms. Shea-Porter. Okay. Thank you very much. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Byrne.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you, Mr. Norquist. Many of us are familiar
with the audit function in the private sector. In preparing for
this, I came across an acronym called an IPA, which, from my
understanding, is a really good type of beer. But I think you
mean something different. These are major, highly reputable,
private sector accounting firms to perform audits for large
organizations across the world. Have I got that right?
Secretary Norquist. Correct. Ernst & Young, KPMG. Large
recognized firms.
Mr. Byrne. And there is a set of auditing standards that is
peculiar to the Pentagon and peculiar to government. In
general, what standards do they use when they perform their
audit?
Secretary Norquist. So there is a Federal board that sets
the auditing standards, and they basically start with the
commercial standards and then they add some modifications. For
example, to defend the power of the purse of Congress, we have
budgetary rules that do not exist in the private sector.
Mr. Byrne. Right.
Secretary Norquist. They have a series of accounting
standards for how we account for obligations, disbursements,
commitments, things that matter to us in managing the money
inconsistent with Congress. So there are changes. All the other
Federal agencies follow them as well, but there is an
accounting standards board that does that.
Mr. Byrne. Okay. Let me talk you to about continuing
resolutions for a second.
Recently, the Secretary of the Navy has said publicly that
since the Budget Control Act was passed, the Navy itself, the
Navy alone, has lost--or we have wasted $4 billion as a result
of continuing resolutions and budget uncertainty.
Do you believe the audit will show inefficiencies like this
in business operations across the Department due to continuing
resolutions?
Secretary Norquist. I think the audit will show you some of
the--yes, the problems that will come out of business, out of
the disruption from the CR. And I think one of the ways that
that shows up, if you think about it is, normally, you have a
year to spend money. And one of the things we tend not to like
about Federal agencies is that the 4th quarter, because the way
Federal money works, if you do not spend it, you lose it. This
sort of unusual thing that we do in the Federal Government.
Well, the CR says wait, wait, wait. And then when you are
down to only a couple months left in the year, okay, here, have
it all.
Mr. Byrne. Right.
Secretary Norquist. Spend, spend, spend. And that, if you
negotiate a good price, you may now be outside the window of
when you negotiate an effective price. Your plans for
contracting, and so forth, get compressed.
So I think some of those disruptions that you see that are
driven by the CR, the audit will help be able to figure out,
either how to manage it or what the consequences are.
Mr. Byrne. Well, it would be helpful to us as the people
that pass continuing resolutions to have that highlighted in
your audit report so that we know that continuing resolutions
have tangible, negative results, not just to the operations,
but to the expenditure of money for the entire Pentagon in each
of the constituent services.
I might add that during another part of my life, I was
asked to take over the Alabama 2-year college system at a time
in which there were two criminal investigations going on and
the Birmingham News won the Pulitzer Prize reporting on
corruption in it. And we used both the internal audit function
and the external audit function, not just to remedy what had
happened, but also to change the culture within the Alabama 2-
year college system.
Do you believe that there will be some, I am not saying
wholesale change, but some change in the culture of the
Pentagon as a result of these audits?
Secretary Norquist. Absolutely. That is the point.
Mr. Byrne. Good. Can you elaborate a little bit about how
that would manifest itself?
Secretary Norquist. Sure. I think that what you find is
there are folks who are doing their mission, and at least one
of their missions is to make sure information is updated for
others to use. When their time is tight, that step gets
skipped, and they do the others. Well, then others who rely on
the information have to either redo it themselves, or function
with incomplete information. Knowing that that is going to be
audited and somebody is going to point out that difference
creates an incentive to make sure that you do the complete
function and you get those items done. It should reduce the
amount of phone calls the person gets to answer the question
because somebody can rely on the system now, but that type of
culture change is important in an organization that has such a
spread of functions and has to rely on those types of datasets
to be able to make decisions.
Mr. Byrne. Well, I just want to say, Dr. Wenstrup and I
were just talking. This may be one of the most important things
that we accomplish during our terms here in Congress. So I
think you will see a lot of support for your activities here on
this committee and throughout Congress. And I appreciate what
you are doing.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Secretary Norquist. Thank you for your support. I
appreciate it.
The Chairman. Mr. Suozzi.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Norquist, I am
very excited about the work that you are doing. It is a
gargantuan, mammoth, really big task that you have ahead of
you. And, you know, I am trained as a CPA and as an attorney,
and I was a mayor of a small city and a county executive of a
large county that did not have proper inventory or procedures
and processes in place. I went through this on a much smaller
scale.
And when I first came to Congress, I would hear my
colleagues asking about different weapon systems and different
pieces of equipment. And I did not know what we owned. And I
tried to get my staff to figure out what we owned by working
together with the DOD and other people, and it was very hard to
get the limited information we got. There is 14,500 aircraft in
the U.S. military, for example. You know, how many ships do we
have, how many armored vehicles, so on and so forth. Will we
have a comprehensive inventory at the end of this process that
tells us what we own?
Secretary Norquist. So this is the important way of how we
implement the audit. It is possible to have that without making
it easily accessible, and my concern is you miss some of the
benefit of the audit. So one of the changes we want to drive is
not only to have the accurate count, but to have it easily
researchable. In other words, in the dataset where somebody can
run the report and say to the Secretary of Defense, here is
what you have, here is where they are, and here is whether or
not they are in maintenance because they are not working, or
here is whether they are working.
Mr. Suozzi. Go ahead. Finish what you----
Secretary Norquist. So the idea is we will have the count,
but what we want to do is be more like a business, which is, go
beyond the mere standards of the audit to using that to drive
business intelligence so that the leadership will have timely
and accurate information, not just about the dollars, but about
the facilities, the equipment, the military supplies behind
those dollars.
Mr. Suozzi. So each piece of equipment will be rated, for
example, as far as its condition?
Secretary Norquist. I am not quite sure. I think the audit
has to do with impaired or not impaired, meaning is it usable
but we will have those. Now, it has to be material enough,
right? The audit does not worry----
Mr. Suozzi. Yeah.
Secretary Norquist [continuing]. About small items. But the
larger-end items would certainly be things that we should be
able to have timely and accurate reporting on.
Mr. Suozzi. What percentage of the overall audit would you
say is going to be devoted to inventory as opposed to procedure
and process and financial statements?
Secretary Norquist. Well, if you walk through, they will do
inventory, they will do property, meaning buildings and other
large items. They will also do pay and personnel, some of those
types of things. So over time, that may be more labor intensive
than most of the other pieces.
Mr. Suozzi. Yeah.
Secretary Norquist. But it is one of many items, but it is
on our property line as one of our largest.
Mr. Suozzi. So is it half the task? Is it a quarter of the
task?
Secretary Norquist. I am guessing, but probably a quarter
of the labor hours would be spent looking at those types of
items, yes.
Mr. Suozzi. And will there be a physical visiting of the
sites to actually identify the pieces by the auditors or will
that be done by our in-house, by the people who work for the
DOD?
Secretary Norquist. By the auditors. And they will do it
two ways, what they call book to floor and floor to book, which
is, they will look at what your records says----
Mr. Suozzi. Yeah.
Secretary Norquist [continuing]. And then they will see if
that is what you really have in inventory.
Mr. Suozzi. Right.
Secretary Norquist. And they will look at what you have in
inventory and see if that is what your records say. That way
they are checking it both directions to make sure that they
both align.
Mr. Suozzi. This is a very exciting task that you are going
to accomplish. Do you think that the audit of the inventory of
equipment, of properties, of buildings, will be conducted by
the end of the calendar year of 2018, or it will be some time
off into the future after that?
Secretary Norquist. So they will go through the audit this
spring and summer. They will publish their reports starting
about November 15, this being a first year audit, may take them
a little bit of extra time. And they will do this every year.
So they will do a sample. So they may pick certain pieces of
equipment the first year, and then pick a different set the
next year. But the findings they have on one are often the same
for the other. So as soon as we see them, it gives the agency a
clear idea of what they----
Mr. Suozzi. Oh, so they only give you a sample inventory of
what we own?
Secretary Norquist. It is statistically significant. And
the way they do their sample----
Mr. Suozzi. Yeah, I know.
Secretary Norquist [continuing]. Is use statistical
sampling to be able to have a level of confidence in it. So
that they will be on site, counting things, checking numbers.
Mr. Suozzi. Will we be able to find out from you, if I
reach out to you afterwards, what you are going to be doing,
what the sample size will be and what it will be of?
Secretary Norquist. We should be able to have the
information and the sample size. I do not know if it will tell
us exactly what they counted, but it will tell us the sample
sizes, yes.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay. All right. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Norquist, for being here. I, again, want to echo a thank you to
Chairman Conaway for his efforts in getting this to come. It is
a massive undertaking, long overdue. It is going to be very,
very difficult.
I hope that we will focus on the things that improve the
processes going forward. And some of those, number one, is OCO.
There is a lot of room, even when people are trying to do that
right, for abuses that are intentional and unintentional, and I
am more concerned about the unintentional where people just do
not know. How far back are you going to the start of the audit,
like as far as OCO and those things?
Secretary Norquist. So when you look at dollars in fiscal
year 2018, they will be auditing money received in fiscal year
2018. When you look at assets acquired, it does not matter when
the asset was acquired. They will look for existence in
completeness of those assets.
Mr. Kelly. Okay. Very good. And then just from having
served quite a long time, I understand the process, ``at the
end of the year, spend all the money or you lose it.'' That
needs to be a recommendation that you do not lose it so that we
can spend that money wisely. Maybe not in operations or
maintenance, but there is some things, acquisitions, that it is
important to be able to carry that money forward as long as it
is earmarked or allocated to a source, even though it is not
spent yet, rather than having to rush and spend it on things
that you do not need. Because you do not need to go buy all
these pens to stack up somewhere for people to pilfer, because
those little things add up.
And I guess my final point is, I am sure you will look at
things like OCIE [organizational clothing and individual
equipment] turn-in, where we turn in equipment and those kinds
of things, and the write-offs and how you do that, and also
like tool droppages. Those things that, you know, you come back
from a field exercise in the Guard, and you do all these tool
droppages to make sure that you get your equipment back, when
maybe that is not the right way.
So you will be looking at processes like that to make sure
that people are adhering to the right way to do that and
holding people accountable when they are accountable or service
members as opposed to just saying, ``Okay, it is within the
dollars.'' Is that correct?
Secretary Norquist. It will hold people accountable because
we will look at disposable equipment. It depends on the size of
the equipment. The audit does not go down to very small items.
But did you properly dispose of it? Did you record it? And, you
know, and then we will start to be able to clearly see, did you
get paid for the disposal, because some of this equipment we do
get money for when we dispose of it.
Mr. Kelly. I guess my final question goes as to, the GAO
indicates that the DOD lacks a sufficient number of financial
managers. And what are you doing or what areas has the
Department done to take care of, or to acquire these?
Secretary Norquist. So this is a challenge. I mean, when
you have an organization that most of it has never been under
audit, and Federal employees do not, themselves, conduct
financial statement audits the way commercial enterprises do.
So you may have CPAs, but you often have CPAs who do not have
exposure to some of those other practices. And so over time, we
have been able to grow that a couple of ways.
The first is, the agencies that went under audit first,
like the Corps of Engineers, Corps of Engineers has a clean
opinion. It had a number of people who have now been through an
audit multiple times, know what it looks like, have been part
of fixing things, they are now helping the Army get through the
larger audits. So some of them we have grown by leading with
certain examples. Some we have just gone out and hired, and
then the third focus is training. We have a robust training
program where we have been emphasizing audit standards, audit
readiness, internal controls, all of those pieces, whereas in,
you know, a decade or two ago, it all would have been budget
type of topics and not accounting-related topics because that
was the almost exclusive focus of a lot of the financial
management community.
Mr. Kelly. Mr. Chairman, I have no more questions. I yield
back my time.
The Chairman. Mr. Norquist, I want to interject on one
point Mr. Kelly raised. I am also very concerned that we are
going to be so late in the fiscal year with a final
appropriation. And the needs are so great that there is going
to be inevitable problems as a result. And I am thinking about
the audit. You are going to find things and you may not have,
there may not be enough time to fix the things you find by the
time the money is--so I think my staff has reached out to yours
to work together to see about some greater flexibility in
spending money after the end of the fiscal year.
I think about our maintenance problems. They are enormous.
And we do not want to waste money, but we also have got to get
our ships and planes fixed.
Secretary Norquist. Absolutely.
The Chairman. And so I think this is an area--and there is
a lot of concern in Congress about accountability for the money
and, you know, I understand that. But I think this is an area
where a number of us in Congress working with you and the
Department can have a better--especially this year, because we
are going to be so late. So I just want to mention that because
you all were discussing it, even though it is a little
different from the topic here.
Mr. Panetta.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Norquist, thank you very much for being here, taking
the time, your testimony. But also thank you for helping us do
our job and giving the people, providing them with
accountability, providing the accountability to the American
taxpayer. I appreciate that. Obviously, you have a tremendous
amount of experience in doing what you are doing, 28 years. You
actually were the CFO. You audited the DHS [Department of
Homeland Security].
Secretary Norquist. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Panetta. That is correct. In the 6 months that you have
been in this position, what has been the biggest lesson you
have learned so far? And do you foresee any other potential
delays besides the worrying about budget stability and funding,
as you mentioned in your last sentence, in your last paragraph
of your statement. Is there any other delays that you foresee
that will prevent you from doing your job?
Secretary Norquist. Sir, I will tell you, the thing that
surprised me the most was how many people who have been working
this issue were eager for it to finally start. I have to tell
you, for an accountant to be told to put together all these
controls and all this stuff, and then say we are not doing the
audit this year. And then each year you repeat that. You start
to get to wondering, is it ever going to happen? So this built-
up sense of ``No, it is happening, it is happening this year,
and everything that you have done up until now matters.'' The
reaction I would get in rooms from the folks who have been
working on this was really reenergizing, right. The sense of
excellent, right. There have been a lot of folks wondering if
they have been working in vain, but now the realization, No,
everything that you did to get ready to get these pieces in
place will matter and pay off. So I think that was a very
pleasant surprise on moving forward.
I think the biggest concern in the long run is going to be
the systems because they take the longest to fix. Policies,
procedures, even cultural changes we can do more quickly, but
some of the system interfaces may take some more time. And so
one of the things I would encourage the committee, as you go
through each year's budget review, when somebody comes in and
asks for money for a business system, make sure you understand,
is it compliant? Have they prioritized the things related to
the audit? Or have they sort of pushed those things down on
their to-do list in place of something else?
So often they do not give--I do not want to say they do not
get much attention because I know there are staff who spend a
tremendous amount of time on this, but they are not sexy or
glamorous, but making sure that the funding for those and the
things that are being done, the system is phased out, those are
the ones that will take us some time. But I think they have
some tremendous long-term improvements for the Department.
Mr. Panetta. Great. Once again, thank you, and good luck.
Secretary Norquist. Well, thank, you sir.
Mr. Panetta. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for having
this hearing. And Mr. Norquist, I apologize, I am probably
going to be covering ground you have already covered. I was in
another committee where we had a markup and I just got here
now. But from the 30,000-foot level, I really like that the
audit will result in more accountability and more transparency,
but the other thing that I think would be accomplished, I think
is real important, and I would like to get your thoughts, and
that is, reform. Uncovering where maybe we do not have the best
practices in place, where there might be waste or duplication.
Can you reassure, not just the members of this committee,
but by extension, the rest of our colleagues in Congress and
the American taxpayers that you think that this audit will
uncover where we are not spending money in the best way
possible, so we can either lower the budget and accomplish the
same thing or invest in more lethal capability for the DOD.
Secretary Norquist. I think it is very essential in its
contribution to reform. And I am very excited about the
possibility and how it is going to reinforce reform. So Deputy
Secretary Shanahan has got the lead for bringing business
process reform to the Department. He set up organizations
within the Department that are working on this issue. I support
them through the audit by helping to make sure that they have
the business data they need to make those reform decisions. So
as you look across organizations and you are comparing what do
we pay in electrical rates across all of our different
facilities? Why? What are the highest ones, why are they paying
a higher rate, and what is the difference? What are the lower?
So instead of somebody saying, everyone, cut your number by 10
percent, we focus on those places where the costs seem out of
line with the rest of the enterprise.
That type of financial data, the accuracy of that, being
able to pull it from multiple systems and have confidence in it
is what the audit gives you, and it is an enabler to reform.
And so I am sure we will find within the financial processes by
removing places where we have to rework data because the
accuracy will allow it to go faster, savings. But I am more
excited, in the long run, about what it allows the Department
to do to function like a business.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. And I know that chairman and my
colleague on my left here and many others have really been
pushing for greater effectiveness and efficiency in how the
dollars are spent. We have that trust to the American taxpayer.
So will the outcome be not just that we find, hopefully, these
efficiencies, but it is done in a way that the American people
know that we are finding these, and the entire Congress knows
that we are finding these efficiencies?
Secretary Norquist. Yes. So we will make sure, I mean, the
financial statement is public, so what the auditors find and
what they then announce is closed, meaning what they fixed,
will be known. But I will also make a point of letting the
committee know, here is how the reform has changed things, and
here is the way that our businesses run differently.
For some of them, like the working capital funds, they bill
for their services so we can look at the rates they charge. Are
they able to reduce their cost of operating because those are
set up closer to a business-type function, and we will be able
to use that there as well.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, thank you for that. And I really
appreciate it. The military of our country is held in the
highest esteem by the American people. The only criticism that
I will sometimes hear is, are we spending the dollars the most
effective way. And people are concerned about that. So thank
you so much for what you are doing.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Veasey.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Norquist, I wanted
to specifically ask you about just some of the issues that the
outside auditors have that were brought in. Someone had asked
the question a little bit earlier, but one of the reports that
I read said that they, I guess, that they were having some
challenges being able to make final conclusions. Can you talk
about some of the issues that the outside auditors that were
brought in had?
Secretary Norquist. Okay. So is there a particular one that
you are thinking about or you just want me to walk through the
challenges they face in general?
Mr. Veasey. Yes, just in general.
Secretary Norquist. Okay. So the first challenge an auditor
faces in general is--and this is true for government and
commercial--they are required to be independent, which means
the people showing up did not used to work for you, so they
have got to understand your business processes. And, so, we
have put together, in our different organizations, guides that
welcome them and say, here is how we are structured. Here is
what we do. When we spend money, the document looks like this,
so they can start to recognize them, that they know what they
are testing for the adequacy of.
We have been doing the security clearances because a lot of
them require security clearances to be able to do their work
and get them through. A number of them are out doing site
visits to get to understand what is going on at the different
places. The Air Force auditor is at Tinker Air Force Base this
week. The Navy auditor is at Naval Air Station Jacksonville and
others in the fall to just see what the operations look like.
So there is an orientation that they go through before they
plan the audit to make sure that their audit is consistent, and
then there are security clearances that we have been getting
them through so they can start in a timely manner. Those are
all some of the key pieces. There will be a challenge on the
volume. You know, this is not just a large audit for us, it is
a large audit for them, but they have all scaled up for that
challenge.
Mr. Veasey. What about training and sustaining a workforce
to be able to work specifically on financial management, and
what have you, within DOD? Like, what are some of challenges
around that? Because I would think just being able to have a
full-time staff, you know, work solely on this, because this is
obviously a big issue, must be a challenge in and of itself.
Secretary Norquist. It is. And we have had to realign folks
internally to be able to provide the time and attention on this
to support them. You know, these are some of the functions that
over time when people took cuts, they sort of said, Well, I can
reduce this, because it is not an audit and accountability.
Some of those functions are being restored.
When we are doing internal tradeoffs on that, we are
basically operating underneath the reduction accounts that the
legislation has put in place. But those are realigning forces
within it. I will tell you that over time, what I likely come
back to you with is shifting some of the work where we hired an
outside firm as a consultant to something run by a Federal
employee by trading off contracting dollars for Federal
employer dollars, because we are going to need those
capabilities in house.
So in some cases, we hired the expertise and we may change
the balance of that over time as we realize this function is
going to stay, and we want to make sure a Federal employee is
able to do that on a sustained basis.
There still is always a use for skilled experts on the
outside on particular topics, but you want to change that
dependency over time.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Conaway.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you. Two other things real quick. The
Department is constantly facing funding challenges, et cetera,
et cetera. David, do you think you have got the right position
or strength in position to be able to maintain and protect the
funding to get all of this done? Because it is going to be
setting priorities and trading these dollars that are going to
be needed to get this done over time versus spending them
somewhere else of importance within the Department.
Do you think you have the right support from the Secretary
and others to be able to make a cogent argument that you need
these funds to continue the audits and continue the fixes?
Secretary Norquist. I do. I have the full support of the
Secretary and the Deputy Secretary. I will tell you at the
President's budget level or the committee level, I am very
comfortable. If you start talking about a CR that runs through
the year, we are in a very different place, and that just
creates challenges because of very tough tradeoffs across the
Department. I will fight to protect this, but we have readiness
issues and others that I would have to be paying attention to
as well.
Mr. Conaway. And at the BCA [Budget Control Act] levels
would be disaster.
Secretary Norquist. That would be a disaster.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. And on the database of findings, there
will be some findings that are more important than others.
Secretary Norquist. Hmm-hmm.
Mr. Conaway. So when it first comes out, just the scope of
the number of findings will probably be startling. Will the CPA
firms grade those findings as to ones that are, for lack of a
better phrase, really critical or systemic versus ones that are
easily fixed that should go away shortly? Is there going to be
some sort of a grade there that would help bifurcate it into
places so we could better understand just the sheer number?
Secretary Norquist. So they will score it and weight it
with terms like material deficiencies and others that relate to
its size compared to the financial statement. That is not
necessarily its importance to the Department in terms of
fixing. They may decide that there is a cyber vulnerability
that has very little dollar value that we think is a security
issue that makes it one of the first things we fix, or we may
see a change where the savings are there, and we want to do
that fix first.
So we will have their scores in terms of how they
categorize it, but then we will need to prioritize, within the
Department, which of these reforms are most important to get
done to support the chief management officer to save the
taxpayers money. And some of the later ones, even if they are
large dollar values, like valuation of old military equipment,
if we do not think that is data that people are going to use
right away, we may wait on some of those reforms to prioritize
the other things first.
Mr. Conaway. So on the assignment of responsibility to fix,
it will come with a timeframe that is rational and expected to
be met?
Secretary Norquist. Generally, I would expect the timeframe
to come from the corrective action plan, where we will check,
is this a reasonable timeframe? But some of these will take
some period of time, but you can see the reductions and the
conditions within it that will show you they are making
progress.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Norquist, thank you for your testimony and for the work
that you are doing, and will continue to do. I think it is
vitally important for the Department, and ultimately for the
taxpayer, to make sure that we are spending dollars the way
they should be spent, and we are getting the most for them. And
this auditing function is something that I have had a
longstanding interest in. And I remember years ago serving on
the Intelligence Committee, and we had somebody from DOD there.
And I asked the question, ``well, you know, what about the
auditing function to make sure that we are spending dollars
wisely?'' And it was then that I became aware that we do not do
the auditing function.
So, long overdue, and I'm glad we are finally getting to
this point. So many of the questions I had have, for the most
part, been addressed, but I did have one area I just wanted to
delve into just a little deeper.
And so while conducting an audit of this magnitude, I guess
I want to know how you plan to deal with the significant
complexities that it may present dealing with, for example, old
contracts, or contracts for systems not designed with an audit
in mind, or auditing, particularly, the classified portion of
the budget. This is a particular area of interest that I would
have, and where there is, you know, by design, there is not
much transparency into black projects and programs for security
reasons.
How do you deal with those issues, and does guidance for
new contracts provide for the eventuality of an audit? So if
you can take those on.
Secretary Norquist. Sure. So there are a couple of pieces.
So the first one you bring up is in contracts. And there are
some issues where in order to, for example, property value,
military equipment, we need the contractor to give us their
invoices set up a certain way so we can see the pieces that are
included. Older contracts do not have that. So you look at
which ones do you modify, which ones do you build on, and are
there some places where you do an alternate way of valuing that
equipment. There is different methodologies you can do to do
valuation. And you try and decide from an accuracy and a
taxpayer point of view, what is the best use of taxpayer money,
how do we do that most efficiently?
Some equipment, if you think it is going to go out of
inventory, you might decide I am not going to spend a lot of
energy on it over the next couple of years. It will not be here
anymore. So that is not as essential, it is not a highest
priority.
With regard to systems, I think you have to look at each
system and ask the question, Can I fix it to do what we need it
to do through a software patch or upgrade? Can I replace it by
moving its work to something else? Or do I have to work around
it in some sort of manual form until that system is eventually
retired and a follow-on? Each of the services, each of the
organizations is going through that.
Defense DAI [Defense Agencies Initiative] is the name of an
accounting system that has been implemented across 20 defense-
wide organizations. So in that case, the answer was just turn
them all off. We are just going across the defense-wide
entities and we are just turning off and replacing those. In
the services, there is a lot more of consolidating. They are
going from several accounting systems down to fewer that are
compliant and support an opinion.
With regard to the classified, I may need to talk to you
offline about how we handle that. I would just assure you a
couple things: One is, classified programs are included in the
audit. We have cleared auditors and cleared IGs and others who
can do this. And as you mentioned, from the intelligence
community, they always see standalone opinions, and so they
actually have been under audit for 3 years now. And I have been
meeting with them, getting an update on their lessons learned
and their issues and how they have been progressing. But those
are published on a classified form, and the Members of Congress
are entitled to look at those.
Mr. Langevin. And for the classified programs going
forward, will those all be in-house auditors, and not outside
contractors?
Secretary Norquist. Can I address all of those in a
different format? At a certain point, I am going to run into
classification concerns, so let me just assure you that they
are included, and then we can talk about the mechanics of it in
a different way.
Mr. Langevin. Sure. I would like to do that. Very good.
Well, thank you very much for the work you are doing.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. McEachin.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Norquist, for being here.
It is my understanding that the Army, Navy, Air Force,
Defense Health Programs, Defense Logistics Agency, U.S. Special
Operations Command, and Transportation Command still have not
received a clean audit opinion from the DOD IG. Can you talk
about how you approach auditing these divisions of DOD over the
course of fiscal year 2018 in doing the audit process?
Secretary Norquist. Sure. As you pointed out, there are
some that have and then there is a series that have not. Some
of those like DLA [Defense Logistics Agency] have begun the
audit. So DLA was under audit this previous year in fiscal year
2017, as was--DISA [Defense Information Systems Agency] was
under audit in 2016, and the U.S. Marine Corps went under audit
this year for the first time in 2017.
So some of them have a year or two of experience. The Army,
Navy, and Air Force, what they are doing is they are splitting
their audits into two parts. They basically have a section of
the Army that is funded through what are called general funds,
meaning appropriations directly from Congress. And another that
is what is called working capital fund, meaning it bills for
its services so it looks more like a company.
These have different accounting systems. And so while the
same auditor does both, they have split the opinion into two
parts, because the way they function is different. But that
will also allow us to see the progress within each of those
organizations. So that split occurs in the Army, the Navy, and
the Air Force. The other ones, most of them get standalones. If
they are too small, they will be covered by the IG rather than
get a standalone opinion. They will all be rolled together by
the IG to give an opinion on the Department as a whole.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Norquist, you referenced this earlier but
I want to ask again. In these efforts, do you have the support
of the Secretary of Defense and the Deputy Secretary? Because
what you have talked about is cultural change, it is
prioritizing dollars, it involves a number of things that, if
they are not supported by the top leadership, are not going to
happen.
Secretary Norquist. Absolutely. The tone from the top is
excellent.
The Chairman. Well, the first conversation I had with the
Secretary after he was nominated to be Secretary, he brought
this up on his own. So my experience with him is that he
believes this is very important, and I just think it is, you
have got to have that support from him to make this successful,
I think.
You good? Mr. Conaway.
Mr. Conaway. I just want to brag on the chairman for having
the very first hearing of calendar 2018 on this issue, and
highlight that. And I appreciate your keen continued support
for getting this done. And that tone from the top that you set
is much appreciated. So I yield back.
The Chairman. Well, I appreciate it, but I think all
members, as I said at the beginning, this has been a bipartisan
priority for years, and we are going to stand there right with
you, Mr. Norquist, to make sure it actually occurs.
Secretary Norquist. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:34 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
January 10, 2018
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
January 10, 2018
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING
January 10, 2018
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN
Mr. Langevin. While conducting an audit of this magnitude, how do
you plan to deal with the significant complexities it may present--for
example, contracts and systems not designed with an audit in mind, or
auditing the classified portion of the budget? Does guidance for new
contracts provide for the eventuality of an audit?
Secretary Norquist. The consolidated Department of Defense (DOD or
Department) audit will likely be one of the largest audits ever
undertaken. The Department has been working for many years to
appropriately plan for this audit. To prepare for the significant
complexities that come with an audit of this size, DOD has specifically
focused on:
a) Breaking the audit down into manageable pieces: To help manage
the audit of a large-scale organization with operations around the
world, the Department's audit will be divided into more than 24 stand-
alone audits of major components, and an overarching consolidated
audit. This structure will allow larger DOD components to directly
manage their individual stand-alone audits, and will allow the DOD's
consolidated auditor to rely on the work performed by stand-alone
auditors. Given the large number of audit requests and the complexities
and findings expected during the initial audits, distributing and
tracking the responsibility to respond to all of these items across the
individual stand-alone audits are critical to success. Utilizing a pool
of qualified independent public accounting firms to perform the various
stand-alone audits also fosters competition, driving down audit costs
for the Department and preserving auditor independence restrictions.
b) Establishing an infrastructure to support the audit: The
Department has put people, processes, and systems in place to directly
support the audit. Furthermore, this infrastructure includes protocols
for ensuring classified programs are also subject to audit, while
maintaining appropriate safeguards over our classified information. My
staff will reach out to yours to arrange a secure meeting to discuss
the details on how our classified programs will be audited. In recent
years, the Military Services and select defense agencies have undergone
limited-scope financial audits or examinations that tested this
infrastructure and provided feedback on areas for improvement. DOD will
only be able to take full advantage of the audit by having adequate
audit infrastructure in place.
c) Leveraging audit results to drive necessary changes to our
contracts, systems and processes: To take full advantage of the
independent auditor feedback, the Department has established a tool and
a process to capture, prioritize, assign responsibility for, and
develop corrective actions to address audit findings. This tool and
process will allow leaders to track and demonstrate progress
implementing fixes that respond to auditor findings while improving
management and data for the Department. For example, the Department is
using auditor feedback to explore methods for standardizing the
structure of future contracts to facilitate greater accountability over
equipment in the possession of contractors and accounting for the value
of our property and inventory.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. CONAWAY
Mr. Conaway. Section 803 of the fiscal year 2018 NDAA authorizes
the Secretary of Defense to use qualified private audit companies, as
opposed to the Defense Contract Audit Agency, for performance of
certain incurred cost audits. a) Do you see value to this approach? b)
How does leveraging qualified private entities to conduct the incurred
cost audits of defense contractors support the Department of Defense's
vision of an audit? c) Please provide an update on how the Department
is implementing section 803 of the fiscal year 2018 NDAA.
Secretary Norquist. a) Do you see value to this approach? I do see
value in the Congressional approach and DCAA is committed to executing
the Congressional intent to establish private sector audit capacity for
the performance of incurred cost audits. Although DCAA already had
processes in place to eliminate the incurred cost backlog, this
provision will also allow DCAA to draw on this private audit capacity
if they experience a surge in audit requirements to avoid future
backlogs. DCAA will be able to accomplish its high risk more complex
effort supporting the contracting community. The Department will
monitor its cost/benefit to ensure the expected value is received.
b) How does leveraging qualified private entities to conduct the
incurred cost audits of defense contractors support the Department of
Defense's vision of an audit? The objectives are different between the
DOD financial audits and the DCAA contract audits. In addition to
evaluating the DOD financial statements, the financial audits look at
DOD systems and processes to ensure that we have reliable financial
information to use for decision-making. Contract audits evaluate DOD
contractor books and records to ensure the Department is paying fair
and reasonable prices for its goods and services. The DOD incurred cost
audit does indirectly support the financial audit as it facilitates
more timely and effective contract closeout that supports the
Department's financial statement audit. As stated above, by leveraging
the qualified private auditors, DCAA will maintain currency on its
incurred cost audit requirements facilitating more timely contract
close-out and reduce expiring funds.
c) Please provide an update on how the Department is implementing
section 803 of the fiscal year 2018 NDAA. The Department is currently
developing a plan to include qualified private auditors in the incurred
cost audit process to maintain an appropriate mix of Government and
private sector capacity to eliminate any backlog of incurred cost
audits and remain current. The plan to implement Section 803 also
includes DCAA coordinating with DCMA and the services to develop a
comprehensive plan for executing the Section 803 requirements and the
identification of additional resources needed for the development of an
infrastructure to support the use of qualified private auditors. DCAA
has already provided initial guidance to its staff on the one-year
requirement for completing its incurred cost audits and the 60-day
requirement for completing its adequacy review of the incurred cost
proposals
Mr. Conaway. The fiscal year 2017 House Armed Services Committee
NDAA Report called on the Department of Defense to ``leverage greater
certified public accountant experience and Federal financial management
experience'' for follow-on contract awards supporting ``implementation,
operation, and full utilization'' of Enterprise Resource Planning
(``ERP'') systems with the Army, Navy, and Air Force. This remains an
important area of focus with the emphasis on audit reform. a) Can you
comment on this approach and on the advantages of the federal
government leveraging contractors who are certified public accountants?
b) Are there particular advantages in using auditors with federal
financial management experience?
Secretary Norquist. a) Leveraging greater certified public
accountant experience and federal financial management experience to
support the success of ERP implementation and operations is important
to the Department of Defense. Because sustainable audit success
depends, to a great extent, on compliant auditable business feeder and
financial systems, having experienced contractor support versed in
federal accounting and audit standards will enable the Department to
have better insight into ERP performance, gaps in compliance, and root-
cause analysis. This, combined with independent auditor feedback on the
systems' compliance, means that the Department can respond to audit
findings that much more quickly and adroitly.
b) There are advantages in using auditors with federal financial
management experience to perform the Department's financial statement
audit. Federal agencies must follow accounting standards, promulgated
by the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board, that are specific
to the federal government. Additionally, the Office of Management and
Budget prescribes the form and content of federal financial statements,
which are different from both commercial and state and local reporting
formats. Also, auditors performing federal financial statement audits
must comply with Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards
issued by the Government Accountability Office. Experience with these
federal-specific requirements allows auditors to better identify
findings and to provide best-practice based recommendations based on
their prior experience working with federal agencies.
[all]