[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
.
[H.A.S.C. No. 115-93]
HEARING
ON
NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
AND
OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES HEARING
ON
FISCAL YEAR 2019 BUDGET REQUEST
FOR NUCLEAR FORCES AND ATOMIC
ENERGY DEFENSE ACTIVITIES
__________
HEARING HELD
MARCH 22, 2018
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-563
WASHINGTON : 2019
SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
JIM COOPER, Tennessee
DUNCAN HUNTER, California
SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama
RICK LARSEN, Washington
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma
JOHN GARAMENDI, California
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama
COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
RO KHANNA, California
JODY B. HICE, Georgia
Drew Walter, Professional Staff Member
Leonor Tomero, Counsel
Michael Gancio, Clerk
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Cooper, Hon. Jim, a Representative from Tennessee, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces.......................
2
Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces...............................
1
WITNESSES
Benedict, VADM Terry, USN, Director, Navy Strategic Systems
Programs.......................................................
5
Gordon-Hagerty, Hon. Lisa E., Administrator, National Nuclear
Security Administration........................................
6
Owendoff, James, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Environmental Management, Department of Energy.................
7
Rand, Gen Robin, USAF, Commander, Air Force Global Strike Command
4
Rood, Hon. John C., Under Secretary of Defense for Policy,
Department of Defense..........................................
3
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Benedict, VADM Terry.........................................
54
Gordon-Hagerty, Hon. Lisa E..................................
64
Owendoff, James..............................................
77
Rand, Gen Robin..............................................
34
Rogers, Hon. Mike............................................
27
Rood, Hon. John C............................................
29
Documents Submitted for the Record:
[There were no Documents submitted.]
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]
FISCAL YEAR 2019 BUDGET REQUEST FOR NUCLEAR FORCES AND ATOMIC ENERGY
DEFENSE ACTIVITIES
----------
House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces,
Washington, DC, Thursday, March 22, 2018.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:00 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Rogers
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES
Mr. Rogers. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order.
I want to welcome you to our hearing, ``The Fiscal Year
2019 Budget Request for Nuclear Forces and Atomic Energy
Defense Activities.'' I want to thank the witnesses for being
here today and for your service to our Nation and for the time
it took to prepare for this. I know it takes a lot of time and
energy, and we appreciate it. It is very helpful to us.
As you know, we have a full witness panel today. Due to the
limited time, we are going to cover the waterfront on DOD's
[Department of Defense's] nuclear forces and all of the
defense-related activities in the Department of Energy.
Our witnesses are the Honorable John Rood, Under Secretary
of Defense for Policy; General Robin Rand, Commander, Air Force
Global Strike Command; Vice Admiral Terry Benedict, Director,
Navy Strategic Systems Programs; Honorable Lisa Gordon-Hagerty,
NNSA [National Nuclear Security Administration] Administrator
under the Secretary of Energy; and James Owendoff, Principal
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Energy for the Environmental
Management.
Two months ago, the Armed Services Committee held a hearing
in this room with Secretary of Defense Mattis on the National
Defense Strategy and Nuclear Posture Review [NPR]. The
Secretary gave us a sobering assessment of the nuclear threat
environment that reflected that, quote, ``we must look reality
in the eye and see the world as it is, not as we wish it to
be,'' close quote.
I am pleased to see that the 2018 NPR does exactly that.
But back in 2010, the Obama administration's NPR said, with
misplaced hope, that, quote, ``Russia is not an enemy and is
increasingly a partner,'' close quote.
Anyone who watches the news today knows that this is not
the case, if it ever was.
We were reminded of the reality just 3 weeks ago when
President Trump--or President Putin announced that Russia is
developing and fielding four new and horrific nuclear weapons.
This includes a nuclear-powered cruise missile of essentially
infinite range and a nuclear-powered underwater drone with an
enormous salt-the-Earth nuclear payload.
These Russian nuclear weapons have been in development for
decades. Former Secretary of Defense Carter has pointed out
that a nuclear arms race between the U.S. and Russia has been
going on, quote, ``for two decades now, but the U.S. has not
been running the race,'' close quote.
Despite U.S. efforts to reduce both the number of nuclear
weapons and their role in the defense strategy, Russia, China,
and North Korea have gone in the opposite direction. Despite
the U.S. policy to refrain from developing new nuclear
capabilities, these countries are spiraling the other way.
Secretary Mattis' new NPR takes stock of the situation and
prudently endorses the nuclear triad modernization program
initiated by President Obama. This will recapitalize our
existing systems, an effort that was put off for far too long.
The NPR also wisely proposes two capabilities to supplement
the program of record. These capabilities will ensure
deterrence of adversaries and assurance of allies remains
strong. They deserve full support of this committee and
Congress.
Finally, let me highlight three issues that this committee
has spent considerable time on and that I am happy to see
discussed at length in the NPR: Number one, the nuclear
command, control, and communications, or NC3, system, which is
old but reliable and must be modernized; number two, the
infrastructure with NNSA that is literally falling apart and
needs considerable attention and resources; and, number three,
the people in uniform and civilian clothes across the DOD and
NNSA that form the backbone of our deterrent.
Nuclear deterrence is our number one priority defense
mission. Forces, warheads, NC3, people, and infrastructure: it
is all part of the deterrent. It is time to buckle down and get
after all of it.
Thank you again to our witnesses. I look forward to a
discussion.
With that, let me turn to our ranking member, my friend and
colleague, for any statement that he may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rogers can be found in the
Appendix on page 27.]
STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COOPER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM TENNESSEE,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES
Mr. Cooper. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to
each one of the witnesses.
I can't help but note that today, on the day we vote on the
fiscal year 2018 appropriations, we are discussing fiscal year
2019, proving, once again, that the authorization committees
are almost lapping the appropriators.
There could not be a more complex or consequential subject
than the one that each one of you will be addressing today. It
is vitally important that we get it right because, literally,
the survival of our Nation, and of the planet, is at stake if
we get it wrong. So I thank each one of you for your excellence
and diligence.
I note, with appreciation, there is some good news in all
this with increased budgets and performance, like with NNSA
having had the number of programs come in under budget since
2011--that is excellent--on page 11 of your testimony. We need
to see lots more of that because taxpayers, even in this vital
area, want to see value received for their dollars.
So I thank the witnesses, and I look forward to the
questions. Most of mine will be in closed session.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman.
We will ask each of the witnesses, if you could--we are
going to be called for votes. We think it is going to be
disruptive. So if you could summarize your opening statement in
3 minutes. Your full statement will be accepted into the
record, without objection.
Before we get started, I do want to take note of the fact
that we have, as a committee, really enjoyed having General
Robin Rand and Admiral Terry Benedict before this committee on
many occasions. They are both real tributes to this country,
and we thank you for your service. I believe this is going to
be your last appearance before us, but just know we appreciate
you, and we won't be too tough on you today.
But, anyway, let's go to opening statements. We will start
with Under Secretary Rood. You are recognized for 3 minutes.
STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN C. ROOD, UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR
POLICY, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Secretary Rood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Cooper, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today on the President's fiscal year 2019 budget request.
Today, the United States faces an increasingly complex
global security environment in which the central challenge to
our prosperity and security is the reemergence of long-term
strategic competition by revisionist powers in China and
Russia. While they pose separate challenges with unique
attributes, both China and Russia seek to reshape the world
order and change territorial borders. Consequently, they pose
increasing security threats to us, our allies, and partners.
Long-term competition with China and Russia requires
increased U.S. and allied military investment because of the
magnitude of the threats they pose today and the potential that
these threats will increase in the future. We must also
simultaneously strengthen our efforts to deter and counter the
clear and present dangers posed by rogue regimes such as North
Korea and Iran.
The U.S. military remains the strongest in the world.
However, our advantages are eroding as potential adversaries
modernize and build up their conventional and nuclear forces.
They now field a broad arsenal of advanced missiles, including
variants that can reach the American homeland. As the chairman
noted, earlier this month, Russian President Putin claimed
publicly that Russia now possesses unprecedented new types of
nuclear forces with which to target the United States and our
allies.
Our task at the Defense Department is to ensure that the
U.S. military advantages endure and, in combination with our
other elements of national power, we are fully able to meet the
increasing challenges to our national security. Weakness
invites challenge and provocation.
The 2018 Nuclear Posture Review reflects DOD's strategic
priority to maintain a safe, secure, survivable, and effective
nuclear deterrent.
The logic of the NPR was best articulated by Secretary
Mattis who said, and I quote, ``This review rests on a bedrock
truth: nuclear weapons have and will continue to play a
critical role in deterring nuclear attack and in preventing
large-scale conventional warfare between nuclear-armed states
for the foreseeable future. U.S. nuclear weapons not only
defend our allies against conventional and nuclear threats,
they also help them avoid the need to develop their own nuclear
arsenals. This, in turn, furthers global security,'' end quote.
The 2018 NPR confirms the findings of all previous NPRs
that the diverse capabilities of the nuclear triad provide the
flexibility and resilience needed for deterrence.
Unfortunately, each leg of the triad is now operating far
beyond its planned service life. Consequently, we must not
delay the recapitalization of the triad started by the previous
administration.
I would note that the U.S. commitment to nonproliferation
and arms control remains strong and is noted in the NPR. The
United States remains committed to all of its obligations under
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, including Article VI.
Mr. Chairman, let me conclude by stating that, in an
increasingly complex and threatening security environment, DOD
must sustain the capabilities needed to deter and defend
against attacks on our homeland. Along with our allies and
partners, we must ensure that we have the capabilities needed
now and in the future to protect our people and the freedoms we
so cherish and are able to engage potential adversaries
diplomatically from a position of strength.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. I urge the
committee to support the President's fiscal year 2019 budget
request.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Rood can be found in
the Appendix on page 29.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes General Rand for 3 minutes.
STATEMENT OF GEN ROBIN RAND, USAF, COMMANDER, AIR FORCE GLOBAL
STRIKE COMMAND
General Rand. Good morning, Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member
Cooper, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for allowing me to appear before you today to represent the
men and women of Air Force Global Strike Command.
As I conclude my third year as Commander of Air Force
Global Strike, I have four fundamental focus areas: First, the
fight tonight; next, the fight in 2030; the development of our
airmen; and the care and feeding of our families.
I will highlight two of these areas in these opening
comments.
In our fight tonight, 2017 was an important year. As we sit
here this morning, our airmen are gainfully employed in the
missile fields in five States--Colorado, Nebraska, Wyoming,
Montana, and North Dakota--pulling intercontinental ballistic
missile alert 24/7. At the same time, we have airmen deployed
in the Middle East, supporting CENTCOM [U.S. Central Command]
and AFRICOM [U.S. Africa Command], fighting violent extremists.
Airmen are deterring our adversaries and assuring our partners
in the EUCOM [U.S. European Command] and PACOM [U.S. Pacific
Command] AOR [area of responsibility], and airmen are
supporting counter-narcotic operations in SOUTHCOM [U.S.
Southern Command] while we are always postured to support
General Hyten's USSTRATCOM's [U.S. Strategic Command's]
operational plan 81-X.
At the direction of the Commander of USSTRATCOM, in
September 2017, we reorganized to establish one line of
authority for USSTRATCOM'S air components under a single four-
star commander. This reorganization has established clear lines
of authority, simplifying outdated command structure for our
bombers and our ICBM [intercontinental ballistic missile]
forces.
My position is now dual-hatted as the Commander of Air
Force's Strategic Air and Joint Forces Component Commander and
the Commander of Air Force Global Strike.
The recently activated Joint-Global Strike Operations
Center, headquartered at Barksdale Air Force Base, enables us
to focus on operational deterrence and global strike missions,
while headquarters Global Strike Command focuses on the
organized train-and-equip duties.
Equally important as our ability to fight tonight, is our
ability to fight in 2030. The key to Global Strike Command's
continued success will remain on our ability to modernize,
sustain, and recapitalize our force. I am happy to report today
that we are on a good path to moving forward.
I look forward to answering your questions and providing
input on the Ground Based Strategic Deterrent; the Long Range
Stand-Off weapon; the B-21 Raider; the UH-1N helicopter
replacement; infrastructure requirements; nuclear command,
control, and communications systems; and other programs within
the command.
Modernization of our nuclear force is critical. It is
absolutely critical.
Mr. Chairman and subcommittee members, I want to thank you
for your dedication to our great Nation and the opportunity to
appear before the committee to highlight the important mission
of Air Force Global Strike Command. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Rand can be found in the
Appendix on page 34.]
Mr. Rogers. I thank you, General Rand.
Admiral Benedict, you are recognized for 3 minutes.
STATEMENT OF VADM TERRY BENEDICT, USN, DIRECTOR, NAVY STRATEGIC
SYSTEMS PROGRAMS
Admiral Benedict. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Cooper, and distinguished
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to be
here today and thank you for your continued support of the
Navy's deterrence mission.
It has been my greatest privilege to represent the men and
women of SSP [Strategic Systems Programs] for the last 8 years.
My goal, as the director, has been to ensure that they are
properly positioned to execute the mission with the same level
of success today and tomorrow as they have done since our
program's inception in 1955.
SSP is currently extending the Trident II D5 strategic
weapon system to match the Ohio-class service life and to serve
as the initial weapon system on the Columbia class.
I will summarize by saying all of our life extension
programs remain on track and on budget. Our life extension
efforts will ensure an effective and credible sea-based
strategic deterrent on both the Ohio and the Columbia class
until the 2040s.
The Navy is also taking steps to ensure a credible weapon
system is available beyond 2040. In fact, the Nuclear Posture
Review directs the Navy to, quote, ``begin studies in 2020 to
define a cost-effective, credible, and effective SLBM, sea-
launched ballistic missile, that we can deploy throughout the
service life of the Columbia SSBN [ballistic missile submarine]
through the 2080s,'' unquote.
In addition to our modernization efforts, our budget
request supports the results of the 2018 Nuclear Posture
Review. In particular, our budget request includes funding to
begin modifying a small number of warheads to provide a low-
yield option. This near-term capability is being accomplished
in partnerships with the Department of Energy and my
counterpart here, Administrator Gordon-Hagerty at the NNSA. It
will not increase the overall number of deployed ballistic
warheads and will, in fact, bolster our deterrence posture.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to additional questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Benedict can be found in
the Appendix on page 54.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Admiral.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty, you are recognized for 3 minutes.
STATEMENT OF HON. LISA E. GORDON-HAGERTY, ADMINISTRATOR,
NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Cooper,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to present the President's fiscal year 2019
budget request for the Department of Energy's National Nuclear
Security Administration. It is a privilege to appear before you
today representing the extraordinary men and women of the DOE
[Department of Energy] NNSA and the vital roles we play in
executing our national security missions.
Since being sworn in exactly 4 weeks ago today, I have had
the opportunity to receive in-depth briefings on NNSA's
programs and projects. I still have a great deal more to learn,
but what I have seen so far has been impressive.
NNSA has shown steady progress with the support of this
subcommittee and Congress. For example, infrastructure
modernization, flight testing of the B61-12, removals of highly
enriched uranium from Ghana and Kazakhstan, and commissioning
of a new class of nuclear-powered aircraft carrier. These are
but a few examples of how NNSA has lent its world-class
expertise to keeping our Nation safe and secure. But there is
much more to be done to meet the challenges posed by the
current geopolitical environment.
The President's fiscal year 2019 budget request for NNSA is
$15.1 billion, providing the resources required to help ensure
we are able to protect and keep our Nation, allies, and
partners safe. This request also moves us forward to a
deterrent that is modern, robust, flexible, resilient, ready,
and appropriately tailored to meet current and future
uncertainties, as outlined in the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review.
The fiscal year 2019 budget clearly demonstrates the
administration's strong support for NNSA and our three enduring
missions: maintaining the safety, security, and reliability of
the U.S. nuclear weapon stockpile; reducing the threat of
nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism around the world;
and providing nuclear propulsion for the U.S. Navy's fleet of
aircraft carriers and submarines. These critically important
missions are executed in lockstep alignment with our
interagency partners, including the Department of Defense, with
whom I am privileged to testify before you today.
NNSA's fiscal year 2019 budget request for the weapons
activities account as $11 billion, an increase of 7.6 percent
over the fiscal year 2018 request. This funding supports the
Nation's current and future defense posture, including
infrastructure across the enterprise.
With the subcommittee's support, our fiscal year 2018 NDAA
[National Defense Authorization Act]--under the NDAA, we have
provided additional flexibility to our infrastructure
challenges by increasing minor construction thresholds to $20
million. Our budget request also includes $1.9 billion for the
defense nuclear nonproliferation account, a 3.9 percent
increase. Finally, the budget request for Naval Reactors is
$1.8 billion, a 20.9 percent increase above the fiscal year
2018 request.
The NNSA's fiscal year 2019 budget request is a result of a
disciplined process to prioritize funding for validated
requirements as designated by this administration. And it sets
forth the foundation to implement the policies of the Nuclear
Posture Review and the National Security Strategy.
Thank you for your continued strong support and the
opportunity to testify before you today. I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gordon-Hagerty can be found
in the Appendix on page 64.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you.
Mr. Owendoff, you are recognized for 3 minutes.
STATEMENT OF JAMES OWENDOFF, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Mr. Owendoff. Good morning, Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member
Cooper, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. I am
pleased to be here today to represent the Department of
Energy's Office of Environmental Management [EM] and to discuss
the work we have already successfully accomplished and what we
plan to accomplish under the President's fiscal year 2019
budget request.
The total fiscal year 2019 budget request for the EM
program is $6.6 billion. Of that, $5.6 billion is for the
defense environmental cleanup activities. The fiscal year 2019
request demonstrates the administration's continued commitment
to the vital mission of EM to address the environmental legacy
of nuclear weapons production and government-sponsored energy
research.
DOE and EM are committed to ensuring the safety of our
workforce, the public, and the environment. Safety is our top
priority for the Office of Environmental Management and its
field sites. It is valued above production, budget, and
schedule. We are also strongly committed to a workplace where
all workers--Federal and contractor--are free to speak out,
voice concerns, or lodge complaints without fear of
retaliation.
To continue and further build upon our momentum of
progress, we have focused on a greater sense of urgency to EM's
decision-making process. This approach means more emphasis on
engaging with regulators, stakeholders, and communities in
making timely decisions which will enhance safety, shorten
schedules, increase transparency, and reduce costs.
Going forward, our fiscal year 2019 request will enable us
to continue making progress on those capabilities necessary to
tackle some of our longer-term challenges while also enabling
us to realize concrete accomplishments across the EM program.
In closing, I am honored to be here today to represent the
more than 20,000 men and women that carry out the Office of
Environmental Management mission. Ensuring a safe work
environment at all of our sites is our highest priority. We are
committed to achieving our mission in a safe, effective, and
cost-efficient manner to serve as good stewards of taxpayer
resources.
Thank you for the subcommittee's support of the defense
cleanup program and, again, for the opportunity to appear
before you today. I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Owendoff can be found in the
Appendix on page 77.]
Mr. Rogers. I thank all the witnesses for those statements.
I recognize myself for the first set of questions.
This will be for Under Secretary Rood and General Rand.
I understand that the NPR examined a lot of different
options, and included in that was de-alerting our ICBMs and
possibly adopting a no-first-use policy.
The previous administration, at least on two occasions,
considered those and rejected them. Are you concerned that the
U.S. may mistakenly launch a nuclear strike, either in a day-
to-day posture or defense crisis, and do you believe we should
de-alert ICBMs?
Secretary Rood. Mr. Chairman, we have high confidence in
our command and control capabilities for our nuclear arsenal.
They have been the same sort of command and control procedures
in the system that we have had for quite some time.
With respect to your question on first use, I would note,
no U.S. President, since the dawn of the nuclear age, has
provided an assurance against the first use of nuclear weapons.
The declaratory policy that you will see in the 2018 NPR is the
same in this respect as the 2010 NPR, produced during the Obama
administration, in that it talks about keeping a nuclear
threshold at a very high level, stating that the United States
would only contemplate the use of nuclear weapons in extreme
circumstances.
Of course, the primary purpose of our nuclear force is
deterrence. It is our nuclear deterrent force. We are not
considering de-alerting our ICBMs and other activities like
that because we don't think it would further those objectives.
With respect to first use, as I mentioned, it has not been
the policy of any U.S. President, in part because we want to
retain some ambiguity around the circumstances in which the
United States would respond with nuclear weapons or to employ
them.
General Rand. Mr. Chairman, I can only add that I would not
be in favor of de-alerting our nuclear ICBMs. The big feature
of the ICBMs is its responsiveness. That is one of the features
of the different legs of the triad, and we would not have that
responsive capability if we de-alerted.
Mr. Rogers. Well, I just want everybody to remember: Our
allies were shaken when this was openly discussed in the past,
and we don't need to be concerning them again with these kind
of discussions.
Administrator Gordon-Hagerty, with NNSA currently with a
projected workload for weapons programs that is very heavy,
some folks have expressed concern that the NNSA's enterprise
cannot successfully execute the additional work required by the
NPR, namely the two supplemental capabilities of, one, a near-
term modification to the W-76 to provide a lower yield option,
and, two, a longer term effort to develop a sea-launched cruise
missile.
Your predecessor, General Klotz, said in an interview on
his way out the door, quote: ``The other great risk in the life
extension programs is we have never done more than one life
extension program at a time since the end of the Cold War. We
are now doing essentially four. The point is we are working
pretty much at full capacity,'' close quote.
What do you make of these comments? Do you believe the NNSA
enterprise has the capacity and the capability to do additions
to these supplemental capabilities without risking the current
warhead programs, and do you think the men and women in your
enterprise can get this done?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Mr. Chairman, yes, I do believe we can
get it done. And, in fact, we are working right now, as General
Klotz correctly stated, essentially four LEPs [life extension
programs], the three LEPs and the one major Alt [alteration].
We are not running at capacity. In fact, we are planning
for a projected--the two additional projected opportunities. In
fact, we are, as you well know, are working the W76-1 process
right now, the LEP, and we are already making plans of moving
as far forward as we can to support the future low-yield
ballistic missile requirement as outlined in the Nuclear
Posture Review. That, of course, we are waiting for authority
and approval from the Nuclear Weapons Council to proceed on
that. And, of course, I am a member of the Nuclear Weapons
Council. So we will make sure that the schedule supports all of
those activities.
Our biggest concern with our workload, however, is people
and the cumbersome clearance process that it takes. We need to
train and equip personnel in the workforce in order to execute
these missions. It is a full mission workload for us, but we
believe we have the capabilities and the capacity to do that.
And with the continued support of this subcommittee and the
full committee, we believe we can do so.
It is also predicated, of course, on our decades-long
future modernization and infrastructure strategy that we have.
That is also predicated on predictable and stable funding.
Mr. Rogers. We want to work with you to help you on your
deferred maintenance problem as well because you are going to
have a hard time keeping those people if we don't deal with
that--or recruiting new people.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. I concur. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers. With that, I yield to the ranking member for
any questions he may have.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I told Mr. Owendoff before the hearing, I appreciated
the vividness of your testimony in helping us understand the
opportunities for cleanup and the accomplishments that have
already occurred.
Administrator Gordon-Hagerty, several years ago, I referred
to the MOX [mixed oxide] program in South Carolina as a zombie
earmark. And I know that you are new to your job, but I would
hope that you and the Department of Energy would have a
proposed termination date for that program in the relatively
near future now that Congress has repeatedly given you the
green light.
It is my understanding in today's omnibus appropriations
bill, there will be no obstacles to terminating the program. So
I hope that you will be able to make that a priority in your
term as Administrator.
Admiral Benedict, General Rand, I would like to echo
Chairman Rogers' praise for you as individuals and for your
excellent careers and service. We will miss your testimony. I
hope you are adequately warning your replacements what to
expect from the subcommittee.
The Nuclear Posture Review suggests several modifications
to current status and has, I think, special implications for
the Navy to have a low-yield D5, to have cruise missiles with
nuclear options.
So, Admiral Benedict, in your valedictory public comments
here, could you tell me what that would do to change the
defense posture of the Navy?
Admiral Benedict. Thank you, Mr. Cooper.
With regards to the low yield, if I may, we could very
quickly get in a classified regime there. I ask that I be able
to answer most of your specific questions in the classified
session.
I would tell you that we are beginning planning on the low-
yield concept for the 76. That is, from our perspective, well
on its way to support the direction out of the NPR.
With regards to the sea-launched cruise missile, we will
begin that effort in fiscal year 2019 with the standard
analysis of alternatives on what that would actually look like,
what the requirements would be for that type of a weapon, and
where it would be based from sea, either surface or submarine.
That work will begin in fiscal year 2019, per the direction of
the NPR. The Navy, today, under the direction of the CNO [Chief
of Naval Operations] and the Assistant Secretary for Research,
Development and Acquisition, are beginning that planning
throughout the Navy, so we will be well situated to begin in
fiscal year 2019.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Hice.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Gordon-Hagerty, let me ask you, are you
concerned about the increasing drone activity at NNSA labs,
plants, and sites?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Yes, Representative Hice. We have seen
increased activity in UAS [unmanned aircraft system] drone
activities at all of our labs, plants, and sites, and we are
concerned about that. But thanks to this Congress, and in
particular this subcommittee, we now have the resources to look
at and be able to put together programs that will address these
issues at our locations where special nuclear material is
located.
We are in the process of down-selecting from two pilot
projects that we have ongoing right now so we can address this
better at our sites. Shortly, we will be putting in counter-UAS
capabilities at our plants, labs, and sites where we have
special nuclear material, Cat I facilities.
Mr. Hice. So the counter-UAS authority that has been
granted, has that been implemented?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. We are in the process of down-selecting
capabilities to do so, so we can execute those authorities.
Mr. Hice. Do you have a timeframe on when you think that
may be?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. In the very near term. I would be happy
to bring the team together and provide you with a more detailed
briefing about what our down-select activities in our pilot
project is showing right now.
Mr. Hice. Okay. I would appreciate that.
When will the engineering analysis and workforce analysis
for plutonium pit production be complete?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. We are undergoing the final draft
review of the engineering analysis as well as the workforce
analysis for our planned path forward for pit production for
the 31 to 80 pits, if you will.
Right now, we have an enduring mission, and, thanks to this
subcommittee and the appropriations committees, we are putting
modernization plans in place for the PF-4, where we will have
our existing and enduring pit production capabilities at Los
Alamos, Los Alamos being the plutonium center of excellence for
our operations. That will be our enduring 30 pits per year
requirements.
As far as the engineering analysis is concerned, in the
next several weeks, Under Secretary Lord and I will be
receiving our final briefings on the final draft product, at
which time I will take that information to the Deputy
Secretary, who is the responsible party for selecting the best
location for the engineering or for the future pit production
requirements. We will do that within the timeframe so that
Under Secretary Lord, as the chairman of the Nuclear Weapons
Council, can submit her report to Congress by May 11.
Mr. Hice. I know the Savannah River Site is in
consideration with that. I will certainly give a plug in that
direction. I appreciate that consideration.
So will Congress be kept up to speed on all of this?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Yes. As soon as we are able to, we will
make provisions to brief Members of Congress and their staff.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Garamendi, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garamendi. Did you say 55?
Mr. Rogers. No.
Mr. Garamendi. I want to go to a recent incident in which
it has been reported that Russia has hacked into our critical
infrastructure systems--electrical grids, power plants, et
cetera--and then refer you to page 21 of the Nuclear Posture
Review, the last paragraph: Given the potential of significant
nonnuclear strategic attacks, the United States reserves the
right to make any adjustment in the assurance that may be
warranted by the evolution and proliferation of nonnuclear
strategic attack technologies and U.S. capabilities to counter
that threat.
Does a cyberattack on our power grid rise to the occasion
of using a nuclear weapon in response?
Mr. Rood.
Secretary Rood. Congressman, the threshold for U.S. nuclear
use has been and will remain incredibly high.
As you quoted from on page 21 of the Nuclear Posture
Review, you will note the first sentence of our declaratory
policy is the United States would only consider the employment
of nuclear weapons in extreme circumstances to defend the vital
interests of the United States, its allies, and partners.
Mr. Garamendi. I did read that.
So is the shutdown of the American power grid an extreme
circumstance that would warrant the use of a nuclear weapon?
Secretary Rood. In the declaratory process, that is one of
the things that we would take into account. And, remember, the
key word being ``consider'' in extreme circumstances.
It is really the context in which those type of attacks
could occur. There is no automaticity. In our response, we
would consider that.
So, for instance, to your hypothetical, if an attack shut
down the electricity grid in the United States and it was
accompanied by other activities, that would be one of the
things we would look at. Are we in a high-threat condition with
Russia? Are there other forms of conventional attack underway?
What is the context in which that is occurring?
There is nothing in our policy that would automatically
require a response, but we would maintain the ambiguity around
exactly how we would respond in order to deter attacks on the
United States, and we would consider the context in which
activities were occurring.
Mr. Garamendi. Ms. Gordon-Hagerty, in answer to the
previous question, you indicated that you intend to continue to
build out the PF-4 facility at Los Alamos.
Have you made a decision on your AOA [analysis of
alternatives] as to the ultimate production location for the
plutonium pits?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Representative Garamendi, the
discussion that we were having about the engineering analysis,
which is the follow-on to the analysis of alternatives, we have
down-selected two locations where we are now undergoing the
final assessment to make a recommendation to the Deputy
Secretary and then, ultimately, to the Nuclear Weapons Council.
And that should be completed on or before--the recommendation
to Congress should be made on or before May 11, so it is very
near term.
Mr. Garamendi. And so it appeared to me that, in answering
the previous question, that you may have made a decision by the
allocation of substantial sums into the Los Alamos facility,
and you are saying that is not the case. It is still an open
question.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Well, this is a twofold process. We
will continue to fund and support the operations at PF-4, which
is where our enduring plutonium pit production capabilities
will remain for the foreseeable future for those 1 through 30,
if you will, pits. And then building out on that, the strategy,
as required by the Nuclear Weapons Council, is to produce up to
80 pits by 2030. That is the parameters under which we are
operating and finalizing the engineering analysis.
Mr. Garamendi. I appreciate your answer. There is one
additional question I will save, but I will state the question
here: Why do you need 80 pits? In the classified setting, I
will ask that question.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi. I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Byrne, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Hyten has consistently called for speeding up the
process for modernizing our major nuclear programs. There is no
doubt that our nuclear national assets require urgent
attention.
General Rand, I know you support that priority. What can we
do to accelerate the acquisition of the Ground Based Strategic
Deterrent [GBSD] and the Long Range Stand-Off [LRSO] cruise
missile programs?
General Rand. Thank you for the question.
My first response would be: We need to continue the funding
for it. We have to continue to be able to stay on time, on
cost. To do that, we need the dollars. Any delays in this
funding will certainly result in delayed acquisition of both
those two critical systems.
We are in a good place right now with the technology
maturation and risk-reduction [TMRR] contracts with our two GBS
contracts with Northrop Grumman and Boeing. It is a 3-year plan
TMRR cycle. If we stay on track, I think we will be able to
meet the requirements that we are shooting for, and that is
2030, to be fielding the GBSD. Delays of the budget would be
devastating to the program.
I would say the same thing about our LRSO. We have two
contracts right now for down-select. We will take the next 2
years to do this TMRR progress. If we continue to fund
appropriately, we will stay on time.
Mr. Byrne. The fiscal year 2019 unfunded priorities list
includes an additional $69 million and $85 million,
respectively, for the GBSD and LRSO programs. Can you provide
more insight, General, on what this additional funding would do
to help accelerate those programs?
General Rand. Well, I think one of the things--and to be
candid with you: I can't give you specifics as probably the
acquisition community can. Our job in Air Force Global Strike
is to help define the requirements. I think we have done a good
job of that.
I can tell you, any time you are going for these innovative
programs that the workforce is very important, and I have to
believe that some of those dollars will be going to building up
the workforces with both the contractors that we have.
Mr. Byrne. Admiral, I continue to have my concern--and I
know you have concerns--about any slippage in the Columbia
program. We have been talking about that on the committee for a
long time.
If you would--you and I have had this discussion before--
bring us up to date. How are we doing on Columbia, and what are
the risks if we do have slippage in that timeline?
Admiral Benedict. Sir, we remain on schedule with the
Columbia. Specifically, I focus on the common missile
compartment, which is our shared effort with the United
Kingdom, since both nations have elected to continue the
Trident II D5 strategic weapon system as the baseline.
The first four tubes are actually--first four missile
tubes, excuse me, are actually on what we call the rotisserie
fixture up at Electric Boat. So we are beginning to receive the
initial contract allocation of 17 tubes into Electric Boat. And
we are on track by the end of this summer, early fall, to
deliver the first missile tube down to what is called the
Strategic Weapon System Ashore facility down in Florida, where
I will use it to do environmental testing for the strategic
weapon system. So we continue to make very good progress on
that.
I was in London last week with the United Kingdom. Their
shipyard in Barrow continues to progress to their schedule and
their program efforts. They are installing the fixtures the
same as we have at Electric Boat in order to build the quad
packs. So we remain on schedule for the submarine force.
We need 12 boats. I think we have explained at length why
we need 12 Columbia class for the United States. We need them
so that we can have the first one on patrol in 2031 in order to
ensure that we can support General Hyten and the STRATCOM
requirements for strategic deterrence.
Mr. Byrne. I thank you for your service. I appreciate your
testimony and everybody's testimony.
Mr. Chairman, it is clear to me that one of the things we
can do to help them is to quit funding them by continuing
resolutions, number one.
Number two, we have a very important appropriations bill
that will be before the House today that I think contains
funding you all need, to do what you need to do. So for us to
do what we are supposed to do to help you do what you are
supposed to do, I hope we have success with that bill today.
I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. The gentleman yields back. And I hope it is
successful, as well.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
O'Rourke, for 5 minutes.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Rand, let me ask you a question about the Long
Range Stand-Off, LRSO, nuclear cruise missile. Is a there a
need for a conventional variant?
General Rand. Sir, the conventional variant that we have
today is called the Joint Air-to-Surface Missile Extended
Range, JASSM-ER, vastly improved capability over our
conventional air-launched cruise missile. That is what we now
are using--I wouldn't even say to bridge the gap. Frankly, we
have a need for more long range stand-off conventionally than
what we already have. And I think we have to balance the budget
with our requirements, and taking on a new now conventional
long range stand-off is not something I think should be our
priority at this time.
Mr. O'Rourke. Just help me understand. I believe a previous
NDAA calls for that, and tell me the plans to pursue that and
develop that.
General Rand. The NDAA, as I understand it, won't let us
retire the CALCM, the conventional air-launched cruise missile,
until we have plans for, which is most unfortunate, because the
CALCM is not a weapon of choice anymore.
Again, I would submit--I can't speak to the larger plans--
the Air Force is relying for its conventional long-range strike
is JASSM-ER. We need to pursue that, and we need to actually
get more than we have. And I think that is where our effort
should be versus trying to come up with a new avenue to get a
conventional long-range standoff.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Colorado, Mr.
Coffman.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am concerned about the command and control and
communications, given the threats to our satellites.
Do you all have a growing concern about how that affects
navigation, targeting, communications, in terms of the triad?
General Rand. Yes, sir. I will start with that.
I think that as we evolve in the contested domains that are
out there--we have undersea, we have sea, we have land, and we
have air--the two domains that we need to pay particular
attention is the space domain and certainly the cyber domain.
Those are very, very important domains to anything that I would
do in Air Force Global Strike.
I would tell you that those domains are becoming
increasingly contested, and absolutely we need to be focused on
that.
I won't speak to the specifics because I am not nearly as
fluent on the topic as my friend, General Jay Raymond, the
Commander of Air Force Space Command, but this is a huge
priority for us. I will tell you that cyber and cyber
protection is a very big priority. Everything that we are doing
in nuclear command, control, and communications are considering
how are we going to operate in those two contested domains.
Admiral Benedict. If I may, I would echo what General Rand
said, specifically with regards to cyber. And then I would just
remind this committee that the undersea leg does not rely on
GPS [Global Positioning System], either for the missile's
performance or for the submarine's position. We have other
means to ensure the performance and accuracy of the Trident
system.
Mr. Coffman. Russia recently announced a new hypersonic
missile, and China is pursuing similar capabilities.
According to General Hyten, quote: ``We do not have any
defense that could deny the employment of such a weapon against
us,'' unquote.
I wonder if you all could comment on that.
General Rand. Sir, he is accurate in that. What we do have,
the very premise of deterrence, though, is that we have some
very strong capabilities ourselves. That is one of the strong
rationales why we need a B-21 Raider, is to deter their even
consideration of using a hypersonic weapon against us. That is
why we need the three strong legs of our triad. That is why we
need to have the conventional long-range stand-off capabilities
that we do have. I think that we have to play or consider that
deterrence is a big part of how we would respond and like why
they wouldn't want to ever use their hypersonics against us.
If the question is, ``Should we pursue ways to defend
against it,'' yes. But we have to balance that on everything
else that we are trying to do.
Mr. Coffman. Admiral, how many nuclear ballistic missile
submarines does Russia currently field or have, and how old are
they on the average?
Admiral Benedict. Sir, I am going to have to take a
specific look up on that and get back to you with the actual
detailed numbers. I don't have that at my fingertips here, but
I will take the action.
Mr. Coffman. Has Russia engaged in large-scale
modernization of their nuclear triad, including strategic
bombers or SSBNs?
Admiral Benedict. Absolutely, sir. And I think that is the
premise for why we believe so passionately that our life
extension programs have to continue to pace, both in terms of
cost and schedule, in order to ensure that we can continue to
deliver our fundamental aspects of national security, which is
the nuclear triad.
Secretary Rood. Congressman, if I could add. The
intelligence community has produced an estimate showing that
over the last 20 years the Russians as well as the Chinese have
engaged in substantial buildup in their strategic nuclear
capabilities. What we saw President Putin announce is just the
latest in a discussion of those. During that same period, of
course, the United States has been going the opposite
direction.
And so they have modernized a very large number of
capabilities, both in the strategic area and the so-called
nonstrategic nuclear weapons. These are some of the concerns in
the NPR that led us to propose some of the adjustments in our
own capabilities.
Mr. Coffman. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Washington, Mr.
Larsen, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Owendoff, I understand no one has asked you any
questions.
Looking at the 2018 request and 2019 request, both for the
Office of River Protection at Hanford and for the operations
office, the administration is requesting less money in 2019
compared to 2018.
Could you try to justify this reduction in the request for
the work at the Hanford site?
Mr. Owendoff. Yes, sir. We have completed activities, both
the vertical pipe unit removal, old burial grounds, and there
is other work along the Columbia River that we have completed.
Our focus, though, is for the high-level waste that is in
the tanks and getting the low-activity waste facility up and
built. The Secretary has placed a high priority on that, with a
goal of having it operational by December of 2021, 2 years
ahead of the consent decree that is in place.
We believe that, from a priority and a risk standpoint, we
are addressing the right thing, certainly on the Central
Plateau, as well as other demolitions across the site.
Mr. Larsen. Moving on to WTP [Waste Treatment and
Immobilization Plant Project], do you believe EM can get that
entire system at Hanford operational by 2039?
Mr. Owendoff. We are looking at that now, sir. As I
mentioned, our focus is on the first of the three process
nuclear facilities.
We found that it is very difficult to try to move along on
three at once. But we are analyzing the other two--the high-
level waste and the pre-treatment--and over the next several
months, we will be having information out that we will be
certainly sharing with this subcommittee on our approach for
those two facilities.
Mr. Larsen. That would be helpful. As you know, this
predates me being on a committee, and I have been on the
committee for 18 years. It is described as America's original
toxic asset, the waste at Hanford and these other places, and
we haven't really dealt with it.
We are expecting to learn something from you in the next
couple of months. Will that include some timelines? Well, going
back to the WTP. When do you anticipate starting treatment of
low-level waste?
Mr. Owendoff. We expect, sir, to have hot operations start
the end of December 2021. In one way, that seems like a long
ways off, but there is a lot of work to do. Certainly this will
be the first time that we have brought up a nuclear facility
for a low-activity waste class, so there could be problems.
But, as I say, we and our contractor are moving forward to get
it done by that date. The Secretary has established a goal for
us.
Mr. Larsen. And do you think the dollars in the budget help
you do that?
Mr. Owendoff. Yes, sir.
Mr. Larsen. In the budget you proposed.
Mr. Owendoff. Yes, sir, we believe that it does. We will
need to continue certainly that funding level.
Mr. Larsen. Can you update us on the status of the ongoing
ventilation problems at tank farms that have sickened workers
over the past few years?
Mr. Owendoff. It has been difficult because of the fumes.
Workers experience different things. They smell different
things. We have a whole suite of new sensors that we are
putting out in the tank farm. Some smell ammonia, some smell
like a sweetness, and so it has been very, very difficult.
What we have done is, when workers are out there, we put
them in air packs to ensure that they have a supplemental air
supply. It slowed the process for retrieving waste in the
single shell tanks, but our first priority, as I mentioned in
my opening, is worker safety, so that is what we are
continuing. We are continuing to look to see if we can find
what is the source of those fumes and vapors, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you. Let me yield back.
I want to apologize to the rest of the panel. I have got a
million questions for everybody, but this is really kind of the
only time of the year, once a year, where we get a chance to
have some conversations on the record in public with the folks
at EM, so I appreciate the indulgence of the rest of the panel.
Thank you, Mr. Owendoff.
I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Colorado, Mr. Lamborn, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
I have a short question for Ms. Gordon-Hagerty, and then I
have another question for Secretary Rood after that.
Administrator Gordon-Hagerty, I am very concerned that the
United States no longer enriches uranium for national security
purposes. Concerning the implications of that and the cost of
delaying a buildout--I think the previous administration wanted
a sizable delay--do you share my concerns, and will you
consider speeding of this vital acquisition process?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. The National Nuclear Security
Administration has a requirement to produce tritium for our
national security needs. With that, it is important to us to
have a domestic enrichment capability.
We are currently undergoing an analysis, if you will, of
two different technologies. One of the technologies is much
more mature than the other. In fact, if you are familiar with
technical readiness levels, one is at about a 7 or 8; the other
is at about a 2 or 3. So we are awaiting for that second
capability to be evaluated more specifically.
Then once we decide on looking at those two capabilities,
once they become a technical level 7 or 8, we will then make a
determination how we are going to proceed with an enrichment
capability for our United States.
But, yes, we do agree that we do require a domestic
enrichment capability.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you. We will work with you on
that. Thank you.
And Under Secretary Rood, it is pleasing to me to realize
that senior-most defense officials from the Obama
administration have reviewed and support the new Trump national
posture review.
I am going to read to you a quote from President Obama's
Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, Jim Miller, who was the
principal author of the Obama administration's 2010 NPR
[Nuclear Posture Review], quote: ``Secretary of Defense Jim
Mattis' 2018 [Nuclear] Posture Review offers continuity with
past U.S. policy and plans, including those in the 2010 NPR. It
deserves broad bipartisan support. Its proposal for a low-yield
SLBM weapon and a new nuclear tipped sea-launched cruise
missile are sensible responses to changed security conditions,
especially Russia and North Korea,'' unquote.
There are also supportive quotes I won't read for the sake
of time, but they are from Secretary of Defense Ash Carter and
former Deputy Secretary of Energy Liz Sherwood-Randall.
Would you agree with me that that sounds like pretty strong
support from prior administration officials for the current
NPR?
Secretary Rood. I would agree with you, Congressman.
We are gratified that, for instance, having spoken myself
to former Secretary of Defense Ash Carter, as well as Jim
Miller, about this, both went out of their way to praise the
work that we had done on the Nuclear Posture Review.
I think you are correct: The programs and policies started
during the previous administration, during the Obama
administration, much of that has been continued in the present
NPR, such as the recapitalization of the nuclear triad. So it
is gratifying to see that. And I think they see the global
security environment in similar ways in discussing the topic
with them. We have just got the hard work ahead of adapting to
that new environment and adjusting our posture.
Mr. Lamborn. I am glad you are adapting to a new
environment.
Admiral Benedict, there is an issue that is going to be
discussed when it comes to submarines, our nuclear power--not
nuclear power but our nuclear warhead submarines and nuclear
missile submarines. I think there is a thought that having a
low-yield weapon on one or two missiles would put that
submarine at risk if it came to the surface, fired a missile,
and then tried to disappear, and it would be easier to follow.
If we can talk about it in an open setting, doesn't current
doctrine allow for that right now for a tiny salvo?
Admiral Benedict. Yes, sir, you are right. The current
submarine doctrine does allow for scenarios like you discuss,
and I would be happy to address more of the detailed specifics
in the classified session.
Mr. Lamborn. So going to a small salvo is not a change of
doctrine or training?
Admiral Benedict. No, sir, not at all. In fact, it is
currently practiced from a training perspective in the
submarine force today.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Wyoming, Ms.
Cheney, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
opportunity for non-subcommittee members to attend and ask
questions, as well. And thank you to all of our witnesses.
My first question is for you, Under Secretary Rood.
We have heard testimony from others in open session about
limitations that our INF [Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces]
Treaty obligations are placing on our research testing of
hypersonic weapons.
Could you, to the extent that you can in an open setting,
address that and, in particular, talk about how an obstacle
like that can rise to the level where we are getting some
attention and focus on it, a situation where we now seem to be
the only nation, anywhere in the world, that is, in fact, bound
by obligations under the INF Treaty given Russian behavior? If
that treaty is now also imposing obstacles on our ability to
develop the next generation of weapons, how does the Department
plan to respond to that?
Secretary Rood. Congresswoman, as you mentioned, the INF
Treaty is between the United States and Russia. During the
Obama administration, a little over 4 years ago, the
administration determined the Russians were in violation of
that agreement. Since that time, those compliance
determinations have been made and maintained. During the Obama
administration senior officials, up to and including President
Obama, and that has continued during the Trump administration,
with senior officials raising with their Russian colleagues our
concerns about that and trying to persuade the Russians to come
into compliance.
We are now in our fifth year of that effort.
Nonetheless, we remain a party to the INF Treaty. We are
not violating that in the United States. As you mentioned, we
take our obligations very seriously. We are pursuing some
research and development on capabilities that would provide us
some offensive capabilities in that regard that do not violate
the INF Treaty. I think it is something we are going to have to
evaluate as we go forward in time, but our current policy is to
still try to persuade them to do that.
There are times where those restrictions do limit some of
our capabilities in the United States, and right now we are
working within the bounds of the treaty, but it is something we
evaluate going forward.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you. I just would reiterate extreme
concern that we are in a situation where we are handcuffing
ourselves, where we are facing adversaries who are clearly
making significant progress that we are not making because of
obligations that only we are now fulfilling.
General Rand, I have a question for you. Could you just
give us more details on the timeline on the UH-1N replacement,
where that stands? Obviously, that is something that we are
very focused on at F.E. Warren [Air Force Base].
General Rand. Yes, ma'am, so, right now, the RFP [request
for proposal] has been released, and it is in source selection.
We are hopeful that that source selection will come before the
end of the summer.
Ms. Cheney. And if it comes before the end of the summer,
what are we looking at in terms of if we have got an award? I
think in your testimony you mentioned June of 2018 timeframe
beyond that.
General Rand. As far as the actual delivery, this will be
an off-the-shelf capability. We will start, obviously,
delivering the first aircraft to our training locations, and
then we haven't finalized the order, but, obviously, there are
84 UH-1N replacement helicopters. Over 40 of those will be
dedicated for Air Force Global Strike, and I am confident to
say we will get the first 40 before we replace some of the
other missions that we have.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you very much. Obviously, the concerns
about security at the missile fields are preeminent.
General Rand. Ma'am, and that is a fair point. I do want to
tell you, though, we have taken excruciating details to
mitigate what those security risks are without the new
helicopter, and I will happily talk about what we have done in
great detail if you would like either offline or in the
classified session.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you. I appreciate that, General.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Tennessee, Mr. DesJarlais, for 5 minutes.
Dr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all
for being here.
Administrator Gordon-Hagerty, a couple of Y-12 questions
and a Watts Bar question for you.
First, what is the status of NNSA's effort to recapitalize
and replace uranium capabilities at Y-12?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Thank you for that question. In fact,
we are having robust discussions about that right now, and I am
glad to say that we are on schedule and on path to provide a
uranium processing facility at a cost no more than $6.5
billion, and completion by the end of 2025. And we are on that
path, and we are progressing forward with that effort.
Dr. DesJarlais. So on time and on budget.
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Absolutely.
Dr. DesJarlais. Very good. What about plans to recapitalize
the lithium production at Y-12?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. As with all of our strategic materials,
we are doing a feasibility study right now on lithium. But with
all of our strategic materials, we pay very close attention to
those important materials and how we are going to process and
produce those products now and in the future.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. And, finally, you touched briefly on
the increase of tritium production. Is the continued use of TVA
[Tennessee Valley Authority] in the future?
Ms. Gordon-Hagerty. Yes, it is, and we are working with
Watts Bar to continue to produce--to use the TPBARs [tritium-
producing burnable absorber rods] and irradiate them for
tritium production.
Dr. DesJarlais. All right. That is all I have. I yield
back. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers. Okay. There being no further questions in this
open session, we will now recess briefly as we walk to the
secured session.
[Whereupon, at 10:03 a.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
March 22, 2018
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
March 22, 2018
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]