- ONLINE PLATFORMS AND MARKET POWER, PART 2: INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
ONLINE PLATFORMS AND MARKET POWER,
PART 2: INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ANTITRUST, COMMERCIAL
AND ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
----------
JULY 16, 2019
----------
Serial No. 116-39
----------
Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available http://judiciary.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov
ONLINE PLATFORMS AND MARKET POWER,
PART 2: INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ANTITRUST, COMMERCIAL
AND ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
JULY 16, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-39
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available http://judiciary.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-901
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chairman
ZOE LOFGREN, California
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia, Ranking
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
Member
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
Wisconsin
Georgia
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio
CEDRIC L. RICHMOND, Louisiana
KEN BUCK, Colorado
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama
ERIC SWALWELL, California
MATT GAETZ, Florida
TED LIEU, California
MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
TOM McCLINTOCK, California
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
J. LUIS CORREA, California
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania,
BEN CLINE, Virginia
Vice-Chair
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas
W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado
LUCY McBATH, Georgia
GREG STANTON, Arizona
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
DEBBIE MUCARSEL-POWELL, Florida
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
Perry Apelbaum, Majority Staff Director & Chief Counsel
Brendan Belair, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ANTITRUST, COMMERCIAL
AND ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island, Chair
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado, Vice-Chair
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
Georgia
Wisconsin
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland
KEN BUCK, Colorado
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
MATT GAETZ, Florida
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania
W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
LUCY McBATH, Georgia
Slade Bond, Chief Counsel
Daniel Flores, Minority Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
JULY 16, 2019
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
1
The Honorable James Sensenbrenner, Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law................
4
WITNESSES
Panel One
Adam Cohen, Director of Economic Policy, Google
Oral Testimony...............................................
6
Prepared Testimony...........................................
8
Matt Perault, Head of Global Policy Development, Facebook
Oral Testimony...............................................
15
Prepared Testimony...........................................
17
Nate Sutton, Associate General Counsel of Competition, Amazon
Oral Testimony...............................................
23
Prepared Testimony...........................................
25
Kyle Andeer, Vice President of Corporate Law, Apple
Oral Testimony...............................................
29
Prepared Testimony...........................................
31
Panel Two
Timothy Wu, Julius Silver Professor of Law, Columbia Law School
Oral Testimony...............................................
73
Prepared Testimony...........................................
76
Fiona Scott Morton, Theodore Nierenberg Professor of Economics,
Yale School of Management
Oral Testimony...............................................
81
Prepared Testimony...........................................
83
Supplementary Testimony......................................
86
Stacy Mitchell, Co-Director, Institute for Local Self-Reliance
Oral Testimony...............................................
186
Prepared Testimony...........................................
188
Maureen Ohlhausen, Partner, Baker Botts L.L.P.
Oral Testimony...............................................
203
Prepared Testimony...........................................
205
Carl Szabo, Vice President and General Counsel, NetChoice
Oral Testimony...............................................
216
Prepared Testimony...........................................
218
Morgan Reed, Executive Director, The App Association
Oral Testimony...............................................
231
Prepared Testimony...........................................
234
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
A letter from the Retail Industry Leaders Association from the
Honorable Lucy McBath, Member, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
53
A statement for the record from The Honorable Doug Collins from
the Honorable Kelly Armstrong, Member, Subcommittee on
Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...................
253
A statement for the record from the Honorable Jerrold Nadler from
the Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...................
260
A letter from the Open Markets Institute from the Honorable David
Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
268
An article accompanying a statement from the Open Markets
Institute from the Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...
274
An article accompanying a statement from the Open Markets
Institute from the Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...
284
A statement for the record from Nathan Proctor from the Honorable
David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
293
A statement for the record from Caleb Watney from the Honorable
David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
295
A statement for the record from Genius Media Group, Inc from the
Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
306
A statement for the record from the Electric Frontier Foundation
from the Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...................
313
A statement for the record from Public Knowledge from the
Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
323
A letter from the Retail Industry Leaders Association from the
Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
328
A statement for the record from DuckDuckGo, Inc. from the
Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
339
A statement for the record from Six4Three, LLC from the Honorable
David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
347
A statement for the record from Brian Warner from the Honorable
David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
354
A statement for the record from the American Hotel and Lodging
Association from the Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...
361
A statement for the record from Gay Gordon-Byrne from the
Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
363
A letter for the record from Spotify from the Honorable David
Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
381
A statement for the record from Apple in response to a letter for
the record from Spotify from the Honorable David Cicilline,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
387
APPENDIX
Questions for the Record from the Honorable David Cicilline,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
394
Questions for the Record from the Honorable Mary Gay Scanlon,
Member, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
600
Questions for the Record from the Honorable James Sensenbrenner,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
606
Questions for the Record from the Honorable Gregory Steube,
Member, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
609
ONLINE PLATFORMS AND MARKET POWER,
PART 2: INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
----------
TUESDAY, JULY 16, 2019
House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law
Committee on the Judiciary
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:00 p.m., in
Room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. David Cicilline
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Cicilline, Johnson, Raskin,
Jayapal, Demings, Scanlon, Neguse, McBath, Sensenbrenner, Buck,
Armstrong, and Steube.
Staff Present: Lisette Morton, Director, Policy, Planning,
and Member Services; Madeline Strasser, Chief Clerk; Julian
Gerson, Staff Assistant; Amanda Lewis, Counsel; Joseph Van Wye,
Professional Staff Member; Lina Khan, Counsel; Slade Bond,
Chief Counsel; Daniel Flores, Minority Chief Counsel; and
Andrea Woodard, Minority Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Cicilline. Good afternoon. The subcommittee will come
to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare
recesses of the committee at any time.
We welcome everyone to the second in our series of hearings
investigating competition in the digital markets, this one on
innovation and entrepreneurship. I now recognize myself for an
opening statement.
Thirty years ago the first software for the World Wide Web
was released into the public domain to create a global
communications network. Within a few years search and browsing
services were built onto this software to give people tools to
communicate, share, and explore information through a
decentralized platform that was designed to be open and
nondiscriminatory.
Vint Cerf, an internet pioneer and codesigner of the
internet's early architecture, testified in 2006 on behalf of
Google that the overarching principle of the open internet was
that no central gatekeeper should exert control over the
internet. As he noted, this open and competitive environment
meant that entrepreneurs with new ideas for applications need
not worry about getting permission for their inventions to
reach end users.
Over the following decades the meteoric growth of our open
and competitive internet revolutionized our lives, our work,
our businesses, and our entire world. Millions of new, good
paying jobs were created, and greater access to information
promised a renewal of our democracy and social progress.
This environment also fostered the growth in dynamism of
four companies that will testify at today's hearing: Google,
Amazon, Facebook, and Apple. Each of these American companies
have contributed immense technological breakthroughs in
economic value to our country. They were started on shoestring
budgets in dorm rooms and garages and are a testament to our
core values as a country.
But in an effort to promote and continue this new economy,
Congress and antitrust enforcers allowed these firms to
regulate themselves with little oversight. As a result the
internet has become increasingly concentrated, less open, and
growingly hostile to innovation and entrepreneurship.
Makan Delrahim, the associate attorney general of the
antitrust division recently noted, and I quote, ``there are
only one or two significant players in important digital
spaces, including internet search, social networks, mobile and
desktop operating systems, and electronic book sales,'' end
quote.
Google controls nearly all the search market in the United
States and over 90 percent of all internet searches are
conducted via Google platforms.
Amazon controls nearly half of all online commerce in the
United States. Despite statements from the company that it only
captures a small percentage of retail in the United States, the
reality is that half of American families have an Amazon Prime
account, up from only 35 percent just 3 years ago, and Amazon's
closest competitor, eBay, controls less than 6 percent of the
market for online commerce.
Facebook controls over 58 percent of the U.S. social media
market and has approximately 2.7 billion monthly active users
across its platforms. Notwithstanding the growing popularity of
TikTok, a Chinese video sharing app, Facebook captures over 80
percent of global social media revenue. And as Facebook
cofounder Chris Hughes has recently observed, no major social
networking company has been founded in the United States since
the fall of 2011.
And finally, Apple is under increasing scrutiny for abusing
its role as both a player and a referee in the App Store
through prices that may be higher than a competitive market
would allow and policies that may favor Apple's own products
and services.
As the Supreme Court recently noted in Apple v. Pepper,
regardless of price, and I quote, ``Apple pockets a 30 percent
commission on every app sale,'' end quote, in addition to
developer membership fees and a 30 percent commission on its--
on in-app purchases.
A former Apple executive who oversaw app store approvals
for 7 years has also described Apple as having, and I quote,
``complete and unprecedented power over their customers'
devices and using this power as a weapon against competitors,''
end quote.
Although Apple has made a series of laudable commitments to
protect consumers' privacy online, as the New York Times
editorial board recently noted, its management of the App Store
is, and I quote, ``dangerously reminiscent of the
anticompetitive behavior that triggered United States v.
Microsoft, a landmark antitrust case that changed the landscape
of the tech industry,'' end quote.
Several reports by leading economists and competition
experts also suggest that the dominance of these firms is
unlikely to be challenged by new rivals due to certain features
that characterize digital markets. As these reports have found,
the combination of high network effects, high-switching costs,
and the self-reinforcing advantages of data can result in a
winner-take-all market that shield dominant firms from
competitive threats.
At the same time there is growing consensus among venture
capitalists and startups that there is a kill zone around
Google, Amazon, Facebook, and Apple that prevents new startups
from entering the market with innovative products and services
to challenge these incumbents.
And in recent years the number of technology startup
financings has dropped significantly, from above 10,000 startup
financings in 2015 to just above 6,000 in 2018, while the
number of venture capital deals for investment beneath $1
million have also declined significantly.
Even when tech startups escape the investment kill zone
they remain extremely reliant on these platforms in other ways.
According to a recent report in Bloomberg, 17 out of 22 initial
public offerings by significant technology companies, such as
Lyft and Pinterest, cited online platforms as competitors or
risks to their business. As this report noted and, I quote,
``the tech giants have the power to change their services at
any time generating havoc downstream,'' end quote, on smaller
firms.
And while the explosion of the early internet connected
local businesses to broader markets, there is growing concern
that anticompetitive practices and the gatekeeper role of
online platforms is now imperiling small business in our
communities.
As Stacy Mitchell of the Institute for Local Self-Reliance
will testify today, and I quote from her written testimony,
``powerful online gatekeepers not only control market access
but also directly compete with the businesses that depend on
them,'' end quote, undermining entrepreneurship and economic
opportunity.
As I said before, this trend is not compatible with the
open internet or its defining features that have allowed
innovation and entrepreneurship to flourish. As Tim Wu will
testify today, ``the United States is at risk of losing the
best of our innovation culture and instead being a country of
giant lumbering concerns where incremental improvement is the
norm and where innovators dream of being bought not of building
something of their own,'' end quote.
Most importantly, for purposes of today's hearing, this
trend is not the inevitable consequence of technological
progress. It is the result of policy choices we are making as a
country. Over the past decade, the largest technology firms
have acquired over 436 companies, many of which were actual or
potential competitors.
For example, according to the New York Times report by Tim
Wu and Stuart Thompson, of the 270 companies Google has
acquired, 171 involved actual or potential competitors, and of
Facebook's 92 total acquisitions, 46 involved actual or
potential competitors. But not a single one of these
acquisitions was challenged by antitrust enforcers. In fact,
only a handful of these were closely scrutinized.
And in the 2 decades since the Justice Department filed its
landmark monopolization case against Microsoft, there has not
been a single complaint filed by either agency alleging
anticompetitive conduct in this market. Together these
enforcement decisions have created a de facto immunity for
online platforms.
I hope that today's hearing provides an opportunity for a
serious and sober discussion about these trends and possible
paths forward to addressing them. As Tim Berners-Lee, the
inventor of the World Wide Web, recently observed, unless we
examine and address these trends, and I quote, ``we can expect
the next 20 years to be far less innovative from the last,''
end quote.
In other words, this hearing isn't just about the companies
before us today. It is about ensuring that we have the
conditions for the next Google, the next Amazon, the next
Facebook, and the next Apple to grow and prosper.
With that in mind, I thank both of our panels of expert
witnesses for appearing before us today. And I now recognize
the gentleman from Wisconsin for his opening statement, Mr.
Sensenbrenner.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Innovation and entrepreneurship are the hallmarks of the
American economy. This has been true in the past and it remains
true now in the digital age. Today's hearing will focus
primarily on the impacts large online platforms have on
innovation and entrepreneurship. This is a critical topic, and
I want to stress that we must take a fair and balanced approach
to it.
There are some who advocate that the biggest platform
should just be broken up because they supposedly dominate too
much of the market. That impulse seems misguided for several
reasons: First, just because a business is big doesn't mean
that it is bad. Antitrust laws focus on the conduct of
companies and whether that conduct is anticompetitive. They do
not exist to punish businesses just because they are big.
Likewise, the antitrust laws do not exist to punish
success; on the contrary, they exist to foster it. The most
innovative, successful, and competitive companies often become
very big, not through anticompetitive conduct, or violations of
antitrust laws, but simply by providing a better service or
product than the other companies in the marketplace.
Second, as the written statements, offered by some of our
witnesses attest, big online platforms can present small
companies in many sections with a better way to reach the most
customers. Breaking up big businesses simply because they are
large would end up hurting lots of small businesses throughout
the country.
Third, breaking up big platforms won't necessarily solve a
problem associated with those platforms. For example, the
privacy issues are prominent in today's discussions of what is
going on wrong online, but breaking up the big platforms into
smaller ones might actually compound the problems of protecting
privacy.
I raise these points not to dismiss the idea that there
might be genuine issues of anticompetitive conduct in the
online ecosystem. However, I want to offer a counterpoint to
some of the more radical positions that are being articulated.
We should take a serious look at allegations of wrongdoing.
Perhaps we'll hear some of those today. But we should not rush
to amend the antitrust laws or break up companies by
congressional fiat based upon false notions that being big is
inherently bad or that everything a big company does should be
presumed to be anticompetitive.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Sensenbrenner.
I want to just acknowledge that both the chairman of the
full committee, Mr. Nadler, and the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Collins, are on the floor right now, and when
they come to committee they'll be recognized, if it's okay with
Mr. Sensenbrenner, for their opening statements.
And at this time now I would like to introduce our panel.
We have two panels of witnesses today. It is now my pleasure to
introduce today's first panel.
Our first witness is Adam Cohen, the director of economic
policy at Google. Before joining Google Mr. Cohen was an
economic corespondent for Dow Jones and the Wall Street Journal
reporting out of both London and Brussels. Mr. Cohen received
his AB from Harvard University and his MS from the London
School of Economics.
Our second witness, Matt Perault, is head of global policy
development at Facebook, leading the company's global public
policy planning efforts on law enforcement and human rights
issues. Mr. Perault has also overseen public policy for
WhatsApp, Oculus, and Facebook artificial intelligence
research. Before joining Facebook he was counsel at the
Congressional Oversight Panel as well as a consultant at the
World Bank. Mr. Perault received his bachelor's degree from
Brown University, his MPP from Duke University Sanford School
of Public Policy, and his JD from Harvard Law School.
Our third witness is Nate Sutton, associate general counsel
for competition at Amazon, who oversees all competition-related
litigation and regulatory matters for the company. Before
joining Amazon, Mr. Sutton was a trial attorney with the
Department of Justice Antitrust Division for 9 years working on
civil antitrust matters. He also worked at the law firm of
William & Connolly, LLP, from 2001 to 2007. Mr. Sutton received
his BS in nuclear engineering from North Carolina State
University and his JD from the University of Chicago Law
School.
The last witness in our panel is Kyle Andeer, vice
president of corporate law at Apple. Prior to joining Apple Mr.
Andeer spent 4 years as the deputy chief trial counsel with the
Federal Trade Commission's Bureau of Competition, managing a
trial staff of more than 25 attorneys and support staff. He
also served as the principal competition attorney adviser to
Commissioner J. Thomas Rosch as well as the DOJ's Antitrust
Division. Mr. Andeer received his BA from the University of
Pennsylvania and his JD from the University of California
Berkeley School of Law.
We welcome all of our distinguished witnesses on our first
panel and thank them for participating in today's hearing.
Now, if you would please rise, I'll begin by swearing you
in.
Please raise your right hand. Do you swear or affirm under
penalty of perjury that the testimony you are about to give is
true and correct to the best of your knowledge, information,
and belief, so help you God?
Let the record show the witnesses answered in the
affirmative. Thank you. You may be seated.
Please note that each of your written statements will be
entered into the record in their entirety. Accordingly, I ask
that you summarize your testimony in 5 minutes. To help you
stay within that time, there's a timing light on your table.
When the light switches from green to yellow you have 1 minute
to conclude your testimony. When the light turns red it signals
your 5 minutes have expired.
Mr. Cohen, we'll begin with you.
TESTIMONY OF ADAM COHEN, DIRECTOR OF ECONOMIC POLICY, GOOGLE;
MATT PERAULT, HEAD OF GLOBAL POLICY DEVELOPMENT, FACEBOOK; NATE
SUTTON, ASSOCIATE GENERAL COUNSEL, COMPETITION, AMAZON; AND
KYLE ANDEER, VICE PRESIDENT, CORPORATE LAW, APPLE
TESTIMONY OF ADAM COHEN
Mr. Cohen. Chairman Cicilline, Ranking Member
Sensenbrenner, and distinguished members of the committee,
thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. My
name is Adam Cohen, and I'm director of economic policy at
Google. In my role I lead our public policy work on antitrust
issues.
Google was founded in 1998 by two students who had a big
idea: Organize the world's information and make it universally
accessible and useful. In their earliest form Google search
results were simply ten blue links on a web page. Twenty years
later we provide our users with much richer results, including
direct answers to questions, pinpoints on a map when they
search for an address, and direct links to flights, products,
and a range of other information.
As a responsible and successful company, we understand the
importance of discussing how our business works and how we
compete. We are proud of our record of continued innovation. We
face constant pressure to improve our products and services,
both sure signs of a competitive marketplace.
In my testimony today I will focus on the value Google and
the wider technology sector are creating for the U.S. economy,
our investments in new technologies, and our industry's
competitive dynamics.
For the U.S. economy, Google's products and services create
significant value, generating an estimated $335 billion in
economic activity in 2018. This has benefited a wide range of
consumers and businesses across the country. Firms that once
operated in a local or regional market now reach national and
international customers using our tools.
We have also made substantial direct investments in the
U.S. economy. Last year we hired more than 10,000 people and
invested over $9 billion in data centers and offices across the
country. In February we announced plans to invest an additional
$13 billion this year with major expansions in 14 States.
These new investments will give us the capacity to hire
tens of thousands of additional employees and create more than
10,000 new construction jobs. Overall, the technology sector
supports roughly 12 million American jobs, the equivalent to
7.6 percent of the total U.S. workforce. It is a vital source
of new jobs.
And for consumers, technology companies continue to provide
innovation and better prices. Prices in the tech sector fell in
2018 compared to an increase in the rest of the private sector.
When it comes to investing in innovation technology companies
are America's largest spenders on research and development.
As an example, Google last year spent $21.4 billion on
research, development, and related areas, three times more than
in 2013. Our continuing investments spur innovation that
improves our own products and services and also supports and
accelerates innovation among other firms. We share many of the
results of our research and new technologies typically through
open-source software. This helps broad communities of
developers to use our advances in their own applications and
services.
In terms of competition, our industry is highly dynamic and
drives innovation that gives consumers better choices at lower
prices. For example, when consumers search for information they
can choose among Amazon, Yelp, Microsoft, Travelocity, and many
other companies like these that consistently report strong user
growth. If you don't want to use Google, there are many other
information providers available.
We also face formidable competition around the world. Our
success enables us to make the research and development
investments necessary to compete in a global environment with
other global players. New firms are competing too. We continue
to see record-setting venture capital activity with over 8,000
venture-backed companies raising more than $130 billion in
financing last year, the highest amount in over a decade.
The technology sector has had one of the highest rates of
business formation and job creation in the country over the
past 3 decades. In fact, in the first quarter of 2019 a record
147 American companies reached so-called unicorn status with
valuations exceeding $1 billion.
These companies had a combined value of $582 billion in the
first quarter of the year, the highest aggregate value ever
recorded. That is a rate of new business success unrivaled
elsewhere in the U.S. economy creating new companies that
compete with established companies across many areas.
To conclude, even as progress and innovation expand sound
regulatory frameworks help ensure our societies and economies
continue to benefit from new technologies. We look forward to
continued work with the committee as it examines these issues.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The statement of Mr. Cohen follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Perault is now recognized for 5 minutes.
TESTIMONY OF MATT PERAULT
Mr. Perault. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Cicilline, Ranking Member Sensenbrenner, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today. My name is Matt Perault
and I'm a director of public policy at Facebook. I've been at
the company for 8 years, and I focus on competition and
economic policy. It's an honor to be here to discuss these
important issues.
Facebook is an American success story. We were founded in a
college dorm room 15 years ago, and since that time we've
helped transform the way people around the world communicate,
connect, and share. We believe deeply in the values of
competition and innovation, values that are fundamental to the
success of the American economy, and it's precisely because of
these shared values that Facebook has grown from a dorm room
idea to a vibrant American company.
New apps enabling people to connect, discover, communicate,
and share are emerging all the time because barriers to entry
for digital platforms are low. Launching a new mobile app or
online service often requires minimal staff, capital, and
infrastructure, and the rise of cloud computing in app stores
enables these platforms to reach a global audience. Consumers
move easily between different apps and services. If they don't
enjoy a product or experience, they'll leave it and explore
other options.
We face intense competition for all of the products and
services that we provide. To name a few examples, Twitter,
Snapchat, iMessage, Skype, Telegram, Google, YouTube, and
Amazon offer photo and video sharing, messaging, advertising,
and other services that compete with Facebook. In fact, more
than 92 percent of advertising happens off of Facebook, and
less than a quarter of U.S. online ad spend goes to Facebook.
And our competition isn't just here in America. We compete
with companies from all around the world. TikTok, for example,
a Chinese app launched less than 3 years ago has been
downloaded more than 1 billion times and was the most
downloaded iOS app in the world in 2018.
Facebook was transformative and groundbreaking when it
launched, and we worked hard to remain so today. That's why we
push ourselves to evolve and experiment to develop the next big
technologies that will change how people connect and
communicate in the future. I'd like to touch briefly on four of
the ways that Facebook is investing in innovation.
First, through developing new products and features. When
Facebook was created the site consisted mostly of text details
about each user. Now users can message, read news, broadcast
live video, connect with businesses, send and receive payments,
and raise money for important causes, just to name a few
options. And the Facebook family goes beyond software to
hardware products like Portal and Oculus. We're proud of how
much we've invented and innovated and of how much our products
and services have improved.
Second, our investments in research and development have
played an important role in fueling our innovation. We devoted
nearly 20 percent of our revenue last year to investments in
innovation, and we've made significant advancements in areas
like artificial intelligence, virtual reality, and energy
efficient data centers.
Third, our acquisitions have been a powerful force for
innovation. Companies like Instagram and WhatsApp have had
increased opportunities to innovate as part of the Facebook
family. We are better together and that's good for users.
Fourth, Facebook has democratized advertising. Helping
millions of small and medium-sized businesses our advertising
platform can accommodate almost every budget, and we help
advertisers reach their target audience and maximize their
impact.
Our services have enabled small and medium-sized businesses
to grow, create jobs, and more effectively compete with larger
companies leading to more choice and better products for
consumers.
We've heard countless examples of small entrepreneurs in
Rhode Island, in Wisconsin, and across America who couldn't
afford print or TV ads but who have been able to succeed by
using our services to reach a local, national, or even global
audience.
Facebook is constantly working to find new ways to help
people connect, communicate, and share. Like many successful
American companies before us, we've grown by taking risks,
learning from our mistakes, and constantly striving to improve.
We recognize that we're a work in progress and we're committed
to addressing the challenges we face as a company, but we are
incredibly proud of what we've accomplished so far.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here today, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Perault follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Perault.
I now recognize Mr. Sutton for 5 minutes.
TESTIMONY OF NATE SUTTON
Mr. Sutton. Thank you, Chairman Cicilline, Ranking Member
Sensenbrenner, and members of the subcommittee. In my brief
remarks today I will provide some background on Amazon's
approach to business and on the industries in which we operate,
I will discuss a relationship with third-party sellers that
sell in our stores, and I will explain the positive effects we
have on competition and the economy.
Amazon's mission is to be Earth's most customer-centric
company. Our corporate philosophy is firmly rooted in working
backwards from what customers want. And we seek continually to
innovate, to provide customers the best experience. This
principle is essential to understanding Amazon as we apply it
to all areas of our business.
Amazon operates a diverse range of businesses, from retail
and entertainment to consumer electronics and technology
services. In each of these areas we face intense competition
from well-established competitors.
For example, retail, which remains by far our largest
business, is as old as human commercial experience. It has long
been and continues to be characterized by intense competition
at every level. New technology, such as the internet, have only
made retail more competitive, reducing barriers to entry, and
expanding output.
Studies show that retailers sell and customers shop in
multiple stores, both offline and online. In fact, as Target
and Best Buy recently announced, one of the fastest growing
consumer practices is a mix of offline and online, whereby
customers order products online that they later pick up in a
physical store.
And there are now dozens of online marketplaces in the U.S.
and around the world. The result in retail is an ever-
broadening array of competitors, including many large and well-
known companies like Walmart, eBay, Target, Safeway, Wayfair,
and Kroger, not to mention large and growing global competitors
such as Alibaba and Rakuten.
Amazon success in retail depends on our partnership with
third-party sellers that sell their products right alongside
our own products. We have invested heavily in these sellers,
and they are growing twice as fast as Amazon's own retail and
make up almost 60 percent of total unit sales in our stores.
These businesses are primarily small and medium-sized
firms, and last year almost 200,000 of them sold more than
$100,000 in our stores. Amazon supports these sellers because
we have a strong incentive to do so. The broad selection and
price competition these sellers bring to our stores are
attractive to our customers.
For example, our selling partners provide the vast majority
of new products in our stores. We know sellers have other ways
to reach customers, so we invest in them, support them, and
make continuous efforts to improve their experience.
We have dedicated teams assigned to supporting sellers,
launch new tools to help them increase sales, and spend
significant resources to root out bad actors and prevent fraud
and abuse that harms both sellers and customers. If we did not
make these efforts on behalf of our selling partners, they
would sell fewer products in our stores and more through our
competitors.
Amazon's investments in retail have also benefited the
economy more generally. We have invested tens of billions of
dollars in infrastructure and technical services. We employ
more than 275,000 people in the United States. We offer a $15
minimum wage and valuable benefits. We continue to invest in
our employees through workforce training programs.
For example, just days ago, we announced an initiative to
invest $700 million to provide 100,000 of our employees new
skills and training to help them move into more advanced jobs
or find new careers.
From our vantage point as a retailer in a highly
competitive field, we offer two views for the committee's
consideration. First, the technology used to provide a service
is not the primary factor in a competitive analysis. Consumers
benefit from all retail competition regardless of the precise
business model involved. In today's retail market the notion
that two products that are exactly the same do not compete with
each other simply because one was ordered online and one was
bought in a brick-and-mortar store makes little sense.
Second, to avoid unintentionally tilting the competitive
playing field, new rules should encompass all retailers
regardless of the supply models that they use.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering any questions
the committee may have.
[The statement of Mr. Sutton follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Sutton.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Andeer for 5 minutes.
TESTIMONY OF KYLE ANDEER
Mr. Andeer. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you for inviting me to speak with you today.
My name is Kyle Andeer, and I am Apple's chief compliance
officer, and I spend a lot of time focusing on business ethics
and competition legal issues.
Apple is a proud American company, a 40-year history of
innovation in very competitive markets. Our mission is to make
the best products and services in the world in each of the
markets where we compete. For us it's never been about making
the most. It's always about making the best. We design our
technology to be easy to use and safe and secure for all
customers.
We see our customers' privacy as a fundamental human right,
and we embed that value in everything we create. We go above
and beyond to incorporate needing accessibility features to
make sure everyone can get the most from their devices. And our
products are made with our responsibility to the environment in
mind. We are deeply proud of the role we play in democratizing
coding and other high-tech skills all around the world.
In discussing Apple's online platforms, we consider five
distinct categories: iOS, macOS, watchOS, tvOS, and our soon-
to-be-released iPadOS. Our products run and compete on these
platforms. We are very proud of each of these and feel that
they are the best at each of their categories. We only create
great products, not commodity products, and as a result we do
not have a majority share in any one of these categories.
For Apple the competition is fierce. Our customers have an
ever-growing number of choices when it comes to products and
services. We compete against some of the largest companies in
the world, both foreign and domestic. We work hard every day to
retain and grow customer trust and to compete for their
business.
Each of our platforms depends on a thriving ecosystem, from
the App Store to peripherals and accessories, to partners such
as service providers and car makers. Our expertise in software
enables experiences like moving seamlessly between Apple
devices, finding your same messages in Safari bookmarks no
matter which device you use, and taking advantage of features
like CarPlay that integrates your iPhone into your daily
commute.
The benefits of this ecosystem and the innovation it makes
possible are clear to our customers. It means, for example,
world-class security and unparalleled ease of use. We are also
proud to offer services where millions of artists and
entrepreneurs can share their work and ideas, like Apple Music,
hosting more than 50 million songs from artists around the
world, podcasts where hundreds of thousands of topics are
discussed and shared, and the App Store, which has spawned new
opportunities from everyone from the individual entrepreneur to
the biggest companies in the world.
Since its launch in 2008, the App Store has been vibrant,
competitive, and ever growing. It has transformed the
experience and reduced the cost of software distribution. So
anyone with a great idea can invent a new app and distribute it
worldwide from home. We're proud that App Store entrepreneurs
across this country have generated over 1.5 million U.S. jobs
across all 50 States.
We designed the App Store to be both a safe and trusted
place for customers to discover and download apps that interest
them and a great opportunity for developers to start
businesses. In entering the App Store every developer abides by
the very same guidelines. From the student in her living room
to some of the largest companies, we want to have--we want
every creator to have an equal opportunity to succeed.
We work hard every day to compete for developers who want
to join and stay in our ecosystem. We're proud that a good
number of apps, apps like Pinterest, Spotify, Lyft, and Uber
have built successful businesses through the App Store with
support from our team and the developer tools we offer. The App
Store provides an enormous opportunity for developers to reach
millions of users overnight, and the vast majority of apps,
over 84 percent share none of the revenue they make from our
store with Apple.
Only a very small number of the nearly 2 million apps in
the App Store are made by Apple. And in every category where
our software competes we face multiple strong competitors.
Apple believes users expect that their devices should provide a
great experience out of the box, so our products include
certain functionality like email, phone, and a music player as
a baseline.
But users have various needs, and they are free to discover
and use any alternatives they might prefer. For instance, if a
customer wants to use iCloud--doesn't want to use iCloud, they
can use Box, Dropbox, or any number of other options.
At the end of the day our only objective is to provide our
customers the very best products and ecosystem in the world. It
means the phone they love, the choice of accessories that
enhance their experience, and millions of applications and
services at their fingertips.
And when it all comes together it means the tremendous
market opportunity for everyone, entrepreneurs, artists,
carriers, car makers, accessory makers, and developers. We are
committed to carrying this legacy forward, believing at our
core that a single great idea can unlock opportunities once
unimaginable. That's what defines Apple and it always will.
Apple welcomes this subcommittee's efforts to promote
American innovation and entrepreneurship, and we look forward
to working with you.
[The statement of Mr. Andeer follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Andeer.
We will now proceed under the 5-minute rule with questions.
I'll begin by recognizing the gentlelady from Pennsylvania,
Ms. Scanlon.
We're doing it a little out of order due to the time
change. A couple of our committee members have other
commitments, so I want to begin with Ms. Scanlon. You're
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you for hosting this event, this hearing.
We've certainly heard a lot about the various ways in which
your platforms have really developed a whole new sector of our
economy, but we wanted to dig into a little bit of the
anticompetitive aspects. And I wanted to focus on the issue of
digital piracy and what that does in the creative community.
So Creative Futures is a coalition representing 555
organizations ranging from MGM to one of our local Philadelphia
theater groups, and it represents a quarter million people in
the creative rights community.
They've raised concerns about the impact on the competitive
process of copyright theft on the Facebook and Google
platforms. Specifically, they noted in a submission unfair
methods of competition can be facilitated or sometimes
practiced on these massive internet platforms, and it results
in less creative content than otherwise would exist, fewer new
voices, and harm to legitimate non-pirated sources of
distribution.
So, Mr. Cohen, can you address these concerns of people in
the creative rights community particularly about how YouTube
doesn't really have an economic incentive to combat widespread
copyright theft and this may have distorted the market for
online streaming of movies and television?
Mr. Cohen. Congressman, thank you for the question. YouTube
has a very strong set of tools to prevent copyright infringing
material from appearing. We developed a technology called
Content ID that can remove copyrighted material before it's
ever seen by anybody using the platform.
We take this matter very seriously, and we provide by
YouTube and other products means for consumers to find and
access quality licensed legitimate content.
Ms. Scanlon. So is that the process that you use when, in
fact, pirated content is uploaded but then there's a takedown
notice? Or are you talking about something else?
Mr. Cohen. Congresswoman, we use a combination of automated
tools. We can recognize copyrighted material that creators
upload and instantaneously discover it and keep it from being
seen in our platforms.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay. I guess an additional concern that has
been raised around this issue is that if you Google--if I were
to Google an original show produced by the YouTube premium,
maybe something like Koper Ky or Weird City, if I try to find
pirated versions of the YouTube shows, nothing comes up. But if
I go search for a pirated version of a show like Game of
Thrones or Netflix's Russian Doll or HBO's Barry, a whole--
well, torrented versions, a lot of different pirated versions
pop up.
So there's a suggestion that there's a discrepancy in how
these tools are working because the YouTube Google shows those
pirated versions are taken down but some of the other
companies' versions aren't taken down. Can you address how that
discrepancy might be occurring?
Mr. Cohen. Congresswoman, I have not seen any evidence of a
discrepancy. We take great steps to protect copyrighted
material and to show and to provide our customers legitimate
means of reaching legitimate licensed content.
Ms. Scanlon. Well, if you do come up with any data
regarding discrepancies between the various platforms, can you
provide that to the committee, please?
Mr. Cohen. I would be happy to.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you. I'll yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. I now recognize the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Sensenbrenner, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you very much.
First question is to Mr. Perault. There is a time when
Facebook was a pledging operation and people thought that
others like MySpace were the future of social media. What
competitive features of the social media marketplace made it
possible for Facebook to overtake and vanquish MySpace and
others like it?
Mr. Perault. Thank you very much, Congressman, for the
question.
We have rolled out many innovations over the course of the
history of our product. We had a real name policy at the time
that we were founded. That was important in ensuring that there
were authentic interactions on our platform and provided users
with a better experience. We've since rolled out many
additional features, such as News Feed and the ``like'' button,
and we continue to innovate today.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. So MySpace didn't have any of those
features? Is that why people went to Facebook and abandoned
MySpace?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, I believe they did not have all
of those features. We competed aggressively with MySpace, and
we believe that that aggressive competition is in part
responsible for our success today.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, I think what we're looking at is
anticompetitive action. Did MySpace complain about what you
were doing being anticompetitive, or did they just watch their
ship slowly sink under the waves?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, I am not aware of anticompetitive
complaints from MySpace.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Okay. Thank you.
To Mr. Cohen, your written statement says that Google
helped reduce prices and expand choice for consumers and
merchants in the U.S. and around the world. That sounds nice,
but what facts, figures, and sources can you point to us to
prove that it's true?
Mr. Cohen. Congressman, I saw a recent study from the
Progressive Policy Institute that showed that for every $3 of
advertising spent online a business would have to spend an
equivalent of $5 offline to get equal prominence. That cost
savings--that efficiency in those businesses goes to
reinvestment, it goes to lower prices for consumers. That is a
tremendous savings for the U.S. economy.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Okay. You know, the print news media has
come on hard times. There are a whole lot of reasons for that,
and Google might be one of them, but I don't think it's the
exclusive reason for the print media falling on hard times.
You know, if I buy a copy of the Washington Post and there
is an ad in there, and the Washington Post, you know, only
circulates at least extensively in the Washington metropolitan
area, and the same company puts an ad on Google, what do you
think the exposure is between the print ad and the online ad in
terms of numbers?
Mr. Cohen. It can vary, Congressman. There's a lot of
variety and control given to the advertiser in how they
interact with online platforms, how they advertise with online
platforms. One of the key things is that in newspaper
advertising you would spend a certain amount of money. When I
was last a journalist it was quite expensive to place
advertisements in print media.
You didn't know what your return on that investment was. It
was hard to measure. In digital formats it's easy to know when
an ad is clicked on. In fact, for our services often you only
pay when an ad is clicked on. And you can then measure the
effectiveness of that advertising campaign. You can have these
ads reach as broad an audience as you like or you can use them
narrowly focusing on local markets, if you prefer.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. What do you think about the persuasive
ability--now I look toward my own campaigns. I don't think
we've put ads in newspapers either daily or weekly for over 25
years because the surveys that we did showed that the people
who read political ads in newspapers were either seeing what
their favorite candidate was doing and mentally cheering or
seeing what the opposition was doing and, you know, saying boo.
But with an online ad, and we've used those for the last
couple of cycles, you would think there is--at least the
purpose of advertising is to educate someone toward a vote or
a--buying a product or something like that? You really don't
need any marketing surveys to show that that's effective?
Mr. Cohen. Well, Congressman, I'm not an expert in
political advertising. But what I would say is that I think
you've identified an issue that affects the newspaper industry.
There are different ways of reaching customers in different
settings.
And the newspaper business model has come under pressure,
even before the internet, from competing services like cable
news and with the advent of the internet from--you know,
newspapers used to make a lot of money from classified
advertising and a lot of that has shifted to services like
Craigslist, Autotrader for automotive ads. There are a range of
competitive pressures, and I think that's probably true for
political advertising as well.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you very much. My time is expired.
Mr. Cicilline. The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
Washington, Ms. Jayapal, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for being here.
My district has the great honor of long being a place for
innovation, a place where many small companies became large
giants, including Amazon. And it is also a place where in the
past innovation has had to be protected by the Federal
Government.
And specifically, I call your attention to in 2001, the
Department of Justice sued Microsoft accusing the company of
violating the Sherman Antitrust Act by using a monopoly
adversely affect the web browser market. And the case later
settled after Microsoft agreed to make it easier for
Microsoft's competitors to integrate their software with the
Windows operating system.
And there are many scholars out there who believe that this
case is actually the one that opened up tremendous space for
real innovation that wouldn't have otherwise existed and
allowed a whole new wave of tech companies to spring up. And
some of the companies represented here today actually
flourished after that court ruling.
Mr. Perault, let me start with you. You're the head of
global policy development at Facebook. Does Facebook devote any
resources to identifying promising tech startups or innovative
non-Facebook platforms and apps?
Mr. Perault. Not to my knowledge, no, Congresswoman.
Ms. Jayapal. None at all?
Mr. Perault. We certainly devote resources to understanding
the competitive landscape in which we operate, but, no, I
believe the answer to your question is no, not to my knowledge.
Ms. Jayapal. So you don't acquire promising tech startups
or innovative non-Facebook owned platforms or apps?
Mr. Perault. Congresswoman, we certainly look to innovate
with our products, and the focus of our acquisition strategy is
focused on acquiring companies that enable us to offer a better
service to the people who use our products. So we do look to
acquire services that will enable us to innovate more
effectively.
Ms. Jayapal. And they might actually be competing with you,
and that might be something that you think would integrate well
into your existing platform?
Mr. Perault. Thank you, Congresswoman. The focus of our
acquisition strategy is on companies that will enable us to
innovate more effectively and bring value to the people who use
our services. For instance, at the time that we acquired
Oculus, a virtual reality company, it didn't yet have a product
in the market. As a result of our investment in Oculus, it now
has a virtual reality product in the market.
Ms. Jayapal. And what about when you acquired the
positivity focused polling startup, TBH, 2 years ago and then
the company shut down the app after only 8 months? It also
bought the app Moves and then later shut it down. How would you
consider those acquisitions and terminations, if you will, of
those smaller companies?
Mr. Perault. Congresswoman, it is certainly the case that
some acquisitions don't work. When they don't work we may
discontinue a product because of legitimate business judgment.
Ms. Jayapal. I would just draw your attention to sort of
a--you know, I would look at the pharmaceutical industry in--
according to a 2018 Yale study, some pharmaceutical companies
seemed to engage in what they called killer acquisitions where
they would buy smaller firms and then shut down potentially
competing projects.
And researchers actually found that when that happened it
was more likely that the acquired companies' competing drug
would be discontinued. So I'm not saying it's directly
parallel, but it is one of the concerns I have.
Mr. Sutton, you're associate general counsel at Amazon.
Does Amazon devote any resources to identifying the most
popular brands and products sold using the Amazon interface?
So, for example, do you track the most popular non-Amazon
brands that are sold in houseware divisions or the brand of
size 14 pants that sold most often or any other product like
that?
Mr. Sutton. Thank you for your question.
Amazon is proud to be a company of builders and have built
our company from within not through acquisitions. With respect
to data such as you identified, we do not use any seller data
for--to compete with them. Last year was our smallest year of
acquisitions, and we've only had one multibillion dollar
acquisition and that was Whole Foods.
Ms. Jayapal. I'm sorry, that was slightly different than
the question I asked, which was when people sell products on
your site, do you track which products are most successful, and
then do you sometimes create a product to compete with that
product?
Because essentially you have this massive trove of data,
right, people that are buying products on your platform, and so
you're able to see which are the ones that are doing really,
really well, like that size 14 pant or that houseware that's
being sold. Do you track that and then do you create products
that directly compete with those most popular brands that are
out there?
Mr. Sutton. Thank you. Let me answer that question. That
data on popularity of products like much retail data is
actually public data. For each of our products you can see
where it's ranked. You can see how popular it is. We do not use
any of that specific seller data in creating our own private
brand products.
And private brands is an area where, quite frankly, we lag
behind many of our retail competitors who have 20 to 80 percent
of their products as private brands, where we're only in the
low, single digits. We do offer private brands on occasion
because we think it offers high value and low-cost items for
customers and because customers demand that and we want to
provide that opportunity for customers.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you. I know my time is expired, Mr.
Chairman. I just wanted to quickly say that my office recently
met with a small business located in my district, and they pay
a living wage, they create a high-quality product that they
sell online and in a storefront.
And they did have concerns, and so I know my office has
reached out directly. We are right in the same place and we're
looking forward to that conversation with you to see how Amazon
can make sure that it's helping some of these small businesses.
Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. I now recognize the gentleman
from North Dakota, Mr. Armstrong, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I'm glad that privacy has come up, already piracy has
come up. I know censorship has come up. We have talked about
newspaper advertising, and I think that's where we get into
this, and everybody sitting at that table up there has a role
in some of those issues. We all have different interests in
that.
But I think that's when we--and I know everybody at this
table is anti--witnesses are antitrust experts, but I think one
of the problems, and I think we have to recognize this, is that
antitrust is very company specific and it's very fact specific.
So while we may want to talk to one of you about piracy, we may
want to talk to another one of you about privacy--piracy and
privacy, I should probably pick two different words--so as we
do that.
But I think one thing that is consistent is everybody
sitting there in the companies you work for are capable of
dealing with regulation. And we have witnessed this before as
we continue to move forward, whether it's Dodd-Frank, whether
it's healthcare regulation, wherever we deal with this.
Whenever we work as a body to attempt to capture big bad
actors, I would argue that often times what we do is we make it
more difficult for startups whether that was our intent or not.
Mr. Johnson. Would the gentleman pull his mike closer,
please?
Mr. Armstrong. Sure. Yeah. So, I mean, and it's just a
caution and it's not that we shouldn't have these conversations
because I'm glad we're having these conversations. But I just
want to say that at the beginning that whatever concerns
anybody may have with a particular company aren't necessarily
the same for the other one.
But you all as for-profit companies with a fiduciary duty
to shareholders, I understand the fierce--particularly in this
field to stay on the cutting edge of innovation. I mean, and 20
years ago GE was the most valuable company in the world, and
sorry to pick on Apple, but you guys were almost bankrupt.
And even through that space and even now, even a handful of
unicorn companies even with the vast resources of other
companies again show that we miss valuable innovations in--
particularly in the tech field. All this just simply
demonstrates how hard it is to predict what consumers will want
in the future.
So I guess we'll just go down, and I don't think this
applies to Apple so much, but to what extent do your companies
use venture capital funding to invest in startups? And I'll
start with Mr. Sutton.
Mr. Sutton. Thank you. Amazon is a company of builders and
we primarily build from within. I'm not sure of the exact
details to the extent we use venture capital funding to start.
I would be happy to follow up with more details.
Mr. Armstrong. Sure. Mr. Perault.
Mr. Perault. Thank you very much, Congressman. My
understanding is that we do not engage in that practice, but
I'd be happy to follow up with specifics.
Mr. Armstrong. And Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Congressman. We do have a venture
capital arm. I'm not familiar with the size or the scope of
their investments. What I can tell you is that we acquire some
small businesses in order to accelerate innovation. We actually
are a great incubator for technology talents as well.
And somebody mentioned the number of acquisitions Google
has made. We have probably spawned ten times as many companies
from former Google employees who have left the company and
started companies like Twitter and Pinterest and Instagram.
Mr. Armstrong. And then I would just go back to Mr. Perault
for a second. Your written testimony highlights the new
products and features Facebook has introduced, but how many of
those has Facebook developed in house as opposed to buying?
That's a really broad and long question, I understand that.
Mr. Perault. Thank you, Congressman. We have developed many
in house. For instance, we developed News Feed, which is now
used broadly by many of our competitors. We developed the
``like'' button. We developed photo tagging. We developed
Portal. We have also invested in companies that we've acquired,
like Instagram, Oculus, and WhatsApp.
Mr. Armstrong. And what features in the current social
media market, if any, could make it possible for a new
fledgling competitor to take on Facebook?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, I think there are probably many
different answers to that question. My understanding, for
instance, is that TikTok has focused on public sharing, for
instance. That may be one feature that companies like ours
might be interested in the future.
Mr. Armstrong. And my last question for Mr. Cohen is more
of a personal question not a congressional question. But can
you explain to me why a 9-year-old would rather watch somebody
play fortnight on YouTube than actually play fortnight, because
I don't understand.
Mr. Cohen. Congressman, I am completely mystified. I have
no idea.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you. And with that, I'll yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes. I want to focus on
how the state of competition online is affecting real people in
the communities we represent. I think we see a tremendous
concentration of economic power that is fundamentally shaping
markets in a way that is often unfair, unbalanced, and not
competitive, resulting in less choice and worse quality of
products and services for working people.
We want to make sure as part of this investigation that
we're doing everything we can to make sure our competition
system is working for the entire economy, including small and
local businesses in our community. For more than half of online
commerce, retailers and manufacturers of consumer goods are
relying on Amazon as a commerce platform.
But as we know, and as Ms. Jayapal's question revealed,
Amazon also offers its own products on the platform. So, Mr.
Sutton, initially I want to say, doesn't that create a conflict
of interest?
Mr. Sutton. Thank you for the question. Respectfully, we
disagree. We partner very closely with our third-party sellers.
We rely on them to provide a broad selection and prices to our
customers, and we've been very proud of our investments to help
them grow to be a majority of our store and growing twice as
fast.
Mr. Cicilline. That's a different question. What I'm saying
is, you are selling your own products on a platform that you
control and they're competing with products in the marketplace
from retail--from other sellers, right?
Mr. Sutton. Thank you. Thank you for the question. That
practice I think has been common in the retail industry for
decades. Most retailers offer their own products in their store
as well as third-party products and----
Mr. Cicilline. But the difference is Amazon is a $1
trillion company that runs an online platform with real-time
data on millions of purchases and billions in commerce and can
manipulate algorithms on its platform and favor its own
product. That is not the same as a local retailer who might
have a CVS brand and a national brand.
I mean, it's quite different. So I want to drill down a
little bit on the question that Ms. Jayapal asked you. You said
we do not use seller data to compete with other sellers online.
You do collect enormous data about what products are popular,
what's selling, where they're selling. You're saying you don't
use that in any way to promote Amazon products?
Mr. Sutton. Let me answer----
Mr. Cicilline. And I remind you, sir, you're under oath.
Mr. Sutton. Yes. Thank you for your question. We use data
to serve our customers. And to clarify my question, we don't
use individual seller data to directly compete with them. And,
again, similarly with respect to some of the most----
Mr. Cicilline. Let me just--do you use consumer data to
favor Amazon products? Because before you answer that, analysts
estimate that between 80 and 90 percent of sales go to the
Amazon buy box. So you collect all this data about the most
popular products, where they're selling, and you're saying you
don't use that in any way to change an algorithm to support the
sale of Amazon branded products?
Mr. Sutton. Our algorithms, such as the buy box, is aimed
to predict what customers want to buy----
Mr. Cicilline. Sir, but----
Mr. Sutton [continuing]. And we apply the same criteria
whether you're a third-party seller or Amazon to that because
we want customers to make the right purchase regardless of
whether it's a seller or Amazon.
Mr. Cicilline. But the best purchase to you is an Amazon
product?
Mr. Sutton. No, that's not true.
Mr. Cicilline. So you're telling us, sir, under oath that
Amazon does not use any of that data collected with respect to
what is selling, where it's selling, what products to inform
the decisions you make or to change algorithms to direct people
to Amazon products and prioritize Amazon and deprioritize
competitors?
Mr. Sutton. The algorithms are optimized to predict what
customers want to buy regardless of the seller. We provide the
same criteria. And with respect to popularity, that's public
data on each product page, we provide the ranking of each
product.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay. I just want to give you an example of
an entrepreneur in Rhode Island who creates a better set of
headphones. She sells her product on Amazon on the marketplace,
sales soar, which is great for her, great for Amazon because
more people become Amazon Prime customers to buy this great
renowned product.
But instead of seeing the fruits of her success, the next
thing that happens is that this hardworking Rhode Islander
discovers that Amazon has rolled out a direct replica of her
product. And because Amazon controls the platform, Amazon gives
itself top billing and demotes the entrepreneur to page three
results, which most people will never see.
So how would anyone--in light of that kind of sequence of
events, how would any entrepreneur invest in this kind of
environment where that can happen, where there's no assurance
it won't?
Mr. Sutton. Our incentive is to help the seller succeed
because we rely on them. If we did that, we know they'd go
elsewhere. They have many options. So we apply the same
criteria to both, and we do not use their individual data when
we're making decisions to launch private brands.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
I will now turn to Google--to Google Search for a moment,
Mr. Cohen. Similar to results in Amazon, every day people think
they are getting the best, most accurate result for searches
for the products or services they're looking for. But instead
what is happening is people are seeing results for Google's own
services.
In 2004, Google's cofounder Larry Page said the purpose of
Google is to have people come to Google, quickly find out what
you want and to get you out of Google and get you to the right
place as fast as possible. Would you agree that Google still
claims that that's your principle--guiding principle?
Mr. Cohen. Congressman, our goal is to provide users
information as quickly and as efficiently as possible.
Mr. Cicilline. Sir, I want to direct your attention to two
studies. The first is a study that was recently produced by
Rand Fishkin, a leading expert on search engine optimization.
His study prominently reviewed desktops and found that the
majority of traffic to Google no longer goes out to the broader
web, but instead stays on Google products.
The second is the research by Cafferata Consulting which
also finds that Google is increasingly keeping both a majority
and a growing share of traffic within Google's ecosystem, sort
of a walled garden. Do you agree that these studies show that
Google is no longer showing people the best products or best
results, but instead is giving them results to keep them on
Google's products, not Google's platform?
Mr. Cohen. Thank you for the question, Congressman. I'm not
familiar with either of those studies, but what I can say is
that we send a lot of clicks, a lot of traffic to competitors.
In our own services we have aimed to connect merchants,
airlines, a range of other services directly with consumers
making the consumer experience better and making the experience
for advertisers and merchants better.
Mr. Cicilline. I regret my time has expired. But I would
just ask you to review these studies because if innovators and
entrepreneurs don't have traffic to their websites because the
Google search is rigged in favor of Google's own services by
keeping them inside Google's walled garden then the internet as
we know it ceases to be an economic opportunity. So I would
really ask you and welcome your comments after you have an
opportunity to study those.
And my time has long expired. I now recognize Mr. Steube,
the gentleman from Florida.
Mr. Steube. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I have got a very important question for Apple that I
believe is on the minds of all Americans, why do you keep
getting that alert for the iCloud and for the 99 cents on the
iCloud all the time, constantly, constantly until you pay the
99 cents for iCloud and then you are paying the 99 cents for
iCloud, but you are not using it.
Mr. Andeer. Thank you, Congressman. I am afraid I'm not
aware of the details around what you're talking about, I would
be happy to get back to you with any information on that. But
I'm honestly not familiar with that.
Mr. Steube. Okay, if you can give men some information on
that, because I've seen and a lot of people have asked me about
the fact that they constantly keep getting these alerts to use
iCloud and you don't want to use it, but the alerts won't go
away until you actually pay the 99 cents to use iCloud but
you're not using it. So I--if you have some information on
that, I'd love to get it.
I'd like to go to Amazon for a second and kind of piggyback
on the chair's questions. What's the current market share of
Amazon in total U.S. domestic retail sales?
Mr. Sutton. Amazon is 1 percent of the global retail market
and 4 percent of the U.S. retail market approximately.
Mr. Steube. So only 1 percent of the domestic retail sales.
So who is above Amazon in total U.S. retail market share?
Mr. Sutton. In the U.S. Walmart is two to three times
larger than we are.
Mr. Steube. Are there others or just Walmart?
Mr. Sutton. I don't know everyone who is potentially
larger. There are thousands of competitors across the retail
landscape.
Mr. Steube. So who is the current market share of Amazon
total U.S. domestic online retail sales?
Mr. Sutton. Online is not a separate market, it's just
another channel. We know customers shop online and offline and
evidence show that prices have converged between online and
offline.
With respect to online, Amazon is one of the leading
retailers. There are many other retailers including Walmart and
every other major retailer who has a large online presence, as
well as just online players such as eBay.
Mr. Steube. So you're like 1 percent, you stated. Is that
correct?
Mr. Sutton. Well, 1 percent of the global retail market and
4 percent of the U.S. retail market.
Mr. Steube. Let's just focus on U.S. So 4 percent of the
U.S. market, what's the largest market share of any retailer in
the total U.S. retail market?
Mr. Sutton. Amazon focuses on our customers and so I'm not
sure of exact market shares of all of our competitors because
that's not what we focus on as a company. I do know again that
Walmart is many times our size in the United States.
Mr. Steube. Okay. And Amazon sales online U.S. retail
shares growing at a faster rate of all companies or along the
same level as other companies. So I know Walmart's put a lot of
investment into their online platform. How do you compare to a
Walmart or to other retail stores online?
Mr. Sutton. Thank you for your question. The third party
reports I've see report Walmart growing at a faster rate than
we are online.
Mr. Steube. Okay. Your written statement suggested Amazon
competes directly with other sellers, serves competing sellers
as a distributor and serves other sellers simply as an online
marketplace platform through which they can reach their
customers, which you testified before.
Explain to me how that does or doesn't translate into
whether Amazon is leveraging allegedly dominant retail market
power into anticompetitive behavior against those other
sellers?
Mr. Sutton. I think the clearest answer to that question is
from the evidence showing how much we've invested to help those
third party sellers since we invited them into our store grow.
They are now the majority of our sales, and they are growing
twice as fast. We think that's great for these small and
medium-sized businesses and it is great for our customers.
Mr. Steube. Are you aware of any facts or figures that show
that consumer choices among outlets in the U.S. retail market
is declining or the competition in the U.S. market is failing
to keep consumer retail prices down?
Mr. Sutton. I'm only aware of data showing increasing
choice for consumers today.
Mr. Steube. Oh, man, we are going to get back to iCloud.
What is Amazon's share of the storage market for the online
cloud, for your cloud?
Mr. Sutton. We offer AWS for Enterprises, which is
different than a personal online storage.
Mr. Steube. Okay. Any other comment on that?
Mr. Sutton. With respect to Enterprises the vast majority
of that space is still operating on premise servers and cloud
is a new and developing space. We are one of the innovators so
we are a leader, but competition primarily exists with long-
standing on premise IT competitors.
Mr. Steube. When did Amazon get into the cloud services
market?
Mr. Sutton. A number of years ago. I don't remember the
exact year.
Mr. Steube. And how fast has this marketshare grown on the
cloud?
Mr. Sutton. Amazon innovated in creating cloud options for
both storage and compute for enterprises. So as one of the
early innovators we had to lead, but competitors, major
competitors have entered and are closing that gap such as
Microsoft, IBM, Google and many others. Although again cloud is
still in its very early days and primarily IT is still serviced
through on premise servers.
Mr. Steube. All right. Thank you my time has expired.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Thank you the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Johnson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
holding this very important and timely committee hearing. And
also I want to thank the witnesses for your appearance today.
Is it Parole or Perault, Mr. Parole or Mr. Perault?
Mr. Perault. Thank you, Congressman. It is Perault.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you sir. Mr. Perault, when was the last
time that Facebook changed its terms and conditions?
Mr. Perault. Thank you, Congressman. We----
Mr. Johnson. There's no need to thank me.
Mr. Perault. We evaluate our terms and conditions on a
regular basis.
Mr. Johnson. When is the last time you changed them?
Mr. Perault. We are constantly changing our terms and
conditions to ensure that people have the best experience on
our product.
Mr. Johnson. Certainly. So how many times over the last
year have you changed the terms and conditions?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, I don't have the specific data on
that. I'd be happy to get back to you.
Mr. Johnson. Ten times?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, I don't have the data.
Mr. Johnson. Twenty?
Mr. Perault. I don't have the data, but I do know that we
certainly face significant concerns about various different
aspects of our products, including privacy. That's one of the
reasons that we have actually called for regulation in that
area.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. Well, I just wanted to know
approximately how many times terms and conditions have changed.
A recent report from the Stigler center observed, quote, one
way in which digital platforms exploit their marketshare or
their market power is by requiring consumers to agree to terms
and conditions that are unclear, difficult to understand, and
constantly changing. Do you agree with that assessment?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, we take privacy very seriously.
It's important to us that we provide users with significant
transparency and control.
Mr. Johnson. I understand. I guess the point I'm trying to
make is the users don't really have much buy in to the
situation. They either have to check the box, agreeing to the
terms and conditions, oftentimes having not read it in order to
get the service or maintain the service or they just go without
the service.
So a user may sign up with one set of terms and conditions
that's valuable time in building a social network on Facebook
and then a month later be faced with a different set of terms
and conditions. And because there is no real alternative to
Facebook, the user has no choice but to accept those changes.
Isn't that correct?
Mr. Perault. No, Congressman, that is not correct.
Mr. Johnson. There is competition with Facebook?
Mr. Perault. Yes, Congressman, there is. We face fierce
competition for all the products and services that we offer.
People come to----
Mr. Johnson. Who would be the competition, if I might?
Mr. Perault. So many of our competitors----
Mr. Johnson. Share that secret.
Mr. Perault. Many of our competitors are sitting here at
this table with me.
Mr. Johnson. I think you're in a unique chair, in a unique
position among those who are seated at the table. Each one of
you occupy a unique and dominant position, but Facebook is--
stands alone in terms of social media. Any other social media
platform that could compete with Facebook?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, we certainly hope that in many
ways that we are unique. There may not be an identical
competitor to Facebook. We try to differentiate our services in
an innovative tech industry in which we compete. But yes, there
is significant competition in advertising. People can----
Mr. Johnson. Well, I'd like to offline I'd like to get a
list from you, so that I could do some shopping around myself.
And that's not to disparage Facebook's offering. I just would
like to know who your competition is. It's not readily
apparent.
Facebook's terms of service maintain that users, quote,
``Own'' end quote, their data. Yet, Facebook has repeatedly
prevented users from transferring their data to certain rival
platforms including Twitter, Vine, Voxer and MessageMe. How do
you reconcile Facebook's stated policy that users own their
data with Facebook's repeated refusal to allow users to
transfer their data on to rival platforms?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, we do offer a data portability
product and we've offered that product for a long period of
time, it is called download your information. We've improved
that product in the wake of the GDPR in Europe. We are actually
a member of the----
Mr. Johnson. You can actually transfer the Facebook data to
another platform?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, you are able to take your data
out of Facebook to another platform, yes. We are also members
of the data transfer project along with several other companies
to try to look for ways to facilitate better data portability
and our CEO Mark Zuckerberg has actually called for regulation
in this area, because of many of the difficult, technical and
privacy issues at stake. It is one that we are hoping to look
to work with Congress on to improve the offerings for our
users.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Thank you, sir. And I yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Demmings, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you to all of our witnesses for being with us today.
Mr. Sutton, bear with us. In recent years Amazon has
started selling digital advertisement placements. Analysts
estimate that digital ads brought in around $11 billion in
business last year. Because businesses are increasingly
dependent on Amazon, some of them are concerned that Amazon is
using its ad business to squeeze more money. As a Bloomberg
reporter recently wrote, Amazon's advertising is better
understood as an additional tax the company imposes on the
millions of businesses that sell through it's vast digital
mall. It's one more toll extracted from sellers, according to
the reporter.
Given how dependent businesses are on Amazon's platform for
online sales, what, if anything, Mr. Sutton, prevents Amazon
from using ads as another way to charging a toll for using its
platforms?
Mr. Sutton. Thank you for the question. We do offer
advertising as a service to our sellers as an optional service
that's not necessary, but that they can use to help get their
products discovered. The large majority of products sold in our
store are not sold through advertisements.
Again, there are many ways in which sellers have many
options. We provide that as an additional one. We know they
have many other options online where customers shop as well as
offline.
Mrs. Demings. So what would be your response to the
reporter's statement that Amazon's advertising is better
understood as an additional tax the company imposes on the
millions of businesses that sells through its vast digital
mall?
Mr. Sutton. Respectfully I disagree. That statement is not
correct. It is not a tax. It is like many services we offer
that's optional. And again there are many other ways that
sellers can advertise. They can sell--advertise through general
purpose search, which still remains the most popular way for
customers to find products online. And in fact, it is one of
the reasons we are one of largest customers of Google.
Mrs. Demings. You say the number is correct that you
brought in about $11 billion in advertising last year? Does
that sound about right?
Mr. Sutton. I don't know that exact figure. I'm happy to
follow up with it.
Mrs. Demings. Okay. Mr. Sutton, who do view as Amazon's
competitors with regard to third party sellers? And if you've
already covered this, I do apologize, but who do you view as
Amazon's competitors as it pertains to third party sellers?
Mr. Sutton. Thank you for the question. Third party sellers
have a wide variety of ways to sell. They can sell directly
through brick and mortar retail stores, through their own
website, and there are dozens of online marketplaces available
for them as well from Walmart, to eBay----
Mrs. Demings. So let's just say if I'm a third party
seller, what other platforms can I list my products on that
would allow them to be seen by a competing number of buyers?
Mr. Sutton. Thank you. Again, they could list on Walmart,
they could list on eBay, Target now has launched a marketplace.
There are other new marketplaces, including also the ones from
Chinese companies such as Alibaba, Rakuten. They are increasing
in numbers. In fact, there are so many marketplaces that there
is a billion dollar industry that has grown up to provide
services to sellers so that they can use them to list across
all marketplaces at the same time.
Mrs. Demings. And you believe that those other platforms
are competitive allow for competitive services.
Mr. Sutton. Yes, absolutely.
Mrs. Demings. Okay.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentlelady. I now recognize the
gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Neguse, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you to the
witnesses for appearing today and for your testimony.
I agree with my distinguished colleague from North Dakota
that antitrust analysis is obviously very fact specific, and
case specific, and industry specific and so forth. I want to
talk today about Facebook.
So Mr. Perault, following up on a question from the
gentleman from Georgia, I think what he was getting at is this,
is Facebook in your view a monopoly?
Mr. Perault. No, Congressman, it is not.
Mr. Neguse. Okay. So I assume the reason is because in your
view Facebook has a number of competitors as you said, and a
number of products that the company offers. Would that be a
fair characterization of your view?
Mr. Perault. Yes, Congressman, that's correct.
Mr. Neguse. What is the largest social media network
platform company by active users in the world? Do you know?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, I don't. I do know that we have
2.7 billion users.
Mr. Neguse. I can tell you that it's Facebook, it's number
one. Do you know the third largest company is WhatsApp. Who
owns WhatsApp or what company owns WhatsApp?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, we do.
Mr. Neguse. Facebook, correct?
Mr. Perault. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Neguse. And the fourth largest social media networking
platform in the world by active users is Facebook messenger. I
won't make you answer the question, suffice to say that that
company is also--that service is also owned by Facebook. The
sixth largest is Instagram. What company owns Instagram?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, Facebook does.
Mr. Neguse. Okay. So you can understand skepticism, because
when a company owns four of the largest six entities measured
by active users in the world in that industry, we have a word
for that and that is monopoly, or at least monopoly power.
Now with respect to my colleague the distinguished
gentleman from Wisconsin, he is right that under the Sherman
AntiTrust Act, a measure of whether or not a company is engaged
in monopolistic activities is whether or not there is
anticompetitive conduct at play. But, you know, I suspect you
and I may have some disagreements on that front.
And just to give you a sense of the way in which I think a
number of us are evaluating the facts before us, if you could
turn to Exhibit 1.5--if the committee staff would just put that
up on the screen--this is a document, to my understanding there
were a number of documents published about 8 months ago, as a
result of a parliamentary inquiry conducted by the U.K.
Parliament with respect to Facebook and various activities of
the company.
This is a platform policy, platform policy number 4. And
you'll see under there highlighted subparagraph 1 the language,
add something unique to the community, don't replicate core
functionality that Facebook already provides. This was a policy
maintained by Facebook. Is that correct?
Mr. Perault. That is correct. Although unfortunately I'm
having trouble seeing the exhibit. As I've gotten older, my
eyes have gotten worse.
Mr. Cicilline. It is behind you as well Mr. Perault.
Mr. Neguse. Mine as well. We will be sure to provide you a
copy.
This is no longer a policy maintained by Facebook. Is that
correct?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, that's correct.
Mr. Neguse. Okay. And I presume that is because this policy
facially would be construed as an anticompetitive one, correct?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, we have--thank you very much--the
Facebook platform was designed to enable third parties to
engage in complementary innovation that would benefit the
people who use our services.
When we launched the Facebook platform, we did have rules
of the road. We continue to have rules of the road that balance
a variety of considerations including protecting the user
experience, protecting privacy and protecting our investment in
our products. We have reevaluated those policies over time and
have changed them to fit the evolving nature of the industry in
which we exist.
Mr. Neguse. Well I appreciate that. And I understand
industries change, industries evolve and that your business has
to evolve to comport with that. I would say from my vantage
point, my understanding is Facebook did have a policy early in
its tenure, it's Exhibit 1 in which the company welcomed
developers with competing applications, including developers
whose applications might compete with Facebook-built
applications. That was a policy that was then repealed in favor
of policy 4.1 the prior document that I just showed.
So this notion that Facebook has been open to competition
as you described in your opening testimony, this notion that
it's a core value of the company is not borne out by the
documentary evidence that we've seen. And I think that's in
part why we are having this important hearing today. I see that
my time has expired.
I yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
gentlelady from Georgia, Ms. McBath.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you gentlemen
for your testimony today.
I am truly deeply concerned about the success of businesses
in my district. I represent Georgia's sixth congressional
district and small locally owned businesses are the economic
lifeblood of our communities. And they should have access to
markets and consumers without facing anticompetitive
constraints.
I also believe that Congress and agencies have a serious
responsibility to make sure that there's real competition in
the market so that startups, small businesses, and local
retailers are able to compete on the merits and give people the
best options they can find.
Mr. Sutton, this morning I met with seller that have had a
very positive experience growing their business through Amazon.
But some sellers have had a completely different kind of
experience. Some sellers report that Amazon uses a variety of
tactics to funnel merchants into Using Fulfillment by Amazon.
International antitrust authorities are investigating whether
Amazon privileges third-party vendors that use Fulfillment by
Amazon. Now does Amazon privilege vendors who use Amazon's
Fulfillment services over those who chose not to?
Mr. Sutton. Thank you for the question. Amazon's very proud
of all we've done to invest and help sellers succeed. And one
of those ways is we built a very successful operation and
delivery system, and we opened that up and made it available
for sellers to use, Fulfillment by Amazon. It is an optional
service that sellers can use if they want to. We continue to
invest and provide tools for them to ship directly as well.
We apply the same--we do not favor sell--products that use
FBA over others. Obviously FBA is one way to provide quick
delivery amongst many and we know that our customers do
appreciate quick delivery, that's why we gave that as an option
to our sellers to use amongst the various shipping options they
have.
Mrs. McBath. On the second panel that we have today, Ms.
Mitchell in her written testimony she highlights how Amazon
abruptly and arbitrarily suspends merchants' accounts, freezing
their funds and shutting down their Amazon pages. According to
her statement, Amazon frequently makes these decisions without
explanation, leaving merchants to navigate a black box while
their livelihoods are hanging in the balance.
According to another report in The Verge, quote, ``Sellers
are more worried about a case being opened on Amazon than an
actual court,'' end quote. So Mr. Sutton, how many employees
does Amazon have that are dedicated to addressing these kinds
of concerns?
Mr. Sutton. Thank you. Amazon again partners with sellers
and we are very proud of our success in helping them grow and
now be growing twice as fast as Amazon.
Mrs. McBath. But how many----
Mr. Sutton. We reluctantly take action----
Mrs. McBath [continuing]. But how many do you have, sir,
that are----
Mr. Sutton. We have thousands of employees dedicated to
helping and address concerns from third party sellers. We
absolutely do not take arbitrary action, but we do have to take
action on occasion when necessary. There is a dedicated group
of bad actors that attempt to sell fraudulent products or
counterfeit products or even dangerous products.
And we have to take swift and immediate action to protect
customers and to protect the legitimate sellers. We try to do
that through a transparent process and we always provide an
opportunity for sellers to appeal or to provide additional
information if they think we got it wrong. In the vast number
of situations they do not take advantage of those
opportunities.
Mrs. McBath. So how do you respond to the concern from
merchants who have been abruptly suspended by Amazon who they
say have no way of ever reaching an Amazon employee to make
their case. And so what recourse do they actually have?
Mr. Sutton. We provide a variety of ways for them to reach
out.
Mrs. McBath. Such as?
Mr. Sutton. I don't know the full way. I know we have a
dedicated customer team. We provide a tool, a dashboard tool so
that they could see the status of their account. We have a
dedicated team that will affirmatively follow up in the more
serious cases. We may communicate via email and allow them to
respond and provide details via email. There are a variety of
ways in which we try to always communicate and to receive
communications from our sellers.
I would be happy to follow up and provide the full examples
and details of that for you as well.
Mrs. McBath. If you could, I'd appreciate it. It is also
important to me that we keep good paying jobs in our
communities. Too often we hear that retailers, manufacturers
and suppliers have an uphill battle due to anticompetitive
prices online.
And Mr. Sutton, again numerous reports have identified
instances when online platforms priced goods significantly
below cost over the long-term, threatening mainstream
businesses and other retailers who can't compete on those
terms. And a letter that I am going ask be placed in the record
for today, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cicilline. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
MRS. MCBATH FOR THE OFFICIAL RECORD
=======================================================================
***********************************************************************
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mrs. McBath. Thank you.
The Retail Industry Leaders Association notes that although
intense competition is the hallmark of America's retail
industry, the absence of competition elsewhere in the retail
ecosystem stifles the benefits that have historically resulted
from the intense competition, through this intense competition.
Mr. Sutton, once again, how do you respond to concerns that
Amazon has the ability to absorb losses in any market that it
chooses?
Mr. Sutton. Thank you. Amazon faces fierce retail
competition across many and including from many members of RILA
who are amongst our biggest competitors, such as Walmart.
Amazon has run a profitable retail business for many years. The
retail business because of the competition has very thin
margins, but our retail business in the United States has been
profitable.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you. And Mr. Cohen, given the
extraordinary----
Mr. Cicilline. The gentlelady's time has expired, but if
you have----
Mrs. McBath. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Raskin.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I have a
question for Mr. Cohen. According to data produced by Rand
Fishkin. Google controls over 90 percent of the search engine
market in the United States. So congratulations on that.
Although this seems to fit the classical definition of monopoly
Google has argued that the company's monopoly in the search
market is nothing to worry about because competition is just a
click away.
I just want to make sure I have got Google's position
right. Is that essentially the argument against viewing it as a
monopoly?
Mr. Cohen. Thank you for the question, Congressman. I would
say that that definition of the market is quite narrow. And
that when consumers are searching for information online there
are a range of different services that they use. For example,
when people are searching for products, the majority of
Americans start their product searches on Amazon when they are
searching for places to travel, hotels and airlines. They start
with dedicated specialist competitors. So I think the market is
much broader than that.
Mr. Raskin. Well, let me followup then. I understand that
Google paid Apple $9 billion in 2018 and $12 billion in 2019
for the right to be the default search engine on Safari. Is
that right?
Mr. Cohen. Congressman, I'm not familiar with those
numbers.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. A billion is a big number so it is big
numbers. Would Google pay these sums if there were really an
effective competitive market in place?
Mr. Cohen. Congressman, I'm not familiar with those
numbers. We do reach syndication agreements with a range of
different partners.
Mr. Raskin. Are you familiar with the deal?
Mr. Cohen. I'm not close to the terms of the deal. I think
that if anything the prices probably reflect control or the
decisions made by platforms, rather than somebody seeking to
syndicate their services on those platforms.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. I mean, my sense is that if these numbers
are correct, that spending over $20 billion in 2 years to
essentially cure it's place as the default search engine
suggests that Google recognizes that defaults matter and that
switching cost for users are high. But I appreciate your
thoughts on that.
Let me come to Mr. Andeer. You are here? Thank you.
Apple's CEO, Mr. Cook, has argued that unlike your peers
who run add based businesses, Apple is a company that
fundamentally is privacy oriented. Do you believe that Apple is
a privacy oriented business?
Mr. Andeer. Yes, absolutely. We believe privacy is a
fundamental human right.
Mr. Raskin. Well then why has Apple allowed Google to be
the default search engine on Safari?
Mr. Andeer. Apple has with all of its products focused on
what is the best consumer experience. And so when it comes to
search, we conducted an open competition to see what did we
think would be the best for our consumers. And consumers have
always gone to Google. And so we ultimately went to Google, but
we also make a number of options available to them. So it is
very easy to change the default on your iPhone to any number of
choices, including DuckDuckGo and other search engines that
perhaps have more privacy protections.
Mr. Raskin. Apple charges app developers a 30 percent tax
on in app purchases in the first year and then 15 percent every
year thereafter. In the statement submitted for the record,
Spotify argues that by charging the 30 percent tax on in app
purchases, Apple forces our providers to make an impossible
choice, either pass the cost on to consumers or refuse to pay
the commission and face a litany of technical hurdles imposed
by Apple. These complaints have been echoed by other app
developers as you may know.
Mr. Andeer, how did Apple arrive at the amount of a 30
percent fee? And could Apple charge a 35, or 45, or 50 percent
fee for in app purchases?
Mr. Andeer. So thank you for the question. Eighty-four
percent of the apps, over 2 million apps available on the app
store pay nothing to Apple. It is only a very small percentage
that pay a commission. When it comes to Spotify, they are one
of our most successful developers. But yet they pay a
commission on less than 1 percent of their subscribers to
Apple. And so they've been able to build a successful business,
thanks to the app store. And we are proud of their success. We
continue to invest in tools and other resources to make it very
easy for developers to create great applications.
You asked how we came to the 30 percent. Ten years ago, and
it is easy to forget, most software was distributed through
physical distribution like CompUSA or Best Buy. Typically a
developer would share up to 60, 70 percent of the retail price
with the distribution channel. So we set a very aggressive
price of 30 percent, only applying to digital content in an
effort to compete for those developer's mindshare and it has
been very successful.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. Do I have, Mr. Chairman, for one more
question?
Okay. A quick question for Mr. Perault. Facebook announced
in January that it would be integrating WhatsApp. Instagram and
Messenger. An announcement that coincided with growing calls in
different places to break up Facebook, specifically by undoing
the buy up of WhatsApp and Instagram. Facebook says the
integration will let it protect users by providing end-to-end
encryption. Is Facebook's integration ploy an attempt to thwart
or preempt these efforts to break up Facebook?
Mr. Perault. Thank you, Congressman. No, it is not. We face
fierce competition for the products and services that we offer.
It's our understanding that there are many services in the
market that offer more and more privacy Protective Services.
And so our pivot towards privacy with respect to interoperating
our services was because of the competition that we face in the
market.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentleman. And the ranking
member has agreed to do a second round of questions and I
appreciate that indulgence.
Mr. Sutton, I want to just turn to you for a moment. In
your testimony you have repeatedly emphasized that Amazon is a
great partner to third party merchants. Now reports suggest
that Amazon has been steadily increasing the fees it charges
merchants. According to a recent article in the Washington
Monthly, in 2014 Amazon fulfillment fees accounted for 17
percent of the seller's total cost.
Today Amazon has raised fees so they now launch around 27
percent of a seller's cost. Amazon has also increased storage
fees by over 40 percent since 2015. Seller fees are extremely
lucrative for Amazon, earning the company over $42 billion in
2018 according to the same article.
And so, Mr. Sutton, my question is given how dependent
merchants are on Amazon's platform, are these steady fee hikes
by Amazon a pure exercise of its outsized buyer power?
Mr. Sutton. Thank you for the question. It is because
sellers have so many options that we have to provide
competitive options. And those fee estimates are not accurate.
The fees that are necessary to be paid in our store to sell
items have actually been steady for a number of years and
slightly declining.
There are optional fees such as Fulfillment, which are
competitively priced to other fulfillment options and they
reflect the cost of the filling products, sending items,
storing them of that nature. But those are reflective and
competitive with other options sellers would have through the
many other third parties that offer similar services or doing
it themselves.
Mr. Cicilline. Well, I would be anxious to receive from you
the data that disputes the numbers. But let me understand the
argument, you said because the seller has so many options they
should therefore--that's the explanation for increased cost by
Amazon on the seller, it's the exact opposite. I mean, the fact
that sellers have other options would not cause Amazon to
charge more money. So I don't understand your argument.
Mr. Sutton. I'm sorry. Let me clarify.
Mr. Cicilline. Please.
Mr. Sutton. Because they have so many options that we
partner with them and we charge fair fees. It's the reason our
fees have been steady, which was the point I was trying to
make. The fees for listing in our store has stayed steady or
slightly declined. Some of these optional fees are based on
market costs, and they have adjusted and they are competitive
with other options in that space.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Over the years various reporting
has documented the aggressive and predatory business tactics
that Amazon employs. In 2013 Brad Stone reported that Amazon
named one of its business campaigns the Gazelle Project, a
strategy where Amazon would approach small publishers, and I
quote, ``the way that a cheetah would a sickly gazelle.'' end
quote. Is the Gazelle Project still in place, Mr. Sutton?
Mr. Sutton. I'm not familiar with that project.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay. If you could get back to me with an
answer. I would also like to know whether Amazon pursues
similarly predatory campaigns in other parts of your business.
If you could get me answers to both those questions I'd
appreciate it.
Mr. Cicilline. The final thing I want to just ask this
committee's investigation is extremely important for the
economy, for consumers, for those you represent. And I hope
that each of the witnesses today will pledge on behalf of the
companies they represent to cooperate to the fullest extent
possible, and to act in good faith to respond to the
committee's requests in a timely and complete manner.
I will ask you, Mr. Andeer, if you can answer that question
on behalf of your company?
Mr. Andeer. Yes, we will.
Mr. Cicilline. And you Mr. Sutton?
Mr. Sutton. Yes.
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Perault.
Mr. Perault. Thank you, Chairman. Yes, we will.
Mr. Cicilline. And Mr. Cohen?
Mr. Cohen. Yes, gladly.
Mr. Cicilline. And finally there has been some reporting of
I think very disturbing efforts by a particular company to
aggressively impede congressional oversight, to go so far as to
hire opposition research firms to do opposition research on
Members of Congress and staff of the committee.
And so I would similarly ask you in the spirit of
cooperation do you commit to not engage in those tactics in
response to this investigation?
Mr. Andeer.
Mr. Andeer. Yes, we would never engage in that sort of
conduct.
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Sutton?
Mr. Sutton. Yes.
Mr. Perault. Yes.
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Perault, thank you. Mr. Cohen?
Mr. Cohen. Yes.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
With that, I will recognize the gentleman from North
Dakota, Mr. Armstrong.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you Mr. Chair. So Mr. Andeer, the 30
percent markup on apps, that's been the same since the company
started, since the app started, right?
Mr. Andeer. Yes, it's correct. But for some apps we
actually reduce that to 15 percent and of course that 30
percent only applies to less than 16 percent of the apps in the
app store.
Mr. Armstrong. And you said 84 percent don't pay anything,
right?
Mr. Andeer. That's correct.
Mr. Armstrong. But what percentage of the total U.S. global
revenue from apps come from the remaining 16 percent that do
share revenue?
Mr. Andeer. I don't know the answer to that question. I do
know that developers monetize in a number of ways. And so, we
have developers on the app store that monetize through
advertising through selling of physical goods, through the
selling of services. The value that developers collect through
the app store is probably hundreds of billions, perhaps over a
trillion dollars.
Mr. Armstrong. So how does the Apple app store fit into
your company's offerings?
Mr. Andeer. So I think to provide some context, when we
launched the first iPhone, it didn't include the App Store. We
thought developers and content creators would access consumers
through the Safari web browser, and we have long supported an
open and free internet. We created the App Store as a
complement, an alternative to the open and free internet. Now,
we have done a lot to encourage developers to create as many
great apps as possible. And we really look at it as a way to
continue to sell devices. We're a device company at the end of
the day. We're looking to convince consumers that we offer the
best possible product.
Mr. Armstrong. How about Apple Music?
Mr. Andeer. Apple Music is part of that strategy. So we
offer Apple Music, but we also make it very easy for
competitors to access each and every IOS user through the App
Store. So Spotify, Google Play Music, and dozens of others
offer apps that compete with Apple Music.
Mr. Armstrong. Is Apple more of a hardware business, a
software business, or a platform business?
Mr. Andeer. We think of ourselves as a products company
first and foremost. So we are selling an experience to
consumers. We are selling an entire product so everything from
hardware, software, to services. It is the total package.
Mr. Armstrong. To what degree does Apple share or not share
markets with the other companies providing testimony today.
Mr. Andeer. We compete with all of the companies on this
panel in various ways, in addition to dozens the others.
Mr. Armstrong. I just felt like you didn't have enough
questions during the first round of questions, so I wanted to
make sure, sir. And this is going to go back to go what my
friend Mr. Neguse was talking about, and then I'm going to go
to Mr. Perault. You can't use Facebook Messenger without
Facebook, right, or can you?
Mr. Perault. I believe that you can, Congressman.
Mr. Armstrong. Okay. So they are two separate and distinct.
Do you know what percent of people that use Messenger that
don't use Facebook?
Mr. Perault. I do not have that data. Would be happy to
follow up.
Mr. Armstrong. And the reason I bring it up is, when we
talk about competition versus complementing, and I mean how we
use this, like, I just asked you all of those things because I
wouldn't know where to get anything other than the Apple App
Store. I'm sure other things exist, but I don't know about
them. And I think there's a lot of us that are in that
situation. So, with that, I just think, as we're closing this
out, I hope as we move forward these hearings become more
focused, more single-topic-specific focused. And then I would
just encourage everybody and the companies who are testifying
to be forthright with answers, and the questions that are--I
can tell you about the half the questions being asked today. Of
which I'm assuming you all with your vast resources and company
resources could do as well. And it sure makes it a lot easier
as we go forward and we focus on specific topics or specific
things it will be easier for everybody if we are more
forthright, honest and transparent with our answers. With that,
I yield.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
gentlelady from Georgia, Mrs. McBath, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Wall Street Journal recently reported that Google Maps
is overrun with millions of false business addresses and fake
names, as many as 11 million. The article also noted that
Google's ad businesses actually profits from these scams while
consumers and legitimate locally owned businesses suffer. Mr.
Cohen given the extraordinary power that Google enjoys over
these small and local businesses, what measures is Google
taking to identify and remove fraudulent listings? And is it a
lack of competition in online search that allows Google to be
so complacent by addressing this problem head on?
Mr. Cohen. Congresswoman, thank you for the question. I'm
not familiar with this Wall Street Journal report. I'm also not
familiar with any claims of fraudulent listings in Google maps
of that scale. We take a number of measures to address
fraudulent listings. It is in our interest to present the most
accurate, up-to-date information as possible to our consumers,
precisely because we operate in a competitive marketplace.
Mrs. McBath. Can you make available to the committee the
processes that you use to make sure that people aren't
fraudulently----
Mr. Cohen. I would be glad to follow up once I discuss it
with the experts in my company.
Mrs. McBath. Okay. Thank you. I yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. Cicilline. I recognize the gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Raskin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Chairman, thank you. I am concerned about
business conduct discriminates against competitors online your
platforms are so dominant, a decision by any one of them,
whether it is deliberate or accidental, malignant or benign,
can be fatal for a business that relies on your platform in
order to reach your customers. First of all, do you all agree
that, in theory, each of your businesses can pick winners and
losers in the marketplace? And we can go down the line. Do you
agree?
Mr. Andeer. No, I don't. I look at the facts of the
marketplace in each and every single market in which we
compete, whether it is music or books or video. There are
companies that are far more successful in our platform than we
are.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. Mr. Sutton, what's your response?
Mr. Sutton. Respectfully, I disagree. Amazon offers one
store amongst thousands of retail options for customers who
shop across them every day. Customers pick the winners and
losers.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Perault.
Mr. Perault. Congressman, I disagree as well. We face
fierce competition for the products and services that we offer.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Cohen. Yes, Congressman. Online people can--traffic
anywhere they like, they can click on whatever services they
like. We often see that in our search results new companies and
new ideas are surfacing all the time that we never heard of.
Mr. Raskin. Let's work our way back down the other way,
then. Do you have processes in place for businesses to seek
redress if they believe that they've been discriminated against
by your platform?
Mr. Cohen. Yes, Congressman, we do.
Mr. Raskin. Can you describe briefly what that is?
Mr. Cohen. There is a process for firms to appeal the way
that they are ranked. I'm not familiar with how it works
indepth, but I'd be happy to follow up with you.
Mr. Raskin. Okay, Mr. Perault.
Mr. Perault. Congressman, we do have processes as well. We
have an appeals process for instance, and we are looking to
expand and improve that process.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. And that appeals process, how does that
work, they go to--who do they go to?
Mr. Perault. Congressman, pages for instance that are
disabled on Facebook that are able to appeal the fact that they
are disabled, we would then review that and make a
determination on the appeal.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. Mr. Sutton.
Mr. Sutton. Most of our large competitors operate their own
independent stores not through Amazon. With respect to the
small- and medium-size sellers that sell through our store, we
have many processes in place. We have a Seller Central that
provides a lot of tools and services for them and lots of
opportunities to communicate with Amazon if they have any
concerns.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Andeer.
Mr. Andeer. First and foremost, it is the consumers who
make it very clear if they are unhappy with the experience on
our products. And we have been very straightforward with
wanting to offer not just our own services but third-party
services as well. I would also say that we also employ hundreds
of Apple employees who are focused on reviewing apps and are in
constant communication with developers. And there is an
escalation path within Apple to make sure any concerns or
issues are quickly escalated. And we address those each and
every week.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you for those answers.
Companies across the digital markets, nonetheless, live in
fear of retaliation. I think by any of the firms that you
represent. And this fear has kept some of them speaking up
publicly about the anti-competitive practices that they
experience and the committee has received a lot of
communication for people in advance of this hearing. One
business wrote: Unfortunately, we are not able to be more
public at this time out of concern for retribution to our
business.
Another wrote: Given how powerful Google is and their past
actions, we are, quite frankly, worried about retaliation. So
my question to you is, would you commit that, on behalf of your
company, that you will not retaliate in any way against any of
the businesses that cooperate with this committee or share
requested information with us as part of the investigation.
Will you all agree to a nonretaliation policy towards
businesses that participate Mr. Andeer?
Mr. Andeer. Yes, as Apple's chief compliance officer, I
would take such an allegation of retaliation extremely
seriously.
Mr. Raskin. That's great to hear. Mr. Sutton?
Mr. Sutton. Yes, we would absolutely not retaliate against
anyone who cooperates with the committee.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Perault.
Mr. Perault. Thank you, Congressman. Yes.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Cohen. Yes for me, too.
Mr. Raskin. I appreciate that because you guys have done a
good job of representing your businesses, but if there were a
monopoly and you asked them if they were a monopoly, they would
say they are not a monopoly. So, obviously, we've got to do
work that goes beyond just asking you for your opinion. You've
got to talk to other people. And so, for that to be meaningful,
they can't be living in fear of retaliation from you so.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Raskin. We have now been
notified that the ranking member of the full Judiciary
Committee has called for a roll call vote. So we're going to
take a quick 10 minute recess so we can all vote, and we will
resume with the second panel. I want to thank the witnesses
from our first panel for being here. You're excused. You are
welcome, of course, to stay for the second panel, but we very
much appreciate you being here today and sharing the
perspective on the current state of competition in the digital
marketplace.
We are in recess until the call of the chair.
[Recess.]
Mr. Cicilline. The subcommittee will come to order. I again
want to apologize to our witnesses. There is historic action on
the House floor that has taken a number of our committee
members away from the committee, but I'd like to get started.
And now we'll introduce our second panel of witnesses. The
first witness on our second panel is Timothy Wu, the Julius
Silver Professor of Law at Columbia Law School. Professor Wu is
an expert on antitrust, copyright, and communications law, and
he is a contributing opinion writer for The New York Times.
He's the author of a number of important works that have
framed discussions around technology and antitrust, including
``The Master Switch'' and ``The Curse of Bigness.'' Professor
Wu has twice been part of the Politico 50 list of individuals
transforming American politics and was named to the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2017. Professor Wu received his
bachelor of science from McGill University and his J.D. from
Harvard Law School.
Our second witness on today's panel is Dr. Fiona Scott
Morton, the Theodore Nierenberg Professor of Economics at the
Yale University School of Management.
Dr. Scott Morton is nationally recognized as a leading
scholar on issues of competition and has published articles
that range widely across industries and leading economic
journals.
From 2011 to 2012, she served as Deputy Assistant Attorney
General for Economics at the Antitrust Division of the United
States Department of Justice where she helped to enforce the
Nation's antitrust laws. Dr. Scott Morton received her B.A.
from Yale and her Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
The third witness on our panel is Stacy Mitchell, the
codirector of the Institute for Local Self-Reliance. She has
spent years working with policymakers and grassroots
organizations to help develop and enact city, state, and
federal policies to strengthen independent business and curb
corporate power. Ms. Mitchell has appeared in publications like
The Nation, The Atlantic, and The Wall Street Journal, and her
works have had a significant influence on discussions around
corporate consolidation. Her paper ``Antitrust and the Decline
of America's Independent Businesses'' earned Ms. Mitchell
recognition in 2017 as part of the Annual Jerry S. Cohen Award
for Antitrust Scholarship. Ms. Mitchell received her B.A. from
Macalester College and currently serves on the Board of the
Main Center for Economic Policy.
Our fourth witness is Maureen Ohlhausen, a partner at Baker
Botts LLP. Prior to joining Baker Botts, Ms. Ohlhausen led the
Federal Trade Commission as Acting Chairman and Commissioner.
While at the FTC from 2012 to 2018, she directed all aspects of
their antitrust work. She has published dozens of articles on
antitrust, privacy, IP regulation, FTC litigation,
telecommunications, and international law issues.
Ms. Ohlhausen has particular expertise in the intersection
of antitrust, technology, and privacy issues. She has received
numerous awards for her work and scholarship including the
FTC's Robert Pitofsky Lifetime Achievement Award. Ms. Ohlhausen
received her B.A. from the University of Virginia and her J.D.
from the Antonin Scalia Law School, formerly the George Mason
University School of Law.
Today's fifth witness is Carl Szabo, vice president and
general counsel at NetChoice. Before joining NetChoice, he
worked as an intellectual property attorney at Wildman Harrold
Allen & Dixon advising clients on privacy, e-commerce, and
contractual matters. Mr. Szabo has extensive experience in
taxation, privacy, copyright, and trademark law.
Before receiving his J.D., he worked at the FTC where he
helped create and implement their consumer information security
outreach plan. Mr. Szabo was also an adjunct professor of
privacy law at the Antonin Scalia Law School. He received his
B.A. from Rice University and his J.D. and Communications Law
Certificate from the Catholic University of America.
Our last witness today is Morgan Reed, the executive
director of The App Association. He specializes in issues
involving application development as it intersects with
privacy, intellectual property, competition, and innovation.
Prior to joining The App Association, he served as managing
director of North American sales for a Taiwan-based trading
company specializing in the manufacture of technology products
for American markets.
Recently, Mr. Reed has focused on developing an innovators
network, organizing a team of intellectual property
professionals to deliver a series of lectures across the United
States focused on the importance of IP law. Mr. Reed received
his B.A. and graduate degree at Arizona State University and
attended the University of Utah and the National Taiwan
University.
We welcome all of our distinguished witnesses on the second
panel. Thank you for participating in today's hearing. Now, if
you would rise, I'll begin by swearing you in. Please raise
your right hand. Do you swear or affirm under penalty of
perjury that the testimony you are about to give is true and
correct to the best of your knowledge, information, and belief,
so help you God?
Let the record show the witnesses answered in the
affirmative. Thank you. You may be seated.
Please know that each of your written statements will be
entered into the record in its entirety. Accordingly, I ask
that you summarize your testimony in 5 minutes. To help you
stay within that time, there's a timing light on your table.
When the light turns green to yellow, you have 1 minute to
conclude your testimony. When the light turns red, it signals
that your 5 minutes has expired.
And we'll begin, Mr. Wu, with you. You have 5 minutes.
TESTIMONY OF TIMOTHY WU, JULIUS SILVER PROFESSOR OF LAW,
COLUMBIA LAW SCHOOL; FIONA SCOTT MORTON, THEODORE NIERENBERG
PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS, YALE SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT; STACY
MITCHELL, CO-DIRECTOR, INSTITUTE FOR LOCAL SELF-RELIANCE;
MAUREEN OHLHAUSEN, PARTNER, BAKER BOTTS LLP; CARL SZABO, VICE
PRESIDENT AND GENERAL COUNSEL, NETCHOICE; AND MORGAN REED,
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, THE APP ASSOCIATION.
TESTIMONY OF TIMOTHY WU
Mr. Wu. Thank you, Chairman and other members of the
committee. It is a great pleasure to be here today, and I'm
very grateful that the subcommittee is conducting this work and
these investigations. I believe this is one of the most
important economic issues facing our country.
I think we face a vitally important question here, which is
this, whether the United States will remain the place that new
industries start, the place where startups get their start, the
place where inventors think that they have a chance to
challenge the dominant firms of their day, where innovation
flourishes, where really the United States is capable of being
the place, as I've said before, that new industries are
started.
And I think that is something that has come into question.
I think that we face across the economy an over consolidation,
an over concentration of many industries, and I think this is
particularly evident and, in fact, extreme in the tech
industries.
So, over the last 2 hours of the first panel, we listened
to something that to me could have been a hearing in the year
2005 or maybe almost like a fantasy zone. If we're to believe
what the testifiers were saying--and they were under oath--we
live in a time of incredibly fierce competition. I could leave
this hearing, go to my garage, and start a challenger to
Google, Facebook, and Amazon. There are no barriers to
competition. Every competition is only one click away.
I think that everybody knows that's not true. There's no
mystery anymore about whether the tech markets have flipped.
There's no question as to whether there were barriers to entry
and whether the tech economies have, in fact, become a very
difficult place for people to get started.
People are starting to talk about the decline in the number
of startups, almost unthinkable in the United States, which has
always had a comparative advantage in being the place where
startups will get their start.
So I think it is time for the reassertion of what I think
have been incredibly successful policies from the last century,
namely the antitrust laws and pro-competitive regulation on the
model of the telecom laws and some of the FTC regulations.
We have a trilogy of cases in the tech space in particular,
IBM, AT&T, and Microsoft, which were big section 2 cases, which
were criticized at the time of being certain to interfere with
competition and hurt American companies at a time when Japan
seemed very threatening.
In retrospect, when you look back at the effects of these
big cases, they loosened up the tech markets; they helped to
contribute to an enormous boom in the tech and telecom markets
that lasted and has lasted more than 30 years, and has restored
the United States to a place of global leadership in the tech
market.
So I think that that trilogy of cases and some of the most
important procompetitive regulation at the FCC and FTC is the
policy we need in this time and not a policy of trying to
endorse or support national champions.
If I have time in questions, I'll address some of the
things that were said earlier, but I want to address one or two
right now. In the testimony we heard earlier, I think it's very
notable that Facebook had trouble naming competitors. They were
repeatedly asked. They couldn't name their competitor.
I think there's a very simple reason for that: They've
bought their competitors. They have bought the most threatening
companies to them, and that is the reason that it's so hard for
them to name them. They could've said Instagram and WhatsApp,
but they own them. In fact--and Facebook also said that its
intent when it bought these companies was peripherally benign.
It saw them as promising companies. It wanted to incubate them.
I suggest that this subcommittee look into an email written
by Mark Zuckerberg around the time of the Instagram acquisition
where he stated, as has been reported in the press, that the
purpose of this--and this is paraphrasing--was to eliminate a
dangerous, potential nascent competitor. You have subpoena
power, if I'm not mistaken, and it might not be a bad idea to
get your hands on that letter.
I'll speak just in my last 20 seconds about Amazon and
their testimony. Amazon swore up and down that there's nothing
funny about their searches or algorithms. They would never
favor their own products over another, but I think there needs
to be serious scrutiny of the Amazon search engine.
The FTC in 2001 issued a ruling suggesting--or a letter
saying that search should be what consumers expect. And I think
we have under enforcement of the questions as to whether
searches are deceptive. And I'm over my time, but I will
suggest that in each of these comments there were statements
that were really not reflective of the conditions of
competition in this country and the conditions of innovation,
and I'm so glad that the subcommittee is taking the time to
look at these issues.
[The statement of Mr. Wu follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Professor Wu.
And I assure you that the committee is not bound by the
characterizations of the witnesses about the nature of the
markets or the lack of competition. That's the purpose of the
investigation, and we'll take you up on your suggestions.
Next, I recognize Dr. Fiona Scott Morton for 5 minutes.
TESTIMONY OF FIONA SCOTT MORTON
Ms. Scott Morton. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Cicilline,
for the invitation to testify today. I agree with my colleague
that we have just heard four very careful corporate
discussions. From an economist's perspective, there were a
number of concerns that they failed to mention, those in
particular that negatively impact competition and innovation.
Digital platforms provide tremendous benefits, and yet
they've also created problems, such as insufficient
competition, and that leads to too little innovation and
entrepreneurship. I urge you as a committee to use this
investigation to identify what types of antitrust enhancements
and regulatory tools are needed to both jump start competition
in this sector and protect it going forward to the benefit both
of consumers and small businesses.
As is detailed in the report that I submitted as my
testimony, there are a number of characteristics of platforms
that tend to drive them toward concentrated markets, very large
economies of scale. Consumers exacerbate this with their
behavioral biases. We don't scroll down to the second page. We
accept defaults. We follow the framing the platform gives us
and instead of searching independently.
And what that does is it makes it very hard for small
companies to grow and for new ones to get traction against a
dominant platform. And without the threat of entry from
entrepreneurs and growth from existing competitors, the
dominant platform doesn't have to compete as hard.
If it's not competing as hard, then there's several harms
that follow from that. One is higher prices for advertisers,
many of these platforms are advertising supported. Then there's
higher prices to consumers who may think that they're getting a
good deal by paying a price of zero, but the competitive price
might well be negative. The consumers might well be able to be
paid for using these platforms in a competitive market.
Other harms include low quality in the form of less
privacy, more advertising, and more exploitative content that
consumers can't avoid because, as Tim just said, there isn't
anywhere else to go.
And lastly, without competitive pressure, innovation is
lessened, and in particular it's channeled in the direction the
dominant firm prefers rather than being creatively spread
across directions chosen by entrance. And this is what we
learned both from AT&T and IBM and Microsoft is that when the
dominant firm ceases to control innovation, there's a
flowering, and it's very creative and market driven.
So the solution to this problem of insufficient competition
is complimentary steps forward in both antitrust and
regulation. Antitrust must recalibrate the balance it strikes
between the risk of over enforcement and under enforcement. The
evidence now shows we've been under enforcing for years, and
consumers have been harmed. We have advances in both the theory
and empirical tools that demonstrate how we can better identify
those harms and measure them.
Digital platforms in particular do raise a number of
practical enforcement challenges, for example, measuring
quality adjusted prices, okay. That's hard. But Congress could
enable the agencies to bring these cases nonetheless by
articulating through statute the risks that Congress wishes
courts to weigh and the evidence they should accept.
For example, if a dominant platform wants to acquire a
nascent entrant when there's uncertainty over how close a
competitor that entrant is going to become in the future, how
should courts treat that uncertainty? Okay, today, that
uncertainty essentially defaults to buy anybody small you want.
That's our rule.
Congress could change that default to you only get to buy
the nascent entrant if the dominant firm proves to the court
that the acquisition will benefit consumers, and then only in
that case can the merger occur. So the defaults that we use in
court really matter, and Congress can write laws that change
those defaults.
Congress could bring enforcement of the antitrust laws more
in line with modern evidence and the resource intensity of
modern investigations by shifting burdens of proof to
defendants in certain settings. That would likely increase
accuracy because the dominant or acquiring firm has the
understanding and evidence of its business model that's needed
to assess the impact of the conduct or merger.
Lastly, regulation is a critical complement to more robust
antitrust enforcement. Congress could give a regulator tools
that allow it move quickly, something that litigation typically
does not do, and effectively when dominant platforms pose a
harm to competition. For example, a regulator could oversee a
requirement that platforms don't harmfully discriminate between
their own services and those of rivals.
If an agency established a violation of the antitrust laws
and determined that the best method of restoring competition
was, for example, mandatory interoperability between the
dominant firm and small entrants, a regulator could oversee and
monitor that interoperability and make sure it happened. Other
remedies that require monitoring might be data sharing,
unbundling of services, or data porting from one service to
another.
A regulator could also establish base line conditions for
competition so that entrepreneurs can enter a more level
playing field and small businesses can grow. So, for example,
an open standard from micro payments to consumers would be
helpful.
In conclusion, strengthening both antitrust enforcement and
regulatory oversight of digital platforms is necessary in my
view to achieve competition in this sector so that it best
serves the American people. Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Scott Morton follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Dr. Scott Morton.
And now the chair recognizes Ms. Mitchell for 5 minutes.
TESTIMONY OF STACY MITCHELL
Ms. Mitchell. Thank you, Chairman Cicilline and members of
the committee. I really appreciate this opportunity to
participate in this hearing and this historically important
investigation.
America's independent businesses are in trouble. They are
declining rapidly across many sectors of the economy and it's
not because they can't compete. On the contrary, research shows
that in many sectors they actually out perform their larger
rivals on many measures, including price.
Rather, the evidence suggests that the problem can be
traced to changes in policy and particularly our antitrust
enforcement that have allowed a few dominant corporations to
consolidate markets and given them free reign to hobble their
smaller competitors.
Today, this threat is really magnified in our digital
markets. A handful of dominant players now act as gatekeepers.
Amazon, in particular, last year, Amazon captured about $1 of
every $2 that Americans spend online. But the more
consequential measure of its market power is that half of all
online shopping searches now start on Amazon's platform.
What this means is if you are--is that for every--virtually
every company in the economy that either makes or retails
anything increasingly to reach the online market you have
little choice but to sell through a platform that's run by your
most aggressive competitor.
This is a bitter pill. Becoming a seller on Amazon's
platform means forfeiting to Amazon your product knowledge, a
trove of data about your transactions. It means giving Amazon a
sizable cut of your revenue, and it means entering into a
relationship that is often predatory.
Studies show that Amazon learns from the retailers on its
platform and starts selling their most popular items itself. It
has capsized businesses overnight by changing its terms, gating
products so they can't sell them suddenly, or simply canceling
their accounts without explanation.
In the absence of competing platforms, there's no downward
pressure on the fees that Amazon can charge sellers, and indeed
these fees now constitute a sizable tax on its competitors'
trade.
And although Amazon didn't address this directly today, it
is true that, in order to rank high and have a better chance of
winning a buy box, you need to use its fulfillment services,
and those fees have increased by double digits for the last few
years.
Amazon is many things. It's a platform. It's a retailer.
It's a manufacturer. It's a digital ad giant and so much more.
And, really, I think key to understanding its market power is
that it's able to leverage the interplay between these
different business lines to extort value from its competitors.
An executive at a large, well-known performance footwear
brand that sells to Amazon told, me that as long as his company
sold to Amazon on their terms, they would help him police the
counterfeiters and the other nefarious sellers on the platform.
But the moment that they pushed back, that they didn't
agree to that next big discount or the change in terms,
Amazon's site became a Wild West of sellers misrepresenting his
brand, many overseas and unreachable. He said, quote, they use
this as a punitive measure. They can sink companies without
anyone to answer to.
Increasingly our commerce is occurring not in a market but
in a private arena governed by Amazon, where it has the power
to regulate, tax, and punish America's entrepreneurs. And the
consequences of this are being felt around the country. There
are few metros that are doing well, but most places are not.
Local businesses are disappearing and, with them, a pathway to
the middle class. Producers are struggling to invest in new
products and grow their companies. New business formation is
down to historic lows.
And for many Americans, including those who walked out of
an Amazon warehouse this week, work has become increasingly
exploitative because there are so few companies competing for
their labor.
Amazon would like us to believe that to challenge its
dominance is to somehow challenge the digital revolution
itself. But the issue here is not technology; it's power, and
it's the policies that enable that concentration of power.
In fact, the urgent risk we face if we do not act is that
entrepreneurialism and invention will become increasingly
stifled. I hope the committee will consider several policy
tools as part of this investigation. In particular, we very
much endorse the approach that Congress took with regard to the
railroads, that if you operate essential infrastructure, you
can't also compete with the businesses that rely on that
infrastructure.
But we also need nondiscrimination rules for platforms,
stronger enforcement against anticompetitive conduct, and
changes to merger policy particularly in light of the pivotal
acquisitions that Amazon and other tech giants have made that
have flown under the enforcement agency's radar.
Thank you very much.
[The statement of Ms. Mitchell follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Ms. Mitchell.
The chair now recognizes Ms. Ohlhausen for 5 minutes.
TESTIMONY OF MAUREEN OHLHAUSEN
Ms. Ohlhausen. My thanks to Chairman Cicilline and members
of the committee for inviting me to testify. I'm Maureen
Ohlhausen, and as a former Acting Chairman and Commissioner of
the Federal Trade Commission and a long-time antitrust
practitioner, I hope to offer some perspectives to assist the
committee with its important inquiry.
In reaction to today's technology-driven economy, there's a
perception in some quarters that antitrust needs to change from
principally protecting consumers to pursuing other goals. Given
the clear consumer benefits of technology-driven innovation,
however, I'm concerned about reducing the focus on consumer
welfare.
But believing that consumer welfare is the appropriate goal
does not mean being passive or embracing the view that
antitrust cannot improve its tools to detect anticompetitive
behavior. If those tools suggest that competition will be
harmed and consumers made worse off from the behavior of any
firm, antitrust enforcers should act.
And my experience suggests that a successful case rests on
three pillars: a secure foundation in the law, a solid factual
basis, and strong economic evidence of an anticompetitive
outcome. And I also recommend that any assessment examined,
first, antitrust laws as interpreted by the courts; second, the
application of that law to particular types of anticompetitive
behavior in defined markets; and, third, the boundaries between
antitrust law and regulation. And I will briefly address each
of these factors.
A defining quality of an antitrust violation is the
elimination or weakening of a market constraint on a firm's
power to set the terms of its interactions. In other words, we
examine the impact on the competitive process through which a
firm makes its decisions on price, quality, and the need to
innovate.
Thus, antitrust enforcers should intervene only when firms
are likely to corrupt the competitive process and gain or
maintain market power through means other than competition on
the merits, such as by colluding with rivals, merging with
competitors to reduce competition, or, for a firm with market,
power engaging in exclusionary conduct that does not benefit
competition on balance.
Thus, under current antitrust law, a dominant provider must
maintain its position through legitimate competition on the
merits rather than through conduct that has little or no
purpose beyond disadvantaging rivals. Now, this doesn't mean
that antitrust can't reach many of the competitive concerns
discussed today as long as there is factual and economic
evidence of cognizable competitive harm, and I'd like to offer
some recent examples.
During my time as the Acting Chairman when the FTC had only
two members, one Republican and one Democrat, we successfully
handled a total of 32 proposed mergers with significant
competition concerns and brought forward nine different conduct
cases. And our challenge to the merger between CDK and Auto/
Mate involved a large established firm with a substantial
market share buying a relatively small upstart that appeared
poised to challenge the market leaders more aggressively.
Now, some have questioned whether the existing antitrust
paradigm can ever reach this kind of behavior where a big
player squashes or absorbs a promising upstart before it can
grow into a more substantial competitor. And the CDK-Auto/Mate
action shows that antitrust law can address this competitive
issue if the facts and economic evidence support it.
I'd also like to say a few words about vertical mergers,
the majority of which are pro-competitive. Vertical mergers
can, however, raise antitrust concerns when the parties gain an
ability and incentive to foreclose their rivals from a
significant portion of the market.
Thus, as with horizontal mergers, vertical deals should be
evaluated on a case-by-case basis based on all the evidence
available and not prejudged based on the size of the parties or
concerns outside of preserving market competition.
Now, the agencies can review consummated mergers and order
divestitures when justified by the facts in the law. But trying
to unscramble the eggs through a divestiture long after a
merger or using a breakup as a remedy in a conduct matter is a
drastic step that carries serious risk of doing more harm than
good for competition and consumers.
And aside from practical concerns, courts would require a
particularly significant causal connection between the
challenge conduct and creation or maintenance of the market
power.
Now, for those that seek to supplant antitrust with the
regulatory approach, given the troubled history of extensive
market regulation by government, we should carefully examine
the assumption that regulators can divine the best course for
technology-driven markets.
Further, the U.S. has consistently been a strong voice
globally in advocating for competition law to focus on consumer
welfare goals and not to include other policy goals. And I fear
that abandoning this clear position will encourage regimes
around the world to pursue industrial policy goals, such as
favoring domestic industry, to the detriment of U.S. consumers
and business interests.
Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Ohlhausen follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Mr. Szabo for 5 minutes.
TESTIMONY OF CARL SZABO
Mr. Szabo. Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, thank
you again for the opportunity to be here. It's been a long day
so I'm just going to give three points and then kind of explain
them a little further.
First, markets have an outstanding record at eroding first-
mover advantages that help small business become large; two,
bigger is better for consumers looking for choices or for small
businesses looking for customers; and three, competition is
robust, Americans know it, and Americans know that
weaponization of antitrust isn't for their benefit.
We've seen throughout the 21st century that markets
naturally erode the first-mover advantages that help them get
big. Search was once dominated by Yahoo. It was later overtaken
by Google. MySpace was the dominant social network later
overtaken by Facebook. And as the chairman pointed out,
Facebook is now facing robust combination from TikTok, a new
entrant, and that's just in the past couple of years.
And with the advent of the internet, we've removed the high
startup costs that are often seen in traditional markets. The
next big innovation is readily buildable and distributable,
further advancing the natural erosion of the first-mover
advantage.
For Americans and America's small businesses, bigger is
better. What we see here are two-sided markets. You have
consumers on one side and small businesses on the other. These
platforms are operating as the bridge between the two. The
connection is providing a much needed lifeline to America's
Main Street businesses.
And the bigger the platform, the better it is for these
small businesses because it gives greater access to more
potential customers. It drives down prices for advertising, and
with micro targeted ads, American businesses can be sure that
every dollar they spend on advertising actually leads to sales,
something you didn't have in traditional media.
And don't take my word for it. Polling shows that online
platforms have helped nearly 60 percent of Americans discover
new small businesses. And good news for those worried about the
death of entrepreneurship, the esteemed Coffman Index, a
nonpartisan group, shows that entrepreneurship is at its
highest levels in over a decade.
Third, competition is robust. Americans know it, and then
they know weaponization of antitrust is not for their benefit.
There's never been more choice and more opportunity. For anyone
whose home was damaged in the recent storms, they can easily
find repairs on Yelp, Thumbtack, TaskRabbit, Google, or Angie's
List. When looking for social media, there's Instagram,
Snapchat, Discord, Reddit, Twitter, and YouTube.
For anyone looking to replace lost commodities they can
turn to eBay, Overstock, Wal-Mart, Wayfair, Amazon, Rakuten,
and many, many more. Americans can quickly and easily do
comparison shopping on price and services on multiple platforms
and on multiple search engines. The internet continues to
create more choices, lower prices, and better services. These
are all things you don't see in a consolidated market.
But advocates on this panel are calling for weaponization
of antitrust to address perceived injustices, and that's just
not the reality. Some of today's panelists say that 50 percent
of a market should now be considered a monopoly, others unable
to prove that a dominant firm exists say, well, let's just take
the top two, add them together, call it a duopoly. This isn't
legitimate antitrust analysis.
And at the end of the day, advocates calling for
weaponization of antitrust standalone from the rest of the
country. Polling shows that only one in 20 Americans think tech
should be the focus of government oversight. And less than one
in five think consumers are the beneficiaries of a breakup of
big tech. That's because markets have an outstanding record at
eroding the first-mover advantage. Bigger is better, especially
for America's small businesses. Competition is robust, and your
constituents know it.
Thank you, and I welcome your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Szabo follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. And before I recognize Mr. Reed,
I do want to correct the record. I did not at all suggest that
TikTok provided robust competition for Facebook. In fact, I was
making the point that, despite their efforts, Facebook
continues to capture 80 percent of global social media revenue.
So, with all due respect, I don't want you to mischaracterize
my opening statement.
And, with that, I'll recognize Mr. Reed for 5 minutes.
They've called votes, but we are going to, I think, be able to
get through the questioning.
TESTIMONY OF MORGAN REED
Mr. Reed. I'll make it as fast as possible. Good afternoon,
Chairman Cicilline and members of the subcommittee. Thank you
for holding this hearing and finally at the end of the whole
list get down to actually giving small businesses a voice at
the debate. Thank you.
I get to start with good news. We've heard a lot of bad
news today, but I'm going to start with some good news. The app
economy in America is thriving. Growing up from virtually
nonexistent in 2007 to $1.3 trillion today, it has created 5.7
million jobs globally--we heard earlier about 1.5 million here
in the U.S.--and is revolutionizing traditional industry
verticals, making everything from agriculture to healthcare
better and smarter.
My written testimony contains a slew of facts and figures
that help to define the breadth and scope of the app ecosystem
and how platforms have benefited my community. But I wanted to
share how the app economy is thriving in your district and what
the world looked like for software companies before the
platform revolution.
Mr. Chairman, in Providence, Mojo Tech is a company with 65
employees creating software solutions for healthcare, finance,
and e-commerce companies. Your district has one of the leaders
in cloud deployment for mobile and project management for
Android and Iowa solutions.
Representative Armstrong, in Fargo there's a company called
Bushel. It's an agricultural tech company that provides
subscription-based web----
Mr. Armstrong. You're stealing my thunder.
Mr. Reed. Oh, no. I'm sorry. Well, let's get through it. So
Bushel basically has developed hardware for the grain supply
chain. There are more than 1,000-grain facilities utilizing
their platform. It's a great example of the way that mobile
apps have that niche and really take advantage of it.
Representative Johnson, I've talked to you a few different
times about coal companies in your district, so this time I
thought I'd come and talk a little bit about Atlanta-based
Turbojet. It's a smaller shop that's doing solutions for
nonprofits, including their website buildout, mobile-enabled
capabilities more in the nonprofit space.
So, in all of these cases, Representatives, I have
thousands of stories just like these from all 435 congressional
districts, each one benefiting from the explosion of platforms
like the App Store or Google Play, Amazon, Web Services,
Microsoft Azure.
And you know who else benefited? Consumers. Here on the
table I have a copy of OmniPage Pro. This was a software you
bought if you needed to scan documents. If you wanted to turn
it into a processor--into a way you could look at it in a word
processor.
I've also got this great review from PC World. They loved
it back in 2005. But the important fact here in this review is
it says the street price of this software in 2005 was $450.
Now, right here, I've got an app from a company called
Readdle that is nearly the same product level, has a bunch of
features that this one doesn't. It's $6. Basically now
consumers pay less than 1 percent of what they used to pay for
some of the same capability. And what's even better about that,
even though I love the product from Readdle, there are dozens
of competitors in the app space. So, when you look at it from
that perspective, consumers are getting a huge win.
How have platforms made this radical drop in price
possible? Simply put, they've provided three things: a trusted
space, reduced overhead, and given my developers nearly instant
access to a global marketplace with billions of customers.
Before the platforms, to get your software onto a retail
store shelf, companies had to spend years and thousands of
dollars to get to the point where a distributor would handle
their product. Then you'd agree to a cut of sales revenue,
write a check for upfront marketing, agree to refund the
distributor the cost of any unsold boxes, and then spend tens
of thousands of dollars to buy an end cap.
Digging in a little bit on this, I don't know how many of
you know or are aware that the products you see on your store
shelf or on the Sunday flyer aren't there because the manager
thought it was a cool product. Those products are displayed at
the end of an aisle, or end cap, because the software developer
or consumer goods company literally pays for the shelf space.
In fact, for many retailers the sale of floor space and
flyers makes a huge chunk of their profitability for their
store. And none of this takes into consideration printing
boxes, manuals, CDs, dealing with credit cards if you go
direct, translation services, customs authorities if you want
to sell abroad.
In the 1990s, it cost $1 million to start up a software
company. Now it's $100,000 in sweat equity. And thanks to these
changes, the average cost for consumer software has dropped
from $50 to $3. For developers, our cost to market has dropped
enormously and the size of our market has expanded globally.
Of course, it's not all roses and sunshine. Platforms need
to improve in important ways, and we appreciate this committee
for monitoring the platform ecosystem to better understand
what's happening.
One area where we see some fault where some of the
platforms have fallen short is transparency. Platforms should
communicate to developers the guidelines and any changes they
make to them clearly and explain what they mean to my
developers.
Another is safety and security. Some platforms have control
over device security, and others don't, but all of them should
strive for security practices that protect everyone who uses
the platform.
Lastly, platforms have a role to play in removing pirated
apps. Platforms should diligently respond to even the smallest
developer when it comes to protecting IP. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Reed follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Reed.
And I'm going to reduce the time to 3 minutes so we can be
sure to get our questions in. I thank everyone, and I apologize
for the shortness, but they've just called votes again.
I want to start off, Ms. Mitchell, with you, if I may.
You've written about a number of ways in which Amazon leverages
its core shopping platform to gain a competitive advantage over
entrepreneurs, small businesses, and other third-party sellers
that attempt to sell their products on Amazon.
Can you explain, elaborate a little on that, particularly
in light of the testimony that was presented in the first
panel, how Amazon leverages its core platform to disadvantage
small businesses and third-party sellers and how such tactics
harm entrepreneurship and innovation online, you know, how it
impacts everyday people who live in our districts.
Ms. Mitchell. Yeah. You know, I spend a lot of time
interviewing and talking with independent retailers,
manufacturers of all sizes. Many of them are very much afraid
of speaking out publicly because they fear retaliation.
But what we consistently hear is that Amazon is the biggest
threat to their businesses. We just did a survey of about 550
independent retailers nationally. Amazon ranked number one in
terms of being what they said was the biggest threat to their
business above rising healthcare costs, access to capital,
government red tape, anything else you can name. Among those
who were actually selling on the platform only 7 percent
reported that it was actually helping their bottom line.
Amazon has a kind of God-like view of a growing share of
our commerce, and it uses the data that it gathers to advantage
its own business and its own business interests in lots of
ways. A lot of this, as I said, comes from the kind of
leverage, its ability to sort of leverage the interplay between
these different business lines to maximize its advantage,
whether it's promoting its own product because that's lucrative
or whether it's using the manufacturer of a product to actually
squeeze a seller or a vendor into giving it bigger discounts.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you so much.
Professor Wu, you have written and spoken extensively about
the importance of enforcing the antitrust laws and the digital
markets in order to spur innovation. That's the subject of this
hearing. Would you speak a little bit about why competition is
so important to innovation and how does it affect people's
lives, also how do you respond to the companies who say we are
innovative ourselves, like we're innovative enough. We don't
need competition because we'll continue to innovate.
And, specifically, would you also address Mr. Szabo's use
of the word ``weaponizing'' antitrust? I'm not sure what he
meant by that, but I think the Antitrust Subcommittee takes our
responsibility to enforce antitrust laws or to take the
architecture of their enforcement very seriously because we
understand the value of competition.
I'm not exactly sure why anyone would suggest that's
weaponizing it, but maybe if you could respond to the critical
nature of competition as it relates to innovation and why what
we're doing is not actually weaponizing them but trying to
promote competition.
Mr. Wu. Right. No, thank you for the opportunity. Yes. To
the word ``weaponization'' I prefer the word ``enforcement.''
You know, when we talk about enforcing the criminal laws, we
don't talk about weaponizing. We talk about enforcing the laws.
And I think that, you know, the Justice Department, FTC, the
States have a duty to enforce the laws. Congress passes them,
and so that's, you know, the way to think about this.
I think, historically speaking, the United States has
experimented with two different types of innovation
environment. One is centralized, where we allow industries to
monopolize or oligopolies and we sit back and figure out what
IBM is going to invent next or AT&T. The other and contrasting
model is one where we have taken action, such as the AT&T
breakup or the IBM suitor, Microsoft, or taken regulatory
action and done a lot to reduce the barriers to entry.
And what we've seen are a very different pattern of
innovation, much more disruptive, much more kind of what
economists sometimes call disruptive innovation or competition
for the market as opposed to incremental, you know, adding call
waiting to AT&T.
And I think the comparative economic vantage of the United
States over the last century has been its ability to start
entire new industries. And in these big sort of centralized
innovation industries, you don't see that. Instead, you see
what's called the Kronos effect, an effort to stop the advance
of new industry.
So I think if the United States wants to be in the next
century the tech leader, preeminent power, it needs to
understand our own legacy and the advantages of competitive
innovation.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from North Dakota for 3
minutes.
Mr. Armstrong. First, I'd like unanimous consent to enter
Ranking Member Collins' statement into the record.
[The statement of Mr. Collins follows:]
MR. ARMSTRONG FOR THE RECORD
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Without objection.
And I also introduce the opening statement of the chairman
of the committee, Mr. Nadler, and a group of letters from a
group of organizations that are contained on this list, without
objection.
[The statement of Chairman Nadler follows:]
MR. CICILLINE FOR THE RECORD
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
[The information follows:]
MR. CICILLINE FOR THE RECORD
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Armstrong. And I do appreciate particularly Mr. Reed
talking in that I think when we recognize--I come from a very
rural area. The closest what you would consider big box store
is Minneapolis or Denver. So, when we're talking about
competition and all of this, I also think we've got to
remember, at no point in time from my house in Dickinson, North
Dakota, have I had more access to more diverse and cheap
consumer products, I mean, things that often would require a
plane ticket or a 9-hour car ride to buy can now be brought to
our house. So I think when we're talking about consumers, we
need to remember that side of it too.
And I'm glad you brought up Bushel because Bushel is a
fantastic company that has created--I don't know if they're
going to qualify as a unicorn or not. I don't know what the
real definition is, but they have created a space that hasn't
existed at this point as well as they do it.
Now, I don't know about this particular company, but I do
know that there is--whether it's in technology or in
traditional business, there are startups that get to a point
where they have a certain product and a certain idea, but
they've gone as far as they could do--go and they get acquired.
And it can be in the oil and gas industry. It can be in any
industry. It can be in the tech industry. So I would hope that
when we deal with this we don't--if, at some point in time
Bushel decides they do want to sell, I hope they have the
ability to do that.
But I guess I would just go to this, and all of the
witnesses talked about different companies in different what
they viewed as problems or potential problems with those
companies, but they're not the same for every company. And I
think that's where we go is that it's well established that the
role of antitrust enforcement is to ensure that companies with
significant market power don't use that power to unfairly harm
competitors or consumers.
And traditionally in antitrust it's very company specific,
and it's very fact specific. So there are limits to what
antitrust can do and enforcement process often takes years. So,
outside of antitrust, I mean, we don't have to only exist in
that universe. Are there measures we can take beyond those laws
that promote competition in technology markets? And I've got 50
seconds so--which means you all have 50 seconds so we get to go
down the line. So please be quick.
Ms. Scott Morton. Yes, there are. My report outlines a
number of things that a regulator could do. But regulations
that break down entry barriers and try to make a more level
playing field for small businesses and entrepreneurs to
actually get share and compete, that's the kind of regulation
that I think would be really helpful.
Mr. Reed. I would say support for open standards and
ensuring that we don't have abusive use of patent rights in a
way that actually harms open standards that are done in a
voluntary manner.
Mr. Szabo. And I would warn against turning to a know-it-
when-I-see-it definition for antitrust or monopoly and instead
actually doing a fact analysis and an independent analysis as
you've suggested.
Ms. Ohlhausen. I agree with trying to break down regulatory
barriers for small business and entrepreneurs, but I would
caution against creating a single regulator. When you look at
the history of the Civil Aeronautics Board and the FCC pre the
AT&T breakup, I think there are important lessons there.
Mr. Cicilline. The time of the gentleman is expired.
I'll recognize the gentleman from Georgia for 3 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. We've run out of time. I do want to
thank the panelists for being with us today. I know it's a late
evening for you all. You had not planned on being here.
I want to thank the chairman for hosting this very
important topic today. If we do not oversee what's going on in
this digital economy, in this digital marketplace with the four
dominant players that we hosted today on the first panel, if we
don't understand their market reach, if we don't understand
their business practices and how those practices affect
consumers, then we will never be able to regulate or legislate
as may be necessary.
So I do appreciate us having this hearing today, which is
one in a series, and with that, I yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
And I do want to thank the witnesses. We will continue to
rely on you as resources as we continue this investigation. I
appreciate your patience and your testimony today.
This will conclude our hearing. I want to again thank our
witnesses. And, without objection, all members will have 5
legislative days to submit additional written questions for the
witnesses or additional materials for the record.
Without objection, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 6:42 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
[all]