- SECURING OUR NATION'S CHEMICAL FACILITIES: STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES ON IMPROVING THE CFATS PROGRAM
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
SECURING OUR NATION'S CHEMICAL FACILITIES:
STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES ON IMPROVING
THE CFATS PROGRAM
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION, AND INNOVATION
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MARCH 12, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-6
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-395 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Peter T. King, New York
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
John Katko, New York
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
John Ratcliffe, Texas
J. Luis Correa, California
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Xochitl Torres Small, New Mexico
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Max Rose, New York
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Mark Green, Tennessee
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan
Van Taylor, Texas
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri
John Joyce, Pennsylvania
Al Green, Texas
Dan Crenshaw, Texas
Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Michael Guest, Mississippi
Dina Titus, Nevada
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Chris Vieson, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND
INNOVATION
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
John Katko, New York, Ranking
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Member
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan
Van Taylor, Texas
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex
Mike Rogers, Alabama (ex officio)
officio)
Moira Bergin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Sarah Moxley, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Statements
The Honorable Cedric L. Richmond, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Louisiana, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................
1
Prepared Statement.............................................
2
The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................
3
Prepared Statement.............................................
4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................
9
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................
9
Witnesses
Mr. Michael P. Wilson, PhD, MPh, National Director, Occupational
and Environment Health Program, Bluegreen Alliance:
Oral Statement.................................................
12
Prepared Statement.............................................
14
Mr. John S. Morawetz, Health and Safety Representative,
International Chemical Workers Union Council:
Oral Statement.................................................
21
Prepared Statement.............................................
22
Mr. Pamela Nixon, President, People Concerned About Chemical
Safety:
Oral Statement.................................................
26
Prepared Statement.............................................
28
Mr. Kirsten Meskill, Director, Corporate Security, BASF:
Oral Statement.................................................
29
Prepared Statement.............................................
31
For the Record
The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Statement of The Fertilizer Institute (TFI) and Agricultural
Retailers Association (ARA)..................................
5
Statement of the Institute of Makers of Explosives.............
6
Appendix
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for John S. Morawetz..
47
Questions from Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Michael P. Wilson.
48
Questions from Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Pamela Nixon......
49
SECURING OUR NATION'S CHEMICAL FACILITIES: STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES ON
IMPROVING THE CFATS PROGRAM
----------
Tuesday, March 12, 2019
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection,
and Innovation,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:09 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Cedric L. Richmond
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Richmond, Jackson Lee, Langevin,
Rice, Katko, Walker, and Taylor.
Also present: Representative Rogers.
Mr. Richmond. Good morning. I want to welcome everyone to
today's hearing on the Department of Homeland Security's
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards or CFATS as we call
it. It's a regulatory program that helps secure the Nation's
highest-risk chemical facilities.
Congress has just over 1 year to reauthorize the CFATS
program and I want to make one thing clear. This committee is
committed to getting CFATS reauthorization done.
Last month we heard from DHS and GAO and today we will hear
from stakeholders who deal with CFATS on the ground. Hearing
from people on the ground and do this on a daily basis is
important to us.
I understand how important the stability of CFATS program
is to the chemical industry which is critical to my district's
economy. I also know how important it is to have a program that
keeps facilities safe and secure because my constituents are
the people who live near these facilities, the employees who
work at these facilities every day and the firefighters and
police we call to respond to an emergency.
At the full committee hearing last month we discussed
opportunities to build on the progress that has been made on
the existing CFATS program. Since CFATS was established, the
number of high-risk chemical facilities has dropped by half.
I believe, and DHS agreed, that there is an opportunity to
take the data on how facilities are reducing risk and use it to
develop voluntary best practices that other facilities could
use to reduce risk.
This will be a win-win for chemical facilities, local
communities, and the taxpayer, making us all safer and letting
DHS focus its limited resources on the highest-risk facilities.
Unfortunately, we also heard about some of the areas where
CFATS continues to fall short. The Department is still not
making sure first responders and emergency planners have enough
information or the right information about local CFATS
facilities in their area. Six years after the disaster in West,
Texas, this is simply unacceptable.
Also--excuse me--also it is not clear to me that CFATS
facilities are including employees in the development of site
security plans, vulnerability assessments, or inspections as
they are required to by law.
Finally, if CFATS is going to be successful, we need to be
sure that the program is taking all relevant factors into
account to access--to assess risk. Otherwise, we can't trust
that CFATS is truly capturing the Nation's highest-risk
facilities.
For example, right now, DHS does not consider whether the
facility is located near a hospital, a school, a residential
area, a military base, a power plant, or close to other
chemical facilities. Any of these factors could make a facility
a more attractive target or make an event even worse for the
surrounding community.
This is especially concerning to me because research shows
that facilities with dangerous chemicals tend to be heavily
concentrated in minority and low-income areas, meaning that we
may be exposing our most vulnerable populations to a
disproportionate share of chemical security risk.
DHS should also do more to understand what it means to be
high-risk and to use expertise of a broader group of
stakeholders. Overcoming the information-sharing challenges
will require us to rethink how we restrict access to certain
information deemed sensitive to National security.
Although I am sensitive to the tension between security and
transparency, it cannot be a barrier to better security or used
to prioritize the security of some over others. I know many of
our panelists have first-hand experience with many of these
concerns and I look forward to hearing your perspectives.
[The statement of Chairman Richmond follows:]
Statement of Chairman Cedric L. Richmond
March 12, 2019
Congress has just over 1 year to reauthorize the Chemical Facility
Anti-Terorirism Standards (CFATS) program, and I want to make one thing
clear: This committee is committed to getting reauthorization across
the finish line.
Last month we heard from DHS and GAO, and today we will hear from
stakeholders who deal with CFATS on the ground.
My district in Louisiana is home to more than 20 CFATS facilities.
I understand how important the stability of the CFATS program is to the
chemical industry, which is critical to my district's economy. Without
regulatory stability, I am concerned CFATS facilities will not make
strategic security investments, which is bad for business and bad for
my community. I also represent the people who live near these
facilities, the employees who work at these facilities every day, and
the fire fighters and police we would call to respond to an emergency.
In short, reauthorizing CFATS is critical for every stakeholder
communities like mine--from facility owners and employees to
surrounding communities and first responders.
At the full committee hearing last month, we discussed
opportunities to build on the progress that has been made under the
existing CFATS program. Since CFATS was established, the number of
``high-risk'' chemical facilities has dropped by half. I believe--and
DHS agreed--that there is an opportunity to take the data on how
facilities are reducing risk and use it to develop voluntary best
practices that other facilities could use to buy down risk. This would
be a win for chemical facilities, local communities, and the taxpayer--
making us all safer, and allowing DHS to focus its limited resources on
the highest-risk facilities.
Unfortunately, we also heard about some of the areas where CFATS
continues to fall short.
The Department is still not making sure first responders and
emergency planners have enough information--or the right information--
about local CFATS facilities in their area.
Six years after West, Texas, this is simply unacceptable.
Further, it is not clear to me that CFATS facilities are including
employees in the development of site security plans, vulnerability
assessments, or inspections--as they are required to do by law.
I am proud of the panel we have assembled here today and look
forward to hearing our witness' perspectives on how we can address some
of the program's shortcomings. We have panelists who know what it's
like to respond to an emergency at a chemical facility without knowing
what chemicals are on-site or how to handle them. We have panelists who
will be able to tell us what it's like to live in the shadow of one or
more of these high-risk facilities, and the difficulty communities have
when it comes to preparing for and understanding the dangers those
facilities present. And we have panelists who know what it's like to
work in a high-risk facility--but do not have a seat at the table when
executives are making decisions about security.
Right now, it appears there are a number of relevant factors DHS is
not including in its analysis. DHS does not consider whether the
facility is located near a hospital, a school, a residential area, a
military base, a power plant, or proximity to other chemical
facilities. Any of these factors could make a facility a more
attractive target, or intensify the consequences of an event to the
surrounding community. If CFATS is going to be successful, we need to
be sure that the program is taking all relevant factors into account to
assess risk. Otherwise, we can't trust that CFATS is truly capturing
the Nation's highest-risk facilities.
Moreover, research shows that facilities with dangerous chemicals
tend to be heavily concentrated in minority and low-income areas,
meaning that we may be exposing our most vulnerable populations to a
disproportionate share of chemical security risks.
DHS should also do more to understand what it means to be ``high-
risk'' and to leverage the expertise of a broader group of
stakeholders. Overcoming information-sharing challenges will require us
to rethink how we restrict access to certain information deemed
sensitive to National security.
Although I am sensitive to the tension between security and
transparency, it cannot be a barrier to better security, or used to
prioritize the security of some over others.
I hope to hear your thoughts on how we might strike that balance,
and I look forward to your testimony.
Mr. Richmond. With that, I will recognize our Ranking
Member Mr. Katko.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this important hearing today.
Welcome to all the witnesses here.
As this is my first hearing as Ranking Member of this
subcommittee, I just want to tell the Chairman that I look
forward to working with him and all the Members of this
subcommittee to improve our cybersecurity and protect our
Nation's critical infrastructure.
Cybersecurity is one of the great threats of our time and
that's why it's such a high honor to be on this committee.
A long-term reauthorization of the CFATS is a crucial
component of this subcommittee's work to protect our
infrastructure and in that regard I completely agree with the
Chairman.
CFATS began in 2007 as a program aimed at keeping dangerous
chemicals out of the hands of terrorists. Since then, it has
evolved into a comprehensive, effective program that provides
chemical facilities with the flexibility to implement security
standards appropriate to mitigate their facility's level of
risk.
CFATS must continue to evolve in small ways to ensure
chemical facilities are equipped to address evolving security
risks. The current program is a strong foundation upon which to
build. The collaborative nature of this program between the
Department of Homeland Security and chemical facilities is a
key part of its value.
I believe that any changes to CFATS should preserve and
encourage this inherent collaboration.
In addition, the certainty that the 4-year authorization of
the 2014 bill provided was a strong signal to both DHS and
industry stakeholders to invest and improve the program.
Prioritizing another long-term bill is key to the success of
this program.
As we look to reauthorize this program it is important that
we hear from those involved and affected by the program. I
appreciate GAO and DHS for providing their testimony last month
on this topic and our witnesses for taking the time to be here
this morning, and I thank you all for being here.
I look forward to our discussion about the CFATS program
and look forward to working with my colleagues on this
committee and in the Senate to continue this important program.
[The statement of Ranking Member Katko follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member John Katko
March 12, 2019
Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this important hearing today.
As this is my first hearing as Ranking Member of this subcommittee, I
look forward to working with you, and all the Members of this
subcommittee, to improve our cybersecurity and protect our Nation's
critical infrastructure.
A long-term reauthorization of the Chemical Facilities Anti-
Terrorism Standards Program, or CFATS, is a crucial component of this
subcommittee's work to protect our critical infrastructure.
CFATS began in 2007 as a program aimed at keeping dangerous
chemicals out of the hands of terrorists. Since then, it has evolved
into a comprehensive, effective program that provides chemical
facilities with the flexibility to implement security standards
appropriate to mitigate their facility's level of risk.
CFATS must continue to evolve in small ways to ensure chemical
facilities are equipped to address evolving security risks. The current
program is a strong foundation upon which to build.
The collaborative nature of this program between the Department of
Homeland Security and chemical facilities is a key part of its value. I
believe that any changes to CFATS should preserve and encourage this
collaboration.
In addition, the certainty that the 4-year authorization of the
2014 bill provided was a strong signal to both DHS and industry
stakeholders to invest and improve the program. Prioritizing another
long-term bill is key to the success of this program.
As we look to reauthorize this program, it is important that we
hear from those involved and affected by the program. I appreciate GAO
and DHS for providing their testimony last month on this topic, and our
witnesses for taking time this morning.
I look forward to our discussion about the CFATS program and look
forward to working with my colleagues on this committee and in the
Senate to continue this important program.
Mr. Katko. Before I yield back, Mr. Chairman, I ask for
unanimous consent to submit statements for the record from the
Fertilizer Institute and the Institute of Makers of Explosives.
Mr. Richmond. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
Statement of The Fertilizer Institute (TFI) and Agricultural Retailers
Association (ARA)
March 12, 2019
Thank you for holding today's hearing, entitled ``Securing Our
Nation's Chemical Facilities: Stakeholders Perspectives on Improving
the CFATS Program.''
The Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) program
provides an important framework to ensure facilities are taking
appropriate steps to be secure. The Fertilizer Institute \1\ (TFI) and
Agricultural Retailers Association \2\ (ARA) represent hundreds of
facilities that are subject to the CFATS program because they
manufacture, store, handle, and sell certain CFATS chemicals of
interest (COI), such as anhydrous ammonia, ammonium nitrate, sodium
nitrate, and potassium nitrate. These fertilizers are needed to feed
the crops that feed the world. Fertilizer is a key ingredient in
feeding a growing global population, which is expected to surpass 9.5
billion people by 2050. Half of all food grown around the world today
is made possible through the use of fertilizer.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ TFI represents the Nation's fertilizer industry, which includes
companies that are engaged in all aspects of the fertilizer supply
chain. TFI's full-time staff, based in Washington, DC, serves its
members through legislative, educational, technical, economic
information, and public communication programs. TFI's members play a
key role in producing and distributing vital crop nutrients, such as
nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. These products are used to
replenish soils throughout the United States and elsewhere to
facilitate the production of healthy and abundant supplies of food,
fiber, and fuel. Fertilizer is a key ingredient in feeding a growing
global population, which is expected to surpass 9.5 billion people by
2050. Half of all food grown around the world today is made possible
through the use of fertilizer.
\2\ ARA is a not-for-profit trade association that represents the
Nation's agricultural retailers and distributors. ARA members provide
goods and services to farmers and ranchers which include: Fertilizer,
crop protection chemicals, seed, crop scouting, soil testing, custom
application of pesticides and fertilizers, and development of
comprehensive nutrient management plans. Retail and distribution
facilities are scattered throughout all 50 States and range in size
from small family held businesses or farmer cooperatives to large
companies with multiple outlets.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TFI and ARA represent companies that include large billion-dollar
production facilities and thousands of small agriculture retailers, the
latter of whom interact directly with American farmers. Agricultural
retail facilities provide essential agronomic services and sell a
variety of products to farmers, including fertilizer. Overall, the U.S.
fertilizer industry generates more than $154 billion in economic
benefit annually and provides approximately 89,000 direct jobs and
406,000 indirect jobs for a total of 495,000 U.S. jobs.
DHS has estimated that over 3,500 facilities are presently subject
to the CFATS program. TFI and ARA estimate that this includes as many
as 1,500 fertilizer manufacturers and agricultural retail facilities,
with retail facilities accounting for the overwhelming majority. The
retail facilities are generally located in rural communities, interface
directly with farmers and often have just 5-10 employees at a location.
Under the CFATS program, the Department of Homeland Security
identifies chemicals which present potential security concerns. As
previously mentioned, included on this list are a few fertilizers,
including ammonia, ammonium nitrate, sodium nitrate, and potassium
nitrate.
The safe and secure handling of fertilizers is a high priority for
TFI, ARA, and our members. We actively participate in and sponsor
numerous safety initiatives, including ResponsibleAg, TRANSCAER, and
the Fertilizer Safety and Health Partners Alliance with the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).
ResponsibleAg--which is a joint effort between TFI and ARA--exists
to enhance compliance by agricultural retailers with a variety of
Federal regulations, including those administered by the Department of
Homeland Security's CFATS program. Each participating facility receives
a Federal regulatory compliance assessment. Any noted compliance
deficiencies must be corrected by the facility before it may be
designated as certified under the program. The assessments are then
conducted every 3 years.
ResponsibleAg is a voluntary, industry-driven initiative and most
of the retail agribusiness industry participated in its formation.
Since its creation over 4 years ago, approximately one-third of the
industry has signed up to participate in the ResponsibleAg program. To
date, over 2,568 facilities are registered with the ResponsibleAg
program, over 1,365 of these facilities have been certified, 207
auditors have been trained, and almost 2,661 audits have been
completed. Approximately 50,000 risks have been identified and
corrected at facilities across the Nation. We are very proud of this
industry-led compliance program.
In the context of the CFATS program, ResponsibleAg ensures
facilities are taking the necessary steps to be secure. We believe it
is appropriate for industry stewardship programs--such as
ResponsibleAg, which is making positive contributions to the CFATS
program--to be recognized in a reauthorization bill.
As Congress works to reauthorize the CFATS program, we have the
following recommendations.
Recognition of industry stewardship programs.
Maintain CFATS focus on-site security.
Enhance transparency between DHS and the regulated
community. For example, DHS recently completed a process for
reclassifying facilities. As a result, some of our member
facilities were reclassified into a higher-risk classification.
What was not clear to some our members was the underlying basis
for the new categorizations. We believe this should be a more
transparent effort between DHS and individual facilities,
allowing for a more thorough discussion of the security risks
posed by individual facilities. This could ultimately bolster
the quality of site security plans.
Any updates or modifications to Appendix A should be subject
to a comprehensive notice and comment rule making. Another
example of the need for increased transparency is the way DHS
utilizes Appendix A, the list of chemicals potentially subject
to the CFATS program. We have encountered some confusing rule-
making interpretations, particularly how the program addresses
ammonium nitrate and ammonium nitrate mixtures. The uncertainty
regarding which mixtures are or are not subject to CFATS has
been the subject of many discussions, but has not been resolved
to the satisfaction of our members, owing to the limited
explanations received from DHS.
Facility owner and operators should retain discretion to
determine how site security information is shared.
The personnel surety program (PSP) should not be expanded to
risk groups Tier 3 and Tier 4. This would be an exponential
expansion of the program from the less than 200 facilities
presently covered to more than 3,500. TFI and ARA recommend
that Congress consider making PSP optional for Tier 3 and Tier
4.
Thank you again for holding this hearing and for the opportunity to
submit this statement. TFI and ARA strongly support efforts to enact a
long-term reauthorization of the CFATS program, and look forward to
working with the you.
______
Statement of the Institute of Makers of Explosives
March 12, 2019.
The Honorable Bennie Thompson,
Chairman, Committee on Homeland Security, U.S. House of
Representatives, Washington, DC 20515.
The Honorable Mike Rogers,
Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland Security, U.S. House of
Representatives, Washington, DC 20515.
Dear Chairman Thompson and Ranking Member Rogers: On behalf of the
Institute of Makers of Explosives (IME) and the commercial explosives
industry, I respectfully submit the following information to provide
you a clearer picture of the duplicative burden our industry faces from
Department of Homeland Security's (OHS) regulations. First, however, I
would like to thank you for your attention to reauthorizing the OHS
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) program and your
efforts to preserve and improve this pivotal security program.
Founded in 1913, IME is the safety and security association for the
commercial explosives industry, a charge we do not take lightly, as
evidenced by the industry's excellent track record. Our industry's
dedication to continual improvement, in conjunction with the
regulations set forth by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives (ATF), has resulted in an ever-increasing culture of
security that has seen the use of regulated commercial explosives as
components of improvised explosives devices in bombing incidents remain
below 2 percent for the last 25 years, according to available ATF
Explosives Incident Reports (EIRs). IME takes an active role in
promoting responsible practices through the full life cycle of
commercial explosives and regularly publishes, updates, and distributes
free of charge, our series of Safety Library Publications (SLPs),
including SLP 27 Security in Manufacturing, Transportation, Storage and
Use of Commercial Explosives, to the benefit of our workers and the
general public.
On February 27, 2019, the committee held the first oversight
hearing of the 116th Congress on the CFATS program and took concrete
steps toward ensuring the security of our nation's chemical facilities.
IME, along with our partners in the CFATS Coalition, strongly supports
the reauthorization of the program and believes that a bi-partisan and
bi-cameral reauthorization process will result in a robust program that
enhances national security while reducing regulatory uncertainty and
undue burden to industry.
During the hearing, David Wulf, Director of DHS' Infrastructure
Security Compliance Division, was asked about OHS regulations that
resulted in duplicative regulation on industry germane to the CFATS
program. IME believes that while Director Wulf's answer that CFATS is
``in all cases bringing something additional to the table'' was made in
good faith, it neglected to address the unique and superfluous impact
of the program on materials that have been successfully regulated by
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) for
nearly 50 years, namely commercial explosives.
In fact, contrary to what one would expect from a new regulatory
program, the commercial explosives industry did not experience a
significant drop in thefts because of CFATS requirements. Instead, data
obtained from the ATF's U.S. Bomb Data Center (USBDC) reveals a
continuation of a trendline started in the 1980's that has seen thefts
of commercial explosives drop from 191 thefts in 1988 to 15 in 2017, as
shown in Figure 1 (right). While IME respects DHS' position that CFATS
is a perceived value add, we question whether they can provide
supporting evidence to quantity the magnitude of this value.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The impressive and consistent progress by the industry in reducing
thefts validates not only the effective regulation of commercial
explosives security by ATF for nearly 5 decades, but also the
industry's commitment to continually improving security. On this point,
after the tragic events of 9/11, IME members worked directly with
Congress to draft the Safe Explosives Act of 2002, which implemented
background checks for all persons receiving explosives, restricted the
availability of explosives to prohibited persons, strengthened
licensing and permitting requirements and aided in the fight against
terrorism. The industry proudly works with the ATF to improve security
wherever possible and is pleased to see the results of this partnership
and on-going commitment to security of commercial explosives.
While the duplicative CFATS program may not have significantly
improved the security of our previously regulated industry, it has
significantly impacted, in a negative way, industry resources. The
commercial explosives industry has approximately 30 facilities
throughout the country that are regulated under CFATS. The compliance
costs to these sites for 2018 alone reached over $1.7 million. There is
no data that shows that these costs required to comply with CFATS have
resulted in an increase in security over the course of the program. The
CFATS program may help the broader chemical sector improve security,
but the evidence shows that ATF, in concert with the commercial
explosives industry's best practices, has had increasing success in
mitigating explosives thefts since long before 2007 and the
implementation of CFATS.
IME respectfully disagrees with Director Wulf's assertion that the
program is ``in all cases bringing something additional to the table''
and would like DHS to quantify their statement. The inability of DHS to
provide metrics to substantiate the value of CFATS to the previously
regulated explosives industry coupled with the USBDC's comprehensive
data to the contrary, makes an exemption for ATF-regulated materials to
the CFATS program a clear opportunity to make impactful and sensible
reform without having an adverse effect on national security.
As a matter of fact, Director Wulf did, during the 115th Congress,
indicate that the industry's record of security is appropriate to
safeguard commercial explosives from terrorists. On June 12, 2018,
during a Senate Homeland Security & Governmental Affairs Committee
round table--Examining the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program, when asked about an exemption for facilities regulated by ATF,
Wulf responded that he ``would not lose sleep if they exited the
program. . . .'' Forty-eight hours later, Director Wulf reinforced this
position when testifying before the House Energy & Commerce
Subcommittee on the Environment at a hearing titled The Chemical
Facilities Anti-Terrorism Standards Program (CFATS)--A Progress Report.
In response to a similar question from Congressman Jeff Duncan,
Director Wulf reiterated that explosives are ``among the things that I
would not lose too much sleep over exiting the program''. This is, in
DHS' own words, a testament to the effectiveness of ATF regulation and
industry stewardship, and soundly reinforces the feasibility of an
exemption for commercial explosives in the CFATS program.
For the reasons explained above, IME requests an exemption for
explosive materials regulated by the Bureau of ATF from the duplicative
CFATS regulations be included in the next CFATS reauthorization bill
the Committee drafts. Specifically, Congress should amend 6 U.S.C.
Chapter 1, Subchapter XVI, Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards,
Section 621(4) to include as an excluded facility ``(F) a business
premises where explosive materials are manufactured, imported, stored
or distributed subject to the regulation of the Department of Justice,
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, under 18 U.S.C.
Chapter 40 and 27 CFR Part 555.
If I can be of any assistance or can provide data that will help
you make a decision on this issue, please contact me[.]
Respectfully,
John Boling,
Vice President of Government Affairs.
Mr. Katko. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Richmond. I will now recognize the Ranking Member of
the full Homeland Security Committee, Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As you have heard the Chairman and Ranking Member
emphasize, CFATS is a critically important country--program to
our country. In the past, Republicans and Democrats have worked
together to reauthorize CFATS and make the program--with
improvements.
I hope that tradition of bipartisanship on this issue can
continue. I believe that with bipartisan, bicameral process we
can quickly move a long-term reauthorization of CFATS to the
President's desk. I look forward to working collaboratively
with the Majority and the Senate and the stakeholders and DHS
to reauthorize the CFATS program.
I look forward also to this hearing and today's witnesses.
Mr. Rogers. With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you to the Ranking Member of the full
committee. Other Members are reminded that statements may be
submitted for the record.
[The statements of Chairman Thompson and Honorable Jackson
Lee follow:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
March 12, 2019
The perspectives we will hear today are often underrepresented in
conversations about how to improve this important anti-terrorism
program, and I am proud we have given them a seat at the table.
Last month, the full committee received testimony from both the
Department of Homeland Security and the Government Accountability
Office to kick off our CFATS reauthorization efforts. The conversations
at that hearing revealed 3 on-going challenges.
No. 1: First responders still do not have the information they need
to respond safely and effectively to an incident at a chemical
facility. As a former volunteer fire fighter who fought to include
first responder information access provisions in the CFATS Act of 2014,
I am disturbed that gap still exists nearly 5 years after the West,
Texas disaster.
No. 2: DHS is not fully leveraging the data and lessons learned as
facilities have tiered down or out of the CFATS program. DHS should use
the information it collects and the experience of the regulated
community to develop voluntary best practices to further reduce risk.
Finally: The CFATS risk-tiering methodology does not appear to take
into consideration the full spectrum of factors that should inform a
facility's risk profile. For example, the CFATS' tiering methodology
rigidly focuses on loss of life when evaluating the consequences of a
release at a chemical facility. It fails to consider on-going health
consequences, whether the facility is located next door to an
elementary school or a nursing home, or whether neighboring structures
might make the facility a more desirable terrorist target.
DHS's failure to integrate this kind of information into its
tiering methodology is particularly troubling because communities along
a chemical facility's fence line tend to be poorer and have first
responders who may not be well-resourced to respond to chemical
facility disaster. I will be interested in hearing our witnesses'
perspectives on these important points today.
Another important priority I am glad we will have the opportunity
to discuss today is facility engagement with its workforce. Despite
provisions in the CFATS Act of 2014 requiring employee engagement on-
site security plans, I understand that the engagement Congress
envisioned is not happening uniformly across the country. In some
cases, it is not happening because employees are unaware that
facilities are covered under CFATS in the first place. Facility
employees are important force multipliers in keeping chemical
facilities secure. And in the event of a disaster, facility employees
are likely the people who will provide first responders with
situational awareness critical to the response.
In the past, this program has enjoyed broad, bipartisan support on
and off the Hill. Every Secretary of Homeland Security from Secretary
Chertoff to Secretary Nielsen has warned of threats posed by chemical
weapons and has supported the CFATS program to make our communities
safer and more secure.
I will remind everyone here that we have only until April 2020 to
reauthorize this important program. As Chairman, I am committed to
getting a CFATS reauthorization package across the finish line. But as
I made clear at the CFATS hearing last month, reauthorization will not
become an excuse to water down the program.
I look forward to working with my colleagues to get CFATS
reauthorization done, and I look forward to the testimony from our
witnesses today.
______
Statement of Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee
March 12, 2019
Chairman Bennie G. Thompson, and Ranking Member Mike Rogers, for
holding today's hearing on ``Securing Our Nation's Chemical Facilities:
Stakeholder Perspectives on Improving the CFATS Program,'' which
affords the committee the opportunity to hear from non-Government
chemical facility security stakeholders.
Today's hearing will give Members an opportunity to hear from non-
Government witnesses in advance of CFATS reauthorization in April 2020.
I thank today's witnesses for their testimony before this
subcommittee:
Major General Randy E. Manner (Retired), U.S. Army, former
acting director of the Defense Threat Reduction Agency;
Dr. Michael Wilson, national director of occupational and
environmental health program, Blue Green Alliance;
John Morawetz, health and safety representative,
International Chemical Workers Union Council (ICWUC);
Pamela Nixon, president, People Concerned About Chemical
Safety (PCACS); and
Kirsten Meskill, director of corporate security, BASF
(Minority witness).
The CFATS program was established in response to warnings from
security experts, including former Homeland Security Secretary Michael
Chertoff, of credible terrorist threats to U.S. chemical plants.
As a stop-gap measure Congress added the CFATS program to a fiscal
year 2007 appropriations rider, which granted DHS temporary authority
to run the program.
DHS was authorized to administer the CFATS regulatory program that
required high-risk chemical plant owners and operators to adhere to a
set of security standards and adopt preventative measures to address
on-site vulnerabilities.
National security experts, former President Obama, and every
Secretary of Homeland Security from Chertoff to Nielsen have warned
that facilities with large amounts of hazardous chemicals are rich
targets for terrorists, who could steal, release, or exploit such
chemicals to inflict harm.
Keeping CFATS linked to the appropriations cycle meant that the
NPPD Office of Infrastructure Protection's Infrastructure Security
Compliance Division (ISCD), has struggled to make strategic
investments, retain staff, and develop policies to sustain the program.
Overall, CFATS has made the country safer. Most covered facilities
are implementing security measures to reduce risk, DHS is working more
effectively with interagency partners like the EPA and OSHA, and the
number of high-risk facilities has dropped by half--from over 7,000 in
2007 to roughly 3,300 today.
In 2011, a leaked internal memo prompted a series of Congressional
hearings and investigations when it revealed major issues in ISCD's
ability to hire and train personnel, process facility applications, and
carry out timely inspections.
Congressional inaction was upended by the April 2013, fertilizer
plant explosion in West, Texas that killed 15 and wounded over 160
others--many of the dead were first responders.
The U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (CSB)
investigation into the West, Texas incident revealed gaps in Federal,
State, and local regulations about the handling and storing of
hazardous materials.
DHS had no knowledge of the facility, despite the fact that the
facility had publicly reported threshold quantities of CFATS chemicals
of interest to other Federal and State regulators, including the EPA's
Risk Management Program (RMP).
On December 18, 2014, the Protecting and Securing Chemical
Facilities from Terrorist Attacks Act of 2014 (CFATS Act of 2014)
authorized the CFATS program for 4 years.
This law gave DHS the guidance and stability it needed to plan for
the program's future by investing in better tools, personnel, and
policy development efforts.
Since 2014, ISCD has streamlined the facility submissions process,
eliminated the backlog of unapproved SSPs, and performed compliance
inspections for most of the regulated population.
As a result, the majority of CFATS facilities have now moved from
planning security measures to actually implementing them.
DHS has reported that since the inception of the CFATS program,
there has been a dramatic reduction in the overall number of ``high-
risk'' facilities throughout the country.
This shift suggests that CFATS has actually been a driver in
encouraging facilities to voluntarily reduce or remove chemical risks.
The issue of great concern to me is the placement of chemical
facilities in areas that may be impacted by severe weather events, such
as was the case with Hurricane Harvey which struck the Houston area in
2017.
During the storm and the subsequent flooding of an organic
peroxides factory, in the Houston-area operated by Arkema, Inc,. in a
facility located in Crosby, Texas, experienced a power outage and
inundation by flood water.
Organic peroxides are reactive chemicals and can be dangerous if
mistreated or mishandled.
Proper storage is critical to the safe handling and use of organic
peroxides, particularly those requiring controlled temperature storage.
Storage should be between below 100 Farenheit however the
RECOMMENDED storage temperature is below 86 Farenheit and if this is
not maintained, uncontrolled decomposition can occur.
The temperature controls for the organic peroxides kept by Arkema,
Inc., at the time of Hurricane Harvey lost its temperature control
systems, which resulted in a major leak and explosions.
The Arkema Inc.'s organic peroxide facility was constructed on a
100-year flood plain in 2007.
But its emergency response plan, revised as recently as 2016,
offers little direction for containing flood waters.
A copy of the plan reviewed by the Associated Press says simply
that ``care shall be taken to be sure water is kept out'' of buildings.
A log Arkema kept of workers' efforts to safeguard the plant did
not mention any effort to relocate its organic peroxides given the
forecast anticipated over 50 inches of rain.
The U.S. Chemical Safety Board determined that Arkema's facility
was not prepared for such heavy rainfall.
Given that climate change has and will continue to have
unpredictable episodes of extreme weather events, it is important that
plans for chemical facilities take into consideration conditions that
would pose a risk to the stability of products or processes.
The CFATS Act of 2014 requires facilities with threshold quantities
of ``chemicals of interest'' (COI) to register with DHS and use an on-
line tool to provide information on chemical holdings, processes, and
other conditions on-site (referred to as a Top Screen).
If DHS determines that the facility ``presents a high level of
security risk,'' the facility must perform a Security Vulnerability
Assessment and develop a Site Security Plan (SSP) that addresses
vulnerabilities in alignment with 18 risk-based performance standards.
I plan to reintroduce H.R. 68, from the 113th Congress that
provides that no Federal funds may be used by the Secretary of Homeland
Security to approve a site security plan for a chemical facility,
unless the facility meets or exceeds security standards and
requirements to protect the facility against acts of terrorism and
incorporate in their plan coordination and engagement of local and
State first responders.
I want to work with the committee on steps that must be taken to
limit risks identified by the Arkema Inc., experience when CFATS
reauthorization is taken up by this committee.
I will pursue several measures to address CFATS that include:
Reintroduction of H.R. 68, a bill to provide for the
evaluation and adoption of proven safety measures that provides
for quantifiable data on the capacity of local first responders
to react and respond to worst-case scenarios of Risk Management
Planning.
Introduction of a bill to evaluate the efficacy and
effectiveness of the safety measure of ``sheltering in place''
with regard to civilian populations living in close proximity
to chemical facilities, storage, or transport capacity.
Finally, I plan to introduce a measure to assess
environmental risk factors that can impact the safety and
stability of chemicals or chemical processing including an
assessment of proven safety measures such as alternatives
assessments that evaluate if Hydrofluoric acid is replaced with
Ionic Liquids or Solid Acids as a catalyst to report on how
this change would affect toxicity or flammability risks.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses on their views of
the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards Program.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Richmond. I now welcome our panel of witnesses. Our
first witness, Dr. Michael Wilson, is the national director for
Occupational and Environmental Health at the BlueGreen
Alliance. Prior to that, he served as the chief scientist with
the California Department of Industrial Relations and he has
also spent 13 years working as a first responder.
Next, we will hear from John Morawetz, who is here on
behalf of the International Chemical Workers Union Council of
the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union,
which represents 20,000 chemical workers in 32 States.
Our third witness, Ms. Pamela Nixon, is the president of
People Concerned About Chemical Safety, an organization that
advocates for individuals and families of the Kanawha Valley
Community of West Virginia, which is home to multiple high-risk
CFATS facilities.
Finally, we have Kirsten Meskill--I hope I pronounced that
right--the director of Corporate Security for BASF Corporation,
who is here testifying on behalf of the American Chemical
Council, who also has a facility in the Second Congressional
District of Louisiana.
So without objection, the witnesses' full statements will
be inserted into the record. I ask--now ask each witness to
summarize his or her statement for 5 minutes beginning with Dr.
Wilson.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL P. WILSON, PH D, M PH, NATIONAL DIRECTOR,
OCCUPATIONAL AND ENVIRONMENT HEALTH PROGRAM, BLUEGREEN ALLIANCE
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Richmond, Ranking Member
Katko, and distinguished Members. My name is Mike Wilson. I am
the national director for occupational and environmental health
of the BlueGreen Alliance.
We are a national coalition of 14 labor unions and
environmental organizations that has been working together for
over a decade to build our Nation's clean energy economy in
ways that also create good jobs with family supporting wages
and safe working conditions.
On behalf of the BlueGreen Alliance and the millions of
members and supporters our partners represent, I thank you for
inviting me today.
We believe CFATS should be reauthorized, but in doing so we
urge Congress to take the opportunity to modernize it by
strengthening its requirements in three areas: Emergency
response, worker participation, and risk reduction. I will
touch on each of these briefly.
In the area of emergency response, CFATS gives authority to
the Secretary to provide information to local and governments,
and I quote, ``to help ensure that first responders are
properly prepared and provided with the situational awareness
needed to respond to security incidents at covered chemical
facilities.''
This is useful but it's not sufficient if the objective is
to give firefighters the ability to respond effectively to an
industrial chemical incident. As we know from the experience of
the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act or
EPCRA, firefighters need much more than chemical information.
They need to talk to the people who run the facilities in
their jurisdiction. They need to get inside those facilities
regularly to see how chemicals are stored and processed in
order to imagine what could go wrong. They need to train side-
by-side with facility operators.
This is pre-fire planning and it's crucial to a safe and
effective response. It requires an on-going commitment by
industry. That commitment, however, needs to be explicitly
required under CFATS, more so than what is currently
recommended within the non-mandatory risk-based performance
standards.
Because the fact is that except in an emergency, many
facilities are reluctant to invite firefighters and other
responders in to look around their property, let alone to pull
out their equipment and conduct training.
I speak to this based on my own 13 years of work as a
professional firefighter, EMT, and paramedic during which time
I responded to about 10,000 emergency calls, including to
industrial chemical releases and fires. I can tell you that to
do their job, firefighters need both information and access and
they are like--they are more likely to get these if facilities
are required to provide them on a routine basis under CFATS.
Our second recommendation pertains to the role of front-
line workers in site security. The existing CFATS language on
employee input is helpful but too generic to be effective.
Depending on the inclinations of the facility, the term
employee input can mean everything from a manager checking the
box to get worker sign-off on a fully executed site security
plan or it could mean a real seat for workers at management's
decision-making table.
In any case, the right of workers to participate
meaningfully in site security decision making needs to be
explicit in CFATS because just as they are reluctant to give
routine access to firefighters, many facilities are reluctant
to seriously involve front-line workers in decision making.
Yet, industry itself recognizes that workers have a great
deal of knowledge and experience to contribute. We suggest that
you consider language from the 2017 process safety management
regulations in California which require oil refineries to
involve workers throughout all phases of process safety
decision making.
If adopted by CFATS, this type of language will help ensure
that the insights of front-line workers are genuinely
integrated into site security.
Finally, our third recommendation pertains to risk
reduction. CFATS is based on a risk management framework which
assumes that dangerous chemicals used at a facility cannot be
reduced or eliminated. So they have to be surrounded by layers
of protection.
Industry is far more innovative and clever than this, of
course, and DHS has reported that under CFATS thousands of
facilities have voluntarily taken action to reduce their use of
dangerous chemicals by consolidating them from multiple sites
into one or two sites, replacing a hazardous chemical with a
less hazardous one, reducing the total quantity held on-site or
switching to a less concentrated form.
These approaches can make a facility much safer and they
have the effect of reducing the desirability of the facility as
a target of opportunity. CFATS could do more to encourage or
require facilities to implement these types of approaches and
we encourage you to make these changes during reauthorization.
In closing, we know from the record and from the excellent
work of the Chemical Safety Board that a major industrial
chemical incident can devastate the lives of workers,
communities, and entire communities. We urge you to use the
reauthorization of CFATS as an opportunity to strengthen it in
the ways we have described.
So thank you, and I am glad to answer any questions you
might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael P. Wilson
March 12, 2019
Thank you Chairman Richmond, Ranking Member Katko, and
distinguished Members. My name is Michael Wilson, and I am the national
director for occupational and environmental health at the BlueGreen
Alliance. On behalf of my organization, our national labor and
environmental partners, and the millions of members and supporters they
represent, I want to thank you for convening the hearing today and for
your continuing interest in chemical security.
The BlueGreen Alliance's 14 member organizations represent
thousands of workers in industrial facilities, as well as teachers,
health care workers, construction workers, scientists, and citizens in
communities across the country. Each one of our partners' members wants
to come home at the end of the day and live in a safe community.
As you contemplate changes to the Chemical Facility Anti-terrorism
Standards (CFATS), we urge you to consider revisions that would
motivate and require companies to meet three key objectives:
Ensure a safe, effective emergency response to a major
industrial chemical incident;
Provide for meaningful worker participation in security
planning and decision making; and,
Implement risk reduction measures to limit the
attractiveness of chemical facilities as targets of
opportunity.
i. cfats meets a critical need in protecting communities and workers
In the context of CFATS, the stakes for communities and workers
could not be higher. When I was serving as chief scientist in the
California Department of Industrial Relations (DIR), I worked with U.S.
EPA Region IX on strategies to prioritize the risks posed by chemical
facilities in our State. One of the ways we did this was by looking at
the ``worst-case scenario'' numbers that facilities submitted to EPA
under the Risk Management Program (RMP) requirements. These numbers are
estimates of the potential casualties that could result in the event of
a catastrophic failure and loss of chemical containment at a facility.
We found a concerning number of chemical facilities in California
that reported potential casualties in the hundreds of thousands and
above. These numbers resulted from a combination of factors, including:
The health hazards and physical properties of the chemicals
used at the facility;
The population density surrounding the facility; and,
Local weather patterns, which might cause chemical vapors
released from a facility to travel into nearby neighborhoods
and beyond.
I invite you to envision the implications, for example, of a major
release of chlorine, which expands in air about 400 times when it's
released from its container. Chlorine vapors are 3 to 4 times heavier
than air, so they're capable of traveling close to the ground for miles
from their point of release. Chlorine vapors convert to acid when
inhaled into the lungs, which can produce pulmonary edema and even
death at concentrations greater then 400 parts per million in air,
which is the equivalent of 0.04 percent chlorine in air. Children are
more vulnerable to the effects of pulmonary edema due to their smaller
airways.
As with chlorine, some of the most dangerous chemicals can produce
life-threatening health effects even at very low exposure
concentrations.
ii. case study: the 2015 torrance, california refinery explosion
endangered the lives of thousands of residents
We recently experienced a near-miss in California from a chemical
whose effects are somewhat similar to those of chlorine. In 2015, an
explosion occurred in the electrostatic precipitator at the oil
refinery in the city of Torrance, near Los Angeles. The explosion sent
tons of industrial dust into Torrance up to a mile away from the
refinery, and the heavy metal debris that was blown off of the
structure nearly struck a tank that contained tens of thousands of
pounds of hydrofluoric acid (HF).
Like chlorine, HF produces death through inhalation and pulmonary
edema. The former chair of the U.S. Chemical Safety Board, Vanessa
Sutherland, noted in the CSB press release related to this incident
that ``hydrofluoric acid can pose a severe hazard to the population and
environment if a release occurs. After HF acid vaporizes it condenses
into small droplets that form a dense low-lying cloud that will travel
along the ground for several miles and can cause severe damage to the
respiratory system, skin, and bones of those who are exposed,
potentially resulting in death.''\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (CSB), U.S.
Chemical Safety Board Finds Multiple Safety Deficiencies Led to
February 2015 Explosion and Serious Near Miss at the Exxon Mobil
Refinery in Torrance, California. January 13, 2016. Available online:
https://www.csb.gov/us-chemical-safety-board-finds-multiple-safety-
deficiencies-led-to-february-2015-explosion-and-serious-near-miss-at-
the-exxon-mobil-refinery-in-torrance-california/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given that 330,000 residents, 71 schools, and 8 hospitals are
located within 3 miles of the refinery, the CSB concluded that the
release had ``the potential to cause serious injury or death to many
community members.''\2\ I invite you to contemplate thinking of
Torrance as your place of residence in light of that statement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iii. gao: many companies have not complied with the requirements of
cfats
While most companies no doubt operate their facilities responsibly,
it's also reasonable to expect that companies might find it difficult--
or at least time- and resource-intensive--to establish effective
security measures that would protect against a deliberate act of
industrial terrorism. Facility managers already face enormous demands
to ensure that product moves safely in and out of the plant, so perhaps
it's not a surprise that past GAO reports on the implementation of
CFATS have found issues with facilities mis-reporting information to
DHS (e.g., their ``Distance of Concern'') or failing to report to DHS
at all.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), Nathan Anderson,
Acting Director, Homeland Security and Justice, Testimony before the
Committee on Homeland Security, House of Representatives. Critical
infrastructure protection: Progress and Challenges in DHS's Management
of Its Chemical Facility Security Program. GAO-19-402T. February 27,
2019. Available on-line: https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/697117.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The GAO did not speak directly to the notion of fraudulent
reporting, but it highlighted the importance of supporting CFATS
implementation with more direct oversight by DHS, including with
enforcement actions and penalties as a matter of routine practice.
iv. congress should make changes to cfats in order to achieve at least
three objectives
I will now return to the 3 objectives noted above that we believe
Congress should seek to achieve in revising CFATS:
Objective No. 1: Ensure a safe, effective emergency response to a major
industrial chemical incident
In the area of emergency planning and response, CFATS must ensure
that facilities have put in place--and routinely test--an effective
emergency response plan for a major chemical incident.
I'm familiar with the emergency response arena because I worked for
13 years as a professional firefighter, paramedic, and EMT, during
which time I responded to about 10,000 emergency calls, including to
industrial facilities with chemical releases and fires. I also served
with the U.S. Coast Guard Reserve for 7 years, and I was rostered for
deployment for 5 years with FEMA Task Force 4, based out of the Oakland
Fire Department, as part of FEMA's National Response System.
In responding to industrial incidents in the fire service, we
typically had very little information about chemicals inside the
building. There was a lot of uncertainty, and I don't think we fully
appreciated how little we understood about the potential risks we were
facing at these incidents. At one industrial fire that occurred late at
night, we were preparing to force open a door when an explosion
occurred inside the building and a 55-gallon drum burst through the
roof, landing in a nearby parking lot.
On another occasion, a routine-sounding dispatch came in for ``a
worker experiencing chest pain'' inside a vegetable processing plant,
so when we arrived, we didn't feel the need to don our self-contained
breathing apparatus (SCBA) to enter the building. Once we were deep
inside the plant, however, we found that there were in fact several
workers experiencing shortness of breath, chest pain, and nausea from a
chlorine gas leak. We were no better protected than the workers we were
attempting to help.
Planning and responding effectively to an industrial chemical
release is more complicated than it might sound. It requires much more
than what is currently required under CFATS, which simply gives
authority to the Secretary to share facility information with first
responders in order to improve their ``situational awareness'' in
responding to a chemical release.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Public Law 113-254, Protecting and Securing Chemical Facilities
from Terrorist Attacks Act of 2014, Title XXI--Chemical Facility Anti-
Terrorism Standards. 6 USC 621, Section 2103, Protection and Sharing of
Information, at (b) Sharing of Information with States and Local
Governments, and at (c) Sharing of Information with First Responders.
December 18, 2014. Available on-line: https://www.govinfo.gov/app/
details/PLAW-113publ254.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While this CFATS requirement is marginally useful, it is far from
sufficient. Even if the information is provided by facilities to the
Secretary and transmitted to fire departments, it's difficult for
firefighters to apply the information in actual response planning. The
information--in and of itself--will be of limited value without
additional facility-specific information, coordination, and training.
For fire departments, chemical information about a facility is
essential, but it is not enough to execute a safe and effective
emergency response.
To be useful to firefighters, information needs to be facility-
specific and continuously updated, and it needs to be part of a broader
coordination, planning, and training effort between the facility and
fire department. Firefighters need to train regularly with the facility
in order to be capable of answering several questions in the event of a
major chemical incident, including the following:
The identity of the chemical involved in the release;
The size of the release;
The hazards and physical properties of the chemical;
The physical lay-out of the plant, with points of access and
egress;
The plume size, behavior, and direction;
The possible health consequences of the release for the
public;
Safe operating distances for firefighters and evacuation
distances for the public;
Suppression, containment, and extinguishment practices;
The potential for escalation to nearby vessels or piping;
Appropriate personal protective equipment; and
On-scene conditions, including actions taken by the facility
to contain and mitigate the release, numbers of persons injured
or trapped, and other associated hazards.
These types of questions can only be answered by knowledge and
experience gained through:
Curated, facility-specific chemical information, as well as
information about the facility lay-out and structure;
Regular planning and training with the facility;
Appropriately-trained hazardous materials personnel;
Proper personal protective equipment;
Effective mutual aid systems; and
Continuous on-plume modeling, evacuation management, and
hazardous materials operations.
In short, an effective response requires much more than the
transmission of chemical information to responders, as currently
required--albeit indirectly--under CFATS.
In practice, the emergency planning and response aspects of
EPCRA and CFATS are similarly limited.
CFATS appears to be following the model of the Federal Emergency
Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA), which has been only
marginally successful in improving emergency planning and response to
major industrial incidents.
Congress passed EPCRA in 1986 in response to the Bhopal disaster
and other U.S. industrial chemical accidents. It consists of three
major elements: The Toxics Release Inventory (TRI); an emergency
planning provision; and a citizen suit provision.
Under its emergency planning provisions, EPCRA requires facilities
to provide chemical information to fire departments through Local
Emergency Planning Committees (LEPCs) and State Emergency Response
Commissions (SERCs)--or directly to fire departments--either by
submitting copies of Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) or by providing
a list of chemicals that are used and stored on-site. EPCRA requires
the LEPCs to update this information annually, and to develop annual
emergency response plans to be used during a major chemical incident.
It requires facilities (under section 311) to submit an annual
Emergency and Hazardous Chemical Inventory Form with information on how
and where chemicals are stored on-site.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), ``Emergency
Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA) Hazardous Chemical
Inventory Reporting Requirements.'' Available on-line: https://
www.epa.gov/epcra/epcra-sections-311-312.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
EPCRA certainly improved industry transparency with regard to the
production and release of hazardous chemicals, and it represents a step
forward for emergency planning and response. Its contributions to
improving actual emergency operations, however, have been constrained
by a lack of resources on the part of LEPCs, limited capacity among
fire departments to assimilate and act on chemical information, an
outdated informational architecture and uneven enforcement by EPA.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Purifoy DM, EPCRA: A Retrospective on the Environmental Right-
to-Know Act. Available on-line: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
2434082.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
EPCRA's reliance on LEPCs is particularly problematic because the
LEPCs are voluntary entities that in the great majority of cases simply
do not have the capacity to receive and organize complex industrial
chemical information and update and distribute emergency planning
documents. I witnessed this when I served on the State Emergency
Response Commission (SERC) in California, where I heard reports from
the volunteer LEPC representatives and heard their complaints about the
objectives they were expected to meet--without the resources necessary
for doing so.
For fire departments, raw chemical information is of limited
utility. Fire departments are not well-suited to organizing,
assimilating, and acting on raw chemical hazard information provided by
facilities. To be useful, chemical information from facilities--at a
minimum--needs to be curated and formatted, and tied to facility-
specific information, as noted above.
The CFATS emergency planning and response provisions could
be significantly improved.
The U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (CSB)
identified emergency response deficiencies as a contributor to at least
14 major industrial chemical incidents. Most of the deficiencies
occurred in the following areas:
Training for emergency responders, including hazardous
materials training;
Emergency planning and community response plans and teams;
Use of community notification systems;
Use of an incident command system and the National Incident
Management System;
Conducting emergency response exercises;
Sharing of information among facilities, emergency
responders, and the community; and
Communicating during emergencies.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ U.S. CSB, Drivers of Critical Chemical Safety Change: Emergency
Planning and Response (Preparedness). Available on-line: https://
www.csb.gov/recommendations/emergency-response-/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Based on these findings, CFATS could improve its emergency planning
and response provisions by requiring facilities to:
Transmit specific types of chemical and facility information
to fire departments and other public response agencies;
Conduct regular planning meetings and training exercises
with fire departments and other agencies;
Conduct an assessment to understand the capacity of fire
departments and other agencies to respond effectively to a
major chemical incident; and
Implement corrective actions to address gaps identified in
the assessment.
These requirements would provide a foundation for improving the
capacity of local fire departments and other agencies to respond
effectively to a major chemical incident, intentional or otherwise.
Alongside these improvements in CFATS, we believe there is a need
for a comprehensive, National emergency response capacity study to
identify at-risk communities and develop realistic response plans. Many
communities--particularly those served by volunteer fire departments--
have very limited capacity to respond to a major industrial chemical
incident.
Objective No. 2: Provide for meaningful worker participation in
security planning and decision making
CFATS section 2102(b)(2) on Employee Input requires that, ``to the
greatest extent practicable, a facility's security vulnerability
assessment and site security plan shall include input from at least one
facility employee and, where applicable, one employee representative
from the bargaining agent at that facility, each of whom possesses, in
the determination of the facility's security officer, relevant
knowledge, experience, training, or education as pertains to matters of
site security.''
This is an important aspect of CFATS, and it could be made more
effective by including a more complete set of employee rights to
participate in security decision making, modeled California's 2017
process safety management (PSM) regulations for petroleum refineries,
as follows:\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ California Occupational Safety and Health Standards Board,
California Code of Regulations (CCR) Title 8, General Industry Safety
Orders (GISO)  5189.1, Process Safety Management for Petroleum
Refineries. 2017. Available on-line: https://www.dir.ca.gov/title8/
5189_1.html. A description of the purpose and necessity for each PSM
element is provided in DIR's Initial Statement of Reasons. Available
on-line: http://www.dir.ca.gov/OSHSB/documents/Process-Safety-
Management-for-Petroleum-Refineriess-ISOR.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The right of employees to participate ``throughout all
phases'' of CFATS decision making, from design to
implementation, training, evaluation, and maintenance;
The right of employees to select their representatives who
participate in management's CFATS decision-making processes;
Access by employees to information relevant to CFATS
decision making, including information that might be subject to
protection as a trade secret;
The right of employees to anonymously report site security
weaknesses; and
The obligation of employers to maintain a record of all
employee reports of site security weaknesses.
Industry recognizes that employees can play an important
role in improving industrial safety; this role
would apply equally to industrial security.
In its Guidelines for Risk-Based Process Safety, the process
industry's Center for Chemical Process Safety (CCPS) lists ``workforce
involvement'' as one of 20 management systems necessary to reduce
process safety risks and prevent chemical accidents, pointing out
that:\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Center for Chemical Process Safety (CCPS) and American
Institute of Chemical Engineers, Guidelines for Risk-Based Process
Safety. Wiley and Sons. (p. 124). 2007.
`` . . . workers are potentially the most knowledgeable people with
respect to the day-to-day details of operating the process and
maintaining the equipment and facilities, and may be the sole source
for some types of knowledge gained through their unique experiences.
Workforce involvement provides management a formalized mechanism for
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
tapping into this valuable expertise.''
The CCPS defines ``workforce involvement'' as a ``system for
enabling the active participation of company and contractor workers in
the design, development, implementation, and continuous improvement of
the Risk-Based Process Safety management system.''\10\ This same
definition could be applied to the role of employees under CFATS.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Ibid. (p. 124).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The CCPS Guidelines were developed and reviewed by experts from
many of the Nation's leading chemical process companies, including Dow,
DuPont, ExxonMobil, Chevron Energy Technology Company, 3M, Air Product
and Chemicals Inc., Shell Chemical, BP, Olin Corporation, Bayer
Material Science, and others.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Ibid.. (Preface).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The evidence suggests that the 2012 Richmond, California,
Chevron refinery fire might have been prevented if
managers had involved employee representatives in
decision making.
Evidence identified by the CSB points to a lack of employee
participation in process safety decision making as a key factor leading
up to the 2102 Richmond, California, Chevron refinery fire, which
endangered the lives of 19 workers and caused some 15,000 area
residents to seek medical attention for symptoms related to exposure to
smoke and fire gasses.
The CSB's interim report of that incident shows that the
catastrophic pipe failure in the plant's crude unit would have been
prevented if Chevron's managers had followed the recommendations of
their own engineers. The fact that they did not resulted in part
because Chevron employee representatives were excluded from
management's decision-making process.
Over a period of several years leading up to the pipe failure and
fire, the CSB found that Chevron's engineers issued at least 6 reports
calling attention to the problem of sulfidation corrosion in the crude
unit and recommending a more aggressive pipe inspection and monitoring
program. As the CSB pointed out, Chevron's engineers made these
recommendations against a backdrop of serious sulfidation corrosion
incidents in the U.S. refinery sector, including at:
Chevron's El Paso, Texas refinery (1988);
Chevron's Pascagoula, Mississippi refinery (1988 and 1993);
Chevron's Salt Lake City, Utah refinery (2002);
Chevron's Richmond refinery (2007);
The Silver Eagle refinery in Woods Cross, Utah (2009);
The Regina Saskatchewan, Canada refinery (2011); and
The BP Cherry Point, Washington refinery (2012).\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ U.S. CSB, Interim Investigation Report. Chevron Richmond
Refinery Fire of August 6, 2012. (pp. 24-27). Available on-line:
https://www.csb.gov/chevron-refinery-fire/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
By 2009, Chevron's engineers warned of the potential for a
catastrophic pipe failure, and still management chose not to act. The
pipe finally failed in August 2012 in the area the engineers predicted
it would, and 19 workers nearly lost their lives.
Had Chevron been required to involve employee representatives in
management's pipe corrosion assessments, those representatives would
likely have been aware of the engineers' reports, and they would almost
certainly have requested that the engineers' recommendations be
implemented. In taking those actions, the serious state of corrosion in
the crude unit would have become apparent. This would likely have
resulted in a shut down of the unit to replace damaged sections of
pipe, thereby preventing the vapor cloud explosion that ultimately
occurred in August 2012.
The same conditions would apply in the security context under
CFATS. Employees possess unique knowledge and experience that can be
crucial to ensuring an effective chemical security program.
The perspectives of rank-and-file employees are invaluable
in site security decision making, but only if they
are given the right to meaningfully participate.
The requirement for employee input is critical to the success of
CFATS. Experienced employees often have a deep understanding of the
practical workings of a plant, and they can apply this experience in
setting priorities and determining if a proposed security measure will
function as intended. Employees have a direct stake in protecting the
safety of the facility. As the CSB identified in the Richmond,
California, Chevron fire, effective employee participation can improve
the transparency and accountability of management decision making,
which can otherwise be skewed by production and financial pressures.
In practice, however, employees and their representatives will not
normally be invited to participate with any real authority in
management's decision-making committees, including those focused on
plant security. At a minimum--including with a unionized workforce--
employees need regulatory authority to obtain a seat at the table. For
employee participation to be meaningful, however, that authority must
provide much more than the basic right to participate; it must provide
for the following 7 elements:
Allow employees to select their representatives, either
through their collective bargaining agent, where present, or by
a credible process established by the employer;
Ensure employee participation throughout all phases of site
security decision making, not simply as a final ``rubber
stamp'' to management's proposals;
Provide for on-going participation in the implementation and
maintenance of security measures;
Provide for participation in the training and evaluation of
site security measures;
Provide a means for anonymous reporting of site security
problems, and an obligation of owners or operators to maintain
a record of such reports;
Provide a means for confidential input by employees to
regulators during CFATS audits and inspections; and
Provide a means to document the extent to which employee
input has been received and integrated into plant security
measures.
The 2017 California PSM regulations include employee participation
rights that require the first 5 of the elements noted above, while also
providing for the right of employees to refuse unsafe work, request
that a process be shut down, and--for operators--actually shut down a
refinery process.
Objective No. 3: Implement risk reduction measures to limit the
attractiveness of chemical facilities as targets of opportunity
CFATS is a risk management--rather than risk reduction--framework;
that is, it assumes that industrial chemical hazards cannot be reduced
or eliminated, and that those hazards must therefore be ``surrounded''
by layers of security in order to reduce the risk of a major release
initiated by a motivated actor.
There is evidence, however, that CFATS is motivating some companies
to voluntarily implement risk reduction strategies. DHS reports that
thousands of high-risk facilities have chosen to meet their chemical
security obligations not only through traditional security measures,
but also by risk reduction strategies that include:
Consolidating chemicals from multiple sites into one or two
sites;
Replacing a hazardous chemical with a less hazardous one;
Reducing the total quantity of a chemical held on-site; or
Switching to a less concentrated form of the chemical.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Suzanne E. Spaulding, DHS Under Secretary, Correspondence to
the Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland
Security. January 11, 2017. See Addendum at page 6, item 12.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Assuming DHS is confident in the veracity of these claims--and is
taking steps to validate them--these approaches represent progress
toward reducing industrial chemical risks at CFATS-regulated
facilities.
CFATS could do more to improve industrial resilience against a
motivated actor by further encouraging or requiring facilities to
investigate--and implement to the extent feasible--approaches such as
these, which minimize, substitute, moderate, or simplify the chemicals
and/or processes they have on-site.
This approach is recommended by the industry's Center for Chemical
Process Safety (CCPS) of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers
(AIChE) in the context of process safety, but it is equally applicable
in the security context:\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ CCPS and American Institute of Chemical Engineers, Inherently
Safer Chemical Processes: A Life Cycle Approach, Second Edition. 2009.
Wiley and Sons. (p. 27).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To minimize a hazard, the facility could use smaller
quantities of a hazardous chemical.
To substitute a hazard, the facility could replace a
hazardous chemical with a less toxic or less flammable one, or
it could use a less concentrated form of the chemical.
To moderate a process, the facility could operate a process
under less hazardous conditions, such as by running a process
closer to ambient temperature and pressure.
To simplify a process, the facility could introduce design
changes to eliminate unnecessary complexity, and to make
operating errors less likely, as well as more forgiving if
errors do occur.
By reducing the hazard severity of chemicals and/or processes used
at a facility, these measures can limit the attractiveness of the
facility as a target of opportunity. This approach was developed by
many of the Nation's leading process companies, including Dow, DuPont,
Eli Lilly, Rohm and Haas, Honeywell, Braskem, Shering Plough, and Nova,
and they were peer-reviewed by process safety experts from academia,
industry, and Government.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Ibid. (Preface)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
California's 2017 PSM regulations for petroleum refineries could
serve as a model for implementing risk reduction provisions into
CFATS.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ California Occupational Safety and Health Standards Board,
California Code of Regulations (CCR) Title 8, General Industry Safety
Orders (GISO)  5189.1, Process Safety Management for Petroleum
Refineries. 2009. Available on-line: https://www.dir.ca.gov/title8/
5189_1.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
v. congress should take action to strengthen cfats
It is essential that Congress take action to protect workers,
communities, and the Nation's industrial infrastructure from the threat
of an intentional attack. The findings of the GAO illustrate that the
CFATS program is making progress in meeting this objective, and that
more can and must be done. The BlueGreen Alliance recommends that
Congress improve the effectiveness of CFATS by making revisions that
will motivate and require companies to meet three critical objectives:
Ensure a safe, effective emergency response to a major
industrial chemical incident;
Provide for meaningful worker participation in security
planning and decision making; and
Implement risk reduction measures to limit the
attractiveness of chemical facilities as targets of
opportunity.
The historical record and the findings of the CSB illustrate that a
major industrial chemical release, fire, or explosion caused by a
motivated actor could devastate the lives of workers, families, and
entire communities. We urge you to use the reauthorization of CFATS as
an opportunity to strengthen the program. The result will be improved
security for our Nation's process facilities, safer workplaces and
communities, and a more resilient industrial infrastructure.
Chairman Richmond, Ranking Member Katko, and distinguished Members,
thank you again for granting me the opportunity to appear at today's
hearing.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Morawetz to summarize his statement for
5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF JOHN S. MORAWETZ, HEALTH AND SAFETY
REPRESENTATIVE, INTERNATIONAL CHEMICAL WORKERS UNION COUNCIL
Mr. Morawetz. Thank you, Chairman Richmond, Ranking Member
Katko, and subcommittee Members for the honor of appearing
before you to talk about the safety of our chemical facility
members and facility security.
My name is John Morawetz and I am here today representing
the International Chemical Workers Union Council, which is a
council of the United Food and Commercial Workers Union. The
ICWUC was founded in 1944 and represents 20,000 chemical
workers in 32 States.
The million-member UFCW strongly supports a multi-year
authorization of CFATS with certain essential improvements. The
industries we work in include petroleum and coal products,
pharmaceuticals, agricultural chemicals, natural gas
distribution, nuclear weapons and power plants.
We work with extremely hazardous substances and have a
vested interest in the safe operation of their facilities for
all workers' health and their facilities' and communities'
well-being.
We handle many of the CFATS Appendix A hazardous materials
in railcars, storage tanks, reactor vessels and respond as part
of on-site response teams. Thankfully, there has not been a
terrorist attack on a chemical facility, but much can be
learned from an unintentional releases at facilities we
represent.
In 2014, 4 people died from a massive release of methyl
mercaptan in Houston, Texas and in 2016 there was a complete
rupture of a full chlorine tanker care in West Virginia that
luckily did not kill anybody.
Most tragically, in 1971 a Georgia facility that
manufactured magnesium trip flares had some fires and then blew
up. Horribly, the evacuation distance was not sufficient and 27
workers were killed.
We can and must learn from each event, large or small, or
from near-misses. We recommend 4 CFATS improvements: Worker
involvement in security plans, more training for workers and
inspectors, stronger whistleblower protections, and compilation
of best practices.
First and foremost, workers and representatives in labor
need to be involved in protecting our chemical infrastructure.
Chemical workers have direct, current knowledge and experience.
It is invaluable in solving a site-specific problem. It's
important that workers' expertise, the same expertise that
operates these plants every day, be utilized in the drafting,
implementation, and evaluation of plant security plans.
We recommend that facility operators document and certify
employee security recommendations and share these with CFATS
inspectors.
I would love to tell you about CFATS inspections, but we
don't know since we are not informed of these visits. Since the
law allows inspectors the discretion of involving workers or
not, our locals and members have not been included. Therefore,
an important stakeholder and their valuable information has
been excluded from inspections.
Other Federal agencies, including OSHA, NIOSH, the EPA, and
the U.S. Chemical Safety Board, have established inspection
models for working with both management and labor.
The second key to effective security, worksite security, is
good training for everyone about their roles and
responsibilities and drills for proper response, as well as
training of CFATS inspectors. This is more fully described in
my written testimony.
Third, whistleblowers who disclose wrongdoing can save
lives and help improve public safety and should not face
retaliation. Regretfully, fear is a fact of life in all too
many workplaces and jeopardizing one's job by blowing the
whistle can be risky.
We recommend that OSHA, which currently administers
whistleblower complaints for 22 Federal agencies, handles CFATS
complaints.
Last, facilities that have successfully reduced their risk
have valuable best-practice information that should be
aggregated and annually released. DHS has stated that many,
``CFATS facilities have either reduced their holdings of high-
risk chemicals of interest or eliminated them completely,
substituting less risky chemicals or have changed their
processes and have actually come out of the program.''
We believe facilities have much to learn from each other
and best practices such as safer substances, reductions in
storage and--use are some of them.
I applaud the recognition that the measures you are
discussing will help protect us, not only from a terrorist
attack but also hazardous material releases from a natural
disaster or accident. The changes outlined in my testimony will
fulfill CFATS' mandate and mitigate the consequences and risk
of a release, regardless of the cause.
We support the work of this subcommittee to ensure the
safety of our chemical workers, their communities, and all
Americans through a multi-year CFATS reauthorization. This will
reduce risk and protect workers and communities from a
terrorist attack and other tragedies.
Thank you, and I will take questions later.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Morawetz follows:]
Prepared Statement of John S. Morawetz
March 12, 2019
Thank you, Chairman Richmond, Ranking Member Katko, and Members of
the subcommittee for holding this important hearing and for the
opportunity to testify. I am here today representing the International
Chemical Workers Union Council (ICWUC) of the United Food and
Commercial Workers International Union (UFCW). The ICWUC was founded in
1944 and represents approximately 20,000 chemical workers in 32 States.
In 1996, we merged with the UFCW and this mutually-beneficial
partnership continues to serve our members well today. It is my honor
to appear before you to address the safety and health of our members
who work in chemical plants and the security of these facilities.
ICWUC strongly supports a multi-year authorization of the Chemical
Facilities Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) program with certain
essential changes.
about the international chemical workers union council
The ICWUC has been active for decades in promoting strong and
effective health and safety standards in hazardous chemical facilities
where our members work. Workers and their union representatives have a
vested interested in safe worksites. The ICWUC supports chemical safety
standards and laws to protect both our members, the facilities they
work at, and the public.
UFCW chemical workers work in many different manufacturing
industries including petroleum and coal products, fertilizers,
pharmaceuticals, pesticides, and other agricultural chemicals in
smelters and refineries, as well as, natural gas distribution, nuclear
weapon production, and power plants. Our members work with extremely
hazardous substances and have a vested interest in the safe operation
of their facilities for their own health, for their coworkers' health
and for their communities' well-being.
Our members handle many of the hazardous materials in CFATS
Appendix A. Specifically, we unload tankers and railcars that contain
hazardous materials, monitor large storage tanks filled with these
substances, move the storage tanks within our facilities, manage the
control rooms that monitor and operate reactor vessels, and load the
containers for their shipment offsite. The vast majority of the time,
the handling of chemicals is done safely, but when there is a release,
we respond in a range of roles including on-site response teams.
Thankfully there has not been a terrorist attack on a chemical facility
to date, but there is much that can be learned from unintentional
incidents. Examples of the tragic impact of the release of Appendix A
hazardous materials include an incident in 2014, where 4 people were
overcome by the massive release of methyl mercaptan in Houston, Texas
or the rupture of a full chlorine tanker car in West Virginia that
luckily did not kill anyone.\1\ Chemical safety is a very serious issue
that we are familiar with and the workers at chemical facilities want
to do everything possible to prevent these types of events whether from
terrorism or other causes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Reports/
HZM1901.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Past incidents remind us of the danger that these chemicals pose.
The site of one of ICWUC's most tragic loss of lives was in 1971 at the
Thiokol facility near Woodbine, Georgia, which manufactured magnesium
trip flares for the U.S. Army during the Vietnam War. On February 3,
1971, the Thiokol facility was evacuated after several small fires
broke out inside the plant which caused the flares to ignite and the
plant was destroyed. Horribly, the evacuation distance was not
sufficient, and 27 workers were killed when the plant blew up. The
Thiokol explosion led to a better understanding of the full danger of
the materials in that plant and what a safe evacuation distance should
be.
Unions have a proud history of fighting for the right to a safe
workplace and for the basic right for workers to return home after a
day on the job as healthy as when they left. Unions have made sure
their members are educated and trained on the safety and health hazards
they face on the job. Union negotiators bargain over health and safety
contract language, unions actively participate in the investigation and
identification of health and safety hazards, and testify in support of
legislation which strengthens workplace safety and health. We are
actively involved in making our workplaces safer. It is therefore an
honor for me to appear before you to address the safety and health of
our members who work in chemical plants and the security of these
facilities.
As to my background, I have over 3 decades of experience
investigating occupational health hazards for the National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH); as the director of health
and safety for the Molders Union and here at the Chemical Workers Union
as the director of health and safety and currently the director of the
Training Center in Cincinnati, Ohio. I am testifying today in my
capacity as a representative of the ICWUC Health and Safety Department.
In my testimony, I will address the following elements that are
crucial to the safety of chemical plants:
(1) worker involvement in security plans,
(2) effective training requirements,
(3) strong whistleblower protections, and
(4) successful practices.
about cfats
In 2007, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) established the
CFATS program to identify and assess the security risk posed by
facilities that contain hazardous chemicals that could be used by
terrorists to inflict mass casualties or harm surrounding populations.
DHS approves facility security plans and inspects high-risk facilities
to ensure that the facilities are compliant with required security
measures and procedures.
workers must be involved in chemical plant security
CFATS inspectors, workers, labor representatives and company
representatives all need to be involved in protecting our chemical
infrastructure. Chemical workers have direct, current knowledge and
experience of plant operations that is invaluable in solving site-
specific problems. Chemical workers know first-hand how a plant works,
what chemicals are used, how those chemicals react to one another and
their facilities' weaknesses. We also know if back-up systems will work
when the power goes out. We know the exact location of the CFATS
hazardous materials and we know if training is effective. All these
responsibilities make chemical workers the first and best line of
defense.
We believe employee involvement in the drafting, implementation,
and evaluation of plants' chemical security plans is crucial. It is
important that workers' expertise--the same expertise that operates
these plants everyday--be utilized. Including chemical workers in this
process will enhance facility security and protection. We believe the
facility's operator should document recommendations received from
employees in their site security plans, certify that there has been
worker input into the site security plan, and share employee
recommendations with inspectors.
Workers should be involved in chemical facility security because
our on-site responders are the first people to respond to catastrophic
events. At many sites, there is a joint labor management response team
that is usually the first on the scene to an incident. The experiences
and knowledge of workers is important when considering how to prevent
or plan for future incidents. These workers should be talking with
CFATS inspectors and sharing their knowledge along with management.
Workers should also be protected from any type of retaliation on
the part of employers for full involvement in workplace safety and
health, and chemical plant security efforts. Any barriers to
involvement, such as discipline for reporting incidents or talking with
CFATS inspectors should be identified and removed.
I'd love to tell you about our perspective of what takes place
during a CFATS inspection, but we don't know since we are not informed
of these visits. Right now, the law allows discretion on the part of
inspectors as to whether workers and the union are advised of an
inspection. We currently have no information that our locals or members
have been involved in inspections, and this means an important
stakeholder and their valuable information may be excluded from the
process.
Concerns about interfering in the labor management relationship
should not be a barrier to greater chemical plant safety. Federal
agencies including the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA), NIOSH, the U.S. Chemical Safety Board and the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) all have procedures to work with both
management and labor during their inspections. By not involving labor
in these inspections, they are relying on management's information and
have de-facto taken a side.
Workers need to know their basic CFATS rights. One way to inform
and include workers is to require a CFATS breakroom poster in all
chemical facilities that submitted a Top Screen survey. The poster
could include basic facts about CFATS and contact information like OSHA
breakroom posters.
effective training for all workers at covered areas in cfats-tiered
facilities
Key to effective worksite security is good training for everyone
about their roles and responsibilities and drills for proper response
and evacuation. For over 30 years my union has run training programs
and collected data on how much training our members received in the
previous 12 months in 10 specific areas. OSHA's Hazard Communication
Standard is the primary OSHA standard requiring training on hazardous
chemicals, and the requirement is minimal--only when initially assigned
to a job, or if new chemicals are introduced. Other than this initial
training, workers often do not receive further training on hazardous
chemicals. According to data collected by our union, we found that from
2017 to 2018 over 80 percent of workers who attended ICWUC training had
no training in the last year in 9 of the 10 key worker safety areas.
The 9 areas not trained on were: Engineering Controls, Air Monitoring,
Decontamination, Toxic Effects, Emergency Response Procedures, OSHA
Regulations, Plugging and Patching, Selection of Protective Clothing or
Respirators. The Government and companies must increase the amount and
type of training for all workers inside of CFATS-covered plants.
Effective training requires training materials that are easily
understood, and that are targeted to the audience using the materials.
An example of where materials have been developed that are useable and
understandable, is the State of New Jersey which has taken a strong
interest in the security of their chemical plants. The State has
devoted a considerable amount of time and effort over the last 30 years
to developing clear resources on these key issues. The New Jersey
training materials cover many of the CFATS substances.
Implementing good training is not easy. One facility that I
reviewed was trying to implement the right procedures but after careful
review, I realized that all the drills were taking place on the first
shift because that is when the salaried employees worked. The facility
has three shifts and operates continuously, so only a fraction of the
workers were being drilled for these types of events.
Training is also important for the CFATS inspectors. They should be
trained on toxic effects, chemical operations, CFATS procedures, Top
Screen operation and definition of tiers, effective controls,
incompatible substances, relevant guidelines and standards, and methods
that reduce the potential consequences of a terrorist attack. Their
training should also include knowledge of methods to reduce or remove
hazards that could be attractive targets. It would be extremely
valuable to inspectors to know how similar facilities have reduced or
removed such hazards. We need to be sure that information received by
CFATS inspectors is consistent with the best industry practices and
inspection observations.
whistleblower protections for workers to report problems to cfats
In addition to routine interactions with inspectors, employees at
facilities with hazardous chemicals can play an important role in
helping to ensure CFATS compliance by submitting a whistleblower report
when they suspect noncompliance. Whistleblowers who disclose wrongdoing
at chemical facilities can save lives and help improve public safety
and health and should not face retaliation.
Regretfully fear is a fact of life at all too many workplaces and
jeopardizing one's job by blowing the whistle is a risky thing to do.
Workers, who bravely come forward to protect themselves, their co-
workers, and communities around the plant, should not fear losing their
jobs when they speak out. Whistleblower protection is vital in assuring
the free exchange of ideas, improving security, and ensuring that
effective measures are actually implemented. Workers must have the
ability to come forth and communicate program deficiencies without fear
of retribution.
DHS is responsible for managing the CFATS whistleblower process and
procedures, but DHS lacks a process and procedures to address
whistleblower retaliation reports. OSHA has developed guidance with
recommended practices for public, private, and non-profit employers to
use in preventing and addressing whistleblower retaliation. To help
ensure that whistleblower retaliation reports are addressed efficiently
and effectively, we recommend that OSHA, which currently administers
whistleblower complaints from 22 Federal agencies, should administer
CFATS complaints as well.
cfats should identify and disseminate successful practices
There are many steps and measures that could and should be taken to
improve chemical plant safety and security. The U.S. Department of
Homeland Security has stated that many ``CFATS facilities have either
reduced their holdings of high-risk chemicals of interest or eliminated
them completely, substituting less risky chemicals or have changed
their processes and have actually come out of the program and
determined to no longer to be high risk.''\2\ These facilities have
substituted less dangerous formulations, better designed containers, or
various engineering steps, which all can minimize the consequences of
an accident or attack at a chemical plant. Unfortunately, there is no
report that can be shared with other facilities that spells out the
methods to reduce the consequences of a catastrophic release of
chemicals from intentional attacks or unintentional disasters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Secretary Wulf's testimony before House Homeland Security
Committee on February 27, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although reducing potential consequences may not be feasible in all
circumstances, either technologically or economically, safer solvents
or formulations could be substituted for more dangerous ones. The
quantities or concentrations can be reduced to below threshold amounts,
some substances can be used in a less dangerous form, alternative
processes can be used, chemicals can be used ``just in time'' (without
storage), vulnerable sections can be reinforced, improving inventory
control, minimizing bulk storage and maintenance schedules reviewed
regularly. Many companies have implemented these changes and there is
much to be learned from which changes have been the most effective.
This information sharing can be done without identifying individual
companies or locations.
Incorporating these considerations into site security planning will
ensure that covered chemical facilities are aware of the security
implications of their production processes and enable the selection of
more effective security methods.
Facilities that have successfully reduced their risk have valuable
best practices information that should be aggregated and annually
released. Facilities have much to learn from each other and aggregated
data could be one step.
conclusion
Although this committee's mandate is the protection of facilities
from terrorist attack, I applaud the recognition that the measures that
you are discussing will protect us not only from a terrorist attack but
will also minimize a hazardous materials release resulting from a
natural disaster or accident. The dangers we face in a chemical release
come from a variety of directions, but the changes outlined in my
testimony will mitigate the consequences and risks of a release
regardless of the cause of that release and fulfill CFATS' mandate.
The International Chemical Workers Union Council supports the work
of this subcommittee to ensure the safety of our chemical workers, the
communities around the facilities and all Americans. We strongly
support a multi-year reauthorization of the Chemical Facilities Anti-
Terrorism Standards program, hope this authorization will reduce risk,
protect workers and communities, prevent a terrorist attack and
tragedies like the Thiokol explosion in 1971.
On behalf of the ICWUC, I urge you to act now to protect America--
to protect all workers and their families--by strengthening and
reauthorizing CFATS before it expires next year.
Again, I thank you for your time and would be pleased to answer any
questions that you may have.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Morawetz. I now recognize Ms.
Nixon for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF PAMELA NIXON, PRESIDENT, PEOPLE CONCERNED ABOUT
CHEMICAL SAFETY
Ms. Nixon. Good morning. Thank you for allowing me the
opportunity to provide a community perspective for improving
CFATS. I am representing People Concerned About Chemical
Safety, also known as PCACS. We are located in the center of
Appalachia in Charleston, West Virginia in the Kanawha Valley.
We are dedicated to protect the health and safety of those
who reside, work, and study in the vicinity of local facilities
that produce highly toxic chemicals.
The core of our work is to promote environmental and social
justice principles and encourage the inclusion of all peoples
that are disproportionately impacted by decision makers. PCACS
is also affiliated with Environmental Justice Health Alliance
for Chemical Policy Reform.
For decades it has been proven that in study after study
that low-income communities and communities of color are
disproportionately impacted by hazardous waste facilities and
facilities that emit highly toxic and extremely hazardous
chemicals.
In Kanawha County there is a community called Institute.
It's mostly an African-American community of about 800
households and it's also the home for a--an historically black
university, West Virginia State University, which is on
direct--directly on the fence line of one of the hazardous
high-risk facilities in the Kanawha County.
Seventy--approximately 70 percent of the people in Kanawha
County live in a 3-mile radius of one or more high-risk
facilities that are included in the EPA Risk Management Plan
Program.
We have experienced chemical fires, explosions, worker
deaths, and numerous air releases forcing us to shelter in
place. These incidences were not acts of terrorism and many of
them occurred in the Institute area.
Making a chemical facility harder for terrorists to attack
and adding cybersecurity doesn't fundamentally change the
probability of a major chemical incident that can cause off-
site consequences.
PCACS has met over the years with chemical company
officials asking them to reduce their hazardous chemical
inventory, to replace the highly toxic, extremely hazardous
compounds with less dangerous chemicals when possible, to
switch to safer processes when feasible, and to adopt best
practices identified by employees and process safety experts.
It is important--it was only after the 2008 explosion at
the Bayer Crop Science Facility in Institute and findings from
the Chemical Safety Board and the National Research Council
that some of the chemical plants in Kanawha County began steps
to reduce their risks to the community.
It is important that CFATS coordinates with other
Government agencies to reduce these facilities as target risks.
West Virginia is a rural State and many of our fire
departments are run by volunteers and with very little funding.
It's imperative that CFATS and high-risk facilities share
information with first responders and especially with volunteer
fire departments to ensure that they are properly trained,
understand the characteristics of the hazardous chemicals, and
have the proper protective equipment. Proper training and
current information on these chemicals allow first responders
to return home safely.
According to our Kanawha Putnam Emergency Planning
Committee Terrorist Incident Response Section, Kanawha and
Putnam County metro area are vulnerable to terrorist incidents.
We have 4 clusters of high-risk chemical facilities located
along the valley floor. Four. These are all reasons why
communities like mine and others in E.J. need to be protected--
in EJHA need to be protected by policy language that addresses
cumulative impacts. Our communities cannot afford to have
anything less.
We encourage improvements in CFATS to include coordinating
with other Government agencies to ensure that high-risk
facilities reduce their risk, ensuring that the facilities
provide the current information to the first responders,
sharing information as much as possible without compromising
security to address public concerns in order to improve
confidence in CFATS.
We need CFATS to recognize and account for cumulative
impacts, including the presence of more than one facility near
a community. Respecting the critical importance of the
community to assess the information--to access information on
hazards of--that--on hazards ensuring that the community have
access to the information. We need to be informed as partners
in security.
Assessing how facilities that have tiered out--that have
tiered out of the program and to share this information and
practices with other facilities and to work with covered
facilities to help them to be proactive in assessing whether
they should reduce or eliminate their chemical vulnerabilities.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Nixon follows:]
Prepared Statement of Pamela Nixon
March 12, 2019
Good morning, my name is Pamela Nixon. Thank you for allowing me
the opportunity to provide a community perspective for improving the
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) program of the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
I am representing People Concerned About Chemical Safety (PCACS),
located in the center of Appalachia in Charleston, WV, in the Kanawha
Valley.
PCACS, formerly known as People Concerned about MIC, has been
active in community for over 30 years. It was formed after we learned
that methyl isocyanate (MIC) was being produced in Institute, WV. MIC
is the same chemical that killed and injured thousands in the Bhopal,
India, in 1984.
We are dedicated to protect the health and safety of all who
reside, work, and study in the vicinity of local facilities that
produce highly toxic chemicals. The core of our work is to promote
environmental and social justice principles that encourage the
inclusion of people disproportionately impacted by decision makers.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ People Concerned about Chemical Safety website: http://
peopleconcernedaboutmic.com/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PCACS is affiliated with the Environmental Justice Health Alliance
for Chemical Policy Reform (EJHA), which networks grassroots
organizations throughout the country to build collective intelligence
and advocate for chemical policy reforms that protect environmental
justice communities.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Environmental Justice Health Alliance for Chemical Policy
Reform website: https://ej4all.org/about-us/overview.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For decades it has been proven in study after study that low-income
communities and communities of color are disproportionately impacted by
hazardous waste facilities, facilities that emit highly toxic and
extremely hazardous chemicals being located nearby.\3\ \4\ These
communities are the most vulnerable and when there is a disaster, they
have the least ability to recover financially, physically, and
mentally.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Toxic Wastes And Race In The United States. United Church of
Christ. 1987. https://www.nrc.gov/docs/ML1310/ML13109A339.pdf.
\4\ Who's In Danger? Race, Poverty, and Chemical Disasters.
Environmental Justice and Health Alliance for Chemical Policy Reform.
May 2014. https://comingcleaninc.org/assets/media/images/Reports/
Who%27s%20in%20Danger%20Report%20FINAL.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The community of Institute is mostly an African American
unincorporated community, and is home to West Virginia State
University, a Historically Black College and University (HBCU) which is
directly at the fence line of a high-risk facility. The majority of the
chemical incidents that have occurred in the Kanawha Valley, occurred
in Institute. The residential community and approximately 4,000
students, staff, and faculty on campus have always had to shelter in
place because the 2-lane road is not be capable to evacuate them out in
a timely manner. In the eastern part of Kanawha County the community of
Belle would have a similar issue evacuating from around the facility
located there.
Seventy percent of people in the Charleston area live within a 3-
mile radius of one or more high-risk chemical plants.\5\ We have
experienced chemical fires, explosions, worker deaths, and numerous air
releases forcing us to shelter in place. And these incidents were not
acts of terrorism.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Life At The Fenceline: Understanding Cumulative Health Hazards
in Environmental Justice Communities. Sept 2018. Environmental Justice
Health Alliance For Chemical Policy Reform/Coming Clean/Campaign For
Healthier Solutions. https://new.comingcleaninc.org/assets/media/
documents/Life%20at%20the%20Fenceline%20%20English%20%20Public.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Making a chemical facility harder for terrorists to attack and
adding cybersecurity, doesn't change the probability of a major
chemical incident that can have off-site consequences. Over the decades
PCACS met with company officials and requested that they assess their
vulnerabilities in order to lower their risk as a target. We wanted
them to reduce their inventory, to install inherently safer
technologies, to substitute the highly toxic/extremely hazardous
compounds with less dangerous chemicals, and to involve the workforce
with engineers for insight on simplifying the process to less complex
procedures that would minimize the human error factor. It was only
after the 2008 explosion at the Bayer CropScience plant in Institute,
and the findings from the investigations of the U.S. Chemical Safety
and Hazard Investigation Board (CSB), and National Research Council of
the National Academies that some companies in Kanawha began to take
steps to reduce risks at their facilities.\6\ \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ CSB Final Report: Bayer CropScience. https://www.csb.gov/bayer-
cropscience-pesticide-waste-tank-explosion/
\7\ The Use and Storage of Methyl Isocyanate (MIC) at Bayer
CropScience. National Research Council of the National Academies. 2012.
https://www.nap.edu/catalog/13385/the-use-and-storage-of-methyl-
isocyanate-mic-at-bayer-cropscience.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is important that CFATS coordinates with other governmental
agencies to reduce the facilities risks as a target. West Virginia is a
rural State and many of our fire departments are run by volunteers with
very little funding. It is imperative for CFATS and the high-risk
facilities to share information with first responders, and especially
with volunteer fire departments to insure they are properly trained,
understand characteristics of the hazardous chemicals, and have the
proper protective equipment. Fortunately, our high-risk chemical
facilities in the Kanawha Valley have their own in-house responders,
and they send their nearest first responders to training and provide
them with some essential protective equipment in case the department is
needed to provide mutual aid. Proper training and current information
on the chemicals will allow them to return home safely.
According to our Kanawha Putnam Emergency Planning Committee
(KPEPC) Terrorist Incident Response section of the Emergency Management
Plan, the Kanawha/Putnam Metro area is vulnerable to terrorist
incidents. We have four clusters of high-risk chemical facilities
located along the valley floor. If there is a terrorist incident, by
Federal mandate the FBI is the lead agency for crisis intervention. The
DHS or FEMA may elect to lead consequence management,\8\ but the lack
of public information may make it difficult for DHS CFATS to address
public information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Terrorist Incident Response. Kanawha Putnam Emergency
Management Plan. Revised 4/18/2017. http://www.kpepc.org/shared/
content/Page_objects/ahp_docs/FA_A20_Terrorism.- pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These are all reasons why communities like mine and others in EJHA
be protected by policy language that addresses cumulative impacts. At
this point our communities cannot afford to have anything less.
We encourage improvement of the CFATS program to include:
Coordinating with other Government agencies to ensure the
high-risk facilities reduce their risk at being a target;
Coordinating with other Government agencies to ensure there
are no regulatory conflicts in the laws to prevent security
breaches;
Ensuring high-risk facilities provide the current
information on hazardous chemicals to first responders;
Have information to address public concerns in order to
improve confidence in CFATS;
Recognizing and accounting for cumulative impacts, including
the presence of more than one hazardous facility in a
community;
Respecting the critical importance of community access to
information on hazards and solutions, ensuring that communities
have access to the information they need to be informed
partners in security, and ensuring this information does not
present the communities any additional exposure (recognizing
that much information about these facilities is already
available in the public domain);
Assessing how facilities that have ``tiered out'' of the
program did so (i.e. reduced or eliminated their chemical
vulnerabilities so that they are no longer required to
participate), and sharing those practices or approaches with
other facilities in the program; and
Working with covered facilities to help them pro-actively
assess whether they could reduce or eliminate chemical
vulnerabilities.
Thank you for allowing me to speak today.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Ms. Nixon. We will now have Ms.
Meskill.
STATEMENT OF KIRSTEN MESKILL, DIRECTOR, CORPORATE SECURITY,
BASF
Ms. Meskill. Thank you and good morning, Chairman Richmond,
Ranking Member Katko, and Members of the subcommittee, for the
opportunity to testify today.
I am Kirsten Meskill, director of corporate security for
BASF Corp., a corporation headquartered in Florham Park, New
Jersey.
We have over 100 facilities in 30 States and more than
20,000 employees in North America. I am the immediate past
chair of the Chemical Sector Coordinating Council, and I am
currently serving as the Chair for the Security Committee of
the American Chem Council, ACC.
I am here today on behalf of the ACC to voice general
support for a multi-year reauthorization of the Chemical
Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards, CFATS. ACC member companies
manufacture products that are critical to the everyday health
and well-being of our Nation and essential to developing a more
sustainable and competitive economy.
Based on our critical role in the Nation's economy and our
responsibility to employees and the communities where we
operate, security is a top priority for my company and for the
ACC.
In 2001, ACC created a stringent mandatory security program
called The Responsible Care Security Code. Since its creation
ACC members have invested more than $17 billion under the
Security Code to further enhance site security, transportation
security, and cybersecurity at our facilities. The Security
Code has become a gold standard for the industry and serves as
a model for regulatory programs.
Over the past 4 years the Department of Homeland Security
has significantly improved its administration of the CFATS
program and has a--has had a positive impact on enhancing
security at chemical facilities.
Most importantly, DHS leadership has demonstrated a
commitment to working with members of the regulated community
to improve implementation of the CFATS program.
While DHS has made considerable strides to improve CFATS,
there are additional areas for improvement. I would like to
highlight 4 of these today.
Ensure multi-year authorization. While industry was pleased
that Congress passed a short-term extension in January to avoid
a complete shutdown of CFATS, I think we all agree that it is
not the best solution going forward. Longer authorization
periods provide important stability for planning security
investments and allow DHS to operate the program efficiently
and effectively.
Congressional oversight is important to evaluate the
efficacy of CFATS regarding the changing security environment;
however, multi-year authorization is warranted to meet the key
objectives of stability and efficiency of the program overall.
Second, assess the value of TSDB screening at low-risk
facilities. Recently DHS has been implementing a risk-based
performance standard at 200 high-risk facilities, those that
are at Tiers 1 and 2.
This requires facility operations--operators to collect
sensitive personal information from thousands of employees and
contractors for DHS to vet against a terrorist screening
database.
DHS is now planning to extend the program to an additional
3,000 low-risk Tier 3 and 4 facilities. This will expand
vetting to tens of thousands of more employees and contractors.
ACC and its members are concerned that with such an expansion
it is unnecessary and it will put personal information at risk.
Furthermore, it is unclear what benefit is associated with
the additional vetting given the cost. While we support vetting
at high-risk Tier 1 and 2 facilities, we hope DHS can
reconsider this requirement for lower-risk 3 and 4 facilities.
Third, improving transparency in DHS risk determinations.
This comes by being more transparent with facility operators
about risk determination, tiering levels, and ways to
potentially reduce that risk.
Since the operator is responsible and has authority to make
security risk-management decisions for the facility it is
important that they have access to all the information about
risk-sharing.
Finally, establish a CFATS public-private partnership. DHS
should leverage CFATS and industry stewardship programs such as
ACC Responsible Care Program with the goal of further enhancing
the security of hazardous chemicals.
By doing so, DHS would be able to recognize responsible
operators for going beyond mere regulatory compliance and
incentivize the use of chemical security programs that enhance
security beyond the universe of CFATS-regulated facilities.
I would like to close by saying CFATS has helped make our
industry and communities more secure. It's a program that will
grow stronger by adopting some additional improvements while
ensuring it retains a strict focus on security and continued
engagement of this community. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Meskill follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kirsten Meskill
March 12, 2019
Thank you, Chairman Richmond, Ranking Member Katko, and Members of
the subcommittee for inviting me to participate in today's hearing. I
am the director of corporate security for the BASF Corporation.
Headquartered in Florham Park, New Jersey, BASF operates over 100
production facilities with a footprint in 30 States and employs more
than 20,000 people across North America. BASF's largest sites are
located in Geismar, Louisiana and Freeport, Texas.
I have also served as the chair of the Chemical Sector Coordinating
Council and I am current chair of the security committee of the
American Chemistry Council (ACC), on whose behalf I am testifying
today. ACC represents a majority of the chemical producers across the
United States, including a diverse set of small and medium-sized
companies engaged in the business of chemistry.
The business of chemistry is a $526 billion enterprise; providing
more than 500,000 skilled, good-paying American jobs. The chemical
manufacturing industry is experiencing a renaissance in the United
States thanks to the increase in domestic shale gas production. In
fact, ACC has identified more than 330 new capital investment projects
worth more than $200 billion adding tens of thousands of jobs and
generating almost $300 billion dollars in economic activity.
BASF has a responsibility to protect our employees and the
communities in which we operate, so chemical security remains a top
priority for us and for all member companies of ACC. In fact, in 2001,
ACC created a stringent, mandatory security program known as the
Responsible Care Security Code. Since the Security Code was
established, ACC members have invested more than $17 billion to further
enhance site security, transportation security, and cybersecurity at
all member facilities. The Security Code has become the gold standard
for the industry and serves as a model for regulatory programs.
ACC supports a long-term reauthorization of the Chemical Facility
Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) program. Ensuring that CFATS remains
in place is a crucial part of establishing a stable regulatory
environment and providing the needed certainty to foster long-term
security investments.
program improvements
Over the past few years, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
has significantly improved its administration of the CFATS program;
having a positive impact on chemical security across the United States.
Several factors have led to its recent success, including: Improved
site security inspections; improved risk assessment; and, a more
streamlined and consistent Site Security Plan (SSP) authorization
process. Most importantly, DHS leadership has demonstrated a
willingness and commitment to work with the regulated community to help
improve the program.
While DHS has made considerable strides to enhance the CFATS
program, more work needs to be done. ACC would like to offer the
following recommendations for CFATS improvement:
1. Ensure Multi-Year Authorization.--Recently, Congress approved a
short-term (15 months) extension to the CFATS program, following a
previous 4-year authorization period. Longer authorization periods
provide important stability for planning security investments, as well
as allowing DHS to efficiently manage the program. Periodic
Congressional oversight of the program is also important for assessing
the efficacy of CFATS to meet a changing security environment.
Therefore, a multi-year reauthorization of the CFATS program is
necessary to meet these key objectives: Oversight, stability, and
efficiency.
2. Assess the Value of TSDB Screening at Lower-risk Facilities.--
Over the past couple years, DHS has been implementing phase one of
Risk-Based Performance Standard 12(iv), screening individuals for
terrorist ties. Phase one was limited to approximately 240 of the
highest-risk CFATS facilities in Tiers 1 and 2. This process requires
CFATS facilities to collect sensitive personal information from
thousands of employees and contractors and transmit that information
over the internet to DHS for vetting against the Terrorist Screening
Database (TSDB).
DHS is planning to significantly expand this requirement to more
than 3,000 lower-risk facilities, Tiers 3 and 4, involving tens of
thousands of employees and contractors' personal information. ACC
believes such an expansion is unnecessary and will needlessly create a
security risk by exposing thousands of individual records to loss or
cyber theft and operational interruptions (e.g., false positives,
etc.). Further, the benefit associated with TSDB vetting at these
lower-risk facilities is minimal at best. While we support TSDB vetting
at highest-risk Tier 1 and Tier 2 facilities, we strongly recommend DHS
reconsider this requirement for the lower risk, Tier 3 and Tier 4
facilities.
3. Improve Transparency in DHS Risk Determinations.--DHS should be
more transparent with CFATS facilities regarding the specific factors
driving risk at each location. Further, DHS should proactively engage
CFATS facilities to reduce risk. CFATS facilities are not fully aware
of the specific threat driving risk at a specified tier level. Site
managers have the overall responsibility and authority for making
critical security risk management decisions at CFATS facilities and are
directly responsible for protecting the site and its operations. The
facility manager or responsible security director should be fully
informed by DHS of all details related to threat and risk. If needed
this can be done in a Classified setting.
4. Establish a CFATS Recognition Program.--DHS should leverage
Industry Stewardship Programs, such as ACC's Responsible Care Security
Code, by creating a Recognition Program under CFATS. By doing so, DHS
would be able to recognize responsible operators for going beyond
regulatory compliance and incentivize the creation of new stewardship
programs. Performance data shows that facilities that participate in
well-established stewardship programs perform better than their peers
who do not, and better than the industry overall. By providing
regulatory incentives, DHS can expand improved performance beyond the
universe of the CFATS-regulated community and prioritize their efforts
where they are needed the most. This would also help to lessen the
burden of security regulation on industry partners that balance similar
yet disparate requirements of other security regulations under USCG,
DEA, TSA, FDA, etc.
CFATS has helped make our industry and communities more secure. It
is a program that will grow stronger by adopting the improvements
outlined above and by the continued engagement of this committee to
make sure CFATS stays on track.
maintain program focus
It is also important that CFATS maintain its security focus. The
continued success of the CFATS program will depend upon its ability to
help manage security risks. CFATS should not stray into areas outside
of its primary function of addressing security risks and into areas
already addressed by well-established environmental and safety
regulatory programs administered by other Federal and State agencies.
Layering on additional responsibilities could impair its focus and will
impede its progress toward the goal of protecting important critical
infrastructure from security threats.
information sharing and coordination
Coordinating with local emergency planners, first responders and
law enforcement is essential to ensure an effective response during an
incident at any facility, but especially at high-risk ones. In fact, it
is in the facility's best interest to make sure this happens in order
to protect its employees, local communities, and continuity of
operations. It is equally important that the sharing of sensitive
information is done on a need-to-know basis.
The current regulatory framework strikes the right balance to
ensure that those with a need to know have sufficient information to
respond effectively. Risk-Based Performance Standard (RBPS) 11 requires
CFATS facilities to coordinate emergency plans with local response
groups. CFATS compliance inspectors will not approve a facility's Site
Security Plan (SSP) if this coordination has not occurred.
Protecting our people, communities, and operations from security
risk is never taken lightly. We engage and include all the necessary
experts and stakeholders to ensure our security plans are solid,
comprehensive, and sustainable. If any issues arise, they can be
addressed collaboratively. CFATS covers these important areas to help
ensure that regulated facilities are taking a sound approach to
developing security plans and providing opportunities for feedback.
cybersecurity
Cybersecurity is an important element of a comprehensive security
risk management system. Cyber requirements and needs vary greatly
across a diverse chemical sector. CFATS includes Risk-Based Performance
Standard (RBPS) 8, which is a performance standard that addresses the
deterrence of cyber sabotage--including the prevention of unauthorized
onsite or remote access to critical process controls and critical
business systems, and other sensitive computerized systems. The level
and degree of cyber protection expected at facilities increases in
correlation to its level of cyber integration. ACC believes that DHS
could do a better job in sharing cyber threat information with CFATS
facilities. This data would be very helpful for facilities to
prioritize risk evaluation and security planning. DHS inspectors should
also be trained in the latest trends in cybersecurity threats against
chemical operators and handlers so those trends can be shared with
regulated facilities and plans can be adapted accordingly.
conclusion
The long-term security of our Nation is a goal and a commitment
that we all share. That is why ACC and its members encourage you to
provide the necessary stability to this important security program and
make the improvements that are needed to take CFATS to the next level
while providing DHS with the appropriate Congressional oversight and
guidance.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you. I thank all the witnesses for
their testimony.
I will remind each Member that he or she will have 5
minutes to question the panel.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes to ask questions.
I will start with Dr. Wilson. As a first responder I think
you bring a unique perspective, so just a couple questions.
Based on that first-responder experience, how is a lack of
information for first responders putting that first responder
at risk?
Mr. Wilson. Well, in a number of ways, and it is an
excellent question. One of the structural problems is that
information is transmitted to local emergency response
committees, LEPCs, and these are essentially volunteer
committees set up by representatives from the safety and
emergency response community.
They are under--they are under-funded and I would say
vastly over-tasked with what they are responsible for doing.
Since 9/11 and Katrina, these LEPCs are responsible for
industrial emergency response plans, for preparing communities
for natural disasters and as well for terrorist attacks, and
for transmitting information to first responders.
I think there is good evidence to show that that structure
needs to be re-evaluated, that--and that first responders need
to get information that is timely, that is comprehensive. They
need to be able to match that information to their experience.
As I said in my testimony, in my written testimony,
actually getting their hands and getting themselves into the--
the plants themselves to better understand what it is they are
walking into in the event they are--that an emergency occurs at
the facility.
You know, in my experience it's--it was even difficult to
get information in the first place and then it was very
difficult to have an on-going cooperation with the industrial
facilities in our jurisdiction.
So as a consequence when we responded to industrial
chemical releases, to fires at industrial facilities, there was
a lot of uncertainty. Honestly I don't think we fully
appreciated the risks that we were facing going into those
incidents.
Mr. Richmond. You mentioned the LEPCs. So I will go to Ms.
Nixon now and ask, as a member of your local LEPC, can you tell
us why emergency managers need to have some visibility into
chemical security risks so they can protect their communities?
Ms. Nixon. They need this because they are getting most of
their information from the EPA's Risk Management Program and so
it's difficult for them to know exactly all of the chemicals
that are within the facilities. Then they have to transmit all
that, as Mr. Wilson said, to the first responders.
I know that during our 2008 fire and explosion at the
Institute plant it was hours before the first responders knew
exactly which unit it was that was burning and that had
exploded.
Even though they questioned them routinely over the radio
over--through the dispatcher trying to find this information,
it was difficult for them to get this information. So if they
had all this information is--it's imperative that it is shared
with our first responders.
Mr. Richmond. Well--and this question I will just ask
generally and maybe start with Ms. Meskill.
In the event of an incident workers would likely be the
first to answer the door when firefighters and police arrive.
Is there a risk that if employees are not involved in a
security plan emergency response could suffer almost like Ms.
Nixon just spoke of?
Ms. Meskill. Sure. So at BASF and I know at many of my peer
colleagues in the ACC, employees are involved in security
planning for all the reasons that were--been summarized today.
The expertise is shared across the facility how to best
prevent, contain, and react to an incident. So definitely for
our company site security planning is very collaborative and
includes many employees. It's absolutely essential that that
planning extends to local emergency responders.
I know at BASF and my peers in the chemical industry at ACC
also proactively engage local law enforcement and emergency
responders to participate in our emergency planning, our site
security planning and in some cases even in, you know, table-
top exercise and insight drills and exercises.
Mr. Richmond. I applaud that. My question would be--follow-
up question would be, do you think that every facility does
that?
I know you said BASF and many of your ACC but would you
think that that is across the board 100 percent? Or do you just
think it's a best practice that should be 100 percent?
Ms. Meskill. Yes. Unfortunately I cannot comment as to
whether or not it's done 100 percent, but it definitely is a
best practice in security planning and emergency response
planning.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you.
I now recognize the Ranking Member Mr. Katko for 5 minutes.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for your thoughtful testimony.
A couple quick questions, Mr.--Dr. Wilson. First of all,
thank you for your time as a first responder. Prior to coming
to Congress I was on the front lines with organized crime cases
and I have worked hand-in-glove with first responders on a
daily basis, so I thank you for your service there.
Have you heard of the term the chemical vulnerability
information?
Mr. Wilson. Was it chemical vulnerability information?
Mr. Katko. Yes.
Mr. Wilson. Sure.
Mr. Katko. Yes. OK. So in order--first responders have
access to that if they go through proper training, is that fair
to say? That allows them to have access to what information--
what chemicals are in a facility?
Mr. Wilson. They have access through the LEPCs through
information on chemicals that are located and the quantities of
those chemicals located at facilities in their jurisdiction,
yes.
Mr. Katko. Correct. In order to have access to that, the
first responders have to get training. I guess my question is
are the first responders getting the proper training and proper
support to get that training so that they can have the
information about each of these facilities?
Mr. Wilson. I would respond to that by saying it really
varies. In urban----
Mr. Katko. That's my concern. Yes.
Mr. Wilson. Yes. I think your concern is warranted. I think
in urban areas we have some of the Nation's elite hazardous
materials response teams. Those folks are well-trained. They
are well-equipped. They are capable of responding.
We also have rural departments, many, you know, that are
served--in rural areas that are served by volunteers who have
other jobs. I can tell you that one of the things that I did in
serving with the FEMA National Response Team on Task Force Four
out in--with the Oakland Fire Department was serving as an
adjudicator for a large Bay Area exercise called Operation
Urban Shield.
I was a judge for really top-notch hazmat teams who were
responsible for going through an exercise responding to a
massive chlorine leak at a water treatment plant. I can tell
you that even with those folks who understand the challenges
they are up against and are well-resourced, it was--it's a
difficult exercise.
It's a high-consequence, low-frequency type of event and
there is a lot of information that--and the situation is
dynamic and changing every--and so there's both, as I said in
my testimony, the need for both information and also routine
access to these facilities----
Mr. Katko. Right.
Mr. Wilson. For firefighters and----
Mr. Katko. OK. So that's my next--it's a good segue to my
next question here.
But first of all, I want to remind everyone that there is
other--other agencies oversee the chemical distributors. Lord
knows Ms. Meskill knows that. So the core function of CFATS is
anti-terrorism.
Mr. Wilson. Right.
Mr. Katko. Right? So I am concerned that with the CFATS
bill that we don't bleed into other things that are
jurisdictions of other areas. CFATS is about anti-terrorism
best practices. Right? So let's keep that in mind.
So there are--and with that mind, sir, there is the
Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act, there is
the Clean Air Act's Risk Management Plan, there is a toxic
release inventory requirement, Toxic Substances Control Act, as
well as other Federal statutes, all of which allow you to
accomplish some of these things. Isn't that fair to say?
Mr. Wilson. It's not. Not quite. I mean, there are, you
know, often large gaps, limitations with the Toxic Substance
Control Act. We have had historic problems with the Risk
Management Program and that was the subject of hearings under
Executive Order 13650.
Those corrections to the RMP Program were implemented under
Executive Order 13650 and subsequently removed and the sort--
and that arena is sort-of in conflict still about what kinds of
information should be transmitted to first responders and in
what form.
Mr. Katko. Right. I--I am sorry to interrupt you because I
only have a little bit of time and I understand what you are
saying. But wouldn't it be the purview of some of the other
committees under those acts to fix those? My concern, again, is
that CFATS should be laser-focused on the anti-terrorism
component.
But I agree that we need to fix those other things, if they
are a concern.
Mr. Wilson. Yes.
Mr. Katko. But I am just wondering whether that--this is
the right arena.
Since I don't have enough time, Mr. Morawetz and Ms. Nixon,
Ms. Meskill, I just note a couple of things here and perhaps
one of my colleagues can pick up on it.
Some employees do not have the security clearances to get
access to some areas of chemical facilities because they have
different screening levels. So if there's a concern about
employee information, probably some of that should be
designated to a high-level employee with the right screening
should be there.
Last, under the inherently safer technologies issue for
chemical facilities there's a built-in incentive, I believe,
for a chemical manufacturer to get the least volatile chemicals
because if you get the--if you get a better IST rating or a
better rating by the CFATS control because that the chemicals
you have are not as volatile or dangerous, you get a better
rating and get less oversight. So there's a built-in incentive
there as well.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses for your testimony here
today. I also want to extend my condolences to our
Representative Katko on the loss of his father and welcome him
back to the subcommittee.
So I want to look at another aspect of security that is
focused on cybersecurity at these facilities. Mr. Morawetz in
your testimony you highlight the importance of training to the
workers at chemical facilities, and I am particularly
interested in the cybersecurity training.
I think that the old adage we are only as strong as your
weakest link certainly applies in this case.
So what type of cybersecurity training do most workers at
chemical facilities receive today?
Again, you click on the wrong link, you, you know, you
download a piece of malware, you could put everybody at risk.
So I--I am looking at what type of cybersecurity training do
most workers receive at these facilities?
Mr. Morawetz. Cybersecurity is really not my area of
expertise, so it is limited what I can say about it. I do know
though that in the limited number of control rooms that I have
been in these are very sophisticated operations and I can only
imagine the kind of training that needs to be sure adequate
protections are taken. But it's really not my area.
Mr. Langevin. OK. Well, I bring this up because I need to--
it is an important topic that, again, all workers need to be
cyber-conscious, if you will, particularly people that are in
the control rooms.
But, you know, bringing in your home laptop and plugging it
in somehow to the network and the systems administrator is not
aware of it and you have got malware on your computer then you
have potentially just infected the system of the entire
facility and could potentially have very serious consequences.
So I think that's something that really needs to be built
into the culture of the organization just as a regular part of
the training.
The reason I bring this up, Mr. Chairman, is that my
colleague Mr. Thompson and I have introduced a bipartisan piece
of legislation to help ensure that our career and technical
education programs in our high schools or--or even at community
colleges incorporate cybersecurity, particularly within the
critical area of the critical infrastructure.
I certainly hope that our Cybersecurity Skills Integration
Act is going to help improve the security at the chemical
sector as well.
Let me turn to Ms. Meskill. Staying on the topic of
cybersecurity, if I could ask you what metrics does your
industry use to assess your cybersecurity posture?
Ms. Meskill. Thank you very much for the question. We
have--BASF being an extremely large organization, and as I
stated earlier, hundreds of facilities, different types of
facilities, manufacturing, distribution, R&D, we have multi-
levels of cyber risk. So the metrics that we use really look
across that spectrum and we do take the risk-based approach.
So we are looking at, you know, risks that might come up in
an administrative building, so trade secrets and things of that
nature. R&D where it might be attacked by, again competitors or
others trying to steal our innovation. Then, of course, to the
topic that you already referred to, to our industrial control
systems.
So once we understand the risks then we start layering our
security planning on top of it. It is rooted, very much as you
suggested, in strong employee awareness of what that risk might
be in the area that they are operating in.
Bringing it back to the point that Chairman Richmond, you
know, originally pointed out, was employee involvement. If they
hear something, say something. They are the folks that are
going to be most keenly aware of something that's not right.
So the metrics that we are using to evaluate our programs
really span, I think, to understanding what the risk is that's
undermining our ability to do what we are doing or the safety
and security of our employees.
It's really looking at awareness across our employee base.
We have got 20,000 folks working, you know, just employees and
you layer on top of that contractors. Our awareness efforts
also extend to them as well. We have got to make sure that
these guys are understanding what might look strange and then
know how to respond to it and report it.
Mr. Langevin. Yes, yes. Excellent points in your answer.
Thank you.
Can you--do you happen to know how often you refresh the
metrics that you use? Is there an annual audit, or something
quarterly?
Ms. Meskill. It's constant. So these areas are being
reviewed by internal audit, by our I.T. function, by our
security function, by our Responsible Care auditing function,
and cybersecurity is a topic that they are reviewing.
Information protection actually is what we call it within in
our organization. So they are constantly looking at it.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you very much. I appreciate your
answer. My time has expired, but thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Richmond. I thank the gentlemen.
I will now recognize Mr. Walker from North Carolina.
Mr. Walker. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank you for calling
this hearing.
I--Ms. Meskill, you seem to be the one getting the most
questions, but I do have a few more for you and I appreciate
your patience and certainly the entire panel. As you know, DHS
has implemented the Personal Surety Program at the Tier 1 and
Tier 2 facilities. My question is--first question is do you
have any feedback on how that's going at this point?
Ms. Meskill. At this point, the feedback that I will share
from my own organization is when we went through the process it
was smooth and it's fine. I am hearing pretty much the same
from my peers in the ACC. There were some initial hiccups, as
you would expect, but now those seem to have been ironed out.
Mr. Walker. As you look, I guess, potentially to implement
some of the changes in the Tiers 3 and 4, would you speak to
talking about maybe the challenges that would exist in
implementing such a program?
Ms. Meskill. Absolutely. So as it happens, at BASF and I
think at many of the companies of our size, many of our
facilities we have worked to reduce our risk and so we are now
down to either 3 or 4 tier levels.
So as I mentioned earlier, this is an enormous number of
folks that we have to do the additional screening on. But
perhaps the more complicated would be the contractors and
visitors that we have on-site. That's where it gets a little
bit--a lot more complicated to ensure that all those
individuals that are coming on to our site day-in, day-out have
gone through the screening process. It's costly. It's very
expensive, needless to say, for us as well as for the
contractors that support us.
Mr. Walker. So that would be one of the challenges for the
cost as well?
Ms. Meskill. Correct.
Mr. Walker. Ms. Meskill, how would you rate the
coordination with State and local officials to improve
emergency management operations? Would you speak to that?
Ms. Meskill. Sure. So again, we take a very proactive
approach at BASF, and I know my peers in ACC do as well, to
ensure that we are networking and coordinating with local law
enforcement, State and Federal, as well as emergency
responders. Our primary responsibility is the safety of our own
people and the continuity of operations, the protection or the
communities that we work in. We recognize our responsibility to
do that.
The best way that we can do that is ensuring that our local
responders and law enforcement officials understand our plans,
know who we are, are familiar with our facilities, and that our
efforts to contain, prevent, and mitigate these threats are
completely aligned and collaborated with them.
Mr. Walker. That's a great goal. Can you unpack that a
little bit more and tell me the intentionality that it takes to
be able to build that relationship?
Ms. Meskill. It's constant, again. So I am not familiar
with any cases where we have been turned down or where a local
law enforcement, State or Federal entity or emergency responder
has not welcomed that opportunity.
But as referenced earlier by Dr. Wilson, it is something
that needs to happen at least annually. I know our sites strive
to have that meeting--conversation at least annually to, you
know, talk about any changes, particularly as people rotate
through positions.
Mr. Walker. Ms. Meskill, how has stakeholder engagement
been enhanced since the beginning of the CFATS program? How in
your opinion can it be regionally improved as we move forward?
Ms. Meskill. I am sorry. Could you clarify stakeholder?
Mr. Walker. Yes. The stakeholder specifically is the
engagement of those that may have some kind of interest or
connection with your organization.
Ms. Meskill. OK. So external----
Mr. Walker. Yes.
Ms. Meskill. As well as internal. I cannot comment as to
whether CFATS has improved that because it's already, as I
mentioned earlier, a best practice for emergency response
planning and site security planning. So I believe that
engagement at least at BASF was occurring--would have occurred
with or without CFATS.
Mr. Walker. It would--it--fair enough. If you are not
comfortable with stakeholder then maybe this final question if
you could elaborate on it? It's where is engagement by the DHS
lacking?
Ms. Meskill. OK, for DHS. We have not experienced a gap
with DHS. There perhaps was when they implemented the new risk-
tiering levels and they needed to educate inspectors as to the
new standards and requirements, but those, again, were part of
working in a new program.
I think they have addressed the issue. As soon as they
heard industry raise it as a concern, they addressed it and now
we are quite satisfied with that level of support.
Mr. Walker. Well, thank you for your expertise in this
area.
Ms. Meskill. Thank you.
Mr. Walker. With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Walker.
I now would like to recognize the gentlewoman from New
York, Miss Rice.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you all for coming here today to talk about
this very important issue. As one of the founders and co-chairs
of the House Whistleblower Protection Caucus, I am very
concerned to hear that facility employees and union
representatives have been left out of the development and
implementation of whistleblower programs at chemical
facilities.
So Mr. Wilson, I think I will give--address my questions to
you. What is the current process for an employee to report a
concern and how is DHS disseminating information on appropriate
whistleblower procedures to facility employees?
Mr. Wilson. For--my understanding is that there are
whistleblower protections within CFATS, but the ways in which
that's actually implemented out in the field it's not clear to
me.
It's also not clear in looking through the risk-based
performance standards if inspections include an assessment of
whether and to what extent whistleblowers, you know, have been
protected or have been retaliated against in some way or
another.
Miss Rice. Well, have you heard of any specific
whistleblower retaliation cases that--at any CFATS facility,
you personally?
Mr. Wilson. I have not personally, no.
Miss Rice. Do you know if DHS requires training for all
facilities covered by CFATS on how to appropriately handle
whistleblower complaints?
Mr. Wilson. My understanding, again, in looking through the
risk-based performance standards and the guidance documents is
that their training around the handling of whistleblowers and
the protection of whistleblowers from retaliation would be a
helpful addition to the program.
Miss Rice. Does DHS need additional statutory authority to
compel facility owners and operators with whistleblower
regulations?
Mr. Wilson. I think that would be a benefit as well, yes.
Miss Rice. So are you aware of GAO's recommendations in
regards to whistleblower retaliation that DHS has not yet
implemented--any of those recommendations that they have not
yet implemented?
Mr. Wilson. My--in looking through the GAO reports my
recollection is that those have not yet been--have not yet been
implemented.
Again though, I would have to look at the GAO reports a
little more carefully.
I recall that they have been looking for a way to formalize
those complaints and to surface them and ensure that employees
know that they have the right to call attention to a problem
and that they can do so without fear of retaliation, that
there's a system for doing that and there's notification within
their workplaces to that effect.
Miss Rice. So, would you agree with DHS's assessment that
it does not have the authority to pressure facilities to comply
with whistleblower regulations?
Mr. Wilson. It's--that's a little bit outside of my
expertise. But my--in reading just simply, you know, a read of
the statute itself, it does have whistleblower protection. But
DHS, you know, would have to make a determination to that
effect.
Miss Rice. Ms. Meskill, can you answer that question?
Ms. Meskill. Would you please repeat the question?
Miss Rice. Do you agree with DHS's assessment that it does
not have the authority to pressure facilities to comply with
whistleblower regulations?
Ms. Meskill. No, I am sorry. I can't comment on that
question as far as DHS authority.
Miss Rice. OK. But any whistleblower--are you aware of any
whistleblower issues?
Ms. Meskill. No, none at all. We have our own, of course,
internal means for employees to escalate concerns and issues.
Miss Rice. OK.
Ms. Meskill. Yes.
Miss Rice. Does DHS issue guidance for cyber--I don't know
if you--if Mr. Langevin asked this question, but does DHS issue
guidance for cybersecurity standards that CFATS facilities have
to meet? Yes.
Ms. Meskill. Yes, they do. They--in the risk-based
performance standard there are guidelines for cybersecurity,
yes.
Miss Rice. Let me just ask you to expound on a comment that
you made before about when you gave a list of 4
recommendations. You were talking about a concern that you had
about the value of testing on lower-level facilities and what
that would encompass in terms of the number of employees and
the privacy issue. Can you just expound a little bit----
Ms. Meskill. Sure.
Miss Rice [continuing]. More on that?
Ms. Meskill. Sure. This is going back to the question that
was raised before. It has to do with the terrorist database
screening of employees and contractors at lower-risk
facilities.
Miss Rice. What are your specific concerns about that?
Ms. Meskill. Our concerns are exposing personal data of
thousands of--more thousands and thousands and thousands of
employees and contractors for this terrorist database screening
and whether the value actually is there for the cost and for
the potential risk of exposing this personal data to
cybersecurity risks.
Miss Rice. But don't you think that's one of the core ways
to ensure security at these facilities?
Ms. Meskill. Well, we are conducting our own background
screening anyway, which includes, you know, criminal background
checks also, so it seems duplicative, yes.
Miss Rice. So have you communicated that?
Ms. Meskill. Yes.
Miss Rice. Are there any questions that they include in
their review of their background check that you do not?
Ms. Meskill. I cannot answer that question. I am not--I
don't know the answer to that.
Miss Rice. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Taylor, is recognized.
Mr. Taylor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for having
this hearing.
Ms. Meskill, just a question for you about CFATS
facilities. So I know that you have, as Mr. Katko was saying
earlier, multiple regulatory entities coming in, you know,
looking at all kinds of different things. In terms of the
counterterrorism piece, the security piece, is the--is DHS the
only counterterrorism security regulatory body that you deal
with?
Ms. Meskill. No. So--thank you very much for the question.
So again, looking at the perspective--my perspective as
security director for BASF with--which has, you know, over 100
manufacturing facilities in North America, we are exposed to or
complying with additional Federal security regulations, so
really looking at security planning and security measures. That
includes the U.S. Coast Guard at several of our sites, where
they have jurisdiction, of course, DHS and CFATS,
transportation security.
We also have for our drug precursors, DEA security
requirements that we need to comply with, Food Defense
Administration for any food-grade chemicals that we are
manufacturing or handling. So yes, there are extensive
regulatory security, really focused on security measures,
regulations that we need to consider and comply with.
Mr. Taylor. So, does that--by having multiple groups coming
in and saying, hey, move this over here, no, no move that over
there, are you getting conflicting regulation--I mean, so in
other words, one regulator says one thing one month, the next
regulator says another thing another month, and so you are--I
mean it is just--it is difficult, because you got different
people----
Ms. Meskill. It is difficult.
Mr. Taylor [continuing]. That want different things----
Ms. Meskill. Yes.
Mr. Taylor. So rather than having one consistent, you know,
coach you have got multiple coaches telling you what to do.
Ms. Meskill. Correct. So I would say conflicting, most
likely not, because security best practice in those measures
are usually pretty much the same. But keeping track of all of
those regulations as a security director, but then working with
our business partners and facility managers and directors to
understand which security measure they need to implement is
where the complexity arises.
Then layered on top of that, of course, is the additional
responsibility that we have already taken on ourselves. So we
have our own internal security practices and requirements that
we need to comply with, as well as the Responsible Care
Security Code.
So when I talk about tiering, just to give you an example,
to paint a picture for you, when I talk about tiering a site,
such as Chairman Richmond's, you know, in his district, I have
four different tiers that I can use to describe that site.
So that is where the level of complexity comes in. Each of
those tiers is looked through a different lens of security.
Mr. Taylor. I am sure you would view it favorably if
Congress moved to simplify that----
Ms. Meskill. Absolutely.
Mr. Taylor. Just to make it easier to do your job and to do
what we are all trying to do here.
Ms. Meskill. It's not just easier. It's really keeping our
focus. So what I think everybody here can agree with that you
want to make sure that chemical manufacturers and handlers are
completely focused all the time on the security risk, on the
terrorist risk.
If I am spreading that focus across many different
regulations, then it can get distracting. If I am more focused
on complying with regulation, rather than managing the threat
to my site, then I am potentially gonna lose focus. I think
that's the greater concern.
Mr. Taylor. Right.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to yield my time to Ranking
Member Katko.
Mr. Richmond. The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Taylor,
for yielding time.
So I have just got a quick question. Does the CFATS--anyone
aware that CFATS has what is a--a tip line program? The reason
I ask that is if they have it why isn't it being used more by
employees?
If there's something we need to do to beef that up, to help
incentivize employees in a confidential nature to come forward
with information, if they have concerns. Anybody?
Mr. Morawetz. I would say the basic question is how much do
our labor unions and the members know about the hotlines?
Mr. Katko. Yes. That's my concern.
Mr. Morawetz. The problem is we have been having
discussions with CFATS about the possibility of publicizing it
in a way that's confidential, where it needs to be, that
information, but it hasn't happened yet. We would be open, and
it is in my testimony, a way that workers can know just like
there are posters about OSHA, posters about minimum wage, a
simple way people can know without identifying what tier you
are on, if you are in danger, here's what you are doing----
Mr. Katko. Right. It might ameliorate some of the--some of
my colleague Ms. Rice's concerns about whistleblower
retaliation. But it seems like something we can do to help
incentivize that program and do something to force the Homeland
Security to better publicize that in all the facilities.
Does that make sense, Ms. Meskill?
Ms. Meskill. Sure. It could definitely help. I think it's
one poster among many. If you have been to a manufacturing
facility and you have seen that wall, there's probably 15
posters. But no, definitely I think it could help for sure.
Mr. Katko. OK. Well, we will get you off-line. Maybe if you
have some ideas afterwards that you could submit to me in
writing, I would appreciate it. Because I would like to figure
out how we can just incentivize people to kind-of fill that gap
a little bit by saying, you know, hey, you have an anonymous
way of doing this, if you don't want to get involved with the
whole whistleblower thing.
I think that would help the unions feel more empowered as
well. So I would love--I would welcome your input on that.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you.
The gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee, is recognized.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for
holding this hearing.
Thank you to the witnesses.
Mr. Morawetz, I am concerned about the workers, who every
day are--certainly the community, because many of the workers
live in the community.
Likewise, Ms. Nixon, concerned about communities and we
want to make sure that they are safe. So I know that during a
chemical incident, for example, time can mean lives and
knowledge about what chemicals are involved can help make the
right decisions in first responders easier.
So Mr. Morawetz, would you share with me the--on the issue
of providing insight on how the lack of information about a
facility or the chemicals can hinder the safety and security of
the members, the workers because they may be working with
chemicals that no one has apprised them of or the facility or
the surrounding area.
I am reminded of a terrible incident in Texas that many of
you may be aware of, would flatten the whole area and schools,
and we only were saved, if you will, in terms of lives--
extensive lives lost because it was a weekend.
Mr. Morawetz, the knowledge of what the chemicals are?
Mr. Morawetz. Thank you, Ms. Lee. Well, actually Texas has
been the scene of a number of incidents with Hurricane Harvey.
I believe there was a facility that blew up many days
afterwards. As I mentioned in my testimony, 4 workers died in a
facility in Houston.
As I put in my testimony, one problem is the knowledge that
workers have, under another jurisdiction, is under OSHA, is a
one-time deal. It is basically--it has communication and you
are trained once and that's it.
Under the realm of Homeland Security, I would say that
you--there is a role that CFATS can play to say--to mitigate
the possibility of an incident happening and what can happen
afterwards. That training should be enhanced. I--I am not fully
aware of the CFATS inspectors' training, but that's part of it
also.
The other thing I would say, that in terms of knowledge,
the other question is what do you do with that knowledge? Part
of the problem that's been alluded to is emergency responders.
Our members, as well as salaried people, are on joint emergency
response teams.
One thing you could enhance is the ability and the mandate
to say you have to train. You have to train internally. You
have to train with the LEPCs, so local first responders. We
have found if people don't drill that things fall apart and
some of those tragedies are really horrendous.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much. I am intending to
introduce again the Frank Lautenberg Chemical Facility
Cybersecurity Act. I know that with all of our excellent
workers that we are moving to more of a cyber system in many of
our facilities. What happens when a cyber attack, combined with
chemicals, is potentially unspeakable.
So we have computer programs that need to be secured, and
Mr. Morawetz, you are making a very good point that I am going
take up on because I am very interested in that in terms of the
training. I think that training should also involve the
cybersecurity system.
So Mr.--Dr. Wilson, do you feel able to comment on that,
the cybersecurity system?
Mr. Wilson. If there's a specific question regarding
cybersecurity, could you repeat that?
Ms. Jackson Lee. The importance of also assessing the cyber
system in a chemical plant.
Mr. Wilson. That's outside my area of expertise.
Ms. Jackson Lee. OK.
Let me conclude my comments, Mr. Chairman. We are in an
infrastructure committee as well, and we do not have this
matter before us, but I just feel compelled just to make a
comment on the recent tragedy dealing with the Ethiopian
airlines.
I know that we have a lot of responsibilities. I consider
that a security issue, and frankly, believe that the FAA should
ground the 737 MAX 8 to protect the lives of individuals
because pilots and flight attendants and passengers count.
So I thank the gentleman, and I yield back my time.
Mr. Richmond. I also share the gentlelady's concern,
especially the neighborhood schools and other facilities that
our planes fly over.
Let me just thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony, and the Members for their questions. The Members of
the committee may have additional questions for the witnesses,
and we ask that you respond expeditiously in writing to those
questions.
Hearing no further business, the committee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:16 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for John S. Morawetz
Question 1a. The CFATS Act of 2014 directs DHS to provide ``such
information as is necessary to help ensure that first responders are
properly prepared and provided with the situational awareness'' to
respond to an incident at a CFATS facility.
Last year, GAO reported that CFATS information is still not making
it into the hands of first responders and emergency managers
consistently, especially at the local level. How does this put first
responders at risk?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 1b. GAO also reported that, without consistent access to
CFATS information, first responders have to rely on information
reported to EPA under the Emergency Preparedness and Community Risk to
Know Act (EPCRA). Is the EPCRA framework for information sharing
adequate? How do the information-sharing provisions under CFATS compare
with EPCRA?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 2a. You mentioned the importance of facilities not only
managing risk, but also working to eliminate or reduce those risks when
it is possible, and depending on factors like cost and the unique
conditions on-site.
What are some of the ways facilities can modify, reduce, or
eliminate risk?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 2b. One of the promising aspects of CFATS is that, over
the years, it has encouraged thousands of facilities to voluntarily
modify chemicals or processes in ways that lower their risk profile,
and as a result, their overall regulatory burden. Is there an
opportunity for DHS to use that data to develop a flexible set of best
practices on how facilities are making these modifications?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 3a. While the location of CFATS facilities is not publicly
available, research has shown that facilities with dangerous chemicals
tend to be concentrated low-income and minority communities. That means
these communities are exposed to a disproportionate share of chemical
safety hazards, and disproportionately vulnerable to chemical security
risks.
For communities with multiple high-risk facilities, is it possible
the close proximity of these facilities could exacerbate the impact of
a security incident or terrorist attack? Or, make that community a
prime target for a terrorist?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 3b. Should DHS consider the presence of multiple chemical
facilities clustered together as part of its risk assessment?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 3c. Are there ways DHS and other regulators could work
with these communities to make sure, for instance, that they have
sufficient first-responder capacity and emergency response plans?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 3d. Are there resources available through other Federal
regulators, like the EPA's EJ Screen tool, that DHS could use to better
understand communities where CFATS facilities are located?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 4a. The CFATS Act of 2014 has some limited requirements
for facility owners and operators to consult with at least 1
knowledgeable employee and/or labor union representative in the
security planning process, but only ``to the extent practicable.''
Can you elaborate on the benefit of having employees on the ground
contribute to security plans and serve as force multipliers for
monitoring compliance?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 4b. How would you characterize the level of engagement
between owners, operators, and workers at CFATS facilities?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 4c. The CFATS Act of 2014 also establishes a whistleblower
process for employees to report potential CFATS violations. If
employees do not know their facility is subject to CFATS, or have never
heard of the CFATS program to begin with, how can they be expected to
report violations?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 5a. The CFATS program is supposed to be identifying the
Nation's highest-risk chemical facilities. In the past, there have been
questions about the metrics DHS uses to assess risk, and whether those
metrics are comprehensive enough to consider the full range of
consequences. As a result, CFATS may be defining ``high-risk'' too
narrowly and leaving many facilities insecure.
Right now, DHS does not consider nearby infrastructure, like
hospitals, schools, power plants, military bases, or other sensitive
buildings, in calculating risk. Should DHS consider these factors?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 5b. Similarly, DHS considers potential loss of life, but
not adverse health consequences of chemical exposure. Is it fair to say
that human illness and injury could result from a chemical attack?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Questions from Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Michael P. Wilson
Question 1a. The CFATS Act of 2014 directs DHS to provide ``such
information as is necessary to help ensure that first responders are
properly prepared and provided with the situational awareness'' to
respond to an incident at a CFATS facility.
Last year, GAO reported that CFATS information is still not making
it into the hands of first responders and emergency managers
consistently, especially at the local level. How does this put first
responders at risk?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 1b. GAO also reported that, without consistent access to
CFATS information, first responders have to rely on information
reported to EPA under the Emergency Preparedness and Community Risk to
Know Act (EPCRA). Is the EPCRA framework for information sharing
adequate? How do the information-sharing provisions under CFATS compare
with EPCRA?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 2a. You mentioned the importance of facilities not only
managing risk, but also working to eliminate or reduce those risks when
it is possible, and depending on factors like cost and the unique
conditions on-site.
What are some of the ways facilities can modify, reduce, or
eliminate risk?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 2b. One of the promising aspects of CFATS is that, over
the years, it has encouraged thousands of facilities to voluntarily
modify chemicals or processes in ways that lower their risk profile,
and as a result, their overall regulatory burden. Is there an
opportunity for DHS to use that data to develop a flexible set of best
practices on how facilities are making these modifications?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 3a. While the location of CFATS facilities is not publicly
available, research has shown that facilities with dangerous chemicals
tend to be concentrated low-income and minority communities. That means
these communities are exposed to a disproportionate share of chemical
safety hazards, and disproportionately vulnerable to chemical security
risks.
For communities with multiple high-risk facilities, is it possible
the close proximity of these facilities could exacerbate the impact of
a security incident or terrorist attack? Or, make that community a
prime target for a terrorist?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 3b. Should DHS consider the presence of multiple chemical
facilities clustered together as part of its risk assessment?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 3c. Are there ways DHS and other regulators could work
with these communities to make sure, for instance, that they have
sufficient first-responder capacity and emergency response plans?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 3d. Are there resources available through other Federal
regulators, like the EPA's EJ Screen tool, that DHS could use to better
understand communities where CFATS facilities are located?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 4a. The CFATS Act of 2014 has some limited requirements
for facility owners and operators to consult with at least 1
knowledgeable employee and/or labor union representative in the
security planning process, but only ``to the extent practicable.''
Can you elaborate on the benefit of having employees on the ground
contribute to security plans and serve as force multipliers for
monitoring compliance?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 4b. How would you characterize the level of engagement
between owners, operators, and workers at CFATS facilities?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 4c. The CFATS Act of 2014 also establishes a whistleblower
process for employees to report potential CFATS violations. If
employees do not know their facility is subject to CFATS, or have never
heard of the CFATS program to begin with, how can they be expected to
report violations?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 5a. The CFATS program is supposed to be identifying the
Nation's highest-risk chemical facilities. In the past, there have been
questions about the metrics DHS uses to assess risk, and whether those
metrics are comprehensive enough to consider the full range of
consequences. As a result, CFATS may be defining ``high-risk'' too
narrowly and leaving many facilities insecure.
Right now, DHS does not consider nearby infrastructure, like
hospitals, schools, power plants, military bases, or other sensitive
buildings, in calculating risk. Should DHS consider these factors?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 5b. Similarly, DHS considers potential loss of life, but
not adverse health consequences of chemical exposure. Is it fair to say
that human illness and injury could result from a chemical attack?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Questions from Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Pamela Nixon
Question 1a. The CFATS Act of 2014 directs DHS to provide ``such
information as is necessary to help ensure that first responders are
properly prepared and provided with the situational awareness'' to
respond to an incident at a CFATS facility.
Last year, GAO reported that CFATS information is still not making
it into the hands of first responders and emergency managers
consistently, especially at the local level. How does this put first
responders at risk?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 1b. GAO also reported that, without consistent access to
CFATS information, first responders have to rely on information
reported to EPA under the Emergency Preparedness and Community Risk to
Know Act (EPCRA). Is the EPCRA framework for information sharing
adequate? How do the information sharing provisions under CFATS compare
with EPCRA?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 2a. While the location of CFATS facilities is not publicly
available, research has shown that facilities with dangerous chemicals
tend to be concentrated low-income and minority communities. That means
these communities are exposed to a disproportionate share of chemical
safety hazards, and disproportionately vulnerable to chemical security
risks.
For communities with multiple high-risk facilities, is it possible
the close proximity of these facilities could exacerbate the impact of
a security incident or terrorist attack? Or, make that community a
prime target for a terrorist?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 2b. Should DHS consider the presence of multiple chemical
facilities clustered together as part of its risk assessment?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 2c. Are there ways DHS and other regulators could work
with these communities to make sure, for instance, that they have
sufficient first-responder capacity and emergency response plans?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 2d. Are there resources available through other Federal
regulators, like the EPA's EJ Screen tool, that DHS could use to better
understand communities where CFATS facilities are located?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 3. In February, DHS testified that they have done outreach
to ``literally thousands'' of local emergency planning committees
(LEPCs), including 800 LEPCs last year alone. You've served on your
LEPC for over a decade--and, your community is home to 4 CFATS
facilities, 2 of which are in the highest-risk tier. How would you
characterize the outreach you have received from DHS thus far?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 4a. The CFATS program is supposed to be identifying the
Nation's highest-risk chemical facilities. In the past, there have been
questions about the metrics DHS uses to assess risk, and whether those
metrics are comprehensive enough to consider the full range of
consequences. As a result, CFATS may be defining ``high-risk'' too
narrowly and leaving many facilities insecure.
Right now, DHS does not consider nearby infrastructure, like
hospitals, schools, power plants, military bases, or other sensitive
buildings, in calculating risk. Should DHS consider these factors?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 4b. Similarly, DHS considers potential loss of life, but
not adverse health consequences of chemical exposure. Is it fair to say
that human illness and injury could result from a chemical attack?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 5a. In 2008, a Bayer pesticide plant explosion in your
area of West Virginia sparked a National controversy after the CEO
acknowledged during Congressional testimony that he had advised
officials to refuse information to first responders, and mark records
as sensitive security information that were unrelated to security, in a
blatant effort to conceal information from first responders, law
enforcement, and Federal regulators. Over 10 years have passed since
that incident.
Through your work with the Environmental Justice and Health
Alliance, do you still encounter issues with chemical companies
refusing to provide information on National security grounds?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
Question 5b. Are there areas where further improvement is needed
when it comes to sharing information about chemical security risks?
Answer. Response was not recieved at the time of publication.
[all]