- BUSINESS MEETING
[Senate Hearing 116-17]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-17
BUSINESS MEETING
=======================================================================
MEETING
before the
COMMITTEE ON
ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 5, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-312 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming, Chairman
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware,
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
Ranking Member
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JONI ERNST, Iowa
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
Richard M. Russell, Majority Staff Director
Mary Frances Repko, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
FEBRUARY 5, 2019
OPENING STATEMENTS
Barrasso, Hon. John, U.S. Senator from the State of Wyoming......
1
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware..
3
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L., U.S. Senator from the State of Maryland
5
Capito, Hon. Shelley Moore, U.S. Senator from the State of West
Virginia.......................................................
11
Booker, Hon. Cory A., U.S. Senator from the State of New Jersey..
12
Sullivan, Hon. Dan, U.S. Senator from the State of Alaska........
12
Markey, Hon. Edward J., U.S. Senator from the State of
Massachusetts..................................................
15
LEGISLATION AND RELATED MATERIALS
Text of S. 268, To reauthorize the Partners for Fish and Wildlife
Program and certain wildlife conservation funds, to establish
prize competitions relating to the prevention of wildlife
poaching and trafficking, wildlife conservation, the management
of invasive species, and the protection of endangered species,
to amend the Marine Turtle Conservation Act of 2004 to modify
the protections provided by that Act, and for other purposes...
18
Text of S. 163, To prevent catastrophic failure or shutdown of
remote diesel power engines due to emission control devices,
and for other purposes.........................................
82
Text of S. 94, To amend the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife
Restoration Act to facilitate the establishment of additional
or expanded public target ranges in certain States.............
84
Text of S. 310, To amend the Neotropical Migratory Bird
Conservation Act to reauthorize the Act........................
91
Nomination Reference and Report Receipts:
Presidential Nomination 2. Nicole R. Nason, of New York, to
be Administrator of the Federal Highway Administration,
vice Gregory Guy Nadeau....................................
93
Presidential Nomination 22. Andrew Wheeler, of Virginia, to
be Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency,
vice Scott Pruitt..........................................
94
Presidential Nomination 78. John Fleming, of Louisiana, to be
Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Economic Development,
vice Roy K. J. Williams....................................
95
Presidential Nomination 79. John L. Ryder, of Tennessee, to
be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Tennessee
Valley Authority for a term expiring May 18, 2021, vice
Michael McWherter, term expired............................
95
Presidential Nomination 80. Peter C. Wright, of Michigan, to
be Assistant Administrator, Office of Solid Waste,
Environmental Protection Agency, vice Mathy Stanislaus.....
95
Text of S. Res. 41, Authorizing expenditures by the Committee on
Environment and Public Works...................................
96
Committee Resolutions:
Lease, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, San Diego, CA.
PCA-01-VA19................................................
101
Lease, Department of Homeland Security, Secret Service,
Brooklyn, NY. PNY-04-BR18..................................
103
New U.S. Courthouse, Huntsville, AL. PAL-CTC-HU18............
105
New U.S. Courthouse, Fort Lauderdale, FL. PFL-CTC-FL18.......
106
Lease, Securities and Exchange Commission, New York, NY. PNY-
05-NY19....................................................
107
(Amended.) Construction, U.S. Land Port of Entry, Calexico,
CA. PCA-BSC-CA19...........................................
109
Rules of Procedure of the Committee on Environment and Public
Works. Adopted February 5, 2019................................
110
BUSINESS MEETING
----------
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Environment and Public Works,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m. in
room 406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Barrasso
(Chairman of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Barrasso, Carper, Inhofe, Capito,
Boozman, Wicker, Rounds, Ernst, Sullivan, Shelby, Braun,
Cramer, Cardin, Merkley, Gillibrand, Booker, Markey, and Van
Hollen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN BARRASSO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING
Senator Barrasso. Good morning. I call this business
meeting to order.
Today we are going to consider five nominees, four bills,
six General Services Administration resolutions, as well as the
Committee funding resolution, and the Committee rules.
Senator Carper and I have agreed that we will begin voting
promptly at 10:20, and at that time I will call up the items on
the agenda. We will not debate the items on the agenda while we
are voting; instead, we will debate the items on the agenda
before we begin voting at 10:20. I also will be happy to
recognize any member who still wishes to speak after the voting
concludes.
Before we move to the items on the agenda, I would like to
highlight this Committee's impressive history of working
together on a bipartisan basis to pass important legislation
for the American people.
Last Congress, working closely with Ranking Member Carper
and all the Committee members, we wrote and passed major water
infrastructure legislation into law, the American Waters
Infrastructure Act. It included 29 separate introduced bills.
We also passed, and the President signed into law, the Nuclear
Energy Innovation and Modernization Act. This bipartisan bill
will make sure America remains a leader of nuclear energy
innovation.
Last Congress our Committee also passed the Utilizing
Significant Emissions with Innovative Technologies Act, known
as the USE IT Act, to support carbon utilization and direct air
capture research. Look forward to continuing to work together
to advance this legislation to reduce emissions.
This Congress our Committee will build on that momentum. We
will together to write and pass a bipartisan highway bill that
upgrades America's roads and bridges in a fiscally responsible
way and will help rural and urban areas alike.
Our Committee will also continue to focus on wildlife
management and conservation efforts. Ranking Member Carper and
I, along with Senators Inhofe, Whitehouse, Boozman, and Booker,
reintroduced the WILD Act from last Congress, which we will
consider this morning. I agree with Ranking Member Carper when
he stated that the WILD Act, he said, would help make the
United States a global leader on wildlife conservation.
The Committee will also continue to process nominations. We
restart that process today by considering the nominations of
Andrew Wheeler to be the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency, Nicole Nason to be Administrator of the
Federal Highway Administration, Peter Wright to be Assistant
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency's Office
of Land and Emergency Management, John Fleming to be Assistant
Secretary of Commerce for Economic Development, and John Ryder
to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Tennessee
Valley Authority.
Each of these nominees is well qualified and will bring a
wealth of experience and expertise to these important
positions.
I would like to say a few words about Andrew Wheeler.
Mr. Wheeler has served as Deputy Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency since April 2018, when the
Senate confirmed his nomination with bipartisan support. Just
last week, 63 agriculture and forestry groups wrote in support
of Mr. Wheeler's nomination to be the Administrator. They said,
``It is hard to imagine a more qualified individual for the
role of EPA Administrator, and we respectfully request that the
Committee move to confirm his nomination so that he may be
considered by the full Senate at the earliest possible date.''
Mr. Wheeler has done an outstanding job leading the
Environmental Protection Agency these past 6 months. I urge my
colleagues to vote in support of his nomination to be the
Administrator.
This morning we will also consider legislation that enjoyed
bipartisan support in the 115th Congress. We already mentioned
the WILD Act. In addition, we will vote on Senator Sullivan's
Alaska Remote Generator Reliability and Protection Act, Senator
Capito's Target Practice and Marksmanship Training Support Act,
and Senator Cardin's Migratory Birds of the Americas
Conservation Act. Each of these bills passed our Committee by
voice vote in the last Congress, and I urge all my colleagues
to support passage of these bills again today.
Last, we will consider six resolutions to approve
prospectuses providing for General Services Administration
leases, our Committee budget resolution, and our Committee
rules.
After Ranking Member Carper gives his opening statement,
other members may make remarks. At 10:20 we will proceed to
vote on the items on the agenda, provided we have a reporting
quorum. After we finish voting I will be happy to recognize any
other member who wishes to speak.
I now turn to Ranking Member Carper for his statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS R. CARPER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
In addition to setting our Committee budget and rules
today, we will vote today, as the Chairman has said, on four
pieces of bipartisan legislation, five nominees, and six
General Service Administration resolutions.
As our Chairman knows and my colleagues know, I enjoy
serving with you on this Committee. I especially enjoy serving
with you on this Committee when we can find consensus on issues
that clean the air, clean the water, improve public health, and
provide economic opportunity and job creation. That is the win-
win that I am always looking for, and I think that is true for
everybody on this Committee.
The four pieces of legislation we are considering today
have all passed out of our Committee on a bipartisan basis last
Congress. I intend to support them again this year.
Let me take just a moment, if I can, to begin to highlight
the two bills that I am especially proud to help lead and are
important for my State of Delaware, and my guess is for a lot
of neighbors and others on this Committee.
Migratory Birds of America Conservation Act, led by Senator
Cardin, would help protect migratory birds, including red
knots, which migrate annually through Delaware, attracting
birders literally from all over the world.
The Wildlife Innovation and Longevity Driver Act, also
known as the WILD Act, also known as Wild Thing, would
encourage innovation to protect endangered species, better
manage human wildlife conflicts, prevent poaching and wildlife
trafficking, and combat invasive species.
Three nominees we are considering today were also reported
out of this Committee last Congress. Two of those are John
Ryder, nominee to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the
Tennessee Valley Authority; and John Fleming, nominated to be
the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Economic Development.
The third is Peter Wright, who has once again been
nominated to serve as EPA Assistant Administrator, leading the
Office of Land and Emergency Management. I appreciate our
Chairman's agreement to ensure that, if Mr. Wright is
confirmed, he will appear before the Committee in short order
to discuss the Agency's efforts to clean up contaminated
Superfund sites.
I also hope that many of the other EPA assistant
administrators, who this Committee has not seen I think since
their confirmation hearings, would similarly be invited to
testify soon.
In the last Congress, minority staff and I worked with EPA
to negotiate a set of significant policy concessions that
enable us to feel comfortable with a quick confirmation process
for Mr. Wright. EPA has not yet indicated now whether it
remains willing to make those same commitments, so, for now, I
will refrain from supporting Mr. Wright's nomination. I hope
those commitments are forthcoming and soon. Then we can move
this nomination expeditiously.
Today we are also considering the nomination of Nicole
Nason to be Administrator of the Federal Highway
Administration. It has been more than 2 years since there has
been an administrator at the agency. I think that is the
longest gap in leadership in more than 100 years. It is my hope
that Ms. Nason's nomination is a signal that the Administration
is ready to work with us in reauthorizing our Nation's surface
transportation programs, and I hope that Ms. Nason will be a
real partner with us in that effort.
I must say I was a bit disappointed that Ms. Nason did not
clearly commit to sharing materials that I requested at the
same time they are provided to FOIA requests or House Committee
chairs as part of her answers for questions for the record. I
will support her today, but I expect additional clarification
from her on that matter.
That brings us to the nomination of Andrew Wheeler, who I
have known for just about 20 years. I know others here have
known him for a long time, as well. When Andrew Wheeler was
named EPA Acting Administrator in July of last year, I sent him
a letter, I think it was like the next day, urging him to heed
the lessons of the past and restore the confidence of the
American people in the Agency's missions to protect our public
health and our environment. I also cautioned Mr. Wheeler that
the damage done by Scott Pruitt would not be easily undone.
It brings me no joy to say today that he has not done what
I hoped he would do in a number of important respects; not all
respects, but a number of important respects. In fact, in many
instances Mr. Wheeler has gone further than his predecessor in
his rejection of important measures that are supported by a
broad list of environmentalists and industry--and industry.
For example, Mr. Wheeler has decided to ignore the course
of coal fired utilities public, health, and religious leaders
who have urged the Trump administration to keep the Mercury and
Air Toxics Standards Rule in place and effective. In fact,
under Mr. Wheeler's leadership, EPA has issued an unnecessary
proposal that undermines the legal foundation of MATS, which
puts the entire rule in legal jeopardy. The proposal also
requests comment on whether the standards should be rescinded
altogether.
In this MATS rollback proposal, EPA is woefully ignoring
the actual benefits of reducing air toxics that permanently
damage children's brains and cause cancer and ignoring the fact
that the compliance costs were a third of what were originally
estimated.
On another front, despite the repeated requests to
negotiate a reasonable compromise on fuel economy and
greenhouse gas tailpipe standards, under Mr. Wheeler's lead,
EPA is moving forward to finalize a proposal that all but
freezes standards in place for the better part of a decade and
all but ensures that the auto industry spends the next half-
dozen years or so embroiled in litigation with California and a
dozen other States.
Let me say to my colleagues when I was elected State
Treasurer of Delaware in 1976, I worked to save a Chrysler
plant in Newark, Delaware. I worked for 30 years to save that
plant. Four thousand people worked at that plant. I worked 30
years to save the GM plant that we had just outside of
Wilmington, Delaware. For years I have fought to try to make
sure that our auto industry in this country is competitive with
the rest of the world.
With respect to fuel efficiency standards and a path
forward, they are united in saying that they want a 50 State
deal. You have heard me say this many times. They want a 50
State deal. Andrew Wheeler sat here and said he wants a 50
State deal, too, with California at the table.
The last thing the auto industry needs in this country to
be successful and profitable is to spend the next half-dozen
years or so in court locked up with California and a bunch of
other States, while the rest of the automakers and the rest of
the world move forward to producing and building the kind of
vehicles that the world is going to be buying in the year 2030.
So, I am very, very frustrated in this regard. This is a
win-win situation where we can get good things for this planet
by actually making sure that we don't somehow screw up the
regulation that is in place for fuel efficiency standards,
CAFE. We can preserve what is necessary, give them some
flexibility in the near term in the early years and then crank
it up on the outer years when they are going to be building
electric powered vehicles and fuel cell powered vehicles to
beat the band to compete with the rest of the world.
I will just say, Mr. Chairman, I will wrap it up with this.
I want us to slow this down just a little bit. Mr. Wheeler has
been nominated for this post. His nomination is good for 210
days. We are 183 days into that nomination, 183 days. Excuse
me; we are 27 days, 27 days into that nomination. There are 183
days to go. For God's sake, slow it down. If we report him out,
I think we will report him out today.
The idea of a rush to judgment to get him up on the floor
before we have an opportunity to make sure that five of the
issues, including the two I have just mentioned here, where we
actually do good things for the planet, and we also provide for
enhanced economic opportunity. Give us a chance to make sure
that those are going to be locked in. That is what my request
would be.
Thank you very much.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Cardin.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BENJAMIN L. CARDIN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MARYLAND
Senator Cardin. Mr. Chairman, first, I want to thank you
for including in today's markup the Neotropical Migratory Bird
Conservation Act. This is a bill that, as you pointed out, had
previously been approved by voice vote by this Committee. I
want to thank Senator Portman, who has been my cosponsor, and
many members of this Committee that help in regard to
neotropical migratory birds.
More than half of all species found in the United States
are migratory birds, so it is key to our ecosystem. This bill
provides for education, research, monitoring, and habit
protection for more than 350 species of migratory birds,
including the Baltimore Oriole, which I have talked about
before, which is endangered in more than one respect. The bird
itself is endangered, plus the baseball team is endangered. So,
we can use all the help we can get in this regard, and I thank
the Committee for its support.
Senator Barrasso. We will refer that other part to the
Commerce Committee.
[Laughter.]
Senator Cardin. I talked to the Chairman and staff before
we started this meeting. We do have some GSA resolutions today,
and I am going to support all the GSA resolutions. Included in
there are two courthouses, new courthouses, one for Huntsville,
Alabama, the total cost of which is $86 million; and one for
Fort Lauderdale, Florida, the total cost is $190 million.
Our Committee is responsible for these GSA resolutions. I
know the staff is arranging for GSA to come in and explain the
processes that are used in regard to these resolutions. I
particularly request that we focus on courthouse selection. I
pointed out that, in Maryland, the Baltimore courthouse was
scheduled for No. 1 for replacement. It is a terribly designed
courthouse. That was about 15 years ago, and today it is off
the list. I just think it would be useful for our Committee to
understand the process that is used for selecting new
courthouses in this country.
I thank the Chairman for his cooperation, and I look
forward to that briefing.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Cardin. That has
already been arranged, and we are working on the schedule.
Any other Senators like to be recognized?
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Chairman, would this be the
appropriate time to say something else about GSA?
Senator Barrasso. Please.
Senator Van Hollen. I appreciate the attention you and the
Ranking Member and my colleague from Maryland have given to the
issue of the new FBI building. As you know, we are still
waiting for a prospectus from the FBI. Senator Cardin and I and
others have shared our concerns about the fact that the FBI and
the GSA had been headed in the direction of a new campus that
met all the security requirements and consolidation
requirements. There were three sites; one they were looking at
in Virginia, two in Maryland. The Administration pulled the rug
out from under that.
I just want to bring to the Committee's attention the fact
that the appropriation bills that had been not yet passed, but
supported on a bipartisan basis in the House and the Senate,
request that the prospectus also include an analysis of one of
those three previous sites, so not just a consolidation at the
existing site in Washington, DC, but also include a prospectus
on one of the other sites.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Inhofe.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me make the other side of Andrew Wheeler. I would like
to comment that one of the most gratifying things that I saw
was, when he was first nominated, and we first acted on him in
this Committee, we went over to his committee that he is going
to be the director of and there must have been 300 people
there, the people that were there when he first came to work.
Here is a guy who spent his whole life in environment and
public works in the EPA and all that activity. We are very
proud. I wouldn't want to hesitate and delay it at all; I think
we need to get him on the job and working.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Now that enough members have arrived, and
I promised we would vote promptly at 10:20, but I will stay for
additional comments from other members afterwards, I would like
to move to the votes on the items on today's agenda.
The Ranking Member and I have agreed to bring up three
nominees for separate votes, and the Ranking Member has
requested that each of these nominees receive a roll call vote.
The Ranking Member and I have agreed to vote on two
nominees, four bills, six GSA resolutions, the Committee rules,
and the budget resolution en bloc by voice vote. Members may
choose to have their votes recorded for a specific item in that
bloc after the voice vote.
I would like to first call up Presidential Nomination 22,
Andrew Wheeler, of Virginia, to be Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency.
I move to approve and report the nomination favorably to
the Senate.
Is there a second?
Senator Inhofe. Second.
Senator Barrasso. The Clerk will call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Booker.
Senator Booker. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Braun.
Senator Braun. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Capito.
Senator Capito. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Cardin.
Senator Carper. Proxy votes no. Cardin votes no.
The Clerk. Mr. Carper.
Senator Carper. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Cramer.
Senator Cramer. Yes.
The Clerk. Ms. Duckworth.
Senator Carper. Senator Duckworth votes no by proxy.
The Clerk. Ms. Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Inhofe.
Senator Inhofe. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Markey.
Senator Markey. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Merkley.
Senator Merkley. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Rounds.
Senator Rounds. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sanders.
Senator Carper. No, by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Shelby.
Senator Shelby. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan.
Senator Sullivan. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse.
Senator Carper. No, by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Wicker.
Senator Wicker. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Aye.
The Clerk will report.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, the yeas are 11; the nays are 10.
Senator Barrasso. We have approved the nomination of Mr.
Wheeler to be Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency, which will be reported to the full Senate for approval.
Next, I would like to call up Presidential Nomination 80,
Peter Wright, of Michigan, to be Assistant Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency.
I move to approve and report the nomination favorably to
the Senate.
Is there a second?
Senator Inhofe. Second.
Senator Barrasso. The Clerk will call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Booker.
Senator Booker. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Braun.
Senator Braun. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Capito.
Senator Capito. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Cardin.
Senator Carper. No, by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Carper.
Senator Carper. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Cramer.
Senator Cramer. Yes.
The Clerk. Ms. Duckworth.
Senator Carper. No, by proxy.
The Clerk. Ms. Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Inhofe.
Senator Inhofe. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Markey.
Senator Markey. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Merkley.
Senator Merkley. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Rounds.
Senator Rounds. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sanders.
Senator Carper. No, by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Shelby.
Senator Shelby. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan.
Senator Sullivan. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse.
Senator Carper. No, by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Wicker.
Senator Wicker. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Aye.
The Clerk will report.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, the yeas are 11; the nays are 10.
Senator Barrasso. The yeas are 11; the nays are 10. We have
approved the nomination of Mr. Wright to be Assistant
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, which
will be reported to the full Senate for approval.
Next, I would like to call up Presidential Nomination 78,
John Fleming, of Louisiana, to be Assistant Secretary of
Commerce for Economic Development.
I move to approve and report the nomination favorably to
the Senate.
Is there a second?
Senator Inhofe. Second.
Senator Barrasso. The Clerk will call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Booker.
Senator Booker. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Braun.
Senator Braun. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Capito.
Senator Capito. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Cardin.
Senator Carper. Yes, by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Carper.
Senator Carper. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Cramer.
Senator Cramer. Yes.
The Clerk. Ms. Duckworth.
Senator Carper. Yes, by proxy.
The Clerk. Ms. Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Inhofe.
Senator Inhofe. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Markey.
Senator Markey. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Merkley.
Senator Merkley. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Rounds.
Senator Rounds. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sanders.
Senator Carper. No, by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Shelby.
Senator Shelby. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan.
Senator Sullivan. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse.
Senator Carper. Yes, by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Wicker.
Senator Wicker. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Aye.
The Clerk will report.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, the yeas are 15; the nays are 6.
Senator Barrasso. The yeas are 15; the nays are 6. We have
approved the nomination of Dr. Fleming to be Assistant
Secretary of Commerce for Economic Development, which will be
reported to the full Senate for approval.
I would like to now call up S. 268, the Wildlife Innovation
and Longevity Driver Act; S. 163, the Alaska Remote Generator
Reliability and Protection Act; S. 94, Target Practice and
Marksmanship Training Support Act; S. 310, Migratory Birds of
the Americas Conservation Act; Presidential Nomination 2,
Nicole Nason, of New York, to be Administrator of the Federal
Highway Administration; Presidential Nomination 79, John Ryder,
of Tennessee, to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the
Tennessee Valley Authority; six General Services Administration
resolutions; the Committee budget resolution; the Committee
rules en bloc.
I move to approve and report S. 268, S. 163, S. 94, S. 310,
Presidential Nomination No. 2, Presidential Nomination 79, and
the Committee budget resolution favorably to the Senate, and
approve six GSA resolutions and the Committee rules en bloc.
Is there a second?
Senator Carper. Second.
Senator Barrasso. All those in favor, please say aye.
[Chorus of ayes.]
Senator Barrasso. All those opposed, no.
[No audible response.]
Senator Barrasso. In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes
have it.
We have approved S. 268, S. 163, S. 94, S. 310,
Presidential Nominations 2 and 79, and the Committee budget
resolution, which will be reported favorably to the Senate. We
have also approved six GSA resolutions and the Committee rules.
The voting part of the meeting is concluded. I am going to
be happy to recognize any member who wishes to make a statement
on any of the nominations, legislations, resolutions, and other
matters we just approved.
I have noted Senator Capito and Senator Sullivan both had
interest in making comments. We will go back and forth. I think
Senator Capito, and then Senator Gillibrand, and then Senator
Sullivan.
Go right ahead.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA
Senator Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am very pleased that the Committee considered and
approved my bill, S. 94, which is the Target Practice and
Marksmanship Training Support Act, which I introduced with
Senator Bennett and which has the support of 11 bipartisan
sponsors.
The bill would provide needed flexibility for States in
applying their Pittman-Robertson funds to build and maintain
public shooting ranges. This will allow greater access to
public shooting ranges for sportsmen and target shooters for
gun safety education, target practice, and sighting in
firearms. Best of all, it achieves this without any budget
score.
This legislation moved by voice vote last Congress and is
also included in the public lands package under consideration
this week. I am optimistic that it will advance through to
enactment this Congress, given its strong bipartisan support.
I would also like to congratulate the five important
nominees for their leadership roles. I congratulate each of
them for moving forward and hope the Senate will take up their
nominations in a timely fashion.
I would like to highlight my support for Acting
Administrator Andrew Wheeler to become the Administrator of the
EPA. The Acting Administrator and his staff have always been
very responsive to my staff and know the significant concerns I
have raised in private meetings and in public forums, including
hearings in this Committee, about the risks posed by a group of
chemicals known as PFOS. I was troubled by media reports last
week that an upcoming interagency plan to address PFOS would
not consider standards for drinking water.
Mr. Wheeler and his staff came to my office and addressed
those concerns by pledging to look at all available statutory
authorities the EPA has been granted by Congress to address
this potential crisis. With that in mind, and considering other
policy concerns to West Virginia, I have no concerns supporting
his nomination. However, I intend to closely track the steps
EPA and other agencies are taking to address this public health
and environmental health crisis, which has had a particular
impact on West Virginians living in affected communities, to
ensure that the Federal Government is sufficiently responsive
to their concerns.
I would also like to take a moment to express my
appreciation for Mr. Wheeler's emphasis on improving
transparency and good governance practices at the EPA and
proposing regulatory solutions that abide by congressional
intent in statute. The important work he is doing at the Agency
underscores that economic growth and environmental protection
need not be at cross purposes.
West Virginia bore the brunt, more than most States, from 8
years of bureaucratic red tape coming out of Washington, and
the recovery from the 2008 recession has been delayed coming to
Appalachia. The EPA's effort to address the legal deficiencies
in the Clean Power Plan and Waters of the U.S. rules will go a
long way to helping our people get back to work, particularly
in the engineering, manufacturing, construction, and forest
industries that are essential to West Virginia's economy.
Thank you very much.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Capito.
Senator Booker.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CORY A. BOOKER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY
Senator Booker. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I have lived and worked my entire
professional career in low income, vulnerable communities, and
I really came to the environmental movement more because of
environmental justice issues than originally on climate issues,
something always of concern to me.
But when you live in a community where children suffer from
lead poisoning, when you live in a community where you can't
plant in your soil because it is toxic in your own backyard,
when you live in a community where you have toxic Superfund
sites within a few miles and live in a community where the air
is so bad that the asthma rates are multiple times higher than
other suburban communities, you begin to realize that children
and young people, as well as the elderly, are being stolen,
having what should be the birthright of every American stolen
from them when it comes to clean air, clean water, clean soil,
and a right to be able to develop and flourish in America by
having a clean environment.
Andrew Wheeler, in his brief tenure as Acting Administrator
at the EPA, his actions have shown that he will be increasing
water pollution, increasing air pollution, increasing carbon
emissions that are causing not just global warming, but real
health risks, from mercury to methane. This is someone who will
make us less safe, less secure, have more health problems, and
raise, unfortunately, the worst consequences of pollution, in
addition to the fact that, as climate change happens, it is the
vulnerable communities in America that face the most tragic
consequences, the communities least resilient when these
weather events occur.
I cannot support Mr. Wheeler. I voted against him. And I
will continue to work with environmental justice advocates
across our country to try to block and stop the rollbacks that
are ultimately going to hurt human life, undermine the well
being in communities like mine across the State of New Jersey,
and unfortunately, set this planet back when it comes to
addressing the urgent crisis we have with climate change.
Thank you very much.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Booker.
Senator Sullivan.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DAN SULLIVAN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF ALASKA
Senator Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to commend you and the Ranking Member on the
continued bipartisan work that gets done on this Committee. I
appreciate the passage of the Alaska Remote Generator
Reliability and Protection Act and note that in the last
Congress, Ranking Member Carper was a cosponsor of that
important legislation from my State, and I am glad to see that
moving again.
I also just want to mention, with regard to Mr. Wheeler, I
think when you saw his confirmation hearing, the one thing that
doesn't come out a lot, doesn't get reported in the press, is
his qualifications from being a career official at the EPA. I
think he might be the first career EPA official to actually
have the opportunity to lead the Agency, won a number of awards
there; and then also his work here on this Committee. So,
almost 20 years of public service on these important issues.
I do want to just briefly mention Ranking Member Carper's
statement about a rush. I have a lot of respect for the Ranking
Member. As a matter of fact, I have a lot of respect and work
very closely with all the members of this Committee, Democrats
and Republicans. I do want to mention, though, one of the kind
of counterarguments to this idea of a rush is what is happening
more broadly in the Senate. There has been unprecedented, by
any historical measure, delay in terms of this President being
able to get his nominees confirmed.
If you look at the number of times that the other side has
required cloture votes, it is literally in the hundreds for the
first 2 years of this President. There has been no precedent
ever, ever in the first 2 years of another President, whether
it is a Democrat, Republican. No one has done this. No one has
delayed more than my colleagues on the other side. That is a
fact. The vast majority of these delays are noncontroversial
Senate confirmed positions; assistant secretaries of HHS,
ambassadors for the State Department, assistant secretaries of
Defense. Delay, delay, delay, delay.
So, my only point is, to my good friend, Senator Carper,
whom I have worked closely with on a number of issues, the
argument to say don't rush it would have a little bit more
credibility if your side has not been delaying so many well
qualified people who want to serve their country and have been
waiting for months and months and months; and we start to lose
good people. We start to lose good people, and we are starting
to see that.
So, I would ask my colleagues on the other side, go to the
minority leader and say, these delays, they are not helping the
American people. They are certainly not helping the American
people when this Administration, which was elected, is trying
to place people in offices that need Senate confirmation to run
the country.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Sullivan.
Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. If I could have just a moment to respond.
I am delighted to serve with you on this Committee, with
our Chairman, and frankly, everybody who serves on this
Committee. I like to get things done. I am a recovering
Governor, as you know, and I like to get things done.
As a Governor, literally in 8 years--I might be mistaken on
this--I think every one of my nominees for judges, for
executive branch positions that required a confirmation, they
were all confirmed and approved. Eight years unanimously. I am
one who believes that Governors and Presidents deserve the
benefit of the doubt in nominations. That doesn't mean we
should rubber stamp them.
But as the Chairman knows, we worked very hard at the end
of last Congress to try to get four senior officials confirmed
at EPA, and to allow them to be confirmed on a voice vote by
unanimous consent, and one was held up, as the Chairman knows,
for reasons beyond my control, our control, and that was the
nominee Peter Wright. We are taking him up today. My hope is we
can get that nomination done as long as EPA recommits to what
they promised to do in anticipation of our confirming of Peter
Wright.
I like to say find out what works and do more of that. You
can look at those four nominations and see what works to
expedite the processing of those nominations. With Andrew
Wheeler, there are five issues; there are five issues. They
include fuel efficiency standards; they include mercury air
toxic standards; they include something called HFCs,
hydrofluorocarbons, that we have talked about before; they
include PFOA, the stuff that gets in water and causes cancer.
Within 2 years we want a drinking water standard.
We are not asking for crazy stuff; we are asking for things
that actually clean the air, clean the water, provide better
public health, and also provide economic opportunity. That is
the win-win I am looking for. I think that is the win-win that
we are looking for.
Andrew Wheeler's report out of here today, you all have the
votes officially to get him confirmed in the Senate, I think.
But I want to make sure, if that happens or when that happens,
that the five issues that we are raising here have been
addressed in an appropriate way. We will be better off as a
people, healthier people. We will also be better economically
as a people. That is what I want. That is what we want.
Senator Sullivan. But my broader point to the overall
delays of many, many qualified candidates, literally hundreds,
over 100 filibusters--not filibusters, cloture requirements, I
think it is a very valid one. When I talk to my colleagues on
the other side of the aisle, a lot of them have reservations
about what the minority leader has been doing, essentially to
just delay the confirmation of people just because they want to
delay it. It is unprecedented, and I think it should stop, and
I think it makes for stronger arguments from this side to look
at more issues with regard to Mr. Wheeler.
I agree on certainly some of the ones you mentioned. I have
raised a number of those with him in my meetings, but again,
the broader issue of the unprecedented delay, by any historical
measure, in the last 2 years. I think it needs to be addressed,
and I think it gives you more credibility to make these
arguments if you are not delaying an entire Administration's
ability to get people to serve their Government who are
noncontroversial and get confirmed.
Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Before turning to Senator Markey, I would
point out that Mr. Wheeler has received significant praise from
former Democrat vice presidential candidate and U.S. Senator
Joe Lieberman, who served on this Committee, the Environment
and Public Works Committee, while Mr. Wheeler was a Republican
staff director. Former Senator Lieberman has called Mr. Wheeler
fair and professional, and I ask unanimous consent to enter
that statement in the record, and it will be offered and
submitted in the record without objection.
[The referenced information was not received at time of
print.]
Senator Barrasso. Senator Markey.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. EDWARD J. MARKEY,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is the EPA's job to protect public health and the
environment, but sadly, I am concerned that Andrew Wheeler's
background means that he will never understand that saving coal
is not part of that mission and not his job.
Andrew Wheeler has spent years protecting the coal
industry; first from here, in the Senate, where he worked to
prevent passage of climate legislation as a Committee staffer;
then as a lobbyist for Murray Energy, one of the largest coal
companies in America that has led the fight by the coal
industry to undo the progress we have made on climate policy;
and now as the man overseeing a number of proposed regulatory
actions that would attack the rules that protect public health,
protect our environment, and protect our climate.
We should be forcefully fighting against climate change,
instead of being forced to convince our lead environmental
protection officer that it is a real threat. For these reasons,
I oppose Andrew Wheeler's nomination.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you. I appreciate your comments.
I appreciate the contributions of all of the members.
Senator Carper, any final words before I adjourn the
Committee?
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I would ask unanimous
consent to submit for the record letters pertaining to the
nomination of Andrew Wheeler as Administrator of EPA from
former Administrators of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Mr. Chairman, I would just reiterate what I said to our
colleague from Alaska a minute ago. There is a pretty good
roadmap that we can follow to lead to the vote on the floor for
Mr. Wheeler sooner rather than later, and it was, as I
mentioned, basically executed at the end of the last Congress.
I don't think we are asking for a lot. We are asking that we
listen to our automakers in this country, who are saying give
us certain predictability with respect to fuel efficiency
standards; not years in court, but certainly predictability so
that we can compete in the world.
We are asking for this Committee and for this Congress, for
EPA to listen to the voices of--with respect to mercury air
toxic standards, we are asking them to listen to the voices of
our utilities throughout this country, for the folks who lobby
on behalf of the utilities, to the Chambers of Commerce,
National Association of Manufacturers, as well as environmental
organizations, as well as Moms Air Force for Clean Air and any
other number of folks on the clean air side.
We are asking that the companies in this country who have
actually developed a lot of time and a lot of money in
alternative follow on product to hydrofluorocarbons to act as a
refrigerant and a coolant. We have a follow on product invented
in America by American companies, and we are unable to sell it
and market it throughout the world because we cannot get a
treaty, called Kigali, sent by this Administration to us and
the Senate to consider it. I think we have had at least 13
Republican Senators who have said to the Administration, send
us the treaty. Send us the treaty.
Senator Capito mentioned this today; we have this PFOA
stuff, a chemical that gets in the water. In my State, we have
a situation where airplanes--we have big airplanes at Dover Air
Force Base and a lot of other places where PFOAs get into the
groundwater that they use with respect to the airplanes, and
all we are asking for is, within 2 years, let's have a clean
drinking water standard for PFOAs.
Finally, I can never remember how to pronounce the name,
but it is a paint stripper. I think it is called fluoride
chlorine. I don't say a lot of good things about Scott Pruitt,
but he actually started the process when he was the
Administrator of EPA to get it off the shelves so that we
wouldn't actually be selling it and exposing people who have
died by the dozens in this country by being exposed to this
stuff. That is a paint stripper. I think in that instance Scott
Pruitt was on to something right, and I would really urge Mr.
Wheeler to take the handoff and get the ball in the end zone.
Thanks so much.
[The referenced information was not received at time of
print.]
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Carper.
Senator Cardin.
Senator Cardin. Mr. Chairman, could I ask unanimous consent
that my votes negative on Wheeler by proxy and Wright on proxy
negative and positive on Fleming by proxy be changed to in
person? It doesn't change the outcome.
Senator Barrasso. Without objection.
Senator Cardin. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Cardin.
I would like to submit for the record, finally, a letter
that was to me and to the Ranking Member from the Auto Alliance
and Driving Innovation. On behalf of the Alliance of Automobile
Manufacturers, who represents 12 leading automakers that
produce over 70 percent of light duty vehicles sold in the
United States. The letter says, ``I want to express our support
for the President's nomination of Andrew Wheeler to be the
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.''
Without objection.
[The referenced information was not received at time of
print.]
Senator Carper. I don't object.
I would ask unanimous consent to submit for the record
similar statements from individual auto companies in this
country with respect to this and one of the issues I have
discussed here today is a 50 State solution for CAFE and fuel
efficiency standards.
Senator Barrasso. Without objection.
[The referenced information was not received at time of
print.]
Senator Barrasso. If there is no one else who would like to
make a comment, at this time, this hearing and business meeting
is adjourned.
I ask unanimous consent that the staff have authority to
make technical and conforming changes to each of the matters
approved today.
With that, the business meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:45 a.m. the Committee was adjourned.]
[Legislation and related material submitted for the record
follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]