- CAMPOS AND GARRISH NOMINATIONS
[Senate Hearing 115-509]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-509
CAMPOS AND GARRISH NOMINATIONS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
TO
CONSIDER THE NOMINATIONS OF MR. JAMES EDWARD CAMPOS TO BE DIRECTOR OF
THE OFFICE OF MINORITY ECONOMIC IMPACT, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY; AND THE
HONORABLE THEODORE J. GARRISH TO BE AN ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF ENERGY
(INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS)
__________
MARCH 15, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-770
WASHINGTON : 2019
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).E-mail,
[email protected]
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE LEE, Utah
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
STEVE DAINES, Montana
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
Brian Hughes, Staff Director
Patrick J. McCormick III, Chief Counsel
Kellie Donnelly, Deputy Chief Counsel
Mary Louise Wagner, Democratic Staff Director
Sam E. Fowler, Democratic Chief Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, Chairman and a U.S. Senator from Alaska....
1
Cantwell, Maria, Ranking Member and a U.S. Senator from
Washington.....................................................
2
WITNESSES
Garrish, Hon. Theodore J., nominated to be an Assistant Secretary
of Energy (International Affairs)..............................
3
Campos, James Edward, nominated to be Director of the Office of
Minority Economic Impact, Department of Energy.................
7
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
Cantwell, Hon. Maria:
Opening Statement............................................
2
Campos, James Edward:
Opening Statement............................................
7
Written Testimony............................................
9
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
25
Garrish, Hon. Theodore J.:
Opening Statement............................................
3
Written Testimony............................................
5
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
22
Heller, Hon. Dean:
Letter for the Record........................................
27
Herrington, Hon. John S.:
Letter for the Record........................................
28
Hodel, Hon. Donald Paul:
Letter for the Record........................................
29
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa:
Opening Statement............................................
1
CAMPOS AND GARRISH NOMINATIONS
----------
THURSDAY, MARCH 15, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m. in
Room SD-366, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa
Murkowski, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
The Chairman. Good morning, everyone. The Committee will
come to order.
We are here this morning to consider two nominations for
the Department of Energy (DOE): Mr. Ted Garrish, to be the
Assistant Secretary of Energy for International Affairs, and
Mr. James Campos, to be the Director of the Office of Minority
Impact.
Mr. Garrish, you have a long and a very distinguished
career of service, beginning with the Department of Justice,
helping to establish the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
You have also had a few tours through the Department of Energy,
including as General Counsel, the Assistant Secretary for
Nuclear Energy, the Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural
Gas Transportation System, and most recently as a Senior
Advisor to Secretary Perry. Your positions outside of the
Federal Government are also numerous. The one that I found
perhaps the most interesting was your nine-year stint as the
Founder and Chairman of Wild Goose Brewery in Cambridge,
Maryland. You have a wide diversity of interests here.
The position you have now been nominated for, the Assistant
Secretary for International Affairs, is quite important within
the Department. So much that goes on in the energy space
requires partnership and cooperation with countries around the
world. This could mean encouraging international cooperation
for research and development activities, facilitating energy
trade and investment or promoting American leadership as we
engage in bilateral and multilateral energy treaties and
obligations. These are all areas of great interest to this
Committee and we're grateful to you for your continued
willingness to serve. We look forward to hearing from you this
morning.
Mr. Campos, as Director of the office you have been
selected to lead, you will have the opportunity to strengthen
diversity, not only within the Department of Energy, but also
within the greater energy and scientific community as a whole.
Our nation would benefit from a more diverse workforce in the
STEM fields, and I would certainly encourage the Department of
Energy to be a leader on this challenge. We want to ensure
opportunities exist for minority students to engage deeply in
these fields. Critical allies in this engagement should include
minority-serving institutions and minority-owned businesses
working with the Department.
So again, I thank you both for your willingness to serve at
the Department of Energy. Given the positions that you will
hold, once confirmed, I would not expect that you will be a
stranger to our Committee. I would ask for your commitment to
work with us, once you are confirmed, would certainly expect
that, and know that we can count on that.
With that, I will turn to Senator Cantwell for her opening
comments.
STATEMENT OF HON. MARIA CANTWELL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WASHINGTON
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I am pleased the Committee is considering these two
nominees this morning.
The Assistant Secretary of Energy for International Affairs
is responsible for managing international energy policy and
coordinating the Department's programs involving international
cooperation, and Mr. Garrish brings an important long history
with the Department of Energy, dating back to the early days of
the Reagan Administration. He is very experienced.
In addition, his prior service at Justice Department, the
Federal Trade Commission, the White House Consumer Product
Safety Commission, the Interior Department, extends further
back to the Nixon Administration. The Committee has reported
and the Senate has confirmed him three times before as General
Counsel of the Department of Energy, as Assistant Secretary for
the Congressional International Public Affairs, and as the
Federal Coordinator of the Alaska Natural Gas Transportation
System.
We welcome also, Mr. Campos. While this is his first
appearance before the Committee, he has had extensive
experience in state government, which will serve him well, if
confirmed.
The Office of Minority Economic Impact has responsibility
for ensuring that minorities are afforded an opportunity to
participate in the energy programs of the Department. We rely
on this Office to ensure that minorities are part of a diverse
energy workforce that we need to fill the jobs in a rapidly
evolving energy environment.
I look forward to hearing more about his prior experience
at Nevada's Equal Rights Commission and Commissioner of
Nevada's Consumer Affairs division and as Director of the
College of Southern Nevada's Renewable Energy Program.
Thank you, Madam Chair and, again, welcome to the nominees.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
The rules of the Committee which apply to all nominees
require that they be sworn in in connection with their
testimony. I would ask that you both please rise and raise your
right hand.
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you are about to
give to the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
[Witnesses respond with, yes.]
The Chairman. You may be seated.
Before you begin your statements, I will ask three
questions addressed to each nominee who appears before this
Committee.
First, will you be available to appear before this
Committee and other congressional committees to represent
departmental positions and respond to issues of concern to the
Congress?
[Witnesses respond with, yes.]
The Chairman. Are you aware of any personal holdings,
investments or interests that could constitute a conflict or
create an appearance of such a conflict should you be confirmed
and assume the office to which you have been nominated by the
President?
[Witnesses respond with, no.]
The Chairman. And are you involved or do you have any
assets held in blind trusts?
[Witnesses respond with, no.]
The Chairman. Alright. Thank you very much.
We will begin with you, Mr. Garrish. We would invite you to
introduce your family or any guests you may have with you today
and know that your full statement will be included as part of
the Committee record.
Again, we thank you both for being here.
Mr. Garrish.
STATEMENT OF HON. THEODORE J. GARRISH, NOMINATED TO BE AN
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF ENERGY (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS)
Mr. Garrish. Yes, thank you very much.
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Cantwell, members of the
Committee and the professional staff, thank you for the
opportunity to appear today as nominee for the position of
Assistant Secretary for International Affairs at the U.S.
Department of Energy.
It is an honor to appear before the Committee, and I
appreciate the confidence President Trump and Secretary Perry
have shown in nominating me for this position.
First, I would like to introduce my family here today. My
wife, Dory Stacks, to my right, who is the strength and support
as I embark on this important task. And also, representing my
home town, Annapolis, cheering section, a dear friend, Gaye
Schamburg, is with my wife.
I have other members of the family undoubtedly watching via
live streaming. That's an excellent feature and good for people
that aren't available.
I'm especially pleased to be back in front of the Senate
Energy Committee. Over the last 25 years, I've spent many a
night working with your staff on both sides on markups and
related items. In some ways, this is almost like a second home
for me here in Washington.
In my time in public service I have been honored to be
confirmed for several positions which you have mentioned,
including General Counsel, two Assistant Secretary positions
and I was able to serve as Federal Inspector of the Alaska
Natural Gas pipeline which gave me the opportunity to visit
many parts of Alaska that were in the process of energy
development and allowed me to see many remote villages. All of
these positions have been an amazing journey for me.
With that background I wanted to spend just a minute, if I
could, to tell you how I came to have an interest in
international affairs. For the last 10 years I have been
involved in helping companies in international business. One
important area I consulted on was to help countries interested
in joining the group of nations using atomic energy for
peaceful purposes. In that effort I advised countries how to
set up governance regimes including legislation, regulations,
treaties and conventions for the peaceful pursuit of nuclear
energy. This work was all done pursuant to E-10 regulations of
the NNSA.
What I learned from these projects was the tremendous
benefit that occurs for the United States when these efforts go
forward cooperatively with other nations. For the U.S., besides
the business benefits, is the transference of safety culture
that the United States best brings to emerging nations. Without
this interaction, the world would not be safe. Our experience
has made an impression on me, highlighting the importance of
these international activities.
If confirmed, I would bring to bear all my experience that
I've gained during the course of my extensive career in the
energy sector, along with my experience in international
affairs. The Office of International Affairs, in conjunction
with the State and Commerce Department will focus on leveraging
America's world leadership in clean, safe and affordable energy
production to expand the U.S. commercial presence around the
world. If confirmed, I will work to ensure that this mission is
achieved.
Again, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to
appear today. If confirmed, I look forward to working with the
members of this Committee and members of the staff in
furthering the energy interests of the United States,
internationally.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Garrish follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Garrish.
Mr. Campos, welcome to the Committee.
STATEMENT OF JAMES EDWARD CAMPOS, NOMINATED TO BE DIRECTOR OF
THE OFFICE OF MINORITY ECONOMIC IMPACT, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Mr. Campos. Thank you, Senator.
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Cantwell, members and
this entire staff, this Committee, it is my honor to appear
before you from the great State of Nevada as the President's
nominee to be the Director of the Office of Minority Economic
Impact at the Department of Energy.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
President Donald J. Trump and Secretary Rick Perry. I am truly
humbled by the confidence they have placed in me with this
nomination.
Most importantly, I would like to thank my family who are
here with me today, my father, Joseph Campos, and my mother,
Christina Campos. My parents are middle school sweethearts who
have been married for 57 years. They were born in Omaha,
Nebraska, in the 1930s and are children of immigrants of Mexico
who came to the United States of America in the early 1900s.
My father proudly served in the U.S. Navy during the Korean
War and went on to serve 15 additional years in the Naval
Reserve. He was later selected to serve in the U.S. government
agency and was stationed in eight different politically,
socially and economically emerging Latin American countries
over a 16-year period. At that time, my mother had an equal
challenging job raising four children. I am proud of them both.
Mom, Dad, without your love, support and guidance, a son could
not possibly have been--your son could not have possibly found
himself in this height and honor.
Also in attendance is my best friend of 10 years who
happens to be my lovely and talented fiance, Irma Aguirre.
Thank you for the many years of support, unconditional love and
understanding.
To my sisters, Laurie and Vickie, my brother, Joe, and
friends who are here with me today, thank you as well for all
your constant support.
I also would like to thank my grade school teacher that was
able to make it today, Janice Artino. Ms. Artino, my journey
started with you in fifth grade and my deepest appreciation for
you being the inspiration to never give up and to always be the
best I could be.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not thank all of my
colleagues and friends in Nevada whose mentorship led me to be
here today.
I believe I come before you with the necessary background
and experience to lead the Office of Minority Economic Impact
at the Department of Energy. I have worked as a state-wide
agency administrator, a regulatory and equal rights
commissioner, a higher education official, a business
development advisor and an entrepreneur working with diverse
groups. All of these experiences have provided me the
substantive skills in organizational leadership, human resource
management, strategic management, renewable energy
applications, public relations, accountability, performance
metrics, planning, setting defined goals and adherence to
budgetary mandates.
Should I have the high honor of being confirmed by the U.S.
Senate, I will look forward to working closely with members of
this Committee and staff to ensure we continue to grow a
culture of inclusivity. My hope is that together we will
continue to inspire and integrate a new generation of
scientists and engineers to develop the technology that is
needed to meet the challenges of the future of this great
nation.
Again, Chair Murkowski, Ranking Member Cantwell, members
and staff of the Committee, thank you again for this
opportunity to appear before you as the President's nominee for
the Director of the Office of Minority Economic Impact.
Thank you for your time today. I look forward to answering
your questions as you consider my nomination.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Campos follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Gentlemen, thank you both for being here this
morning. We welcome you. We welcome your families, your friends
and your supporters.
It is really quite touching to know that you have a teacher
that has been keeping an eye on you, Mr. Campos, and is here to
make sure that you continue to excel.
So, congratulations to you all.
Mr. Garrish, let me start with you. It is good to hear that
the exposure you had when you were working on the Alaska
natural gas pipeline issues, you had an opportunity to not only
be in our urban centers but get out to some of the remote and
rural areas in Alaska.
I want to ask a question about our role as an Arctic
nation, given that with Alaska coming into statehood some 50
plus years ago we became an Arctic nation by virtue of our
geography here. We are, as we all know, experiencing a new
reality in the Arctic as we have an opportunity to access
resources that were previously much more challenging. We have a
new reality with increased marine traffic in the region. And
all of this suggests that our future is going to be one that
will require greater cooperation with our neighbors to the East
and to the West and really, throughout the Arctic as a whole.
Can you speak to what you believe the U.S. role is for the
changes that we are seeing up in the Arctic? How we lead in
this area? And also, speaking to the issue of cooperation and
the level of cooperation that DOE might have whether through
the Office of International Affairs, working with Russia,
Canada, other Arctic nations, on issues like research,
understanding more of, again, the synergies that we have up
there, but also the challenges that we share.
Mr. Garrish. Yes, thank you. Thank you for your question,
Senator. That's, I think, a very important issue.
For the Department of Energy this is a developing issue, is
how I would describe it. We currently have at the Department
something called the Arctic Working Group which has had one
meeting thus far. It hasn't developed a sense that--and the
first meeting was mainly organizational, and it includes
several elements of the Department, our policy office, fossil
energy, obviously science, Indian energy and several of the
offices that would have anything to do with the Arctic. Now,
that feeds into an organization that now has been created
called the Arctic Executive Steering Committee which is
composed of the deputies around the government. And so, we
would then, in our working group, work with our Deputy
Secretary who would then work with this larger group to
coordinate Arctic issues to the President. But I will have to
say that this is simply only a beginning in what we need to do,
and we haven't really begun to look at issues. So I would think
it would be helpful and I would commit to you that, if
confirmed, I would be happy to work with your office in trying
to define issues that need to be brought before the larger
bodies.
Now there also is the Arctic Council which is another
international group which we participate in. Finland is now the
Chair, the U.S. was previously the Chair, and they are focusing
more on scientific research and less on resource development.
And that is another opportunity for the Department to
participate in Arctic issues. So between that organization and
the parts that are in the Department of Energy, I see a really
important thing that we could pursue in the future.
The Chairman. Well, I thank you for that.
Know that you will find me to be very pushy on the Arctic
issues because I feel that here in this country we have taken,
kind of, a back seat in an area where the eyes of the world are
focused on the North. If you don't think that that is the case,
go talk to the Chinese or talk to those in Asia. India is
looking to build an icebreaker, India. China already has more
than we have in this country. It is not just about
infrastructure, again, it is these cooperative and
collaborative arrangements. We have some legislation that we
have been working on that will help to formalize the Arctic
Steering Committee, the executive committee that you have
mentioned. When it comes to the issues, we have worked to
identify a whole slate of concerns.
So, again, we look forward to bringing them to you. I am
actually going to be meeting with a panel from PNWER, the
Pacific NorthWest Economic Region, comprised of Canada and
Alaska, but I will be pointing out at that meeting this
afternoon that given now the change at the State Department and
a recognition that several of the positions that are important
to us from an Arctic perspective have not yet been filled.
There is a sense that within the Administration there is
not a high enough priority that is being placed on the Arctic,
whether it is at the State Department, whether it is at Energy
or whether it is at Interior, so you will find that this is one
where I am going to be probing people about.
I mentioned it to Secretary Zinke, day before yesterday
when he presented DOI's budget, and said I want to know where
in the budget we are prioritizing Arctic issues. So know that I
look forward to further engagement with you on this.
Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Garrish, you are aware that the Columbia River Treaty
with Canada, which is about the modernization of our hydro
system. The relationship between our two countries is of
critical importance to the entire Pacific Northwest--the region
of Idaho, Washington, Oregon and Montana. The region's tribes,
power companies, environmental interests, agriculture
interests, fishing interests, communities, and towns are all
focused on how and when we are going to modernize that Treaty.
Obviously, the Department of Energy is engaged through the
Bonneville Power Administration, which together with the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, administers the Treaty.
I am pleased that the State Department's Chief Negotiator
has begun working with the Canadian counterparts and that the
bipartisan Congressional delegation has urged the
Administration to keep this a priority.
How can you and the Department of Energy and the Office of
International Affairs work effectively to expedite the
negotiations and make sure that the negotiating team stays on
schedule?
Mr. Garrish. Yes, thank you, Senator. That's a very
important subject.
Obviously, this is a process for the negotiation that has
lagged over a number of years to begin. And we are fortunate
now that there is, at least this year, set forth the concept
that we will begin the negotiations.
Now State will be the lead, but we have, there are two
parties to this, obviously Bonneville Power and the Corps of
Engineers. It would be my intention, if confirmed, to assure
that the views of Bonneville Power and the tribes necessarily
that are affected with Bonneville, their views are known and
emphasized to the negotiator so that they can make sure that
their voices are heard in the process. I would specifically, if
confirmed, work with your office and the other delegations that
this will be important to, because I know this is an important
issue. But we need to get this negotiation on and completed, so
I appreciate that.
Senator Cantwell. Well, thank you.
If I could talk bluntly, even though we're in this public
forum?
Mr. Garrish. Yes.
Senator Cantwell. I think you could play a key role, even
though State is very much in the lead, because I feel that
there is so much dialogue going on between the United States
and Canada right now in a lot of trade discussion. I am worried
that somehow the Columbia River Treaty issue doesn't get the
full attention that it needs.
Our previous Energy Secretary understood, and I am sure
this Energy Secretary understands, how a broad discussion of
modernization might be able to help us get over the goal line
here with the Treaty. It is so very, very important and I hope
you will use your great, long history with the agency and your
skill to help push things along. I guess the point is that I do
think the region, in and of itself, both on the Canadian side
and on the U.S. side, can bubble up a lot of great ideas
through the Bonneville Power Administration on how to resolve
the Treaty.
I would just, again, hope that you, as a Department of
Energy representative, would help nurture that process along
and not let us get stuck with top-down politics between Canada
and the United States that may have a lot of different issues
on the table in the next several months.
Mr. Garrish. Senator, thank you.
I can assure you that, if confirmed, I will make this one
of my priorities.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you.
Mr. Campos, how do we continue the outreach to women and
minorities on energy policy when energy is changing so
dramatically right now? And what do you think are some of the
ways in which we can help diversify the sector?
Mr. Campos. Senator Cantwell, thank you for the question.
It is vitally important that we do exactly what you just
mentioned. We have to outreach better. We have to educate
better. We have to get out there in the communities, in the
institutions, to work on these issues and it is my promise that
I will, as soon as and if I'm honored to be confirmed, to look
into those issues, to go through the office, to do a review, to
see how we can improve those many areas.
But my main focus would be on the education and pushing
that forward.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you.
Well, I am very excited about your nomination and the role
that you can play. In the energy bill that we passed, we tried
to give the Department of Energy more focus to help us in the
transitioning of energy to help educate and attract 1.5 million
new energy workers that we need.
Some of the work we have been able to do in our state in
that transition, even on the smart grid education, is
encouraging. We have been able to train over 2,000 individuals
in those new skills that are needed. The upshot from the
educators that I have seen is that even a starting apprentice
is making $25 an hour.
To me, the good news is these are high paying jobs and we
should just figure out what are the best ways to reach out to
those educational institutions to help diversify. I look
forward to working with you on that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Welcome, gentlemen. I appreciate your willingness to serve.
Mr. Garrish, let me start with you. You have had previous
tours at the Department of Energy, and much of your career has
involved working in nuclear energy, including working at the
DOE as Assistant Secretary for Nuclear Energy and working at
the Nuclear Energy Institute. I am also aware that you have
been advising Secretary Perry for almost a year on nuclear
policy. What has been your advice so far on the Yucca Mountain
licensing situation?
Mr. Garrish. Well, there are a couple of points that I'd
like to make. Thank you for the question, Senator.
My first point is that the position that I'm going to be
going into has no relationship with Yucca, so I'd just like to
make sure that you understand that that's how this is
organized.
I have consulted with the Secretary on a variety of issues
and one of them has been Yucca. I have explained to him,
briefed him on the history and understanding on what the
history of the program is and that's been the extent of it. And
there's been some discussions, relative to what's required in
the cases that are currently before the courts.
Senator Cortez Masto. Do you support the siting of spent
nuclear fuel and high level radioactive waste at Yucca
Mountain?
Mr. Garrish. Only if it is deemed to be safe and follows
the--and is authorized by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Senator Cortez Masto. And when you talk about safe, what
are you referring to? Scientifically safe?
Mr. Garrish. Scientifically safe.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
So, based on your comments, I can, I guess, take comfort in
the fact that you will not be advising Secretary Perry in the
future on anything having to do with Yucca Mountain?
Mr. Garrish. That is my intention.
Senator Cortez Masto. Alright, thank you.
Mr. Campos, good to see you again. Thank you for visiting
with me. I really appreciate it.
We talked a little bit about this when we met. It has been
no secret that this Administration has had difficulty
cultivating good relationships with minority communities and in
some ways they have barely even tried and have had an extremely
hostile relationship.
In a position such as yours, whose job will be to outreach
and work with our minority communities, the climate that this
Administration has engendered can only make your job more
difficult and many might be skeptical or hesitant to work with
you. How do you plan to overcome these obstacles? And what is
it that you can do to build bridges where they have become so
fractured?
Mr. Campos. Senator Cortez Masto, thank you for the
question and nice seeing you again as well.
There's a lot of complexities and a lot of effort that is
going to need to be done to reach out to the minority
communities in an effective manner. My intention is to follow
the guidelines of this office to continue the good work that
has been done and to reach out, even further, into the
communities at large, small and large, the institutions.
Education is a very important aspect of getting into these
communities, not just higher education, but K through 12. Being
involved in these communities in a proactive manner is vital.
In my background, I have had experience in those areas as
Commissioner of Consumer Affairs dealing with minorities and
the outwardly communities. In my position in higher education
both at Nevada State College and the College of Southern
Nevada, I had to deal with these issues of outreach. I'm trying
to include minorities at a greater capacity and understand the
importance that this is vital. And I will do everything in my
power to make sure I fulfill the mission of this office.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, I appreciate your
comments.
Mr. Garrish, the Fiscal Year '19 budget request includes a
reduction of about $1.3 billion from DOE's Office of Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy and reduces R&D funding from
$3.7 billion to $1.6 billion. Considering your office manages
the relationship with the Clean Energy Ministerial, do you
think this large de-emphasis on clean energy technologies by
this Administration will affect your work with international
partnerships like this that have historically looked toward the
United States for leadership in this area?
Mr. Garrish. I do not believe that that budget will
necessarily affect the collaborations that are ongoing. In
other words, I think that they are, the collaborations are
funded.
We do work with the individuals within the agency and
there's a lot of scientific work or scientific individuals that
are available to do these collaborations. And that goes with
all of the different offices in energy. We work with the
individuals from the particular office.
As I understand it, those individuals will continue to be
available. In other words, what the budget may have cut, I
don't believe will affect the ability of the individuals and
the scientists to join in this.
In addition to that, much of this is done at the labs and
their budgets are modestly stable, so I would say that those
individuals will also be available.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
I know my time is up. Thank you, again. I appreciate you
being here.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
I want to follow on with your comments because I, too,
share the concern that at a time that we want to maintain that
leadership role, globally, that our global competitiveness,
that the advances that we have made in our research and
development be allowed to continue.
The U.S. National Science Board released a statement last
month stating that China will surpass the U.S. in total
research and development expenditures this year. When you think
about the strength of our national labs, they are unparalleled
in quality. I think we recognize that. But what we have seen is
we have seen China, really, start taking the lead here in
commercializing many of the clean energy technologies that we
actually developed first here in the United States. Know that
this is something that I think we need to continue as a
priority. Maybe a little bit broader than Senator Cortez Masto
has framed it with a focus on just that budget.
How do we ensure, Mr. Garrish, that the U.S. does remain
globally competitive in developing, commercializing and
exporting the technologies that are developed through these DOE
programs so that we can continue to be the leaders when it
comes to these clean technologies that are going to help us
from many different perspectives, but most certainly as it
relates to our environment?
Mr. Garrish. Yes, thank you for the question.
One of the things that is occurring at the Department is
there is considerable work right now in collaboration with a
number of organizations around the world, and that will
continue. And what we need to do is emphasize the relationships
to make sure that we continue our global competitiveness. For
instance, there's a Clean Energy Ministerial coming up in May.
This will be very important and we need to continue to
emphasize the importance of that. There's a G7 coming up in
October in Nova Scotia, and this will be important for that
event. The IEA is also a very important organization and we
have a role in that and what we need to do is continue to
advance this concept in the process of governance of that
organization where we are large contributors, and it will be
important for us to make this one of the priorities for that
organization.
The Chairman. Well, thank you for that. I appreciate you
mentioning the IEA, the International Energy Agency. We had Dr.
Birol before the Committee here in early January as head of the
IEA, and he provided some pretty compelling testimony.
You know, his four upheavals in the energy sector, I keep
repeating as I move around, but I do think it is important that
working with IEA in your position will be important and I am
glad to hear you are placing a priority on it.
Mr. Campos, as you know, Alaska is home to half of the
tribes in the country and while you may have certain experience
in the West working with our tribes, I am a firm believer that
you get no better education than by going and visiting, being
in the villages, in the communities and seeing firsthand.
So I would ask that after you are confirmed that you would
hopefully consider a trip to Alaska to meet with our DOE
employees. It will not take you long to find them. We only have
two and they are in the Office of Indian Energy. We have been
pushing for years now, to bump that up. They actually doubled
the number because for years we were literally an office of one
for, again, a state that is the size of one-fifth the country
and has half the tribes, and we have one DOE individual. I
would hope that I would have your commitment to not only come
to the state but to work through the Office of Indian Energy as
they seek to facilitate grants to tribes to assist with the
development of energy solutions.
As you know, in parts of rural Alaska we have the highest
energy costs in the country, even higher than Hawaii, and not
that we want to arm wrestle for first place here, we all want
to work to lower them. I would ask that you help us in that
regard.
Mr. Campos. Senator, thank you for the comments.
I will assure you today that I will make it a priority to
visit the great State of Alaska and visit these individuals,
the two individuals in particular, that you've mentioned.
It is my intention to make sure that we find a way that all
states, including Alaska, get the proper resources and
attention. So it's my promise today that I will make sure to
visit Alaska and the tribes.
The Chairman. Good. Well I appreciate that and we will be
happy to work with you in your new capacity and offer
suggestions as to some of the places that you might want to
visit to get a real understanding as to some of the challenges
that we are facing. So thank you for that.
Senator Hirono.
Senator Hirono. Thank you, Madam Chair.
To ensure the fitness of nominees for any of our appointed
positions, I ask every nominee who comes before me to answer
the following two questions. And so, I would like for Mr.
Garrish to answer and then Mr. Campos.
First, since you became a legal adult have you ever made
unwanted requests for sexual favors or committed any verbal or
physical harassment or assault of a sexual nature?
Mr. Garrish. No.
Mr. Campos. No.
Senator Hirono. Second question. Have you faced discipline
or entered into a settlement related to this kind of conduct?
Mr. Garrish. No.
Mr. Campos. No.
Senator Hirono. Thank you.
Question for Mr. Garrish. DOE has been working with our
Caribbean partners on hurricane recovery and a longer-term
transition toward clean energy and the people of Hawaii
understand the unique challenges that come with living on
islands and we face--I have here the highest energy costs but,
among the highest--energy costs in the United States and are
working to reduce our reliance on imported petroleum as our
main fuel source.
Hawaii has a forward-thinking standard of 100 percent
renewable electricity by 2045, and we have cut our dependence
on oil by 41 percent since 2006 which is saying a lot because
we were the most oil-dependent state in the entire country up
to that point.
What is your agenda for helping the island communities in
the Caribbean and how would you apply those lessons to islands
in the Pacific such as Palau or Micronesia?
Mr. Garrish. Yes, Senator, thank you for the question. I
have a couple of thoughts.
The first is an observation. I had the opportunity in
Hawaii to work on a battery issue that involved conversion to
wind from oil production, and I saw the advantages of that in
the time that I was doing that work.
To me, one of the important pieces of research that we need
to continue and we need to foster around the world is battery
development for commercial use at a commercial scale. I think
that that's one of the areas where the island nations that
don't have to then use oil for generation of electricity is
very important.
The other area that I think, and this is especially in the
Caribbean, is the development of small-scale LNG. That has
been--we need to work through some ways to get those permits
done quicker, and we also need to find how we can do that
economically on small scale and be as a lot of these plants
that are currently being built are fairly large for their
delivery process and there is a limited number of opportunities
for the smaller scale. And that is one of the things, I think,
that we need to concentrate on to work for the islands. I think
that's important.
Senator Hirono. Yes, I would say that there are questions
about economies of scale for islands such as Palau or
Micronesia with their much smaller populations. But I encourage
you to continue to do those things that will enable these
places to become energy self-sufficient.
For Mr. Campos, if confirmed, you will oversee the DOE's
Office of Minority Business and Economic Development. As a
member of the Small Business Committee here, I believe the
Federal Government has a responsibility to the public to ensure
that small businesses, including minority-owned small
businesses, have fair access to the marketplace.
We also know from the DOE's own U.S Energy and Employment
report that ethnic and racial minorities make up a lower-than-
average portion of the energy workforce. What is your plan for
improving the access of minority workers and minority-owned
small businesses to the Department of Energy to national labs
and the energy sector in general?
Mr. Campos. Senator, thank you for the question.
That is one of our, if so honored to be appointed, it's one
of the pillars of the office is to make sure that minorities
have access to the many energy programs that the Department of
Energy offers. And it will be my job, in particular, to make
sure that there's proper education in these communities. Again,
and not just only at the public institutions of education, but
also in the business development centers, the chambers of
commerce, wherever there is an ability to communicate these
initiatives.
I'll make sure to do the best that this office can to
communicate and to allow and to foster and grow and increase
minority participation.
Senator Hirono. What I would want to see, if you are
confirmed, is that you develop a base of information so that
you know where you are with regard to the status of minority-
owned businesses and minorities in the energy workforce, and
then I am assuming you would get confirmed through your
efforts, you know, how those numbers can increase. I would like
to see that kind of data and information presented to this
Committee in the future.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hirono.
Senator Cortez Masto, did you have any follow-on questions?
Senator Cortez Masto. No, thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Well, gentlemen, I thank you for your willingness, again,
to serve and for appearing before the Committee here today.
As I think about so many of the priorities, we talk a lot
about workforce development and whether it is ensuring that we
have skilled workforce in our nuclear areas or you know,
whatever aspect of the energy sector. I think we are reminded
that we are lacking in certain areas, most notably in the
diversity in the STEM workforce.
Mr. Campos, this is something that you are going to be
faced with. National Science Foundation finds that women only
represent 28 percent of the STEM workforce and that African
Americans, Hispanics, American Indians and Alaska Natives are
all significantly underrepresented. I think we all know that we
have to do better.
You have mentioned that it comes with education. We need to
get in there earlier, not just at the university level but
really working to provide some direction here so that we can
build out and increase the necessary diversity. You have a job
in front of you that has bearing on what everybody does within
the Department of Energy.
Mr. Garrish, one last comment and it stems off something
Senator Hirono has raised. We have been pioneering microgrids
in Alaska. We have over 200 in the state right now. We are,
kind of, our own big, little island of energy opportunity and
innovation. I think about how we can take lessons learned from
a remote, high-cost place like Alaska where so many of our
communities are 100 percent reliant on diesel and how we are
transforming them into an energy future that is renewably
fueled, clean and affordable. How we make that transition? How
we can share this with whether it is islands like Palau or
CNMI, sharing our lessons learned with Puerto Rico as they are
trying to rebuild?
I see the role that you would have within the Office of
International Affairs there at DOE as being really key in
helping to facilitate some of this great innovation, this great
knowledge that will allow us to move to a more transformative
space when it comes to our clean energy solutions.
It is an exciting opportunity for you and a lot on your
plate.
Gentlemen, again, thank you for your willingness to serve.
My hope is that we will be able to advance your nominations
expeditiously.
We thank you for being here, and we thank you and your
families for the support that they have provided.
With that, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:53 a.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]