- UNDERSTANDING ODEBRECHT: LESSONS FOR COMBATING CORRUPTION IN THE AMERICAS
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
UNDERSTANDING ODEBRECHT: LESSONS FOR
COMBATING CORRUPTION IN THE AMERICAS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE, CIVILIAN SECURITY, AND TRADE
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
TUESDAY, MARCH 26, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-18
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-616PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or www.govinfo.gov
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York, Chairman
BRAD SHERMAN, California
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
Member
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
KAREN BASS, California
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TED S. YOHO, Florida
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
AMI BERA, California
LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
JIM SENSENBRENNER, Wisconsin
DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
JOHN CURTIS, Utah
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
KEN BUCK, Colorado
COLIN ALLRED, Texas
RON WRIGHT, Texas
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
GREG PENCE, Indiana
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey
STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
DAVID TRONE, Maryland
MIKE GUEST, Mississippi
JIM COSTA, California
JUAN VARGAS, California
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
Jason Steinbaum, Staff Director
Brendan Shields,
Republican Staff Director
------
Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere, Civilian Security, and Trade
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey, Chairman
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida, Ranking
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
Member
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
TED S. YOHO, Florida
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan
JOHN CURTIS, Utah
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
KEN BUCK, Colorado
JUAN VARGAS, California
MIKE GUEST, Mississippi
Sadaf Khan,
Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FROM COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Prepared statement submitted by Chairman Sires...................
3
WITNESSES
Camilleri, Michael, Director, Peter D. Bell Rule of Law Program,
Inter-American Dialogue........................................
9
Salazar, Katya, Executive Director, Due Process of Law Foundation
17
Hall, David L., Partner, Wiggin and Dana LLP.....................
24
APPENDIX
Hearing Notice...................................................
44
Hearing Minutes..................................................
45
Hearing Attendance...............................................
46
RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
Questions submitted by Chairman Sires............................
47
Questions submitted by Representative Rooney.....................
51
UNDERSTANDING ODEBRECHT: LESSONS FOR COMBATING CORRUPTION IN THE
AMERICAS
TUESDAY, MARCH 26, 2019
House of Representatives
Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere,
Civilian Security, and Trade
Committee on Foreign Affairs
Washington, DC
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
Room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Albio Sires
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Sires. Good morning, everyone. This hearing will come
to order. This hearing, titled ``Understanding Odebrecht:
Lessons for Combating Corruption in the Americas,'' will focus
on Odebrecht's regional corruption scandal and U.S. policy
options to support the fight against corruption in Latin
America. Without objection, all members may have 5 days to
submit statements, questions, extraneous materials for the
record, subject to the length limitation in the rules.
I will now make an opening statement before turning to the
ranking member for his opening statement.
Good morning, everyone. Thank you to our witnesses for
being here today for a topic that extends across much of our
hemisphere. Odebrecht is a Brazilian construction firm, but its
name has become synonymous with one of the largest global
corruption scandals in history. This web of bribery and money
laundering with Odebrecht at its center has reached at least
ten countries in the Western Hemisphere, brought down
presidents, and shaken public confidence in government
institutions.
In 2016, Odebrecht and Braskem, a petrochemical company
partly owned by Odebrecht, reached a plea deal with the U.S.
Department of Justice. Under that agreement, Odebrecht agreed
to pay at least $3.5 billion in penalties to resolve bribery
charges in the U.S., Brazil, and Switzerland. It was the
largest ever global bribery resolution in history. We know from
the agreement that Odebrecht paid nearly $800 million in bribes
from 2001 to 2016. However, this may be a low estimate.
Countries like Venezuela have stifled efforts to investigate
allegations linking government officials to corrupt payoffs.
This scandal has rocked the political system of numerous
countries including Brazil and Peru. Just last week, Brazil's
former president, Michel Temer, was arrested for accepting
bribes and campaign contributions from Odebrecht and other
firms. In Peru, virtually every major political leader has been
tarnished by Odebrecht including the last four presidents.
In this hearing, we hope to better understand how this
massive corruption scheme was executed. We will examine how
Odebrecht attempted to buy off politicians from across the
political spectrum. We will also look at how it moved money
across borders using anonymous shell companies. A harsh reality
is that dirty money from Odebrecht passed frequently through
U.S. banking and financial systems. We must examine how we can
do a better job in the future of stemming these illicit flows.
We should also take this opportunity to assess U.S. policy
and U.S. assistance programs to combat corruption in Latin
America. Many governments and civil society organizations in
the region are working hard to learn from cases like Odebrecht
and prevent this from happening again. I believe the U.S. must
be a reliable partner for those government officials seeking to
root corruption and for the local organizations seeking to
expose it.
We should identify and support those who show the courage
and political will to tackle this problem wherever it appears.
As we look to the Fiscal Year 2020 budget, it is essential that
we provide levels of foreign assistance funding that reflect
our commitment to supporting a regional fight against
corruption. We know that corruption erodes democracy,
undermines the rule of law, and breeds citizen distrust and it
is imperative that we work together to strengthen the region's
institutions.
Democracy, human rights, and the rule of law should be at
the center of our foreign policy. I look forward to hearing
from the experts with us today about further steps the U.S.
Government can take to help combat corruption in this
hemisphere.
Thank you, and I now turn to the ranking member for his
opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sires follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Rooney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Odebrecht bribery scandal is unprecedented in our
hemisphere. It uncovered a systemic level of corruption that
has reached every corner of Latin America and has led to the
arrest and investigations of hundreds of public officials and
businessmen in nearly a dozen countries. The scandal highlights
the region's ongoing struggle to combat corruption, but it also
presents an opportunity for the United States and our regional
partners to discuss meaningful public-private sector reforms
and to improve anti-corruption mechanisms and strengthen
democratic institutions.
The Odebrecht scandal was discovered through the
investigation known as Operacao Lava Jato, or Car Wash, which
was initially launched by Brazilian authorities in March 2014
to uncover corruption within Brazil's State-controlled
Petrobras oil company. Odebrecht, a Brazilian construction
company, was also discovered to be providing bribes for
preferential treatment in awarded contracts.
However, Odebrecht's corruption knew no boundaries and
extended far beyond Brazil, from Argentina to Mexico, and as
far away as Angola and Africa. Lamentably, I have personal
experience with witnessing their activities in Panama. Many
jobs that me and my partners were going to pursue like Tocumen
Airport, we dropped off as soon as Odebrecht joined the bid
list.
To date, we know that nearly 800 million in Odebrecht
bribes have been accepted by government officials and
candidates in ten Latin American nations. Through its in-house
Division of Structured Operations--that is quite a euphemism--
Odebrecht used bribes to secure construction contracts worth
over $3 billion. High-level officials have been linked to
Odebrecht scandals in Colombia, Mexico, and the Dominican
Republic, including links to former presidents and vice
presidents in Brazil, Peru, Argentina, Ecuador, and of course
Mr. Martinelli in Panama.
While no country or region of the globe is completely
immune to corruption, the Odebrecht scandal highlights the
pervasive corruption throughout Latin America which holds the
region's civil society, governments, and economies hostage.
Corruption within the government and public sector of Latin
America impedes regional growth, creates artificial economic
barriers, and erodes public confidence in democratic
institutions. Further, this corruption and its ruinous
consequences are a main driver of regional migration in the
narcotics trafficking which directly affects us here in the
United States.
While Latin America faces many challenges in rooting out
corruption, many countries in the region have provided a
framework for solutions in trying to solve their regional
corruption issues. In Brazil, Transparency International, in
consultation with public and private partners, has developed a
package of reforms to include constitutional amendments,
government institution reforms, and new rules related to
corruption. Brazil's Minister of Justice has so far
incorporated a number of these reforms into draft laws.
Similarly, Ecuador, Colombia, and Peru have all considered
anti-corruption measures in 2018.
I know that INCAE in Nicaragua and Costa Rica are working
on things in connection with many of my associates in Panama to
strengthen institutions there which suffered great debility
during the Odebrecht-Martinelli corruption times. The United
States is also providing assistance to strengthen the
institutional and technical capabilities of our regional
partners to combat corruption. The State Department is working
with the Department of Justice to implement programs such as
the Criminal Investigative Training Assistance program and the
Office of Overseas Prosecutorial Assistance and Training.
I encourage our executive agencies to continue to work
together and with our partners in Latin America to offer
training and assistance to better practices and good governance
and rule of law. I further encourage the exchange in posting of
American officials throughout the region to assist in anti-
corruption and to serve as a resource for the region's
governments, private sector, and financial institutions.
Civil society also plays a critical role in demanding
transparency and accountability in government, and I encourage
continued support for strengthening civil society's role in
fighting against corruption. I commend our friends in the
region who are taking meaningful steps in rooting out
corruption and upholding the rule of law.
I am especially encouraged by Brazil's response to the
Odebrecht scandal and by the activities that Panama is taking
to try to address the time following the Odebrecht era there,
and I support continued efforts to build off of these lessons
throughout the region. I look forward to the testimoneys and
opinions of all these important witnesses today and I want to
thank Mr. Chairman Sires for holding this hearing. I yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Congressman Rooney.
Let me introduce, first, Michael Camilleri, Director of the
Peter D. Bell Rule of Law Program at the Inter-American
Dialogue. He served from 2012 to 2017 as the Western Hemisphere
advisor on the Secretary of State's Policy Planning Staff and
as Director for Andean Affairs at the National Security
Council.
Welcome to our hearing.
We will then hear from Ms. Katya Salazar, Executive
Director at the Due Process of Law Foundation where she has
worked since 2004. Under her leadership, the Foundation created
the human rights and extractive industries program and became
involved in the defense of the inter-American system of human
rights.
Thank you.
Finally, we will hear from Mr. David L. Hall who is now a
partner at Wiggin and Dana after more than two decades as a
Federal prosecutor with the U.S. Department of Justice. At
Wiggin and Dana he advises clients concerning the Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act, the False Claims Act, and the
cybersecurity and data privacy, including assessment of
policies and procedures as well as data breach preparation and
responses.
I ask the witnesses, please, limit your testimony to 5
minutes and, without objection, your prepared written statement
would be made part of the record. Thank you so much for being
here today.
Mr. Camilleri, you have 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL CAMILLERI, DIRECTOR, PETER D. BELL RULE OF
LAW PROGRAM, INTER-AMERICAN DIALOGUE
Mr. Camilleri. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Rooney, members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. I am honored to be here.
Corruption represents an enormous obstacle to economic
development and human rights across the globe and closer to
home. It weakens democracies, facilitates drug trafficking and
organized crime, breeds extremism and unrest, and prompt mass
migration. It also creates an unlevel playing field for U.S.
businesses as the ranking member referenced.
For these reasons, I believe that combating corruption
advances the U.S. national interest and a more free, secure,
just, and peaceful hemisphere and world, and I commend the
subcommittee for convening today's hearing.
Latin America, today, is with a few notable exceptions
characterized by functional democracies. However, consolidating
the rule of law is a consuming challenge and corruption remains
pervasive. The Odebrecht case offers a singular opportunity to
understand how corruption works in Latin America, why it
happens, which countries are best equipped to combat it, and
what the U.S. Government can do to help. My written submission
to the subcommittee addresses all four of these issues in some
detail. I will focus here on the role of the U.S. Government.
First, the basics. Odebrecht admitted to the Department of
Justice that it paid $788 million in bribes in ten Latin
American and two African countries. Odebrecht's bribery was not
just widespread, it was systematic. The company's secret
Division of Structured Operations was set up specifically for
this purpose. The bribes in question were often destined for
political campaigns.
From Brazil to Mexico, Venezuela to Panama, the Odebrecht
schemes had a dual impact on citizens. Not only pilfering
public funds for private use, but also distorting electoral
processes through elicit campaign financing. The Odebrecht case
reveals a series of structural weaknesses that allow corruption
to flourish in Latin America. These include a permissive
environment characterized by lack of accountability and
specific challenges related to public contracting, campaign
finance, and the role of shell companies and offshore accounts.
The contrasting responses to the Odebrecht case are also
revealing. In some countries, presidents, ministers, and CEOs
went to jail; in others, investigations stalled. The judicial
systems that enjoyed the greatest success were characterized by
prosecutorial independence and political will, as well as
technical capacity, effective use of tools such as plea
bargaining, and a strong supportive role for civil society and
the independent media.
So what can the United States do to support Latin America's
anti-corruption fight? I will offer four recommendations based
on lessons learned from the Odebrecht case. First, strengthen
the Department of Justice's mandate and capacity to combat
foreign corruption. The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act is one of
the most underappreciated sources of U.S. soft power in Latin
America. Of course, the SFPA is designed to keep corporations
with ties to the U.S. out of the business of corruption. It
does not aim to police the conduct of foreign officials.
But when a citizen of Mexico or Argentina or Ecuador learns
from a DOJ plea agreement that Odebrecht paid tens of millions
of dollars in bribes to dirty politicians in her country, she
wants to know who was on the receiving end of those bribes. I
believe it should be the policy of the United States to help
her find out.
Second, support proven in-country accountability
mechanisms. This can be as simple as a well-timed tweet or an
appearance by the U.S. Ambassador at a high-profile trial. It
includes maintaining U.S. backing for international cooperation
mechanisms that have proven highly effective in supporting
countries with fragile judicial systems, most notably CICIG in
Guatemala. And U.S. foreign assistance programs should
prioritize support for independent journalism and civil society
watchdog groups.
Third, maximize the impact of the Global Magnitsky Act.
Staffing up the Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets
Control will help ensure that OFEC has the bandwidth to
investigate and target both corrupt foreign officials and the
networks surrounding them.
And finally, lead by example. The U.S. leads best in our
hemisphere when we lead by example. Unfortunately, in the past
year, the United States dropped out of the top 20 countries on
Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index. One
specific way in which the United States can do more here at
home is by improving beneficial ownership transparency so that
shell companies cannot be used to launder dirty money through
the U.S. financial system.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify on this
crucial issue. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Camilleri follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Ms. Salazar?
STATEMENT OF KATYA SALAZAR, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, DUE PROCESS OF
LAW FOUNDATION
Ms. Salazar. Thank you very much. Good morning and thank
you again, Chairman Sires, Ranking Member Rooney, and members
of the subcommittee for inviting me to testify this morning.
As it was mentioned, the Odebrecht case represents maybe
the largest transnational bribery scheme ever uncovered in
Latin America. The case was a difficult blow for Latin America
democracies and a challenge for its judicial institutions which
were not well prepared to investigate and prosecute cases of
this magnitude. But it was also important because it allowed us
to understand how sophisticated criminal organizations operate
in the 21st century.
Latin America has robust international and national legal
frameworks to combat corruption, so how could the Odebrecht
scheme operate successfully for so many years? I will now
present some lessons learned and recommendations arising out of
this case.
First, a strong legal framework alone is insufficient and
State institutions must be able, in practice, to address the
challenges presented by grand corruption, which means adapting
institutional designs, policies, and methodologies to new
realities, the realities of the criminal organizations in the
21st century.
Second, judges and prosecutors in charge of these cases
must be able to carry out their work with autonomy and free
from undue interference either external or internal from within
their own institutions. And this is still one of the most
common problems in Latin America especially for highly
sensitive cases.
Third, the modus operandi that has been brought to light by
the Odebrecht case shows that large corruption networks seek to
control criminal investigations against them and thereby
guarantee impunity for their illicit actions through the
control of high-level justice sector authorities especially
Attorneys General and the high courts. To this end, and this is
very important, such networks exert their influence on the
appointment mechanism of these officials which is much easier
to do when the designations are in the hands of the political
powers and have little transparency and citizen participation
as counterbalance.
In this context, I would like to emphasize the role of the
Attorney General as a figure of fundamental importance in the
fight against corruption in Latin America. It is, the Attorney
General, it is an official with significant power, but also one
extremely vulnerable on the face of influence of people and
groups interested in shielding themselves from prosecution. In
Latin America, most prosecutors are independent from the
executive branch, but aside from--at least in theory. But aside
from a few exceptions, the President and the Congress still
have the almost exclusive power to appoint and remove the
Attorney General.
Again, with few safeguards to counterbalance this power,
these decisions could be--and in many cases are--arbitrary and
motivated by reasons other than strengthening the rule of law.
The aforementioned does not discount the need for international
support mechanisms to tackle grand corruption as occurred in
Guatemala and Honduras with CICIG and MACCIH, where there have
been successes, but where the resilience of corrupt networks
and their capacity to respond aggressively when their interests
are at risk has also been put on display.
Although there are many more lessons to be learned from
this case, I have focused my comments on the role on the
judicial systems, because in my opinion the best deterrent to
the commission of corruption crimes is the successful
prosecution of high-profile cases involving high ranking
authorities.
A few broad ideas about what the U.S. can do to support the
fight against corruption in Latin America. First, through its
foreign assistance, the U.S. Government should prioritize
programs that support judicial independence, especially those
oriented toward improving selection processes of high-level
judicial authorities. U.S. diplomacy should also play a role in
monitoring and making public statements on these issues when
needed like it has done in Guatemala and in El Salvador.
Furthermore, the U.S. should continue supporting
investigative journalism in Latin America as well as civil
society organizations throughout the region, leading the
investigation of corruption cases, monitoring selection
processes of high-level judicial authorities, and promoting
institutional reforms.
Finally, the U.S. must pay attention to the role of
campaign financing and support strategic reforms in Latin
America. True campaign finance reform is needed in the region
to avoid repeating the history of Odebrecht. Thank you very
much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Salazar follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Mr. Hall, 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF DAVID HALL, PARTNER, WIGGIN AND DANA LLP
Mr. Hall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Sires, Ranking
Member Rooney, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to appear today.
On December 21st, 2016, Odebrecht and its petrochemical
unit Braskem each entered a guilty plea to one count of
conspiracy to violate the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. The
U.S. Government estimated that Odebrecht conspired to pay
approximately $788 million in bribes in association with more
than a hundred construction projects in 12 countries, mostly in
Latin America.
The global investigation of this scheme has ensnared almost
a third of Brazil's government ministers, two former presidents
of Brazil, two former presidents of Peru, a vice president of
Ecuador, and many, many others. This conspiracy is nothing
short of astonishing in scale. If somebody wrote a movie about
it, I would not believe it. And it is not a one-off event and
it did not result from the actions of a few rogue employees or
officials. It could hardly have been more systematic and
sustained.
The company, Odebrecht, actually created a bribery
department, which was known as the Division of Structured
Operations, for the specific purpose of operating the corrupt
scheme and laundering money. The scheme came to light in 2014
after allegations of money laundering revealed that money
dealers operating out of gas stations and car washes were
working on behalf of an executive at Petrobras, the Brazilian
petroleum corporation.
Brazilian law enforcement initiated Operation Car Wash and
discovered that Petrobras directors had been overpaying on
contracts in order to fund kickbacks that were then deposited
into a secret slush fund. This slush fund was used, in turn, to
bribe politicians. Significantly, and unlike many FCPA cases
prosecuted in the United States, this case originated from an
investigation that began outside the United States by non-U.S.
authorities.
In the past, the U.S. often stood alone in its anti-
corruption efforts, and as a result, other nations did not
enforce similarly robust anti-corruption laws. Some believed
that the FCPA placed U.S. companies at a disadvantage in global
commerce compared to international competitors that were not
similarly constrained in behavior and did not operate under the
financial burden of FCPA compliance and recordkeeping
requirements.
All this might be changing. The Odebrecht case itself
implies as much given the extensive and effective anti-
corruption effort displayed by a magnitude of foreign nations.
If these trends continue, it is good news for U.S. business
operating on a global playing field because that playing field
might become more level.
There is much that the United States can do to take
advantage of this momentum. For one thing, it can continue
enforcing the FCPA against foreign corporations as well as
domestic ones. But the degree of difficulty faced by U.S.
enforcement and regulators in investigating conspiracies on
foreign soil is very high. This is why it is so important that
foreign governments are increasing their efforts in anti-
corruption enforcement.
The United States can directly assist foreign authorities
in anti-corruption investigations and enforcement, and the best
way to do this is to have U.S. investigators and prosecutors on
the ground in foreign countries developing relationships with
their foreign counterparts. This sort of integration can be
accomplished by expanding the scope of attache programs such as
those at the Justice Department, the FBI, and the Department of
Homeland Security, as well as expanding the scope of other
programs including State Department programs that have already
been mentioned.
The United States has long been at the forefront of
prosecuting anti-corruption cases and is now presented with a
new opportunity to partner effectively with foreign governments
in enforcing anti-corruption laws. Thus, the Odebrecht case
might, with a little luck, portend the beginning of more
effective and more fair global anti-corruption law enforcement.
Thank you very much for your attention and I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of David Hall follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Hall.
Before we question, I would like to recognize the former
chairman of the Western Hemisphere Subcommittee, Connie Mack,
who is in the audience today. We worked very well together when
he was chairman, from Florida.
You know, this is a topic of interest to me for many years,
the corruption in the Western Hemisphere. I really think that
some of these countries have been set back for so many years
because of the constant corruption that you read about it. So,
when I came to Congress and tried to encourage attention to the
Western Hemisphere and tried to encourage people to have money
to help some of these countries because they really do need it,
the question of corruption always surfaces.
Why should we give money to countries that are so corrupt
that the money that we give them may not go to the initial plan
that we originally want it to? And, you know, it is a tough
question to ask when you try to increase funding for these
countries, and then we have this huge corruption case with
Odebrecht.
Mr. Camilleri, I am interested in how these bribes made it
through the banking of the United States and how was it that
they were able to do this and it took us so long to pick up on
this. Can you answer that?
Mr. Camilleri. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
your longstanding interest and concern for this issue and for
convening the hearing.
There were, within the Odebrecht conspiracy, acts that took
place on U.S. soil. Those included meetings of Odebrecht
executives. It included money that found its way into our
financial system. Odebrecht, however, was pretty systematic
about how it used this Division of Structured Operations to
have the bribes paid and did things, for example, like
acquiring a bank on a small Caribbean island which it used in
order to deposit many of these payments into the bank accounts
affiliated with the corrupt politicians they were looking to
pay off.
So while some of the money did find its way into the U.S.,
much of it was routed elsewhere. The issue that I mentioned in
my testimony is an important one. Beneficial ownership
transparency is critical to allowing the law enforcement to
scrutinize these financial flows, and it will, I think, just as
importantly put the United States in a much stronger position
to then go to other countries where this sort of thing is
happening and ask them to take the same steps that keep shell
companies, in order to keep shell companies from being used as
a route for illicit financial movements.
Mr. Sires. Thank you. I am concerned that this
administration and previous administrations really did not
speak up strongly enough on some of these issues in some of
these countries.
For example, Ms. Salazar, can you speak to the fact that
CICIG was kind of pushed out of Guatemala and what are the
repercussions of that?
Ms. Salazar. Well, thank you. This is a very important
question, Mr. Sires, because CICIG was a very important
institution, not just for Guatemala but for the whole region
for two main reasons. First of all, because it helped Guatemala
to uncover these criminal organizations networks and how they
operated, but they also showed the region that it is possible
to do something to fight against corruption, to prosecute the
corrupt.
From the perspective of a Latin American expert on judicial
reform, I have to say that I felt very disappointed for the
decision of the U.S. Government to, you know, not give an
unconditional support to CICIG. It was really sad.
As you know, the head of the CICIG is living in New York
right now and the CICIG will finish its mandate at the end of
the year. And we expect that the U.S. Government can reflect
about the lessons learned of the CICIG because there are other
similar initiatives moving around the region. In Ecuador, the
President of Ecuador, for example, has offered to create a
similar institution. In El Salvador, the new President has
offered to create also a kind of CICIG.
So I think it is important to take seriously the lessons
learned from the CICIG and support it. In general,
international corporation to combat corruption is a good idea.
The bad idea is like thinking that there is a one-size-fits-all
method, because we need to analyze what are the particularities
of each country. But I think with all due respect that the U.S.
Government should support these kinds of initiatives which
bring international support to our countries.
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
I now recognize the ranking member, Congressman Rooney.
Mr. Rooney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, I have been
doing business around the world since 1975 in my family
companies and when the FCPA came in we did not think much of
it. It added a lot of complexity to our work in many parts of
the world, but I have got to tell you, reading this stuff and
hearing this testimony and watching the Odebrecht thing impact
in Latin America, makes me really appreciate one of the
subsidiary roles of the FCPA was to attack the culture of
corruption. Not just specific instances, but the culture of
corruption.
And I just wonder, Mr. Hall and Mr. Camilleri, you know,
Brazil is known for the jeito and the culture of corruption and
how does that kind of culture contribute to what Odebrecht did
and some of their competitors, who I am not going to mention
right now, and how will that culture impede the Brazilian
Government's efforts to improve things now?
Mr. Hall. Thank you, Mr. Rooney.
I think it is clear that a culture of corruption is what
leads to the criminal behavior. And in the case of Brazil, I
would say that the Odebrecht case, what we have learned about
that one conspiracy, the part that is public so far,
demonstrates that that does exist. I think that one of the--and
I say this as sort of a law enforcement traditionalist--is that
one of the positive effects from law enforcement actions like
this, and particularly effective multilateral law enforcement
actions like this, is to create a deterrent effect and to
change the standard.
The problem with the culture of corruption is that it
corrodes standards. It lowers them and it makes it seem OK to
do things that people individually might understand is not the
right thing to do, but it is the easy thing to do and I am
probably going to get away with it. When law enforcement is
effective in holding people to a higher standard or holding
companies and institutions and government agencies and
government officers to a higher standard, it creates a
deterrent but it also creates an incentive to hit that higher
standard.
Mr. Rooney. Thank you, Mr. Hall.
Mr. Camilleri?
Mr. Camilleri. Thank you, Congressman. The Odebrecht case
could only have happened in a culture of pervasive corruption.
You only set up a dedicated bribe unit and pay hundreds of
millions of dollars of bribes if you are pretty sure you can
get away with it. This was not something that was exceptional
that was a case of a few bad apples in the company. It was
something that was premeditated, structured, systematic.
So, I think your question goes to the heart of what the
case revealed. In terms of how it might be changing, I think,
and very much consistent with what Mr. Hall said, first of all,
incentives are changing. The very fact that this case exists
and the fact that prosecutors in many countries, not all in
Latin America, have sort of taken up what the DOJ did and
pursued the cases at the local level, creates a different set
of incentives, so that is positive.
We have heard anecdotally that business culture may be
changing in some places, that the sting of the Odebrecht case
is being felt and that the business community is pushing back
against being shaken down for bribes. I think we will have to
see on that, but it is positive that noises are being heard.
And then the other piece of this obviously is political
policy reform that is the preventive strengthening the
frameworks and the enforcement mechanisms, and Katya spoke to
this. I think, there, it is going to be more challenging,
frankly. In Brazil, the current Justice Minister is former
Judge Moro. He was kind of the hero of the Odebrecht case, the
Lava Jato case at the local level. He has already had to water
down the set of anti-corruption reforms that he presented to
Congress because it is very hard it turns out to get the folks
who are part of the system to then reform that system.
So I think there is positive news, but also some wait and
see and a lot we need to do to kind of stay on this issue.
Mr. Rooney. Thank you.
Can I have one more little bit?
To followup on what Mr. Hall and you said as well, Mr.
Hall, about the--you mentioned DOS and DOJ programs. How would
you assess the level of cooperation across the different
programs in the U.S. Government and what things have been most
effective?
Mr. Hall. Of course I can only speak from my experience,
and I should point out that I did retire from the government 5
years ago so maybe it is a little dated, but I did serve for 23
years. I had a lot of experience with international
investigations and, generally speaking, I would describe the
programs really as nascent. There are programs in place. I have
seen them work very effectively in terms of training, in terms
of advice.
What I think we can do better is to actually integrate our,
you know, operations with foreign law enforcement in a more
sustained way than we do right now. Right now, based on my
experience, it is very ad hoc. So, my experience would be I
would have an investigation into a transnational crime and I
would, you know, basically establish a bilateral relationship
with a counterpart in a foreign country and we would try to
work together using, you know, our different sets of laws and
try to merge them so that we could, you know, work effectively
together.
But it really was very ad hoc and, essentially, I was
talking to a stranger. I was trying to make friends but we did
not really know each other. What would be better would be to
have more attaches on the ground, because the job of an attache
is to establish those kinds of relationships so that when a
field prosecutor like me shows up and says, here is what I want
to do, the attache knows who to call.
And I have seen that work well where there are attaches and
particularly where there are good ones who really do have those
kinds of relationships and really can make that work.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Hall.
Congressman Espaillat.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member.
So Brazil, Venezuela, the Dominican Republic, Panama,
Angola and Argentina, Ecuador, Peru, Guatemala, Colombia,
Mexico, Mozambique, and several other countries that allegedly
have been involved in this major scandal. My first question is,
are there any--Mr. Hall, this is to you. Are there any current
prosecutions, open prosecutions in the U.S. Federal system of
cases, directly connected to the Odebrecht case?
Mr. Hall. Since I am no longer with the government I do not
actually know the answer to that authoritatively. My
understanding is the answer to that is yes, is that the
investigation is continuing. I am confident that--with what we
have just seen with, you know, recent events in Brazil--that
the investigation certainly is continuing overseas and my
understanding is that it is here too.
Mr. Espaillat. So here in the U.S. circuits of Federal
courts there are open investigations?
Mr. Hall. Yes. And not anything that is charged, but my
understanding is that the investigation does continue.
Mr. Espaillat. OK. My second question is we have seen what
has happened with CICIG and MACCIH. Ms. Salazar, there seems to
be a resistance in Latin America, because of the history of
Latin America, outside groups coming in to tell locals what to
do. I happen to think that in some of those countries there are
many good people in the civil society that want to battle and
combat corruption, nonpartisan people, people of goodwill, good
government folks that want to really combat corruption.
Do you have like a model, is there a model that functions
sort of like outside of the CICIG/MACCIH structure that
involves local people that could be impartial and really have
ownership and skin in the game to combat corruption like the
Odebrecht corruption in these countries?
Ms. Salazar. Yes, Mr. Espaillat. And, actually, there are
different models that can be used to support a particular
country using international law and international mechanisms.
CICIG and MACCIH are just one more, but there are many others
promoted by United Nations, by the Organizations of American
States, which includes a different level of international
personnel and international law or international mechanisms
involvements. For example----
Mr. Espaillat. But what about locally, because I think
that----
Ms. Salazar. Yes.
Mr. Espaillat [continuing]. People see international
entities or folks from outside the country as interventionists
in some way. But I feel that in those countries there are good
people that want to battle corruption. Is there a model that
will bring in good folks that will combat----
Ms. Salazar. Well--I am sorry. Actually, in CICIG and
MACCIH there are many local people. Not all of them are
foreigners. So I mean, I do not think, I mean the leaders, the
heads of the institutions----
Mr. Espaillat. Right. The leadership, right.
Ms. Salazar. The leadership maybe are people from other
countries, but there are many locals in the institutions. But
what I wanted to say again there are different models. There is
not just one model that we need to apply. For example, and this
is connected with what Mr. Hall say, there are countries where,
you know, their general prosecutors' offices have been opened
to receive international cooperation, international legal
assistance, people from abroad but work with the local.
Mr. Espaillat. Yes, but usually those local prosecutors'
office are appointed by the local government and they may
themselves be involved in corruption. But what about having an
entity, an impartial nonpartisan entity in a--is there anything
that works out there?
Ms. Salazar. For me, CICIG has worked.
Mr. Espaillat. OK.
Ms. Salazar. For me, for example, the International
Commission of Human Rights belonging to the Organization of
American States has an initiative called Grupo de Expertos,
group of experts, and they have created this group of experts
to send to Nicaragua and to Mexico----
Mr. Espaillat. OK.
Ms. Salazar [continuing]. To analyze the case of the 43
students disappeared. These initiatives were a kind of
combination----
Mr. Espaillat. I see, thank you.
Ms. Salazar [continuing]. And they work also.
Mr. Espaillat. I have one last question for Mr. Hall. You
mentioned there was a bribery department, right, sort of like
structure for this. Where was this department and who headed
it?
Mr. Hall. It was a department of Odebrecht and it was
literally created for the purpose of organizing in a corporate
way the payment of----
Mr. Espaillat. Where was it based, yes?
Mr. Hall. I believe in Brazil.
Mr. Espaillat. And who headed it?
Mr. Hall. I do not know the answer to that.
Mr. Espaillat. OK. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sires. Congressman from Florida, Ted Yoho.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for being
here, I appreciate it.
And to me it is fascinating to see the level of corruption
around the world, and I think a universal truth is all
governments are made up of people one way or another and
whenever people are involved there is always a level of
corruption involved. And we can look at our own government in
our own country, so we are not excluded from that. And it is
just, the sad thing to me is that it robs the individuals in
those countries of the resources of that nation, whether it is
Maduro in Venezuela or in this case in Brazil, and I look over
the years the level of corruption that goes on.
And I read an article yesterday in the Wall Street Journal.
It says since Brazil's return to democracy in 1985 after a
military dictatorship, four of the eight presidents who took
office have now fallen afoul of the country's law, either
impeached for misconduct or arrested after leaving office. Mr.
Temer's arrest is further evidence of a crisis in Brazilian
democracy according to Marcelo Freixo, a Member of Congress for
the left-wing Socialism and Liberty Party.
This is what I find interesting and I want to ask you if
this is just the way business is. We cannot celebrate the
arrest of another former president, he said. Corruption is
structural and is embedded in the relationships between our
institution. And I ask you, is this truly the norm for Latin
America, Asia, Africa, or even the U.S.?
Mr. Camilleri? Excuse me.
Mr. Camilleri. Fourth time lucky, thank you, Congressman.
Corruption certainly was structural in Brazil. I think that is
what this case among others revealed. I think that has to do
with different issues, some having to do with accountability
and some having to do with the particular kind of coalition
Presidential system that the Brazilians have, where essentially
presidents are very weak and have to cobble together
legislative majorities among a dozen or more parties and at
first pork and later corruption became the currency with which
they were able to govern.
And so there are some structural things that are particular
to Brazil that will make it difficult for them to root out this
problem and I think that is what the article you are
referencing was----
Mr. Yoho. It is. I mean we can look at JBS. I got pulled
into this to the largest meat producers in the world. They got
slapped with a $3.2 billion fine for paying hundreds of
millions of dollars out in bribes.
In your statement you said the World Bank calls corruption
public enemy No. 1 for the developing world. The United Nations
observes that corruption represents an enormous obstacle to the
realization of human rights and that unchecked it can undermine
the functioning and legitimacy of institutions, the rule of
law, and ultimately the State itself. And I see it as a cancer
that just erodes society, it robs people of the wealth of a
country that should be propelling society.
So, my question for the panel is, No. 1, can you point out
any examples where U.S. support has led to progress in
addressing anti-corruption in the region? And we will focus on
Latin America. Ms. Salazar?
Ms. Salazar. OK. OK, two things. I want to start saying two
things. First of all, when I, when we, or at least when I talk
about corrupt institutions in Latin America, I mean in general
it is true, but in particular we need to see each country and
each particularities. I mean, I do believe that there are
countries where in spite the whole institution could be, you
know, people not corrupted but attacked by corruption. There
are like good people----
Mr. Yoho. Sure.
Ms. Salazar [continuing]. --champions, I mean good people
working to fight against corruption, so I think we need to
support or you need to support these groups. And this is
something that we have seen, for example----
Mr. Yoho. Let me ask you this, how do you support those?
Are you familiar with MCC, the Millennium Challenge
Corporation?
Ms. Salazar. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Yoho. You know, they go in and they have a set of
metrics that they measure a country.
Ms. Salazar. Yes.
Mr. Yoho. I propose that we do trade that way. We trade
with countries, we set up a metric. Countries at the very top
that fall in alignment with America, not us dictating to them,
but if they fall up here, they get the best trade deals.
Countries that are below get a little bit less trade deal. They
can always aspire to get to the other level, and that is the
only way I can see that we can do that.
But in doing that we have to make sure we are following the
rules the way we are supposed to. I would love to go on, but I
am out of time. Thank you for being here.
Mr. Sires. Congressman Vargas.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you for holding this hearing. And also, the ranking member,
thank you. Especially, thanks to the people that are here with
us today especially the presenters.
Mr. Camilleri, you said that it is hard to get people that
are part of the system to reform that system. As you know,
Andres Manuel Lopez Obredor, AMLO, in Mexico, was recently
elected President. He ran on an anti-corruption platform. That
was going to be and is what he is attempting to do.
And a number of us were able to go down to his inauguration
and he basically said, you know, if we can stop corruption in
this country, we can do all sorts of things for the country and
quite aggressively propose the future for Mexico. What do you
think of Mexico and what is going on there with the programs
that he has instituted or he is attempting to institute and how
do you think that is going to work out? Because he was not
part, I would say he was not part of the people he was trying
to get in, obviously, but he was not part of that system.
Mr. Camilleri. Thank you, Congressman.
I think you are right about that. AMLO is somebody who is
viewed by the Mexican people as having a level of personal
rectitude that is pretty unique in that political system. That
gives him a real platform to take on this issue and I think it
is right to say that the backlash against corruption was one of
the things that most drove his successful election campaign.
I think what has been perhaps concerning is that it is not
clear what the institutional kind of approach to combating
corruption will be from his government. That is, having this
momentum, having this platform, having the personal legitimacy
that he brings to the issue, what is he going to do with that?
This is not going to be a case where the fact that the
president is not a crook is enough to make, you know, every
last cop in Mexico honest, right. You are going to have to do
some things at a structural level starting with, for example,
and DPLF has done a lot of work on this, bringing greater
independence to the public prosecutor's office. And those sorts
of things----
Mr. Vargas. He has proposed a number of these measures. I
think that you probably have seen them in his inauguration. I
do not know if he is going to follow through, but he certainly
did propose them.
Mr. Camilleri. Yes, I think we are waiting to see. I mean I
have met with his minister who is sort of running this file. I
think their diagnosis of the situation is accurate. I think
they are well meaning, but they have been a little bit slow out
of the gate, to be honest, in terms of actually putting in
place a program to weed out corruption in the country. It is
early, but we will have to wait and see.
Mr. Vargas. Before my time runs out, I have to do ask this
and I would be remiss if I did not. I am a former Jesuit. I was
in the Jesuits for about 5 years. And Nicaragua, right now, has
an incredible problem with the President there and some of the
corruption, and in particular I fear for the life of Chepe
Idiaquez. He is director of the Jesuit university there, UCA,
because he is standing up to the corruption.
Can anyone comment about what is going on in Nicaragua, and
again in particular this priest who I think has been very brave
to stand up to the corruption that he sees.
Mr. Hall, would you like to handle that one if you can, and
then we will go to Ms. Salazar. If you have information, go
ahead.
Mr. Hall. I do not think I am the right person to answer
that.
Mr. Vargas. OK, Ms. Salazar?
Ms. Salazar. Yes. Well, the situation in Nicaragua is very
complicated and somehow, you know, from my opinion, from my
point of view, what we have seen last year in Nicaragua, I mean
cities movilizations and the people killed, detained, political
detentions, and so on and so forth, are the result of a process
of 20 years of co-option of the government institutions.
From my perspective, from the work I do, I feel somehow
guilty for not being able to say something before, because now
all institutions are corrupted by the political power and it is
going to take time to find, I mean to enter into a transition
process. I think this is what this country needs, a transition
process to go through accountability and institutional reforms.
Mr. Vargas. Well, thank you. And again, I want to mention
again the priest's name is Father Chepe Idiaquez. He has been
threatened many times. The university has been harassed, has
been attacked. I want to make sure that we keep him and the
university in our mind when we speak about this issue. I hope
he was not one of the people that has been killed, because a
number of people have been killed. So again, I would mention
his name, Chepe Idiaquez, the Society of Jesus, the rector of
the UCA. Thank you.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Congressman.
Congressman Levin.
Mr. Levin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Camilleri, when it comes to the U.S. role in fighting
corruption both our actions and our words matter, yet, at
times, the Trump administration has been inconsistent in
speaking out about corruption in the Americas. The
administration has been relatively quiet about the efforts by
Guatemalan President Jimmy Morales to undermine the U.S.
supported, U.N. supported International Commission against
Impunity in Guatemala, or CICIG, particularly while it
investigates corruption within Mr. Morales' own administration.
Last month, Foreign Policy reported, quote, that over the
past 2 years, the Trump administration's political appointees
have worked to undermine a highly regarded U.N. anti-corruption
commission in Guatemala, one that has uncovered alleged illegal
campaign contributions to Morales as well as allegations of
corruption by his brother and son.
Foreign Policy also reported that following a March 2018
trip to Guatemala, then U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations,
Nikki Haley, began pushing for the U.S. to end its financial
support for CICIG. Yet months earlier, Haley argued in an op-
ed, quote, corruption spurs revolutions, enables extremist
groups, and fuels civil wars. Combating corruption is not just
about good governance, it is about maintaining peace and
security. What do you think accounts for this inconsistency
from the Trump administration?
Mr. Camilleri. Congressman, I honestly do not know, but I
am glad you raised it. CICIG, in my view, has been the most
successful innovation in anti-corruption policy and law,
certainly in the 15 years that I have been working on legal and
policy issues in the hemisphere. It has also been----
Mr. Levin. Most important in the hemisphere or most
important in Guatemala?
Mr. Camilleri. In the hemisphere, certainly in Guatemala.
Mr. Levin. And why, expand on that. What is so great about
CICIG?
Mr. Camilleri. CICIG took an extremely fragile judicial
system with almost absolute impunity for the powerful with high
degrees of penetration and cooption, intimidation by organized
crime, and turned it into a place where not only was that
impunity broken, Guatemalan democracy quite literally was saved
on a couple of occasions by CICIG. Presidents, vice presidents,
ministers started going to jail. And I think, most importantly,
the courageous Guatemalans who were always there, the Attorney
Generals Claudia Paz, Thelma Aldana, were able to do their
work.
I think what we discovered when you put CICIG in the
country and you gave them sort of this blanket of protection
was that Guatemalans are capable, they are courageous, they
just need to be in an environment where everything they are
doing is not being leaked to organized crime and their families
aren't being intimidated and they are being forced into exile.
And so CICIG was a gamechanger. It was also something that
had strong bipartisan support. It was created during the George
W. Bush Administration.
Mr. Levin. Right.
Mr. Camilleri. Supported through the Obama Administration,
supported at the beginning of the Trump administration.
Secretary Tillerson gave a speech in Austin in which he praised
CICIG. So, it came as a, I would say not just a surprise, but
sort of a devastating blow to those of us who work on this
issue to see the Trump administration in some respects turn its
back on CICIG.
Mr. Levin. And do you think President Morales has felt
emboldened by the Trump administration's tepid response to his
actions?
Mr. Camilleri. There is no question in my mind. I will say
the Trump administration's broader policy in Guatemala in the
last couple of months has seemed to find its footing again, so
the administration's stance on the revival of an amnesty law
for war-related crimes has been good and some of its statements
on election-related issues have also been good.
The decision to, on the jeeps that were misused to
intimidate CICIG and other Guatemalan organizations and
institutions, again I think the administration is coming to a
better place on some of those broader rule of law issues in
Guatemala, but certainly on CICIG it was not just
disappointing, but emboldening as you said for Jimmy Morales in
his campaign to save his own skin by going after CICIG.
Mr. Levin. All right.
Well, I have just a little time left. Ms. Salazar, let me
bring you in to this. Given this idea about the Guatemalans own
capacity being freed here, what is your idea about how
different countries have prosecuted or not prosecuted
corruption cases? Is it differences in legal framework? Does
the U.S. have a big role to play or the U.N. in helping empower
countries?
Ms. Salazar. As I was saying before, I think that--I mean
in general judicial institutions in Latin America are weak, but
in particular if you analyze country by country there are good
people working in good institutions. I mean it is possible to
identify particular areas, divisions worth it to support. Maybe
it sounds strange, but, for example, this is what happened in
Peru. There is a huge corruption scandal, not necessarily the
Odebrecht case but a similar one, and because of this case the
general prosecutor had to resign. But there is still a group
within the general prosecutor's office investigating the
Odebrecht case and investigating it really good. I mean,
really, they are doing a great job. So this is my first idea.
And the second idea is in terms of prosecution for the
Odebrecht case there are differences in countries. I would say
that countries that have done more have been Brazil and Peru
and the countries that have done less are of course Venezuela
and Mexico, unfortunately Mexico. Yes, they have done almost
anything.
Mr. Levin. Thank you.
Sorry to go over, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Sires. Congressman Gonzalez.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
panel for being here with us today. I am going to continue
asking a couple of questions that Congressman Espaillat and
Congressman Levin talked about, which in particular is with, in
Guatemala. And I am very interested in Guatemala because I
think the idea of CICIG is a great idea, but there are some
issues that concern me. But I think it is a great idea that we
have a group that is internal in a country and is on the ground
fighting corruption on a daily basis.
My concern is, what Department of Justice supervision do we
have on CICIG, if at all? That could be to anyone on the panel
who wants to take that question. Mr. Hall might know about
that.
Mr. Hall. I do not know authoritatively. My understanding
is that it is not a Department of Justice program so it is not
supported directly in the way that other more bilateral
programs might be.
Mr. Gonzalez. That is my understanding as well. So how do
we measure the accountability of CICIG? Does anybody know how
much has been spent on that group in the last 10 years?
Mr. Camilleri. Congressman, that information is public but
I do not have it in front of me.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes. Well, it is about $168 million. That is
a lot of money. And I see what the Department of Justice could
do with a $168 million just in a small, you know, in the
southern district of Texas where I practice law, and they would
have a lot of arrests and convictions. And I know they did a
great job at the beginning with Otto Perez and that
organization that was severely corrupt and I am sure we are far
from where we need to be.
But my only concern is that I feel the Department of
Justice should be more involved in overseeing what is happening
in Guatemala and in particular with CICIG. At the end of the
day I know, and by no means am I giving President Morales or
the Government of Guatemala a pass on anything, but it is
concerning that we have an international organization in that
group with complete immunity, if I am correct. If I am not
correct, please correct me, right--with complete immunity, with
high investment both American and international, and it seems
like we do not have milestones that we could measure that that
investment is a good investment.
And I just could tell you, you know, just looking at what
we do in the Department of Justice in one area with $168
million, it seems that we would have a massive result from
that. And I do not see--I did see some great results at the
beginning, but it seemed to have kind of taken a huge dip. And
I know that at the end of the day the President was, the
President's brother and son had some issues. Can you tell me
anything about that?
Ms. Salazar. I agree with you, Congressman Gonzalez, about
the accountability thing. I really do think, I think all
institutions need to be accountable for the work they do and
the money they receive, either State money or private money.
This is clear. I do not know the details about the
accountability mechanisms of CICIG where, but I agree totally
with you that they need to be accountable for the way they have
spent their money. But on the other side, I have to address the
great work that the CICIG has done.
Mr. Gonzalez. Do you know--excuse me for interrupting. Do
you know why, what are the issues that concern the President's
brother and son that they got caught up in a corruption scandal
in Guatemala? Does anybody here know the details of that?
Ms. Salazar. Well, they were of course they did not like
what CICIG was doing because in one of the----
Mr. Gonzalez. But do you know what they are being accused
of?
Ms. Salazar. I do not remember. Illegal finance?
Mr. Gonzalez. OK, that is political. That is the President.
Ms. Salazar. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. I am talking about the son and the brother.
Ms. Salazar. I do not remember. I do not remember.
Mr. Gonzalez. OK. I have done a little bit of research on
this and it had to do with $10,000 worth of gift baskets.
Ms. Salazar. Oh, OK. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Which is quite shocking. And I have no
problem, you know, anybody who commits a crime should pay for
it and deal with it, but I have huge issue. I know we barged
into that Presidential palace with cameras and machine guns to
arrest a kid who had been going to school here in the United
States that came down to face the consequences, and I just
think that CICIG when they did that, really, I think it hurt
their credibility.
And I am not talking about Guatemala, because what other
country--I thought that was a great model to take to other
countries in Central America and Mexico and South America. But
how are we ever going to get them to accept that program when
they see that type of abuse in places like Guatemala?
Ms. Salazar. I accept that, you know, if this is the case,
I will agree with you that maybe it was a mistake in the
strategy to select the case. But I would not think that this
decision, this maybe bad decision would, you know, nullify or
would, you know, disappear all that important things that the
CICIG has done.
Mr. Gonzalez. I agree with that.
Ms. Salazar. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. I agree with that. At the beginning I think
they did a great job, but I do feel that something went off
track at some point. And, you know, I think that maybe the U.N.
should have gotten involved at that point and maybe changed the
leadership or something to save the integrity of CICIG and to
allow an organization like that to be acceptable to other
essential American countries or Latin American countries. And I
am particularly bothered that the Department of Justice plays a
very little role in that group.
Ms. Salazar. If you allow me to say, if that happen I would
agree with you that you need to do more oversight about CICIG's
activity.
Mr. Gonzalez. So who would do that?
Ms. Salazar. I would agree with that. But again, on the
other hand, we need to preserve the institution. We need to
preserve the initiative because, you know, if you see in other
countries in the region, they are asking for a CICIG, because
in many countries State institutions are corrupted by the
political power and the criminal organizations.
Mr. Gonzalez. I agree. But who would supervise CICIG?
OK, I yield back. You can answer that later.
Mr. Sires. I gave you a minute and a half.
Congressman Phillips.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and to our panel.
I would like to move to a little bit more macro level and
discuss for a moment how we measure corruption, how we best
measure corruption and how we provide incentives to combat
corruption. So, turning to the former, I would welcome each of
your thoughts on using the Corruption Perceptions Index as a
real measure of corruption and if there are some alternatives
that we should be considering.
Mr. Camilleri. Congressman, thank you. So, corruption is
notoriously hard to measure which is probably why you are
asking the question. Asking experts is the CPI, the Corruption
Perception Index does is one method, another is to ask citizens
themselves their experience, so, you know, have you paid a
bribe in the last 6 months, in the last year. Those capture
slightly different things. One is more about petty corruption,
the other is about grand corruption.
I think the CPI is probably the best thing we have. I do
not think it means that we can take a country that is 67th on
the list and say it is doing better than a country that is 68th
on the list. You know, it is more, you know, it helps us kind
of spot general trends and place countries comparatively in
broader terms. But certainly, you know, we do have a challenge
in terms of accurately measuring corruption.
Mr. Phillips. OK. Thank you.
Ms. Salazar.
Ms. Salazar. Yes, briefly. Yes, I agree with Michael, it is
very difficult to measure corruption. For me as a lawyer, I am
not a political scientist, but as a lawyer I think that, you
know, if you find high level corruption cases with no
prosecution or with high levels of impunity, well, for me in
this country the problem of corruption is very high.
But I want to--two things. One is that, I mean why
Odebrecht happened and these kinds of cases happened, the
Odebrecht case I think it found a very particular context in
the region because we went through during the last 20 years, 15
years in Latin America, we went through a crisis of political
parties. Our traditional political parties lost trust from the
public and this is why appear many new political parties, the
small ones who need money. They needed money to do their
campaigns and this is where Odebrecht appeared, so two needs
found each other and I think it was a great context for
Odebrecht to have a success.
And the second thing is that for me, the main sign that the
anti-corruption movement or anti-corruption measures are having
success is seeing that high level authorities are prosecuted
and are imprisoned. This is the best example that you can have
in any Latin American countries as a deterrent for corruption.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you.
Mr. Hall.
Mr. Hall. I have already made it clear that I am an
advocate for deterrence so that is why I agree with Ms.
Salazar's comment. I also think that perception does matter. I
mean, I analogize it to the organized crime in Philadelphia
where I am from and the effect of organized, the pernicious
effect of organized crime often was overlooked in press
coverage of the mob.
What would get covered would be things exploding and people
getting shot, you know, and exciting events like that. But
where it really was felt was on the street, you know, if there
was somebody, you know, causing a problem in the neighborhood,
the neighbors would have to ask themselves, do I call the
police or do I call the capo, you know, and when, you know, the
mob infiltrates unions that affects people's jobs and it
affects, you know, who gets hired for what.
And then of course when American politicians are corrupted
by the mob the same thing happens, and people, it is this exact
phenomenon we are describing. People just lose confidence in
the process and they do not believe that they are going to be
treated fairly and so they have to make these decisions. It
becomes a shadow government, in effect.
So the idea of asking people, you know, questions about how
does this affect you on a concrete level, I agree, makes a lot
of sense.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you. And we have less than a minute
left, but I would welcome any comments on incentivizing good
governance and in the Millennium Challenge Corporation, whether
or not any of you think those are worthy mechanisms to provide
incentives to encourage good government. We have about 30
seconds.
Mr. Camilleri. Sure. Well, you know, thumbs up for MCC.
Certainly, anything that creates a direct link between stronger
rule of law, stronger programs to combat corruption, and
stronger support from the United States, I think, is a good
idea.
Mr. Phillips. And effective?
Mr. Camilleri. Yes.
Mr. Phillips. I like succinct answers.
All right, we are out of time. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Congressman Castro.
Mr. Castro. Thank you.
I want to ask you all--and I apologize. I have been running
around this morning so I just got in. But this corruption, how
much of it is driven by poverty and socioeconomic circumstances
versus by greed, for example, or graft or things like that?
Ms. Salazar. Well, in the case of petty corruption I think,
you know, poverty and lack of opportunities are an important
factor. But when we talk about grand corruption, big criminal
organizations, you know, working as a network to take advantage
of public wealth for their own gain, I do not think it is
connected to poverty, it is connected with greed, and taking
advantage of State wealth.
Mr. Castro. And also you all may have gone through this
already, but what is--we have talked a lot, for example, about
doing something in the Northern Triangle countries of Central
America. A big part of that would be an anti-corruption
assistance, right? What is the scale of the challenge as far as
you all can tell? For example, are we talking about $5 billion,
are you talking about $20 billion, $30 billion? What is the
scale of the challenge?
Mr. Camilleri. Congressman, obviously it is hard to put a
number on it.
Mr. Castro. Sure.
Mr. Camilleri. The Central America package that was focused
on the Northern Triangle that I was involved in piecing
together was the one that the Obama Administration designed. It
was a billion dollar per year package. I think Congress funded
about three-quarters of that which is still a significant
investment in the region. And so I think something on that kind
of magnitude is probably about right.
There is obviously an issue of absorption capacity as well
as the vast sort of needs on the ground. But I think just as
important as kind of a scale is this issue of incentives that
Congressman Phillips raised, which is, you know, how can we
more nimble with that money? How can we put it in places where
it is being used by responsible stewards?
We have seen, just taking the Northern Triangle countries
for example, we have seen extraordinary attorney generals and
we have seen corrupt attorney generals. Shouldn't our
assistance be responding to the particular people in charge of
the institutions on the ground that we are supporting in order
to both get more bang for the U.S. taxpayers' buck but also
incentivize proper behavior by our partners in the region?
Mr. Castro. Anybody else?
Ms. Salazar. Yes, just briefly. Again, for me, the best
deterrent for corruption is putting high level authorities in
prison. Really, I mean this is what I have seen in the region.
This is the best example for others and the best deterrent.
Mr. Castro. All right, I yield back, Chairman.
Mr. Sires. Well, I want to take this time to thank the
witnesses Mr. Hall, Ms. Salazar, Mr. Camilleri, and all the
members that were here today. And with that, the committee is
now adjourned. Good job.
[Whereupon, at 11:17 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]