- OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: SPECTRUM AUCTIONS PROGRAM
[Senate Hearing 116-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: SPECTRUM AUCTIONS
PROGRAM
----------
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 17, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 10:01 a.m., in room 138, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. John Kennedy (Chairman) presiding.
Present: Senators Kennedy, Moran, and Boozman.
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JOHN KENNEDY
Senator Kennedy. The Subcommittee on Financial Services and
General Government of the Appropriations Committee of the
United States Senate will come to order.
Good morning to everyone. This morning, we will be
conducting an oversight hearing with our friends from the
Federal Communications Commission.
As most of you know, our responsibility, and when I say
our, I mean the subcommittee's responsibility is to evaluate
agencies' budget requests and to appropriate money in a prudent
manner. Our job is not finished once an agency receives an
appropriation. It is also critically important to conduct
oversight of how agencies use those resources to make sure that
they are used efficiently and economically and in the public
interest, and I know our esteemed Chairman shares that
sentiment with me.
The agency before us today, the Federal Communications
Commission, is one of the most consequential agencies under
this subcommittee's jurisdiction. The transmission of
information has come to play a dominant role in our lives, both
economically, civically, socially, and commercially. It has
made the world smaller and I think, on balance, better.
It is incumbent upon this subcommittee, in my judgment, to
ensure that the FCC is using its resources to appropriately
execute its responsibility to implement and enforce America's
communications laws and regulations.
Now today's hearing is going to focus specifically on the
FCC's Spectrum Auctions Program. This subcommittee's
appropriation bill not only sets the FCC's top line budget
number but it also sets the amount of resources that may be
retained by the agency for the purpose of spectrum auctions.
Now these auctions, as you know, are the means by which the
Federal Government allocates the right to transmit signals over
specific bands of the electro-magnetic spectrum: including the
radio, television, satellite, and cellular communications.
The allocation of spectrum, low band, mid band, high band,
but particularly with respect to the sweet spot in terms of 5G,
C band. By sweet spot, I mean in terms of both striking
appropriate balance between capacity and coverage. That is a
very critical issue. It is a critical issue to this
subcommittee as we continue implementation of fifth generation
or 5G cellular network technology.
A day does not go by that we do not hear about the Race to
5G and the need to get there quickly, and we do need to get
there quickly. However, none of us should be willing to
tolerate a situation where rural Louisianans or rural Kansans
or rural West Virginians or any rural Americans are left
behind.
Congress and the administration must work together to make
sure that every American gets there so that when the United
States wins the 5G race, and we will, we will win it together,
and the C-band spectrum is an integral part of the 5G debate
and how we accomplish that end.
The FCC is in the process, as the Chairman knows well, of
determining how it is going to allocate C band and when I talk
about C band, I am talking about the mid band, if you will. I
am talking about the 500 megahertz that my understanding is
totally within the C band and how that is going to be
allocated, and I know the FCC, has been for about 2 years, and
is in the middle of that discussion.
The issue is how we are going to allocate it. Are we going
to allow a private spectrum deal with foreign-owned satellite
companies, which say they can do it faster, or are we going to
do a public auction?
Now my mind could be changed, but I have read everything I
can get my hands on, and I confess my bias at the moment is for
a public auction. Luxembourg should not reap these profits. The
American taxpayer should.
I know the Chairman is a big believer in transparency. I'm
new to Washington but I'm not new to government and it's been
my experience that the best way to resist temptation in
government and in life is a proper upbringing, a strong set of
values, and witnesses, and that's why public auctions work
because everybody gets to see how the sausage is being made.
Now by allocating the C band through a public auction, we
can ensure that billions of dollars in revenue will go to the
American taxpayer. I have seen estimates that the initial value
of the C band, not the total of 500 megahertz but the 300 to
400 megahertz that the FCC is talking about allocating, could
generate as much as $60 billion. That is nine zeroes.
We toss around--I want us to understand what is at stake
here. We toss around the term ``a billion'' here in Washington
as if it was a nickel. If I started counting to one billion
right now and counted one digit per second, I would not finish
until 2051. I would die first.
I did a little math this morning. A billion seconds ago was
1986. Ronald Reagan was president. A billion minutes ago, the
Romans were conquering Mesopotamia. A billion hours ago,
Neanderthals were roaming the earth. Some may still be in the
Senate, but that is a separate subject.
We are talking 60 of those, $60 billion. I did a little
more math. For $60 billion, we could send one million kids to
college. For $60 billion, we could hire one million new cops
for a year. You want to get control of the crime problem in
America? You want to stop the murders in Chicago? For $60
billion, we could build 7,000 miles of new interstate. It is a
lot of money and that is what is at issue here.
I will also note that I think the FCC, under the leadership
of this Chairman and others, has done an extraordinary job in
conducting public auctions. Since 1994, you have conducted over
a hundred auctions, generating about a $123 billion for the
American people, and I thank you for that, Mr. Chairman.
Over the past year, the FCC has completed two spectrum
auctions, both for 5G, 24 gigahertz band and 28 gigahertz band.
Therefore, we know it can be done.
Lastly, I want to talk a little bit about the proposal to
open up the 6 gigahertz band unlicensed users. This is causing
a lot of concern, as you know, Mr. Chairman, among the users of
that spectrum, particularly those who operate critical
infrastructure systems, like our electric grid.
Those systems have to be extraordinarily reliable to meet
mandatory standards and the potential for interference with
those systems by unlicensed users concerns me and I know it
concerns you, Mr. Chairman, and I hope we can talk about that
issue today, as well.
Today, we are going to hear from two panels. Our first
panel is the distinguished Honorable Ajit Pai, the Chairman of
our Federal Communications Commission.
Our second panel will feature representatives from two
nonprofit government-spending watchdogs.
We all know this but it bears repeating. The Chairman was
unanimously confirmed as an FCC Commissioner in May of 2012. In
January of 2017, the President demonstrated good judgment in my
opinion in designating the Chairman as Chairman of the agency.
Ajit is originally from Parsons, Kansas. He graduated from
Harvard University and the University of Chicago Law School,
and he previously has served as an attorney at the Department
of Justice, the FCC Office of General Counsel, and the Senate
Judiciary Committee.
And with that, I would like to invite the Chairman to make
his opening statement, unless my--let me do this first.
My colleague from Kansas may have something to say.
Senator Moran. Mr. Chairman, two things. I agree with you
in many ways in your opening statement.
First of all, I want to commend you for having oversight
hearings, something I think is very valuable to the United
States Senate and, more importantly, to the American people. In
my view, we ought to do as this kind of circumstances often as
we can find the time and get the witnesses before us. How we
spend money is important and I am appreciative of the direction
you are taking this subcommittee.
I would welcome my fellow Kansan to the dais, and I look
forward to his testimony.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Senator.
Mr. Chairman, welcome. The floor is yours.
STATEMENT OF HON. AJIT PAI, CHAIRMAN, FEDERAL
COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
Chairman Pai. Thank you, Chairman Kennedy, both for the
kind words and for holding this hearing. I appreciate this
chance to discuss the FCC's Spectrum Auctions Program before
the witnesses, as the Chairman aptly put it.
Before I begin my remarks, however, I do want to note that
both the function you are discharging as well as the first word
of the title of this hearing is ``oversight,'' and we lost, of
course, a critical Member of the oversight community this
morning.
I want to express my condolences to the family of
Representative Elijah Cummings. He served many years with
distinction in the 7th District of Maryland as well as the
Maryland House of Delegates, also served as a role model for
millions of Americans with the story of how he progressed from
grade school to law school. Rest in peace, sir, and I wish all
of the members of the Cummings family some peace in the time
ahead.
Senator Kennedy. Well said, Mr. Chairman.
DEPLOYMENT OF 5G
Chairman Pai. Chairman Kennedy and Senator Moran, good
spectrum policy is critical to securing our Nation's position
as a global leader in the deployment of 5G, the next generation
of wireless technology.
The FCC favors a market-based approach in order to make
more spectrum available for 5G and what that means is whenever
feasible, we favor the flexible use of wireless spectrum over
command and control top-down mandates coming from Washington.
SPECTRUM AUCTIONS PROGRAM
Now one important component of this approach is our
Spectrum Auctions Program. As you know, Congress over a
generation ago authorized the FCC to conduct spectrum auctions
in the Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 and since then, the
Commission has conducted some 93 spectrum auctions and our
Spectrum Auction Program has been critical to the explosive
growth in wireless communications over the last two and a half
decades.
The FCC Spectrum Auctions Program has also been good for
American taxpayers, as the Chairman mentioned. Overall, it has
generated some $116.5 billion in revenue for the U.S. Treasury
with administrative and personnel costs constituting only 1.7
percent of that amount.
SPECTRUM AUCTIONS PROGRAM--FINANCIAL AND LICENSES AWARDED
Each year, Congress, thanks in part to this subcommittee
and you, Mr. Chairman, sets an auctions spending cap for the
FCC and I want to express my gratitude for this subcommittee's
strong financial support for our Spectrum Auctions Program.
Recently, the Commission's Spectrum Auctions Program has
been extremely active as we move aggressively to make more
spectrum available for 5G services. As Chairman Kennedy
mentioned, on November 24, 2018, we began our 28 gigahertz
auction, which concluded on January 24 of this year. It made
available 850 megahertz of spectrum and raised over $700
million for the U.S. Treasury. Overall, 33 bidders won almost
3,000 licenses in that auction.
Then on March 14 of this year, we started our 24 gigahertz
auction. That auction ended on May 28 of 2019 and made
available 700 megahertz of spectrum for the commercial
marketplace. It raised over $2 billion for the U.S. Treasury
and again almost 3,000 licenses were awarded to 29 bidders
overall.
Each of these auctions was successful and combined they
pushed almost 1,550 megahertz of spectrum into the commercial
marketplace, and this will be critical to supporting the high
bandwidth ultra low-latency applications that will be made
possible for 5G.
MID-BAND SPECTRUM AUCTIONS
Now this is major progress, but we cannot and will not be
complacent. Indeed, we have already scheduled two more spectrum
auctions that will begin within the next few months.
On December 10, bidding will commence on what we are
calling Auction 103. This auction will be making available more
spectrum than any auction in American history with 3,400
megahertz available in the upper 37, 39, and 47 gigahertz
bands.
And next, the FCC will turn to mid-band spectrum auctions.
Senator Kennedy. What band was that?
Chairman Pai. The upper 37, 39, and 47 gigahertz bands,
3,400 megahertz across those three bands.
Next, we will turn to mid-band auctions. Mid-band spectrum,
of course, is important for 5G because, as the Chairman put it,
it matches coverage with capacity and so on June 25 of 2020,
the FCC will start an auction of spectrum in the 3.5 gigahertz
band.
Seven 10 megahertz channels will be made available for a
total of 70 megahertz of spectrum. Bidders will pay for the
right to use a 10 megahertz channel, but they will not bid on a
specific channel. Instead, the specific frequencies that they
will use will change periodically as a result of a new
technology, dynamic spectrum sharing, between Federal and non-
Federal users. The FCC in this auction will offer over 22,000
licenses, which will be the most ever.
Following the 3.5 gigahertz auction, the FCC plans to hold
an auction in the 2.5 gigahertz band. With almost 200
megahertz, this band is the largest continuous band of
terrestrial flexible use spectrum below 3 gigahertz in the
entire country, but that band is dramatically underused today.
Existing licenses cover only about one-half of the country
and the spectrum is barely even assigned west of the
Mississippi River. We have not yet scheduled a start date for
this auction but I am aiming for it to begin next year.
C BAND
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I know there is significant interest
in the Commission's rulemaking regarding the 3.7 to 4.2
gigahertz band, commonly called the C band. Our C band
proceeding involves a very complicated array of legal and
policy and factual issues and I haven't yet made a final
decision on the way forward, but in my view, we must accomplish
four goals.
C-BAND GOALS
First, we must make available significant amount of
spectrum for 5G. Second, we must make the spectrum available
for 5G quickly. Third, we must generate revenue for the Federal
Government. Fourth, we must ensure that the services currently
delivered using the C-band spectrum will be continued to be
delivered to American consumers.
Chairman Kennedy, Members of the subcommittee, thank you
once again for holding this hearing, and I look forward to
answering your questions and continuing to work with you and
your staffs in the time to come.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Ajit Pai
Chairman Kennedy, Ranking Member Coons, and Members of the
Financial Services and General Government Subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me here to discuss the Federal Communications Commission's
spectrum auctions program.
Good spectrum policy is critical to securing our Nation's position
as the global leader in the deployment of 5G, the next generation of
wireless technology. In my testimony before this subcommittee in May, I
outlined the Commission's three-pronged strategy for Facilitating
America's Superiority in 5G Technology--the 5G FAST Plan. This plan
calls for freeing up more spectrum for commercial use, making it easier
to install wireless infrastructure, and modernizing our regulations to
encourage the deployment of fiber.
The FCC favors a market-based approach in order to make more
spectrum available for 5G. We have eschewed command-and-control, top-
down mandates in favor of flexible use for wireless spectrum whenever
feasible. The free market best determines what technology should be
deployed in what band, especially as the pace of technology accelerates
more rapidly and demand for spectrum continues to grow.
One important component of this market-based approach to spectrum
policy is our spectrum auctions program. As you know, Congress
authorized the FCC to conduct spectrum auctions in the Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1993. Since then, the Commission has conducted 93
spectrum auctions. Among other things, these spectrum auctions have
been critical to the explosive growth in wireless communications over
the last two-and-a-half decades. For example, the AWS-1 and 700 MHz
spectrum auctions conducted during the Bush administration were
critical to the United States leading the world in 4G LTE deployment.
The FCC's spectrum auction program has also been good for our
Nation's taxpayers. Because of our spectrum auctions, the FCC is one of
the few government agencies that generates more money for the U.S.
Treasury that it spends. Overall, the Commission's spectrum auction
program to date has generated $116.5 billion in revenue for the U.S.
Treasury, with administrative and personnel costs constituting only 1.7
percent of that amount. Each year, Congress sets an auction spending
cap for the FCC. For fiscal year 2019, that cap is $130,284,000. And
for fiscal year 2020, both the House and Senate subcommittee bills have
set the fiscal year 2020 level at $132,538,680. The Commission
appreciates this subcommittee's financial support for the spectrum
auctions program.
With ever-increasing demand for and technological advances in
spectrum use, spectrum policy is becoming more complicated. That's one
reason why Congress provided the FCC in 2012 with incentive auction
authority. In 2017, the FCC concluded its first incentive auction,
which provided payments to broadcast television stations that chose to
relinquish their spectrum. That auction ended up making available 70
megahertz of spectrum for mobile broadband use in the 600 MHz band. It
also generated about $19.3 billion in revenue. About $10.05 billion of
that money went to pay broadcasters that relinquished their spectrum,
more than $7 billion was directed to the U.S. Treasury for deficit
reduction, and more than $2 billion is being spent to compensate
broadcasters for their relocation costs as a result of the post-
incentive auction spectrum repack. I am pleased to report that the
repack is going well. Most broadcast television stations that need to
be moved from their old frequencies have already done so. The process
for compensating stations for their relocation costs has been running
smoothly. And wireless carriers are already using much of the 600 MHz
spectrum that they won at the auction to provide service across the
country. Looking forward, we'll keep our eye on the ball and make sure
that this repack is brought to a successful conclusion.
Recently, the Commission's spectrum auction program has been very
active as we move aggressively to make more spectrum available for 5G
services. On November 14, 2018, we began our 28 GHz auction, which
concluded on January 24, 2019. It made available 850 megahertz of
spectrum and raised over $700 million for the U.S. Treasury. Overall,
33 bidders won a total of 2,965 licenses.
Then, on March 14, 2019, we started our 24 GHz auction. That
auction ended on May 28, 2019 and made available 700 megahertz of
spectrum for the commercial marketplace. It also raised over $2 billion
for the U.S. Treasury. Overall, 29 bidders won a total of 2,904
licenses.
Each of these auctions was successful, and combined, they pushed
1,550 megahertz of high-band spectrum into the commercial marketplace.
This spectrum will be critical to supporting the advanced high-
bandwidth, ultra-low latency applications that will be made possible
for 5G.
But we can't and won't be complacent. Indeed, we've already
scheduled two more spectrum auctions that will begin within the next 9
months. On December 10, bidding will commence in what we are calling
Auction 103. This auction will make available more spectrum than any
auction in American history. 3,400 megahertz of spectrum in the Upper
37 GHz, 39 GHz, and 47 GHz bands will be on the auction block.
One notable feature of this auction is that we are making use of
our incentive auction authority to reorganize the band. But while the
broadcast incentive auction used separate forward and reverse auctions,
Auction 103 will use an innovative voucher system that will allow
incumbents to receive payments for relinquishing their existing
licenses or apply the value of their current licenses for new licenses
won at the auction. This creative solution illustrates why Congress'
decision to give the FCC flexibility in structuring auctions was a wise
one.
Following Auction 103, the FCC will turn to mid-band spectrum
auctions. Mid-band spectrum is important for 5G deployment because
these bands combine good coverage with good capacity. On June 25, 2020,
the FCC will start an auction of spectrum in the 3.5 GHz band. For this
band, the Commission adopted an innovative regulatory regime for
commercial use known as dynamic sharing. We set up a three-tiered,
hierarchical framework to coordinate shared Federal and non-Federal
use. Incumbents, which are Federal users, comprise the highest tier and
receive protection from all other users, followed by Priority Access
Licenses (PALs) on the second tier, and General Authorized Access (GAA)
on the third tier. PALs receive protection from GAA operations and must
accept interference from incumbents. GAA is licensed-by-rule and must
accept interference from all other users.
Automated frequency coordinators, known as Spectrum Access Systems,
will coordinate operations, and Environmental Sensing Capability
operators will manage a sensor system designed to detect the presence
of Federal incumbent radar transmissions and communicate that
information to the SASs. Just last month, we authorized five such
frequency coordinators so that initial commercial deployments could
commence.
Next June, we will start auctioning the PALs in the 3.5 GHz band.
Seven 10-megahertz channels will be made available, for a total of 70
megahertz of spectrum. But while bidders will be paying for the right
to use a 10-megahertz channel, they will not be bidding on a specific
10-megahertz channel. Rather, the specific frequencies that they will
be using will change periodically as a result of the dynamic spectrum
sharing described above. A total of 22,631 PALs will be offered in this
auction, which will be the most licenses ever offered in an FCC
spectrum auction.
Following the 3.5 GHz band auction, the FCC plans to hold an
auction in the 2.5 GHz band. With almost 200 megahertz, the 2.5 GHz
band is the largest contiguous band of terrestrial, flexible use
spectrum below 3 GHz in the United States. But that band is
dramatically underused today--existing licenses cover only about one-
half of the country, and the spectrum is barely assigned west of the
Mississippi River. In July, the FCC revised the rules for the band,
allowing more entities to access the spectrum and eliminating
unnecessary restrictions. The Commission will soon open a Tribal
priority window to give Tribes an opportunity to obtain this spectrum
to provide wireless services on rural Tribal lands. Following this
window, we will hold an auction to assign the remaining unused portions
of the band for commercial use. We have not yet scheduled a start date
for this auction, but my goal is for it to begin next year.
Finally, I would like to conclude by discussing a relatively recent
change to the Commission's management of its spectrum auction program.
Until late last year, the program was run by the Auctions Division of
the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau. But auctions aren't limited to
the wireless space. The Commission also auctions spectrum for broadcast
radio and television licenses. This summer, for example, we held an
auction for FM translator licenses. And the Commission now holds
reverse auctions of universal service support to promote rural
broadband deployment. In 2018, for example, we held the Connect America
Fund Phase II reverse auction, which allocated almost $1.5 billion to
deploy broadband to over 713,000 homes and businesses in rural America.
Next year, we intend to launch the Rural Digital Opportunity Fund,
which will allocate over $20 billion for rural broadband deployment
using a reverse auction format. And in December of this year, the
Commission will hold an auction of new toll-free numbers.
In light of the Commission's increasingly diverse auctions
portfolio, it no longer made sense for the Auctions Division to remain
under the purview of the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau. So when we
created the new Office of Economics and Analytics, we decided to move
the Auctions Division there. This was a good fit because good auction
design must be based on sound economics. I am pleased to report that
this transition has been smooth and, as evidenced by the Commission's
busy auctions schedule, has not disrupted our important auctions work.
*
*
*
Chairman Kennedy, Ranking Member Coons, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to testify. I would be
pleased to answer your questions.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
C BAND
Let me ask you a couple of questions about the C band. As I
understand it, we are talking about the airwaves from 3.7
gigahertz to 4.2, is that right?
Chairman Pai. Correct. That is one portion of the C band,
space to earth.
Senator Kennedy. And there's a C-Band Alliance comprised of
some foreign-owned satellite companies who have approached the
FCC with the proposal to let them handle the auction and they
are proposing, as I understand it, to sell a 180 megahertz. Am
I right so far?
Chairman Pai. The proposal has changed over time, but that
is the core of the proposal, yes.
Senator Kennedy. Who owns the C band?
Chairman Pai. Ultimately, sir, this is a public resource
that is owned by the American people, the airwaves. The FCC, as
imbued by Congress with authority, is the steward of that
spectrum.
Senator Kennedy. So this is a strategic American asset,
which is owned by the American people. I understand that the C-
Band Alliance, three, maybe four companies, I understand two
are from Luxembourg, one from Canada, the French company may
have dropped out but they could come back in. So when I say the
foreign-owned satellite companies, they have control of it
right now, is that correct?
Chairman Pai. That is correct, sir, yes.
Senator Kennedy. Okay. I am just trying to set the table
here, and they are offering to handle the allocation of this
very valuable C band which is critical to 5G and keep most of
the money. Why in God's name would we do that?
C-BAND PRIVATE SALE TO WIRELESS COMPANIES
Chairman Pai. Senator, as I understand their proposal, they
use the C band currently to sell satellite delivery program to
content companies,----
Senator Kennedy. Right.
Chairman Pai [continuing]. Broadcasters, and cable
companies and others. So what they are proposing to do is
essentially transition a portion of the C band to wireless
companies through a private sale and move some of the content
companies that I just mentioned to a different portion of the
band and the argument that they have made to us is that that
would be a win-win for the United States Government as well as
for the various industries that would be involved and that's
one of the proposals the FCC is evaluating right now.
Senator Kennedy. Well, why don't we do it and keep all the
money for the American people? I mean, I do not mean--look, I
am a free enterprise guy, you know. I believe companies are
supposed to serve their stockholders. I am not much into the
serving the stakeholder stuff, but we did not take these to
Luxembourg and one Canadian, one French company to raise here.
This asset is ours. Why do we need them?
Chairman Pai. I appreciate the question, Senator. From our
perspective at least, I embrace those four principles I
outlined in my opening statement, spectrum for 5G, timeliness,
revenue for the Treasury, as well as making sure that those
services will continue to be delivered, and so those are the
four factors that I'm thinking about and I want to make sure
that whatever course we chart forward, it's a course that
respects each of those four principles, including the important
factor of revenue to the Treasury.
C-BAND ALLIANCE
Senator Kennedy. Well, how do we know the C-Band Alliance--
and I do not mean this to sound pejorative. I am just really
trying to understand the advantage of doing it this way. How do
we know the C-Band Alliance, which is going to conduct this
sale itself, has not already presold it? Do we know whether
they have or not?
Chairman Pai. So as far as I know, they have not because in
part, that would be contingent on the FCC making a decision in
this particular band, but, again, what I would say is that we
want to make sure that we respect each of those four
principles.
Senator Kennedy. Yes, but how do you know the C-Band
Alliance--I am not saying they would or would not. How do you
know they have not gone out to others, the real principals, and
said, hey, I do not know if we can talk this the FCC into doing
this, but if we can, let's go ahead and do a deal already and
they already have it presold.
Chairman Pai. Right. Again, I cannot speak to what
conversations or decisions or actions the C-Band Alliance might
have taken.
Just from our perspective,----
Senator Kennedy. Don't you think we ought to ask them, see
how much money we are leaving on the table?
Chairman Pai. From our perspective at least, our job is to
vindicate the public interests, not the private----
Senator Kennedy. Yes.
Chairman Pai [continuing]. Interests of any entity or
organization.
Senator Kennedy. I've heard one argument--the only thing
I've been able to find, and I don't pretend to have your
expertise. I mean that, I don't, but I've read a lot on this.
The only argument that I can find to doing the deal with C
band, to which I mean no disrespect, is that they say they can
do it faster and it would take the FCC 7 years, is that right?
Chairman Pai. That is one of the arguments they have made,
is the relative timeliness.
Senator Kennedy. But is it true?
AUCTIONS
Chairman Pai. So that's one of the things we're evaluating
right now; we have auctions on the table and one of the things
we're studying, in coordination with our Technical Staff, is
how quickly would the various auctions yield some of the
spectrum?
Senator Kennedy. How long would you think it would take you
to do a public auction, if we start today?
Chairman Pai. That is one of the questions that is very
difficult because of this particular band. If this was
Greenfield spectrum, then that is the bread and butter of the
FCC's----
Senator Kennedy. I know. I get it. It will be hard.
Chairman Pai. With incumbents, it does----
Senator Kennedy. How long?
Chairman Pai. That is one of the difficult questions.
Several years is the estimate that we have heard.
Senator Kennedy. A couple? One?
Chairman Pai. One would be fairly ambitious.
Senator Kennedy. Two?
Chairman Pai. That is more closer than one would be.
Senator Kennedy. So two, two and a half? I feel like we are
bidding against each other. Would it be fair to say you can do
it in 3 years?
Chairman Pai. It is difficult to say, Senator, because some
of the incumbents we have to accommodate, as well, and so
that's----
Senator Kennedy. Well, it is not going to take you 7 years,
is it?
Chairman Pai. We do not have a firm estimate.
Senator Kennedy. Let me make a suggestion to you. I am not
trying to tell you how to run your business, but you have done
over a hundred auctions. Your people have generated a lot of
money.
Would you consider calling in all your people in charge of
these auctions and specifically with the C band auction and
say, ``I want this done in 3 years?'' We have already wasted 2
talking about the C band deal. Would you call in all your
people and say, ``I want this done in 3 years?'' I will give
you a bonus if you can do it in 2 and a half or 2.
Now I have been around government long enough. There's
going to be one, if not more, that's going to go, oh, Mr.
Chairman, you don't know how hard it is. It is going to take us
7 years. That is the one you fire and you say, ``you are going
to do this in two to 3 years.'' If C band can do it, then we
can do it, and if they cannot do it, fire somebody and let us
go on Zip Recruiter and find somebody who can do it.
I mean, I am serious, Ajit. The only argument I have been
able to find is that they can do it faster. Maybe they can do
it faster; I am not alleging this, because they have got the
deal presold.
All right. I am going to hush and turn to my colleagues,
but I have a couple more.
Chairman Pai. Absolutely.
Senator Kennedy. Okay. Senator Moran.
Senator Moran. Chairman, I could defer to you if you want
to do your couple more.
Senator Kennedy. No, no. You go right ahead.
Senator Moran. I want to make sure that I am not the guy
that says you cannot ask your questions in less than 7 years.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Ajit, Chairman Pai, thank you for being here today. Thank
you for the conversations we have been able to have in the
Commerce Committee and here in the Financial Services and
General Government (FSGG) Subcommittee, and again to the
Chairman, oversight is so important and, in my view, lacking in
too many instances in the United States Senate. So thank you
again.
HIGH-SPEED BROADBAND AND 5G MOBILE WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY TO PLACES LIKE
KANSAS
I'll start by commending the FCC for continuing to pursue
policies that enhance the availability of high-speed broadband
to my constituents, our constituents, including the expeditious
deployment of 5G mobile wireless technology that contributes a
lot to our country's economic growth, creating jobs and,
importantly, technological competitiveness to the advantage of
the United States.
I also understand that mid-band spectrum, like C band, has
critical capacity and coverage characteristics to meet those
service needs.
In my view, it is critical to ensure that the content-
providing customers of the satellite incumbents currently
operating in the C band, such as broadcast television stations
and cable programmers, are effectively accounted for in any
future repurposing of that spectrum through an auction.
The services that these businesses provide are particularly
important to the places that I represent and that I come from,
and it is absolutely necessary for the benefit of places like
Kansas. If they are not relocated, then they deserve protection
from harmful interference.
STAKEHOLDERS AND RURAL CUSTOMERS
I understand and my impression is that the FCC is already
considering the importance of the stakeholders and rural
customers based upon the agency's questions that were posed in
the Order and Notice of Proposed Rulemaking considering new
commercial wireless services in the C band.
So would you explain to me how the agency plans to protect
those services, the incumbents, and the benefits that accrue by
the services we have today in a place like Kansas?
Chairman Pai. Appreciate the question, Senator. That's part
of the reason why one of the critical factors to me, to the
agency, is making sure that those services that are delivered
today using the C band will continue to be delivered to
American consumers because we recognize that whether you want
to see Kansas State win on Saturday afternoons or have small
cable operators across our State be able to deliver some of
that programming, they need a method of distribution. That's
important for millions of consumers of video content around the
country and around our State.
NOTICE OF INQUIRY AND PROPOSED RULEMAKING
One of the reasons why, to go to the Chairman's point about
transparency, one of the reasons why we have been considering
this issue for a while is that we started with the Notice of
Inquiry in 2017. Then we moved to a Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking in 2018. It was important for me, for us, for the
American public to have a greater understanding about some of
the issues involving some of the customers who rely on the C-
band spectrum, which is part of the reason why we put out not
one but two public notices this year, one on May 3 and another
on July 19. We simply wanted to understand the full range of
issues that are involved here.
So one of the things that we'll be looking at is of the
various proposals that are on the table, how can we make sure
that that content that consumers are continuing to rely upon
from their providers can continue to be delivered, and we want
to make sure that we don't leave those customers behind, as the
Chairman put it in his opening remarks.
MOBILE NOW ACT AND 6 GIGAHERTZ BAND
Senator Moran. Chairman, let me ask you about 6 gigahertz
in particular. The need for additional unlicensed spectrum, we
have acknowledged in Congress, as has the FCC. We did so in the
Mobile NOW Act. In 2018, the FCC adopted a Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking seeking comments on permitting unlicensed devices to
operate in the 6 gigahertz band.
It proposes to use automatic frequency coordination to
protect incumbents in that band, but the development and
regulatory certification of this innovation will take, I would
think, maybe not 7 years but a significant amount of time,
probably years.
UNLICENSED SPECTRUM
What are your thoughts about addressing the urgent needs of
additional unlicensed spectrum in the near term while
protecting incumbents from harmful interference?
Chairman Pai. Great question, Senator, and I've
consistently said that we recognize that the incumbent users of
that band, in particular electric utilities, need to be
protected from harmful interference and you've got my guarantee
that I will work with our career staff to do the technical
analysis necessary to ensure that that happens.
But I truly believe that American consumers can have the
best of both worlds. They can have the electric utilities using
the spectrum in a way that allows them to deliver power more
efficiently and they can have the benefit of unlicensed
innovation. To give you a sense of why this matters, what I
propose to do is to free up for unlicensed use from 5925 to
7125 megahertz to some extent for unlicensed innovation.
Currently, most consumers use 2.4 gigahertz or 5 gigahertz
spectrum for Wi-Fi. A lot of times, the Wi-Fi is slow. Those
channels are congested. With this massive swath of new
spectrum, consumers could benefit from super-fast Wi-Fi
services delivered over 160 megahertz of channels. That is a
lot of gobbledygook, but to the American consumer, what does it
mean?
WI-FI IN RURAL AREAS
Well, I will tell you. A couple months ago, I was in a
small town in our home State and I sat next to a seventh grade
girl on the bus named Adaya and using Wi-Fi, she was able to do
her homework and to upload it in a way that would be
unthinkable to those of us who grew up in the era when the
cutting edge technology was a Number 2 pencil.
So using this kind of Wi-Fi, especially in rural areas,
could be a game-changer for America's schoolchildren and that
is just one application.
We're talking about precision agriculture, telemedicine,
and all the other new applications that unlicensed innovation
could unleash. That is part of the reason why we think it is
important to have this conversation.
Let us protect the incumbent users, but let us also have
our eyes on the future and the future in many cases is
dependent on Wi-Fi.
Senator Moran. Chairman, thank you. Let me see if I can get
one more question in in 39 seconds.
Chairman Pai. Sure.
BROADCASTER REPACK
Senator Moran. We have directed you, the FCC, to provide
monthly reports to the Commerce Committee regarding the status
of the construction schedule and the relief granted for the
Broadcaster Repack following their incentive auction.
I appreciate the details in the report, but I wanted to
highlight this issue and give you the chance to give me a brief
update on the current status of that Repack.
Chairman Pai. Thanks for the question, and thank you,
Senator, for both advocating for this issue here and FSGG as
well as your approach on Commerce. You have flagged the
importance of this issue for quite some time.
We are now happily done. There are 10 phases in the Repack.
Phase 5 ended on September 6 and I'm pleased to report that as
of that date, 533 of the 987 broadcasters that were required to
move from the pre-auction channel have in fact moved. That is
54 percent, which puts us ahead of the game.
Phase 6 ends tomorrow and my expectation is that we'll have
a hundred additional stations that will have successfully
moved. So we will be over two-thirds of the way through, all of
which to say that I think we are on track. We're continuing to
monitor the situation and, in particular, for the low-powered
TV and translators, which are important especially west of the
Mississippi, thanks in part to the resources afforded by this
subcommittee, we have now--back in March, the FCC adopted some
rules to reimburse them, as well, for certain costs they incur
through the Repack and so we want to make sure that this is a
smooth transition for everybody and thus far, I'm happy to
report that it is.
Senator Moran. No requests of Congress in this regard?
Chairman Pai. In this regard, I have plenty of others that
I will be sure to write to you about.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and you, Mr.
Chairman.
Senator Kennedy. The distinguished Senator, senior Senator
and former football star from the great State of Arkansas.
Senator Boozman. I like that. I need to carry you around
and introduce me all over.
Senator Kennedy. I just speak the truth.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
having this hearing. It is always great to have the Chairman
over. We appreciate all of your hard work and especially I know
that you are very, very well versed, lots of people are well
versed on our urban problems, but I think you genuinely
understand Rural America and the challenges that they're going
through right now.
6 GIGAHERTZ BAND
I'd like to follow up on Senator Moran's question about the
6 gigahertz band and trying to encompass it for the very
reasons that you talked about in the sense of looking forward.
You know, there is great opportunity and great need.
There is real concern, though, not only among the
electrical grid users but also the first responders. I know my
Governor Asa Hutchinson, who does a tremendous job, so well
respected; he has real concern in visiting with the people in
my State as to how that is going to be effective.
It is my understanding that the Department of Energy has
offered to make the National Labs available to test the safety
and security of allowing unlicensed users to share the 6
gigahertz band with the critical infrastructure companies.
Have you considered this offer? Does the FCC have the
capacity to test and evaluate the continued effectiveness of
utility operations yourselves?
Chairman Pai. Thanks for the question, Senator, and having
personally visited the Idaho National Laboratory about a year
ago, I have a firsthand appreciation for the terrific work that
they do, including on some of these spectrum experimentation
issues.
I'm working with our career staff in the Office of
Engineering and Technology on some of the technical issues,
that although I'm not an engineer, I can rely on them for the
ability to tell it like it is, and so we are working through
some of those issues and I'd be happy to take a look at the
Department of Energy's proposal in due course.
Senator Boozman. Good. Well, I think that that certainly
merits a good look at and anything we can do to work together
to solve these problems is great.
LIABILITY AND DISRUPTION BY UNLICENSED USE
The other issue is liability. Who would be liable if
incumbent users are disrupted by the unlicensed use?
Chairman Pai. That is a legal question that I would have to
rely on our Office of General Counsel to answer fully, but
that's one of the concerns that we will take a look at.
Senator Boozman. Right. Again like I say these are things
that are very important and I think my Governor is not the only
one that has concerns in this area. So hopefully we can all
work together to see if we can make it such that those kind of
concerns are resolved in the future.
Chairman Pai. Happy to do so, Senator. I have learned in
Washington there are three things you do not discuss in polite
society, religion, politics, and spectrum usage, but,
nonetheless, we are committed to going forward in a way that
accommodates all users.
Senator Boozman. I think that is well said. After the nice
introduction, I am going to yield back my time to you, Mr.
Chairman, so that you can continue with your concerns.
[Clerk's note: Senator Boozman submitted the following
letter on the next page to be included in the record of the
hearing:]
Senator Kennedy. Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
ALLOCATION TO RURAL BROADBAND
I share my colleague's concern about rural broadband. I
think we all do. If we do a competitive bid for C band and
brought in 60 billion, maybe more, why couldn't we allocate 20
billion to rural broadband? Start with Arkansas. Why couldn't
we?
Chairman Pai. Senator that would be a decision within
Congress's purview. We are required by law to deposit any
proceeds from an auction into the Treasury. So that would be a
decision that Congress would have to make.
Senator Kennedy. But we can--I know, and I appreciate your
discretion there, but maybe we can all agree that would help
solve the rural broadband issue.
My biggest worry about 5G is that our folks who do not live
in the largest population centers are going to see it last and
that is not fair. That is not fair.
Chairman Pai. So I could not agree more with you and that
is part of the reason why if you look at some of our decisions
in recent months, they have all been tailored to make sure that
we meet your priority of making sure that no American is left
behind.
T-MOBILE-SPRINT DEAL
For example, with the T-Mobile-Sprint deal, 99 percent
coverage within 6 years. The 2.5 gigahertz band, making sure
that rural-tribal carriers get first bite at that apple. The
3.5 gigahertz band, making sure we adopt a county-sized license
so that smaller providers serving rural Americans can compete.
These are the kinds of building blocks that will enable
rural Americans not to look with envy upon their urban brethren
but to actually be the leaders of this digital revolution.
PUBLIC AUCTION--EXCLUDING COMPANIES FROM BIDDING
Senator Kennedy. If we do a public auction, could we not
exclude from bidding a company that might be perceived to be an
enemy of the United States?
Chairman Pai. I would have to take a look at legally
whether we could do that on that ground. That is a question
that we have not, to my knowledge at least, explored of late.
Senator Kennedy. Well, let me put it another way. If we do
a public auction and a certain country that has the second
largest economy in the world said we'll buy it, we could say
no, no, I don't think so, couldn't we?
Chairman Pai. I believe--if I understand your question
correctly, I think we would have the power to do that.
Senator Kennedy. Yes.
Chairman Pai. To present it in national security terms.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT
Senator Kennedy. My reading of the Communications Act tells
me that you have to do a public auction, that this private deal
is not permissible under the Communications Act.
Chairman Pai. Senator,----
Senator Kennedy. What do your lawyers say about that?
Chairman Pai [continuing]. That's one of the things they
are diving deep into, is Section 309 and the other authorities
granted under the Communications Act, and as a recovering
lawyer myself, I don't pretend to know as well as they do, but
they're preparing analyses of the various provisions at issue
and----
C-BAND ALLIANCE PROPOSAL
Senator Kennedy. Well, and again, I do not want this to
come out the wrong way. I do not have anything against the C-
Band Alliance. I am just really trying to understand the
advantage of taking their proposal.
They say they can do it faster than the 7 years that they
say it will take the FCC. Now that--what I heard you to say
today is it will not take 7 years. So that kind of offends me
that somebody is saying it would take this long. That is a
denigration of our good people at the FCC.
But I know, Mr. Chairman, you can do it quicker than 7
years. I think you can do it in 2, 2 and a half. I have got
complete confidence in you, especially if you fire a couple
people, as we talked about.
But if that's a fair reading, and I'm not saying I'm an
expert either because I'm not, but I think a fair reading of
the Communications Act says this has to be bid out.
If you accept a private deal, we're going to be in
litigation a lot longer than 7 years, are we not?
PRIVATE DEAL AUCTION OF C-BAND SPECTRUM
Chairman Pai. Senator, what we understand, there are
different litigation risks for different auctions and that is
one of the things we're evaluating, is what does the law says,
and I can tell you that in this matter, as in all matters,
we're going to be driven by two things and two things only. The
facts on the ground in our record as well as the laws Congress
has set for it.
Senator Kennedy. Well, if we do take the private deal and
there is litigation, then the argument that we in the private
sector can do it faster is no more, am I correct?
Chairman Pai. Well, litigation is, of course, a delay in
any context.
Senator Kennedy. Well, we are talking $60 billion here. I
mean, anybody who knows the litigation environment, who knows a
law book from a J.Crew catalog knows there is going to be a
lawsuit separate, and they're not going to be completed in 6
months. It will take years. Probably go to the United States
Supreme Court over the straightforward issue, which you would
have to defend of why we did a private deal as opposed to a
public auction of a valuable American asset.
Does it give you--if we do this private deal and we give
this C band, valuable C band to a foreign-owned satellite
company, does that concern you in terms of national security?
Chairman Pai. Senator, that is one of the concerns we
always think about, is making sure that whatever decision we
make comports with the public interest and there is no
component of the public interest greater than our national
security.
Senator Kennedy. Well, I am not saying it's just the cash.
Please do not misinterpret. But any private company that comes
to us and says, hey, I've got a win-win for me and the American
people and I can do it faster and we're going to beat those
Chinese and let me handle it and keep the money, what if
they've got it presold to Huawei?
Chairman Pai. Right.
Senator Kennedy. That would not be cool, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Pai. I would share concerns in that circumstance.
Senator Kennedy. You would get a call from the President on
that one and, I mean, that concerns me.
All right. I do not want to beat this to death, but I would
like you--and I do not want to add to your workload. I am
really trying to understand the advantages of the private deal
and I just don't see them, other than we can do it faster.
Well, we have already spent 2 years, have we not, talking
about the private deal? So we've wasted--not wasted, but we
used 2 years, and when I ask, well, why can you do it faster, I
never get an answer. They just say, ``we can,'' and I do not
believe it. I have confidence in your leadership and your
ability to do it a lot faster than the 7 years and that is the
only advantage that I can see.
5G AIRWAVES TO FOREIGN-OWNED COMPANIES
The disadvantage, we are giving control of the 5G airwaves
to foreign-owned companies. We are going to have lawsuits out
the wazoo. We are going to leave at least $60 billion on the
table and it may be more. I am not saying the C-Band Alliance
would do this, but I know the C-Band Alliance only wants to
offer a 180. I mean, if they are good business people, I am
sure, if you have a private profit motive, you're going to
offer the 180, get the price up, and once the price is up,
you're going to offer the rest. So it may be more than 60
billion.
Look, I am a free enterprise guy but that money ought to go
to the American people. Think of what we can do with it. This
would solve all the President's law problems. I mean, I am
really worried about this, Mr. Chairman.
When do you think you all would make a decision? By you
all, I mean the FCC.
Chairman Pai. So I had said, Senator, that we would make a
decision this fall, so a couple months left, I guess, in the
fall, so somewhere within that time frame, and if I might offer
two other quick points.
One is that again, I have not made a decision yet, but we
would be happy as appropriate to keep Members of Congress
informed as we have in the past couple of years.
AUCTIONS TEAM
The second thing is I do want to give plaudits to our
Auctions Team. They have done heroic work and that's important
because we have reorganized them into the Office of Economics
and Analytics and so now, because they handle auctions not just
on spectrum but on universal service support and other
programs, they've done just heroic work helping to close the
Digital Divide and so I do want to say that their leadership
and the career staff there have been fantastic to work with and
I have a firsthand appreciation for how difficult and
interdisciplinary their work is and I'm glad we have talented
public servants like that.
Senator Kennedy. Well, I could not agree more with you. I
think they can do it, given their experience. Nobody has
experience doing spectrum auctions like your people, and I just
do not believe that--I love the people of Luxembourg and Canada
and France, but I do not believe they are better than our
people at doing this, and I am glad you mentioned that.
I am probably going to call you. I'm thinking about doing a
second hearing and asking your auction folks to come over and
tell us where they are and ask them straight up, you know, some
people say it will take you 7 years, is that true, and, if so,
why, because I don't believe it will.
But I want to thank you. I know you're busy, Mr.
Chairman,----
Chairman Pai. No, no.
Senator Kennedy [continuing]. And we really appreciate you
coming by today. You are one of the smartest guys I have met in
government and I just want to thank you for your service.
Chairman Pai. Well, you are very kind to say that and
hopefully I will continue to live up to the acclimation.
Senator Kennedy. You will. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Pai. Thank you.
Senator Kennedy. Folks, we are going to recess for 5
minutes because I have to go to Judiciary and make a quorum or
my office will be in Roanoke, but I will be back. In 5 minutes
and we will do our second panel.
[Recess.]
Senator Kennedy. We will now turn to our second panel of
distinguished witnesses. They represent two very fine
organizations in my judgment, two government watchdogs, the
Citizens Against Government Waste and the Taxpayers Protection
Alliance, Mr. Tom Schatz--am I saying that right, Tom?
Mr. Schatz. Yes, Senator.
CITIZENS AGAINST GOVERNMENT WASTE
Senator Kennedy. Serves as the President of Citizens
Against Government Waste. His organization, we are all familiar
with it, was founded in 1984. It was the successor to the Grace
Commission established by President Reagan. It is dedicated to
eliminating waste, fraud, abuse, and mismanagement in
government.
Mr. Schatz has served as President of that organization
since 1992 and is a respected authority and expert on efforts
to protect taxpayer dollars.
TAXPAYERS PROTECTION ALLIANCE
Mr. David Williams, we are happy to have him with us today.
He serves as the President of Taxpayers Protection Alliance.
The Alliance was founded in 2011, I believe, as a nonprofit
educational advocacy organization. It is dedicated to educating
the public through the research, analysis, and dissemination of
information on the government's effects on the economy, and I
can say that the Alliance's work and the Citizens Against
Government Waste work, I read their analyses often and they're
always well done and insightful, and I thank them for that.
What else? Mr. Williams is a strong advocate of good
government and an opponent of government waste, as is Mr.
Schatz, and has offered testimony on these efforts in State
legislatures and before foreign governments.
And with that, I will start with Mr. Williams, and I thank
you both for being here very much. Help us understand this
important issue.
STATEMENT OF MR. DAVID WILLIAMS, PRESIDENT, TAXPAYERS
PROTECTION ALLIANCE
Mr. Williams. It would be my pleasure to, and good morning
and thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this opportunity to testify
today about C band.
Now before we talk about the C band, let us get one thing
straight. These are the people's airwaves. These are not the
airwaves of private companies. This is the spectrum that is the
people's spectrum. It is owned by taxpayers. It is regulated by
the FCC. So let us get that out of the way.
You know, it is funny because over the years, people often
ask me, what is the biggest taxpayer rip-off? I have been doing
this for 26 years. People say what is the biggest taxpayer rip-
off you have seen. This is in the top 10. I mean, this is
significant. This is in the top 10 of taxpayer rip-offs I have
seen in 26+ years.
You have my written testimony. I am not going to read it. I
will give the Cliff Notes and give some highlights.
Senator Kennedy. I have it and I promise I am going to read
it later.
Mr. Williams. Fantastic. Thank you.
C-BAND SPECTRUM
So C-band spectrum, as you mentioned earlier, is the sweet
spot of spectrum. It is the mid band. It can go far distances
and we are talking about 5G that is going to be at least 10
times faster than 4G.
So this is going to do two things. The spectrum is two
things. First, it is a taxpayer asset. $60 billion. We are
talking about a lot of money, $60 billion, but we are also
talking about closing the Digital Divide in this country.
Right now, inner city kids are going to a Starbucks or
going to McDonald's to do their homework. That is unacceptable.
Right now in rural areas, people just do not have broadband.
So when we get this spectrum, we will utilize it for 5G,
we're going to close the Digital Divide without taxpayer money.
In fact, it is going to be a net gain for taxpayers when we
sell the spectrum.
Rural areas, we are talking about farmers. We are talking
about just communities but also telemedicine. The ideas are
limitless when it comes to--we have a doctor shortage in rural
areas. 5G is going to connect rural communities with hospitals
so they can make immediate diagnosis, potentially remote
surgery. So this is really fascinating stuff we are talking
about here when it is closing the Digital Divide and that's why
it has to happen quickly.
C-BAND ALLIANCE--SELL 5G IN THE PRIVATE MARKET
Now we have talked about the C-Band Alliance and their
offer to sell this in the private market. Well, we have a lot
of concerns. The first is that they want to sell 180 megahertz.
Experts have said we need at least 300 megahertz for it to be
real, to use the mid-band spectrum in a real way. That is the
first problem.
The second problem, the taxpayer. Where is the taxpayer in
all these discussions?
C-BAND ALLIANCE
So about 5 months ago, the C-Band Alliance called me and I
had about a 40-or-50-minute lecture from the C-Band Alliance as
to why we were so wrong about this issue and why we were
stopping the deployment of 5G and that, you know, we didn't
like the country.
So after this 40-or-50-minute lecture, I asked a very
simple question. I said, okay, you sell the spectrum. How much
are taxpayers getting? Silence, absolute silence. He said,
well, it is going to be a voluntary contribution. What does
that mean? Is that a dollar? Is that $10? Is that a billion
dollars?
Five months later, they still cannot answer that
fundamental question. What are taxpayers getting from this
spectrum? So that was the reddest of red flags during my
conversation, plus I didn't appreciate a 50-minute lecture. I
have been doing this a long time. I think I know my business by
now.
They railed against the FCC. They showed an incredible
amount of contempt for the FCC and the FCC process. Another red
flag. Listen. What Ajit Pai, Chairman Pai has done in the last
couple of years has been amazing. To close the Digital Divide,
really, you know, to increase speeds of the Internet.
A group of companies, is it four or three because one
backed out, I think they are coming back in, I do not know, but
everything always changes with the C-Band Alliance. You notice
that. So there is a lot of uncertainty with even who their
members are, but here you have the C-Band Alliance who rely on
spectrum disparaging the Federal Communications Commission, an
agency that they should be very thankful of because they got a
lot of spectrum and they've made a lot of money off of the
spectrum.
Again, they receive the spectrum for free. So that is our
concern, is what the C-Band Alliance is doing and what they are
saying.
So our choice----
Senator Kennedy. Could you repeat that, Mr. Williams?
Mr. Williams. Yes.
Senator Kennedy. The C-band spectrum or C-Band Alliance,
rather, got the C band. They hold it now. They got it for free.
Mr. Williams. Yes, this was given to them and they received
the spectrum for free and now they want to profit off of it.
So, Senator Kennedy, we have two choices. We have the FCC,
which, as you heard earlier, has done this hundreds of times in
the past. Taxpayers have gotten a $120 billion; I think is the
estimate to the Treasury from these spectrum sales. It is an
open, it is a transparent process.
Then we have the C-Band Alliance, totally in the dark. We
do not know whom they are going to sell it to. We do not know
for what price, what taxpayers are going to get from it, how
long it is going to take. We don't know any of these answers
from the C-Band Alliance, and isn't that what we deserve, some
answers?
There is going to be lawsuits. As soon as a private sale is
announced, there will be lawsuits and, quite honestly, the
Taxpayers Protection Alliance, we never get involved in
lawsuits, but this is pretty damn tempting because this is a
lot of money left on the table for taxpayers and this is a
bipartisan issue.
We have public knowledge on our side. We are a conservative
organization. I can count the amount of time that we have
agreed with public knowledge on one finger. We have the New
America Foundation. They are looking at this in a legal way to
look if the FCC can even do this. This was brought up earlier,
also. Can the FCC even do this?
So, please, for the sake of taxpayers, for the sake of
closing the Digital Divide, we hope that your subcommittee
continues to look at this and urges the FCC to look at this as
the people's spectrum. This is not the spectrum for these four
companies. This is the people's spectrum and it needs to be
treated as such.
Thank you very much.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of David Williams
Good morning and thank you for the opportunity to testify today. My
name is David Williams, president of the Taxpayers Protection Alliance
(TPA). TPA was founded to be a rapid-response nonpartisan taxpayer and
consumer advocacy group. When the government neglects its citizens and
makes decisions in the interests of a connected few at the expense of
all Americans, TPA sounds the alarm through op- eds, coalition letters,
and the media. We pride ourselves in quickly and loudly responding to
these taxpayer and consumer issues, and keeping citizens educated on
what their government is up to.
I've come to testify on a pressing issue that many people may not
know about, but will nonetheless be greatly impacted by with tens of
billions of taxpayer dollars and faster Internet speeds at stake. That
issue lies in the valuable piece of mid-band spectrum commonly known as
the C-band, which has unique properties critical to the nationwide
deployment of 5G wireless services. The C-band part of the spectrum is
especially important for making sure that consumers will have 5G access
in their homes, at work, and everywhere in-between, because of its
ability to support larger volumes of mobile data than lower
frequencies. And, by using this mid-band spectrum to deliver 5G to
millions of consumers, Internet providers can be sure that information
gets transmitted over the digital domain quickly and effectively. And
that's important, because 5G is at least 10 times faster than 4G and
doesn't require the pricey infrastructure currently required to get
Internet out to rural areas. That's right: Internet providers can use
C-band spectrum to close the digital divide, meaning that valuable
taxpayer resources won't have to be spent on government-owned networks
which typically waste more than $50 million while serving few
residents.
With 5G, consumers can get Internet access via small-cell
deployments the size of pizza-boxes attached to telephone poles. And I
assure you, the costs of these small-cell deployments are far lower
than laying cable through long stretches of rural America. 5G means
Internet far faster than 4G, and the capacity for powering telemedicine
and the Internet of things. And, let me repeat, 5G means closing the
digital divide WITHOUT taxpayer money.
There's a well-documented shortage of doctors in rural America, and
having a surgeon coordinate a procedure in real-time on a patient 2,000
miles away is a possibility with high-speed, high-quality Internet. But
things like remote procedures can only happen with better Internet
standards, and the standards promised by 5G will only be a reality if
there's sufficient bandwidth for Internet providers.
Lower income folks won't have to pay for expensive fiber to the
home or sit at a McDonald's or Starbucks to have access to fast
broadband.
Some have argued that, in order to harness the power of the C-band
for 5G, we need an alternative to the proven history of Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) auctions. A group of three--used to be
four--satellite companies known as the C-Band Alliance (CBA) has been
lobbying the agency and lawmakers for the right to commandeer C-band
and sell it privately in order to clear the spectrum of current users.
There's just one small problem: their proposal leaves the FCC and
taxpayers--the current owners of the spectrum--out of the equation
entirely. That's right, nowhere in the CBA's proposal is a plan or
guarantee that taxpayers will be made whole. The satellite group talks
a lot about making a ``voluntary contribution'' to the Treasury once
their private, opaque transaction is complete, but interestingly
enough, there are never any details provided.
TPA meticulously analyzed the ins-and-outs of CBA's proposal
shortly after it was announced. I had deep concerns after hearing about
this ``voluntary contribution'' to taxpayers, so I had a call with the
C-Band Alliance and shared these concerns with a senior employee at the
organization. This employee kept reassuring me that spectrum owners,
taxpayers, would see their due at the end of the day, but repeatedly
refused to provide any concrete details. He also railed against the FCC
and its auction process, despite a proven track record by the agency in
conducting more than 100 spectrum auctions since 1994 and compensating
taxpayers more than $120 billion over the past 25 years. Instead of
acknowledging this effective, transparent way of doing business, the
employee claimed that a truly free market approach would sidestep the
FCC entirely. It is amazing that an organization like the C-Band
Alliance (which has benefitted greatly from the current spectrum
allocation process) wouldn't trust the FCC, an agency that has given
them so much.
The CBA claims to be pro-free market, while proposing a process
that would make a mockery of free enterprise. To make their plan work,
the CBA would need the FCC to give them a monopoly on the selling of C-
band spectrum. TPA believes that government-granted monopolies
undermine markets and make things more expensive and difficult to
obtain. And of course, when a market exchange takes place, there is
usually some sort of pre-agreed upon payment that happens during the
transaction.
If the CBA gets their way, they'll receive all the benefit from
selling C-band spectrum without any guarantee that the true owner of
the spectrum--taxpayers--will see a single cent of the proceeds. And
the stakes are too high to ignore, since the proceeds from a C-band
auction could generate upwards of $60 billion for taxpayers. According
to CBA's description of their proposal, they want taxpayers to believe
that this is a special situation in which a large amount of spectrum
needs to quickly and efficiently be sold off, otherwise America will
lose the race to 5G. Except, the CBA's proposal provides nowhere near
enough spectrum to meaningfully aid in the nationwide deployment of 5G.
These satellite companies want FCC permission to clear just 180-
megahertz, which would not be nearly enough to meet the Trump
administration's laudable goals of 5G deployment. Experts in the field
recommend that, in order for America to have comprehensive 5G coverage,
each mobile operator should have access to at least 100-megahertz worth
of contiguous mid-band spectrum. That's certainly what other countries
are doing. China and Japan are in the midst of allocating at least 100-
megahertz to most of their carriers and freeing up at least 500-
megahertz total mid-band spectrum in their countries.
CBA would free up less than half the spectrum that other countries
are freeing up, despite our Nation having one of the largest and most
complicated digital markets in the world. America's lopsided deal with
a handful of satellite companies would force 330 million Americans to
rely on too little spectrum at far too high of a price. And even that
assumes that the CBA's actions will ever come to fruition. Their
``private sale'' proposal almost certainly runs afoul of FCC
regulations, particularly Section 309(j)(6)(E) of the Communications
Act, which reaffirms the obligation of the FCC to ``avoid mutual
exclusivity in application and licensing proceedings.'' Current law is
designed to protect the public interest of citizens and taxpayers, and
for good reason. If the FCC were to sidestep the auctions process and
empower a government-granted monopoly to sell spectrum, there would
almost certainly be an avalanche of lawsuits. And if a judge rules
post-FCC approval that CBA's proposal does in fact violate the
Communications Act, it'll be back to the drawing board for the U.S. as
other countries move forward in providing 5G. A sale by the FCC would
incur no legal recourse and make the deployment of 5G faster.
Even before the FCC comes to a decision about C-band spectrum,
there are large cracks emerging in the supposed ``alliance'' of
satellite companies. On September 3, Eutelsat decided to drop out of
the CBA, citing significant member disagreements about the share of
proceeds and the ``voluntary contribution'' to be given to taxpayers.
Eutelsat chief executive Rodolphe Belmer claimed that there's no real
agreement within the CBA about how much taxpayers should be compensated
post-sale, a statement that undermines the stated position of the
alliance's leadership. This clearly doesn't bode well for taxpayers,
who can't seem to get a clear answer as to whether they will receive
any compensation from the CBA under their plan. But it also means that
the FCC can't be too sure as to who they're dealing with. Post
Eutelsat's exit, the FCC has to wonder if CBA will further splinter in
coming months, and what impact continuing disagreements will have on 5G
deployment.
But there's good news: America has other, better alternatives to
the CBA's non-plan. The 5G Plus Plan, proposed by America's
Communications Association, the Competitive Carriers Association, and
Charter Communications, would free up more than double the amount of
spectrum that CBA's proposal would, without jeopardizing the law and
making a mockery of free enterprise. Under this plan, the FCC would do
what it does best and auction off at least 370 megahertz of critical
mid-band spectrum for broadband deployment.
Since the FCC would be running the show, proceeds from winning bids
would actually be deposited in the Treasury, just as they have been for
every spectrum auction run by the FCC since 1994. Taxpayers would see
dividends from the valuable spectrum assets that they own, instead of
losing them in a fly-by- night sale devoid of any transparency. Under
the 5G Plus Plan, the delivery of cable and other video programming
would be shifted from satellite systems to a comprehensive network of
terrestrial fiber facilities. Since most of the satellite bandwidth in
the C-Band is consumed by the delivery of video programming,
transitioning to fiber solves the pressing problem of spectrum
availability and makes it possible to free up a historically-large
block of mid-band spectrum.
This freeing-up of spectrum can and must be done through lawful,
transparent channels that guarantee compensation for taxpayers. It must
be done in a way that avoids lawsuits and any unnecessary delays in 5G
deployment. And it must be done in a way that keeps companies from
rigging the system in the future. If the FCC makes a habit out of
granting government-guaranteed windfalls for businesses that received
spectrum for free, other companies will quickly jump on the gravy train
of cronyism. Imagine a future status-quo where companies sit on
spectrum for decades, waiting for the FCC's green light to form cartels
of their own and sell taxpayers' property without having to compensate
taxpayers. That will send all the wrong signals to taxpayers,
consumers, and Internet providers, but that's the future we're looking
at if these satellite companies get their way.
This decision is an important one, with ramifications that go well
beyond Treasury proceeds and future FCC policy. More than 20 million
Americans currently lack access to Internet at a speed and quality
deemed adequate by the FCC. There's been plenty of progress made on
broadband access since Ajit Pai became Chairman in 2017. Under his
watch, the agency has made sure that unnecessary regulations don't get
in the way of deploying high-speed Internet. But the remaining
Americans without access to quality, high-speed Internet will continue
to be locked out of the digital domain until the costs of rural
deployment go down. Currently, it makes little sense for Internet
providers to expand their networks out to places like Burlington,
Vermont or rural Kentucky.
The costs of laying the cable required to connect these places to
the Internet are simply too high for the number of consumers covered.
The economics just don't work out, but that hasn't stopped city,
county, and State governments across the country from trying to build
out their own networks to connect the 20 million Americans without
Internet access. And almost always, these government attempts to build
out Internet networks end in failure. Kentucky is trying to build out
their own state-wide broadband network, but costs have ballooned from
$330 million to $1.5 billion without any real plan to connect rural
residents to broadband. Additional Federal and State tax dollars are at
risk of being spent and wasted.
Burlington, Vermont has had to take $20 million from critical
public services to invest in their own broadband boondoggle, which just
like in Kentucky, is failing to deliver Internet. You can see countless
more examples of these failed undertakings on our website
munibroadbandfailures.com, which features an interactive map complete
with project descriptions and cost estimates. If you take the time and
scroll around that map, you'll quickly see far too many pins across the
50 States than there should be. The truth is, the list of failed
government broadband projects is far too high. And that list will only
continue to grow unless the broken status-quo of Internet deployment
changes.
Of the proposals presented for clearing critical mid-band spectrum,
only the 5G Plus Plan delivers the goods without destroying the
spectrum markets that policymakers worked so hard to build for decades.
And with enough spectrum cleared for 5G deployment, high-tech companies
currently considering which countries to invest in would give the U.S.
another look.
For the past century, America has been a pioneer in game-changing
technologies and led the way on biomedical technologies, aviation
innovation, Internet development, and yes, the Popeye's chicken
sandwich. Pro-innovation policies have been the result of consistent,
principled U.S. leadership, reinforced by diligent decisionmaking
across dozens of agencies. Now, lawmakers and the FCC must decide how
to power next-generation Internet and close the digital divide between
rural and urban America. There is a way to get this done, an approach
that would preserve the rule of law, make taxpayers whole, and end the
burden of broadband boondoggles across the country. But if policymakers
abandon their leadership and empower a government-granted monopoly to
sell off spectrum, America will forfeit a critical opportunity and make
millions of taxpayers and consumers worse off.
As such, our organization urges you to embrace the promise and
potential of FCC auctions and ensure that taxpayers are justly
compensated for the use of their assets. Tens of billions of dollars,
and most importantly, the lives of millions of consumers are at stake.
So please, do the right thing and embrace markets and innovation.
I am happy to answer any questions at this time.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Williams.
Mr. Schatz.
STATEMENT OF MR. TOM SCHATZ, PRESIDENT, CITIZENS
AGAINST GOVERNMENT WASTE
5G
Mr. Schatz. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
being here, as well, and I appreciate Dave's comments about the
reasons why we should be adding more 5G capacity to our
Nation's spectrum, to our communications, and I know that 5G is
real because I saw an ad at the bus stop on the way over here
today. So it is here, but we need more of it and we certainly
need the mid band, as everyone has mentioned. It is the sweet
spot.
C-BAND ALLIANCE
Dave mentioned New America Foundation. I was at a briefing
earlier this year. The first thing I mentioned was the property
rights issue. C-Band Alliance does not own it. The taxpayers
do. I asked the same question that Dave asked at the end of his
discussion or lecture, I should say, which is what are the
taxpayers getting out of this? I was met with the same silence.
It was a room of about 50 or 60 people. They never said a word
about how the taxpayers will benefit from this.
So in my written statement, which I offer to the record,
along with CAGW's report called ``The Race to 5G: Protecting
Taxpayers Through Spectrum Auctions,'' I ask they both be
entered into the record.
ANALYSIS GROUP STUDY--ALLOCATING C-BAND SPECTRUM
One of the things I would point out is that there's a
February 2019 Analysis Group study that's found allocating 400
megahertz of C-band spectrum would lead to $154 billion in
capital expenditures by wireless providers on 5G networks over
7 years, add $274 billion to U.S. GDP, and create 1.3 million
new direct and indirect jobs. That is just 400. I know we have
talked about 300, but it is a large number, much larger than
the $60 billion that the taxpayers should be getting from this
deal.
For the C-band spectrum sold through the normal FCC
process, there would be strong oversight, proceeds would go to
the taxpayers, all of the incumbents would be assured of being
protected, and the spectrum would be used for 5G development
and deployment.
C-BAND ALLIANCE
C-Band Alliance has never said they would even be using it
for that purpose. They would just be selling it. No guarantee
it would be used for anything, other than whatever the people
they sell it to would like to do with it.
There are, of course, questions about their ability to sell
something they do not own. Imagine that somebody is leasing a
piece of Federal property and they say, hey, I would like to
sell this now. I do not own it, I am just using it. I got a
license and I got a lease, but I want to sell it. This is what
we are looking at with this process.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT
You asked about the Communications Act. I am not an expert
in that, but certainly the FCC can figure it out, but I think
you are correct that the Communications Act is very clear that
spectrum, regardless of where it is, is an asset of the U.S.
taxpayers. Unless the licenses are sold, nobody can sell them
again.
There is a secondary market process, but companies that
sell on the secondary market have already purchased the
licenses from the FCC. They cannot sell them without purchase
and that has been tried before. Dave worked with me for many
years and we went through with Cyren Call, North Point and
Winstar, all of whom tried to do something with spectrum they
either did not own or they just tried to get it for free,
promising they would do something really interesting with it,
like first responders, which we are finally dealing with.
Since 1994, the FCC has conducted a 102 spectrum auctions,
generated more than a $122 billion to taxpayers. I am not
disagreeing with the Chairman's estimate. He was talking about
since the Balanced Budget Act, but there were prior auctions,
as well.
Given this track record of success and the FCC's expertise,
I do not see any reason that anyone other than the FCC should
be conducting the C-band auction.
KERRISDALE CAPITAL MANAGEMENT--PRIVATE SALE ESTIMATES FOR INTELSAT AND
SES
You know, again one of the issues we have raised in this
report is the ownership one and the C-Band Alliance (CBA)
apparently thinks that they do own it because people are
calling this a windfall for them if they are able to sell it. A
hedge fund, Kerrisdale Capital Management, estimated that a
private sale would increase Intelsat's value by 757 percent and
the European satellite company SES's value by 217 percent.
So this is a wonderful deal for them.
C-BAND ALLIANCE--FOREIGN COMPANIES
Senator Kennedy. These are the foreign companies.
Mr. Schatz. These are two of the three or whatever the
number. These are two that are still in the C-Band Alliance,
yes.
And this was written a year ago when they first made this
proposition. So, of course, their stock immediately went up.
So, yes, it is certainly going to benefit them, but we do not
know who else it's going to benefit.
You mentioned the pre-selling concept. It may be there, may
not be there, but if it is there and the C-Band Alliance goes
forward, you cannot undo that. That would mean there would be
no competition.
C-BAND ALLIANCE PROPOSAL
Chairman Pai mentioned all of the companies that have been
able to purchase licenses over the past 2 years and will do so
in the future, that is open, fair, and transparent. None of
that appears in the C-Band Alliance proposal.
So I think your subcommittee's--I should say the
committee's comments in the fiscal year 2020 Appropriations
Bill are accurate that the FCC should be conducting this
auction.
Senator Danes and Representative Gianforte have sent a
letter to the FCC urging a traditional public process that
offers transparency and equal opportunity and we certainly very
much agree with that, as I said, as well as the language in
there, and we very much appreciate your strong leadership on
this issue.
We know that you have concerns about helping to bridge the
Digital Divide and giving Rural America access to the latest in
telecommunications technology, and we think that whatever
happens with that $60 billion, using some of that for that
purpose would be totally appropriate.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement and the report ``The Race to 5G: Protecting
Taxpayers Through Spectrum Auctions'' follows:]
Prepared Statement of Thomas A. Schatz
My name is Thomas A. Schatz, and I am president of Citizens Against
Government Waste (CAGW). CAGW was founded in 1984 by the late
industrialist J. Peter Grace and nationally-syndicated columnist Jack
Anderson to build support for implementation of President Ronald
Reagan's Grace Commission recommendations and other waste-cutting
proposals. Since its inception, CAGW has been at the forefront of the
fight for efficiency, economy, and accountability in government. CAGW
has more than one million members and supporters nationwide, and, over
the past 35 years, the organization has helped save taxpayers $1.3
trillion through the implementation of Grace Commission findings and
other recommendations.
CAGW does not accept government funds. The organization's mission
reflects the interests of taxpayers and covers a wide variety of
issues, including technology and telecommunications. The sale of
Federal assets, including spectrum, has been part of CAGW's agenda for
many years.
The October 25, 2018 Presidential Memorandum on Developing a
Sustainable Spectrum Strategy for America's Future made it clear that
access to spectrum is a critical component to maintaining America's
lead in next generation technologies, particularly 5G network
deployment.\1\ The widespread use of wireless 5G will dramatically
change mobile communications across the Nation and lay the groundwork
to support an increasing number of Internet of Things applications and
devices. While 5G networks are currently being deployed using high-band
millimeter wave and low-band spectrum, deployment of 5G using mid-band
spectrum is essential. CAGW appreciates the Subcommittee on Financial
Services and General Government and particularly Chairman Kennedy's
leadership to ensure that taxpayers are protected throughout the
process of determining how to make as much mid-band spectrum as
possible available for this purpose.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The White House, ``Presidential Memorandum on Developing a
Sustainable Spectrum Strategy for America's Future,'' October 25, 2018,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/presidential-
memorandum-developing-sustainable-spectrum-strategy-americas-future/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mid-band is considered the sweet spot of spectrum, with unique
properties that make it especially effective for 5G infrastructure
deployment. According to an August 2, 2017 Intel blog, ``Mid-Band
spectrum is especially well suited for mobile broadband due to its wide
coverage, and potential for low latency, and high reliability.'' \2\
Mid-band doesn't require several small cells to be located in a
condensed area because data signals can travel through a larger range
in the spectrum; its wide channels also allow for high-speed data
transfers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Peter Pitsch, ``5 Reason Why We Need Mid-Band Spectrum for
5G,'' Intel, August 2, 2017, https://blogs.intel.com/policy/2017/08/02/
5-reasons-need-mid-band-spectrum-5g/#gs.9d7mdu.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The economic impact of mid-band spectrum utilization was examined
in a February 2019 Analysis Group study, which found that reallocating
400 MHz of spectrum in the 3.45 to 4.2 GHz range for licensed mid-band
spectrum would lead to $154 billion in capital expenditures by wireless
providers for 5G networks over 7 years, add $274 billion to U.S. GDP,
and create 1.3 million new direct and indirect jobs.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ David W. Sosa, Ph.D. and Greg Rafert, Ph.D., ``The Economic
Impacts of Reallocating Mid-Band Spectrum to 5G in the United States,''
Analysis Group, https://api.ctia.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/The-
Economic-Impacts-of-Reallocating-Mid-Band-Spectrum-to-5G-1.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On July 12, 2018, the FCC adopted an Order and Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking on Expanding Flexible Use of the 3.7 to 4.2 GHz Band (GN
Docket No. 18-122) to review the potential for using this mid-band
spectrum, also known as the C-band, for further 5G deployment.\4\ This
500 MHz swath of prime spectrum is currently used by satellite and
video content providers for content distribution, and satellite phone
service for those areas where existing landline or cellular
capabilities are non-existent or unreliable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Federal Communications Commission, ``In the Matter of Expanding
Flexible Use of the 3.7 to 4.2 GHz Band,'' GN Docket No. 18-122, Order
and Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Adopted July 12, 2018, https://
docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-18-91A1.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, C-band spectrum is underutilized. The satellite industry
has indicated a willingness to vacate 200 MHz of the 500 MHz, but there
is an ongoing debate over whether this is sufficient, as well as how
the spectrum might be re-purposed and sold.
If C-band spectrum is sold through the normal FCC auction process
with strong oversight, the proceeds would go to the taxpayers,
incumbent users of the spectrum would be protected, and the spectrum
would be used for 5G development and deployment. If it is sold through
a private sale or auction conducted by a small group of satellite
companies, there are questions about their ability to sell something
they do not own; there is no guarantee taxpayers would see any of the
revenues generated from the sale; incumbent users are not assured they
will be made whole; and there would be limited FCC oversight. The
government has a strong interest in making sure this process works like
other auctions, because spectrum is unlike any other public asset in
terms of its value and strategic importance for the future of the
economy and national security.
Since 1994, the FCC has conducted 102 spectrum auctions, which have
generated more than $122 billion for taxpayers.\5\ An auction of C-band
spectrum has the potential to add $11 billion to $60 billion to that
total, depending on the amount of spectrum made available for sale and
the amount of net proceeds available following reimbursement for the
cost of vacating and reallocating the spectrum.\6\ Given this track
record of success, it is difficult to see why any entity other than the
FCC should be permitted to conduct the C-band spectrum auction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Federal Communications Commission, ``Auctions Summary:
Completed Auctions,'' July 17, 2019, https://www.fcc.gov/auctions-
summary.
\6\ Deborah Collier and Thomas Schatz, ``The Race to 5G: Protecting
Taxpayers through Spectrum Auctions,'' (``The Race to 5G'') Citizens
Against Government Waste, April 2019, https://www.cagw.org/reporting/
race-to-5g.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There have been several proposals provided to the FCC on how best
to utilize the C-band spectrum and sell portions of the spectrum for
5G. One suggestion is to use the incentive auction authorization
provided by the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012,
which included provisions to increase the amount of spectrum available
for mobile use by allocating additional federally held unused spectrum
to be auctioned by the FCC.\7\ This law also provided authorization for
the FCC to conduct the first reverse incentive auctions to make
additional spectrum available to mobile providers, from which the
proceeds are being used for nationwide deployment of FirstNet, a first
responder communications network, and deficit reduction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ ``H.R. 3630 (112th): Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation
Act of 2012,'' govtrack.us, February 22, 2012, https://www.govtrack.us/
congress/bills/112/hr3630.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If this process was used for C-band, satellite owners and their
customers would be reimbursed for vacating a certain amount of spectrum
through a reverse auction, and then the FCC would repackage the vacated
spectrum and sell it in a forward auction to mobile carriers. Another
proposal would increase the amount of available spectrum to at least
370 MHz of spectrum by recommending that the net proceeds from an FCC
conducted C-band auction are used to bring the content carried over
satellite back to earth by building out fiber across the country to
deliver the data between the broadcast stations.
The most widely-publicized and controversial proposal for mobile
carriers to gain access to the C-band has been proposed by the C-Band
Alliance (CBA), a consortium of satellite owners who have agreed to
vacate their customers from the lower 200 MHz of C-band spectrum and
sell this spectrum in the private market. In April 2019, CAGW published
a report, ``The Race to 5G: Protecting Taxpayers Through Spectrum
Auctions.'' Auctions.'' \8\ I ask that the report be included along
with my written testimony for the record.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Collier and Schatz, ``The Race to 5G.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One of the issues raised in CAGW's report is whether the satellite
companies have or can obtain the authority to sell something they do
not own, but only have a license to use. In FCC auctions, the
government is selling spectrum that it owns. In secondary market sales,
companies that purchased spectrum licenses from the FCC may sell them
to another company. Therefore, ownership is paramount to the ability to
sell Federal assets.
Rights to the C-band spectrum are more complicated than some
respondents to the FCC's notice of proposed rulemaking would make it
seem. According to the International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
Constitution, radio frequencies and satellite orbits are limited
natural resources, and therefore must be used in a manner that will
allow for equitable access.\9\ Globally, the ITU Radiocommunications
Sector (ITU-R) manages radio-frequency spectrum and satellite orbits to
ensure a rational, equitable, efficient, and economical use of the
radio-frequency spectrum of all radiocommunications systems, including
those using satellite orbits.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ International Telecommunication Union, ``Constitution of the
International Telecommunication Union, Article 44, Use of the Radio-
Frequency Spectrum and of the Geostationary-Satellite and Other
Satellite Orbits,'' https://www.itu.int/council/pd/constitution.html.
\10\ International Telecommunications Union, ``Welcome to ITU-R,''
https://www.itu.int/net/ITU-R/
index.asp?category=information&rlink=itur-welcome%2525E2%25258C%2525A9=e
n.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The C-band spectrum is governed by a ``full-band, full-arc'' policy
which means that rather than users receiving and holding an ownership
right to one specific frequency in the band, the FCC has given all
users of the band equal access to the entire 500 MHz of spectrum within
the band, allowing ground stations to point their satellite dishes in
every direction toward every possible geosynchronous satellite.\11\
Because incumbent users of the C-band spectrum have authorization to
access the entire 500 MHz as part of the full-band, full-arc policy,
individual corporate rights within the C-band are amorphous, but the
government's rights are clear.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Mitchell Lazarus, ``Fixed Service versus Full-Band, Full-Arc
Coordination,'' National Spectrum Management Association, May 16, 2017,
https://nsma.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/2017-06-nsma-fixed-service-
versus-full-band-full-arc-coordination.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions have also been raised about whether the lower 200 MHz of
spectrum described in the CBA plan will be enough for 5G deployment.
GSMA, which represents mobile operators around the world, recommends
that regulators allocate at least 80-100 MHz of contiguous mid-band
spectrum and around 1 GHz of millimeter wave bands (26/28 GHz) to each
mobile operator. \12\ China has already begun assigning a minimum 100
MHz to each of their mobile operators within the C-band.\13\ Based on
one of the CBA's submissions to the FCC, of the 200 MHz they plan to
clear for mobile use, only 180 MHz would be available, due to the
necessity of a 20 MHz guard band between the lower mobile portion of
spectrum use and the upper satellite use. This means that only two
carriers would have access to barely enough spectrum to deploy 5G
networks in the mid-band using this spectrum, and if the spectrum was
sold through a private sale or auction, the CBA would be placed in the
untenable position of picking winners and losers in the U.S.
marketplace.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ GSMA, ``5G Spectrum GSMA Public Policy Position,'' July 2019,
https://www.gsma.com/
spectrum/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/5G-Spectrum-Positions.pdf.
\13\ Joseph Waring, ``China releases 5G spectrum to state-run
operators,'' Mobile World Live, December 10, 2018, https://
www.mobileworldlive.com/asia/asia-news/china-releases-5g-spectrum-to-
state-run-operators/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The CBA's second-price, sealed bid auction proposal is
exceptionally complex and lacks transparency in how winning bids would
be determined, creating uncertainty for mobile providers. The novelty
of the CBA proposal would require additional time as bid evaluation
metrics are developed and auditing and transparency protocols are
created to ensure a fair bidding process. Potential bidders must also
be educated on how such a sale would be conducted. Yet, the CBA claims
its process would be more efficient and faster than an FCC auction.
Any delay in the sale of the spectrum is a luxury the U.S.
Government does not have in its race with China and other countries to
deploy 5G. By contrast, the FCC-conducted public auction process is
well-documented and administratively simple, encouraging a broad
spectrum of bidders from a variety of incumbents, and new entrants.
A 2014 GSMA study reviewed the costs of re-allocating 400 MHz of C-
band spectrum in Australia and Indonesia, noting that based on the
number of providers in the area, this is optimal amount of spectrum
that could be reused for mobile broadband purposes in the APEC
area.\14\ This same amount of spectrum could provide four carriers in
the U.S. with sufficient spectrum, keeping 100 MHz of spectrum
available for satellite use.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ ``Economic assessment of C-band re-allocation,'' Frontier
Economics, January 2014, https://www.gsma.com/spectrum/wp-content/
uploads/2014/11/GSMA.-Frontier-report-on-Economic-assessment-of-C-band-
re-allocation-2014.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, there is a question about how the proceeds from any sale
of the C-band spectrum would be allocated. Under the CBA proposal, the
satellite owners would retain any profits achieved from the sale of the
spectrum after expenses of reallocating, vacating, and repurposing the
spectrum are deducted.
The deal is being called a ``windfall'' for the members of the
CBA.\15\ Hedge fund Kerrisdale Capital Management estimated that a
private sale would increase Intelsat's value by 757 percent and SES's
value by 217 percent, and that the total value of the sale of the
spectrum could be as much as $60 billion.\16\ The CBA has offered a
small ``contribution'' to the U.S. Treasury, but Eutelsat's withdrawal
leaves this in doubt.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Chris Forrester, ``Satellite's Multi-Billion Dollar
Windfall,'' ibc.org, October 10, 2018, https://www.ibc.org/publish/
satellites-multi-billion-dollar-windfall/3374.article.
\16\ Ibid.
\17\ Caleb Henry, ``Eutelsat leaves C-Band Alliance as spectrum
decision looms,'' Space News, September 3, 2019, https://spacenews.com/
eutelsat-leaves-c-band-alliance-as-spectrum-decision-looms/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As CAGW noted in its April 19 report: ``The C-Band Alliance has
received commitments from its members to 'undertake, manage, and
complete all necessary actions to effectuate' customer migration and
has proposed covering the moving expenses of their satellite service
customers with 120 percent of the costs of repacking them onto new
satellites.\18\ However, this commitment only applies to members of the
C-Band Alliance and provides little assurance to incumbents using other
satellite providers that their video and audio content will continue to
be delivered as expected.'' \19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Collier and Schatz, ``The Race to 5G.''
\19\ John Eggerton, ``C-Band Alliance Outlines Compensation for
Repack,'' Multichannel, April 3, 2019, https://www.multichannel.com/
news/c-band-alliance-outlines-compensation-for-repack.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During the July 12, 2018 FCC meeting, Commissioner Michael O'Reilly
said, ``any reallocation must fully protect the incumbent users that
currently use the C-band to bring many services to consumers. ... That
does not mean they all must be accommodated on remaining C-band
spectrum, but their ability to offer services cannot be disrupted.''
\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Federal Communications Commission, ``Statement of Commissioner
Michael O'Reilly, Re: Expanding Flexible Use of the 3.7 to 4.2 GHz
Band, GN Docket No. 18-122; Expanding Flexible Use in Mid-Band Spectrum
Between 3.7 and 24 GHz, GN Docket No. 17-183; Petition for Rulemaking
to Amend and Modernize Parts 25 and 101 of the Commission's Rules to
Authorize and Facilitate the Deployment of Licensed Point-to-Multipoint
Fixed Wireless Broadband Service in the 3.7-4.2 GHz Band, RM-11791;
Fixed Wireless Communications Coalition, Inc., Request for Modified
Coordination Procedures in Band Shared Between the Fixed Service and
the Fixed Satellite Service, RM-11778, July 13, 2018, https://
docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/DOC-352520A3.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Due to the questions about property rights associated with this
spectrum; the broad experience of the FCC in conducting public
auctions; the obscure secondary market auction proposed by the CBA and
its failure to assure the protection of all incumbents and users; and
the lack of a guarantee that taxpayers will benefit from the sale or
that the spectrum would be used for 5G in the CBA plan, CAGW believes
that only an FCC-led public auction can provide the best and most
objective outcome for all interested parties, including satellite
operators, cable operators, broadcasters, and programmers. As FCC
Commissioner Brendan Carr noted during the FCC's April 12, 2019
meeting, the agency's auction proceedings are ``a model for the
world.'' \21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Federal Communications Commission, ``Statement of Commissioner
Brendan Carr, Re: Incentive Auction of Upper Microwave Flexible-Use
Service Licenses in the Upper 37 GHz, 39 GHz, and 47 GHz for Next-
Generation Wireless Services, AU Docket No. 19-59,'' April 12, 2019,
https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/DOC-356984A3.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Several senators and representatives support the FCC auction
process for the C-band, including Sen. Steve Daines (R-Mont.) and Rep.
Greg Gianforte (R-Mont.) who sent a letter to the FCC on July 25, 2019,
urging the agency to conduct the assignment of 5G licenses in the C-
band ``through a traditional public process that offers transparency
and equal opportunity.'' \22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Sen. Steve Daines (R-Mont.) and Rep. Greg Gianforte (R-Mont.),
``Letter to FCC Chairman Ajit Pai,'' July 25, 2019, https://
www.ccagw.org/sites/default/files/Gianforte%20Daines%20
FCC%20C-Band%20Letter%202019.07.25.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CAGW also appreciates Chairman Kennedy's strong leadership on this
issue. His efforts to support the public auction of this spectrum will
provide transparency to taxpayers and prevent U.S.-owned spectrum from
being sold on the private market. Such an auction will ensure the
taxpayers' interests are protected, and any proceeds above and beyond
relocation costs and expenses should revert to the treasury. The
chairman's continued advocacy to ensure that auction proceeds are
repurposed to help bridge the digital divide and give rural America
access to the latest in telecommunications technology will also enhance
and maintain the Nation's leadership in 5G.
Report language has been included in the fiscal year 2020 Senate
Financial Services Appropriations Act that suggests only the FCC should
conduct a public auction of the C-band spectrum: ``The Committee
encourages the FCC to prioritize resources toward exploring
opportunities for spectrum to help accelerate the deployment of 5G to
rural communities. The mid-band spectrum, specifically the C-band, is
particularly well-suited for 5G services. However, the Committee
remains concerned by proposals that entail limited FCC oversight and
public input, and contain no guarantee that taxpayers and the U.S.
Treasury benefit from revenues generated by the sale of 5G licenses.
The airwaves are a public resource, and the Federal Government has a
responsibility to exercise appropriate oversight of its allocation.
Therefore, the Committee encourages the FCC to conduct a public auction
of the C-band spectrum that is fair, open, and transparent.'' \23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Senate Committee on Appropriations, ``Financial Services and
General Government Appropriations Bill, 2020,'' September 19, 2019,
https://www.appropriations.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/
FY2020%20FSGG%20Appropriations%20Act,%20Report%20116-111.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CAGW agrees with this report language, which sends a strong message
to the FCC that the airwaves are a public resource and any sale of C-
band spectrum should be conducted through an FCC public auction to
protect the taxpayers' interests.
I would like to thank the subcommittee and in particular Chairman
Kennedy for your efforts to ensure that as much spectrum as possible is
made available for 5G and other mobile and Wi-Fi uses, and the proceeds
from the sale of any publicly-held spectrum benefits taxpayers, the
economy, and U.S. global technological leadership. I appreciate you
inviting me to testify and I am prepared to answer any questions you
may have.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, gentlemen.
Maybe you can help me understand this. I do not hate
anybody and I do not mean to disparage anybody. I may disagree
with folks, but I do not hate anybody, and I am a free
enterprise guy, and there are instances when a private company
or a private entity is more efficient than government. We know
that.
PRIVATE SALE
But I am trying to understand why that may be so in this
case, and the only argument I have been able to find for doing
a private deal is speed.
Now we all share that concern. We would like to be first in
5G. I do not want to exclude anybody else in the world from 5G,
but at the same time, we do not want to be excluded either. So
speed is important.
But I do not understand how a private deal, fairly done--
well, let me approach it another way. I don't understand why it
will take the FCC 7 years and that's what I keep reading, and
I'm thinking about holding another hearing and asking our
colleagues at the FCC who are in charge of public auctions to
come over here and tell us about their experience and tell us
if it will take 7 years and, if so, why.
What is the advantage of a private sale?
Mr. Williams. Well, it's going to take a lot less than 7
years for the FCC to do this and a private sale is going to--
the private sale may actually take the 7 years because there
will be litigation because this is out of the norm for the FCC.
You are going to have people suing the FCC for this process,
and I appreciate your question and your concern about the 7
years.
The FCC can do this in 2 and a half or 3 years and I will
leave that obviously to the experts at the FCC, but this is
what they have done in the past. If history is any indication
of what they can do, then they should be able to do this and
that is why one of the reasons we are against the private sale.
This could actually slow the deployment of 5G. The FCC
ultimately will be a quicker process than a private sale, and
we just do not know who is going to get the spectrum, but the
FCC is going to be an open, transparent process.
There have been hiccups in the past that they have
addressed and that they have moved past. If there are hiccups
with the private sale, there is no recourse. What is our
recourse with the private sale? What is your recourse as a
subcommittee Chairman if there's a problem with the private
sale? Virtually nothing. The oversight is gone.
Mr. Schatz. One of the reasons they may be saying it might
be faster is, as you have discussed and we have heard around,
is that they may have already figured out to whom they are
selling it. That would make it faster because they have already
made a deal. I do not know if that is correct or not.
Senator Kennedy. I understand.
Mr. Schatz. But that would make it faster. We already have
something set up and if the FCC allows them to do that in that
manner, then, as Dave said, there is no transparency, there is
no competition, but it would be quick. It would not be fair. It
would not be right. Money would not go to the taxpayers, but,
sure, that would be one way to do it. Again, they are selling
something they do not own.
Senator Kennedy. If you make--if you want it fast, just go
give it to somebody.
Mr. Schatz. Right.
Senator Kennedy. That is pretty fast.
Mr. Schatz. Right. And again, we do not know what may or
may not be involved in that.
The FCC is going to have to oversee this auction, which
also begs the question why don't they just do it themselves
since they are the experts?
C-BAND ALLIANCE
The C-Band Alliance has never sold spectrum, and the other
piece of this is that within the C band, this whole 500
megahertz of spectrum, they have what is called ``full band/
full arc access.'' Everybody has access to the entire band.
So how do you say who owns what? What about all the other
satellite companies that are not part of the C-Band Alliance?
Three of these satellite companies are not domestic-owned. It
does not matter. They are the ones that will be getting the
proceeds. They have not said they would share it with the
satellite companies. They do not own it and even if they said
all the satellite companies who use it will get the monies, you
still run into the same problem, maybe a little more equitable,
but they certainly have not said that. That is why you see the
small satellite owners objecting to this and others, as well,
saying we do not think that this is fair.
They also argue, by the way, that they would be able to
more quickly determine how the incumbent users could be moved
to the other piece of the spectrum, the higher band.
Senator Kennedy. It has to be dealt with.
Mr. Schatz. Right. But the FCC is already doing that with
broadcast repacking and moving these licensees, as the Chairman
said, now faster than they expected. Low-power stations and
others are moving to new bands, but the FCC knows how to do
that, too. So they could do that with these current users.
Senator Kennedy. So the incumbent--helping the incumbent
users' issue, as I call it, there is no reason the FCC cannot
deal with that itself.
Mr. Schatz. No, and that is what Commissioner O'Reilly has
said, that this is of paramount importance. I am paraphrasing,
but he said this is critical to the C band, is to protect the
incumbents, all of them.
Again, we do not know if the C-Band Alliance will protect
all of them or some of them or maybe even they have some deals
with some of them. We do not know anything. It is completely
opaque.
Mr. Williams. And let me just repeat something Tom said. I
think it is important that the FCC is still going to be
involved in this. So tax dollars are still going to be spent
to, you know, make sure the spectrum is used properly.
So why not just get the taxpayer benefits? If we're going
to spend taxpayer money to make sure that the private sale that
the spectrum is used properly, why not just get the benefits
and the money because the FCC is not going to allow a private
sale and just walk away and shut their doors. They are still
going to be very much involved in the process.
PUBLIC SALE VERSUS PRIVATE SALE
Senator Kennedy. Well, the--I'm not an expert by any means
on this, but the analogy I use, which is familiar to many of my
people, we're an oil-rich State and not only on onshore, as we
say, but from the seabed off the coast of Louisiana. The
minerals--this is an oversimplification. I will say many of the
minerals out there are owned by the American taxpayer. They are
owned by Louisiana but also the citizens of other states, and
it is important to get the wells drilled and to get the energy
produced.
But if I went to the Department of Interior and said speed
is of the essence, time is of the essence, here is the deal,
give me all the Federal minerals and I will get them leased in
a week, they would call security on me, and I don't understand.
I mean, I could do it faster than a public bid. I mean, I
think I could do it probably in a couple hours, but I would get
to keep all the money, and I don't understand why this is any
different. I am not disparaging anyone, and I'm not attributing
that scenario to C band.
I am thinking in terms of public sale versus private sale.
Mr. Williams. And royalties are paid on the extraction of
oil and minerals. So the taxpayer is made whole on that.
You can build a house really quickly. It could be an awful
house that has a terrible foundation, but you can do anything
quickly. That doesn't mean quick is the right way, especially
in something as sensitive as spectrum, and what we're trying to
accomplish as a nation technologically, this needs to be timed
the right way, and again, you know, I don't mean to keep on
repeating myself, but what if something goes wrong in the
private sale? What oversight is there to make sure that it is
done properly and correctly? I would say there is virtually no
oversight.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT
Mr. Schatz. Well, and again, the Communications Act, as you
mentioned, does control this entire process. So again, without
disparaging anybody, I do not know why it has taken this long
to figure out whether anyone else, other than the FCC, has the
authority to conduct an auction under the Communications Act.
It seems to me it would be a pretty straightforward
situation where it says the FCC conducts auctions, period. This
is the taxpayers' spectrum. They have done it before.
My other concern is if this is an exception to the rule and
an exception to the law, again after it's done, Congress comes
back and says, wait a second, you shouldn't have done that,
then we've got to redo everything else, not that we don't think
the Communications law should be updated, but I think in this
case, it's going to set a bad precedent not just for spectrum
but for other Federal assets, as you've just pointed out.
One of the things that we both have consistently talked
about over the years is if you can sell something that is owned
by the Federal Government and have it run by or owned by the
private sector, they're going to do a much better job with that
particular asset, whether it's property or anything else, but
spectrum is really the ultimate property.
We have gotten $122 billion. I cannot think of another
asset that has been sold as effectively and efficiently and
really made the United States the leader in technology. So I do
not know what these companies are going to do or how they are
going to do it and unless we do know that and your questions
are answered and the taxpayers are protected, I do not know why
we are even talking about it.
C-BAND ALLIANCE--EVASIVE PROPOSAL WITH AMOUNT OF MONEY GOING TO
TREASURY
Mr. Williams. And with all due respect, Senator Kennedy,
the C-Band Alliance has been very evasive with their proposal,
with the amount of money that they are going to give back to
the Treasury.
I do not like when people are evasive and they will not
answer and, listen, I don't take it personally that they
lectured me for almost an hour. You know, that is my job. But I
do take it personally, when they are leaving $60 billion worth
of taxpayer dollars on the table and that's what the FCC could
potentially do with a private sale.
So this is--you know, I am from Philadelphia. I take
everything personally. $60 billion I take very personally.
Senator Kennedy. Let me ask you one last question. I really
do appreciate your time today.
Help me understand. What is this about a voluntary
contribution? What is that?
Mr. Schatz. Well, it is because they have not said what
they will give. Their proposal does not include any commitment
or any kind of money that will go to the Treasury. That is why
they did not answer Dave's question how much goes to the
Treasury or my question directly to one of their
representatives. How much are you saying will go to the
Treasury? They do not have an answer because it is not in their
proposal. None of it is in their proposal. Even when they said
maybe we will go from 180 to 300 MHz or whatever else they are
amending, that has not changed.
There is no commitment for any of the money that may go to
them to be turned back to the taxpayers. That is why they are
saying, quote unquote, voluntary after all of our costs are
covered or after we, you know, help the incumbents move.
Well, I am putting this together and I am saying, wait, my
profit is whatever is left over after I help the incumbents
move. That is what it costs me to do this. How do we know if
that is accurate? But if it is done by the FCC, other than the
money that's needed to move these incumbents, goes to the
taxpayers.
Mr. Williams. So, look, Senator Kennedy, look at it this
way. We know that a $120 billion has gone to the Treasury from
these spectrum auctions. We have a lot of information about
what the spectrum auctions have been. That is gone.
PUBLIC SALE VERSUS PRIVATE SALE
I mean, what kind of information will we have after this
process? What kind of information will this private sale hide?
We have an incredible amount of transparency from the FCC and
this is not just Republican administrations. This has happened
at the FCC with Democrats and Republicans that we have had a
transparent process that has put a lot of money into the
Treasury. That is out the window with this private sale. It is
gone.
The voluntary contribution really sends, you know, chills
down my back because it could be a dollar. They could say,
well, we had all these costs of transition. We had all these
other things. So here is a $100 million. You guys happy? No?
Well, tough because that is what we are going to give.
C-BAND ALLIANCE BIDDING IN THE PUBLIC AUCTION
Senator Kennedy. Well, if we do a public auction, if the
FCC in its wisdom decides to do a public auction, do you know
of any prohibition against the companies, which I am sure, are
fine companies that comprise the C-Band Alliance, from bidding
in the public auction?
Mr. Schatz. Well, if they want to use the spectrum for 5G,
sure, that is not actually what they do, but, yes, they could
do that.
Senator Kennedy. But they could bid like everybody else,
right?
Mr. Schatz. Right. Exactly. They could bid on purchasing
the spectrum they've been licensed to use essentially, which
happens often that somebody has a piece of property that
they've been leasing and the government says, well, we're going
to sell it. Well, if you like it, then you buy it.
Mr. Williams. And to be clear, they are not worried about
the spectrum because they are in the position of selling it.
They know that they can sell the spectrum and just do fine
enough with their satellite companies. So this is not about
taking away a scarce resource from the satellite companies
because they are ready to get rid of it anyway. I mean, they
are ready to sell it. So, you know, they'll believe them if
they say that this is about scarcity because they're----
Senator Kennedy. Well, there is always a risk in a private
sale that the asset is going to be flipped.
Mr. Williams. Yes.
Mr. Schatz. Exactly.
Mr. Williams. So one thing the FCC does is makes sure that
you have a bunch of different bidders. You just do not have the
big incumbents bidding on this. There are programs to make sure
that other bidders can come in and serve rural areas.
PRIVATE SALE AND RURAL AREAS
We have zero assurance from a private sale that that will
take place.
Senator Kennedy. That the rural areas----
Mr. Williams. Yes.
Senator Kennedy [continuing]. Will be addressed?
Mr. Williams. Yes.
Senator Kennedy. That is a good point.
Mr. Williams. Because if they sell it to one big incumbent
and they do not use rural connectivity, yet the FCC will ensure
that either the money is used for that or the spectrum is used
for rural connectivity, and, I mean, your State needs it, you
know.
Senator Kennedy. Yes. We do.
Mr. Williams. Yes.
Senator Kennedy. We all do.
Well, thank you, gentlemen. I want to thank you again for
testifying today. I want to thank the Chairman, Chairman Pai,
Ajit, for coming over. I know he is busy.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
The record will remain open for one week for our
subcommittee Members to submit any statements or questions for
the witnesses for the record.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Commission for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted to Hon. Ajit Pai
Questions Submitted by Senator Steve Daines
Question 1. Chairman Pai, great to have you here to update us on
the work the FCC is doing to expedite moving spectrum into the
marketplace for 5G and broadband expansion. This is a topic we have
discussed before and you know better than most the importance of
clearing more spectrum, especially in the mid-band, for 5G technology.
The U.S. cannot afford to lose the race to 5G to China or any other
country. 5G, like 4G, will open up a whole new digital economy, and
making sure the U.S. is leading should be a top priority for all of us
here today. What more do you need from congress to help you expedite
getting more spectrum into the marketplace so the U.S. can continue to
lead in 5G deployment?
Answer. Securing American leadership in 5G is a national priority.
That's why the FCC has been pursuing a strategy to Facilitate America's
Superiority in 5G Technology--the 5G FAST Plan. By executing that plan,
the Commission has already made an unprecedented amount of spectrum
available for commercial, flexible wireless use, promoted wireless
infrastructure, and modernized regulations to encourage fiber
deployment. We appreciate the authority that Congress has granted us to
pursue the 5G FAST Plan, including the authority to repurpose spectrum
for 5G use. We will work with the Congress and this Committee if and
when any resource issues arise.
Question 2. Chairman Pai, one of the bands for 5G that I have been
very active on is the C-band, including writing you a letter on it in
July. I want to stress the importance of getting this spectrum out to
the market quickly. We cannot wait five plus years for it to be
available. But I also want to make sure that we don't steam roll
Montana's rural communities in the process or push out current
incumbents. I believe any auction of the C-band should be open and
transparent, allowing for both our small, rural companies to
participate as well as our national carriers. If only one company or a
small number of carriers have access to this spectrum then rural
Montana will be left behind again. Can you commit to me that you will
find a solution that is open and transparent, protects [C-band]
incumbents, and has real benefits for our rural communities?
Answer. Promoting broadband access in rural communities and closing
the digital divide is one of the Commission's top priorities, and mid-
band spectrum will play a major role in achieving this. Making
additional mid-band spectrum available offers incalculable benefits to
the American public, including promoting job growth, increasing access
to healthcare and education, and modernizing infrastructure in the
United States.
I am pleased to report that on February 28, 2020, the Commission
adopted rules to make 280 megahertz of C-band spectrum available
through an FCC-led auction. C-band spectrum is widely seen as a
critical swath of mid-band spectrum that could help drive American
leadership in 5G, the next generation of wireless connectivity. This
spectrum offers both geographic coverage and the capacity to transmit
large amounts of data--a combination that is appealing to entrepreneurs
and wireless consumers alike.
The decision meets each of the four priorities I've identified in
this proceeding. It frees up a significant amount of C-band spectrum
for 5G. It does so quickly. It generates revenue for the U.S. Treasury.
And it protects the services that are currently delivered using this
spectrum. The Commission will commence an auction later this year--on
December 8. I believe that a public auction, run by our outstanding
staff here at the FCC, is the best way to ensure that we assign this
spectrum in a fair, trusted, and transparent manner. The Commission has
a quarter-century track record of designing and implementing open and
transparent spectrum auctions to promote the development and deployment
of new technologies in all areas of the United States, including in
rural areas.
The Order establishes bidding credits for smaller entities and
rural service providers to facilitate their participation in the
auction and will, in turn, increase the availability of 5G service in
rural areas. The item also adopts Partial Economic Areas (PEAs) as the
geographic license area for the new flexible-use licenses. The
Commission has found that using PEAs--a smaller license area than some
may have wanted--encourages auction participation by a diverse group of
buyers and generates competition among large, regional, and small
carriers across various geographic areas.
The item is a win for innovators who want to introduce new services
in the C-band. It is a win for incumbents who will be fairly
compensated during this transition. And, most importantly, it is a win
for the American people, including those in rural America, who will
enjoy the rollout of new 5G services.
Question 3. Chairman Pai, as you know spectrum has many different
uses. It can be used for fixed-wireless broadband, WiFi systems, 5G,
public safety, cable and broadcast television, and so much more.
Balancing these uses can be tricky especially when dealing with
unlicensed spectrum. The 6 GHz band is one of those tricky bands where
we are looking to expand unlicensed use while simultaneously protecting
current uses. Are you optimistic that the FCC will be able to
successfully protect incumbents while also expanding uses in this band?
Answer. I have consistently stated that the Commission is committed
to protecting incumbent systems in the 6 GHz band from harmful
interference. The Commission's technical experts in our Office of
Engineering and Technology have spent considerable time reviewing the
substantial record that has been compiled in this proceeding and
meeting with interested stakeholders. The record reflects several
detailed technical studies and analyses relating to the potential
impact of unlicensed use on incumbent use of the 6 GHz band and
technical and operational methods to mitigate harmful interference. Our
Office of Engineering and Technology has been evaluating a variety of
issues, such as indoor and outdoor use cases and a variety of power
levels, to discern whether and to what extent unlicensed operations can
exist alongside incumbent uses. I can assure you that the Commission's
ultimate decision will be grounded in sound engineering analysis. And I
remain optimistic that we will be able to develop a set of technical
rules that will both safeguard incumbent users and allow for unlicensed
operations throughout the band.
Question 4. Chairman Pai, Montana is a big State, with populations
spread all over. What we have found is that some companies, sometimes
unknowingly, sometimes intentionally, will buy spectrum and only build
out in high-populated areas, missing our rural communities. I believe
it is important that when building the rules for spectrum auctions that
we focus on the needs of rural America. Buildout requirements that
focus on meeting specific population goals or rules that disincentive
subleasing or sharing spectrum hurt rural Montana. What can the FCC do
to better prioritize rural Montana when creating its build out
requirements and other rules during spectrum auctions?
Answer. My top priority has been to ensure that we close the
digital divide so that every American, including those living in rural
areas, enjoys the benefits of 5G and other advanced wireless services,
and I have taken several key steps to fulfill that goal.
First, I have supported the adoption of robust construction
requirements in all the bands that the Commission has made available
during my tenure. Buildout or construction requirements have functioned
as a core part of the Commission's wireless policy for decades. Such
requirements are an important tool for ensuring that spectrum does not
lie fallow and that new services are built out to businesses and
consumers. The Commission, when establishing construction requirements
for spectrum, considers a variety of factors to encourage deployment,
particularly in rural areas. We carefully consider various
characteristics of a spectrum band, including the availability of
equipment, before we establish construction requirements, and we
generally seek public comment on construction timeframes.
Second, I have supported the adoption of appropriate license area
sizes to ensure that small or rural providers have opportunities to
serve rural areas; for example, in the 3.5 GHz band, I supported the
adoption of counties as the geographic license area, which is the
smallest license area size that the Commission has auctioned. These
providers are likely to be focused on building out aggressively in the
areas in which they have obtained a license from the Commission.
Third, I have ensured the adoption of bidding credits in many of
our auctions to create additional opportunities for small businesses,
rural service providers, and entities that serve Tribal lands.
And finally, I have recognized that in some cases, the private
sector alone cannot create a business case for serving rural, sparsely
populated areas. Those are cases in which the FCC can and should help.
In particular, the FCC must take decisive action to target Universal
Service Fund support to rural America. That's why I will be proposing
the creation of the 5G Fund to deliver $9 billion to facilitate the 5G
deployment in rural America, including $1 billion that is specifically
set aside of precision agriculture needs.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Richard J. Durbin
Chairman Pai, you and I share a concern for closing the digital
divide. I recently introduced a bill that would help to accomplish this
goal, the Promoting Access to Broadband Act. This legislation would
award grants to States to increase awareness of, and enrollment in, the
Federal Communications Commission's (FCC) Lifeline program. Although 50
percent of non-broadband users cite cost as a reason they do not have
broadband at home, the Lifeline program had just a 28 percent
participation rate in 2017. I am very concerned that current proposals
being considered by the FCC will decrease enrollment even further and
make it more difficult for low-income Americans to afford
telecommunications services. Rather than moving forward with harmful
proposals such as capping the Universal Service Fund or establishing
lifetime caps on benefits, I believe we should be focused on expanding
access to the Lifeline program.
Question 1. Do you agree that we should increase enrollment in the
Lifeline program to benefit more low-income Americans, and will you
support my proposal to help States increase enrollment?
Answer. The Commission's top priority is closing the digital divide
and bringing the benefits of the Internet age to all Americans,
including low-income Americans. I agree that additional consumer
outreach can help inform consumers of the options they have for
affordable broadband, both through the Federal Lifeline program and
through private efforts such as the Connect2Compete initiative.
Question 2. What actions can the Commission take to boost
enrollment in the Lifeline program?
Answer. The Commission has taken a number of steps to inform
qualifying low-income consumers about the Lifeline program and
facilitate enrollment. For example, the Universal Service
Administrative Company, which administers the Lifeline program,
provides consumers with information on how they can (1) qualify for
Lifeline benefits; (2) enroll in the program; and (3) find service
providers in their area. Additionally, USAC offers educational
materials on its website that consumer advocacy groups, social service
agencies, and other organizations that support Lifeline-eligible
consumers can distribute in their communities. And the National
Verifier offers a consumer-friendly system for prospective Lifeline
subscribers to check their eligibility and enroll in the Lifeline
program without having to rely on a Lifeline carrier. In particular, a
consumer web portal enables Lifeline applicants to check eligibility
directly with the National Verifier--a process that usually takes only
a few minutes--and then receive a list of participating Lifeline
carriers in their area from which they can choose.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Joe Manchin, III
Question 1. C-BAND Auction
I am aware that there is an alternative plan to the private auction
being considered by the FCC that would free up even more spectrum by
using the proceeds from a transparent, public auction to build out
fiber to provide high-speed broadband to unserved rural areas. This
seems much more reasonable to me.
--How do you intend to ensure that small carriers and rural areas are
not left behind in the upcoming auction?
Answer. Promoting broadband access in rural communities and closing
the digital divide is one of the Commission's top priorities, and mid-
band spectrum will play a major role in achieving this. Making
additional mid-band spectrum available offers incalculable benefits to
the American public, including promoting job growth, increasing access
to healthcare and education, and modernizing infrastructure in the
United States.
I am pleased to report that on February 28, 2020, the Commission
adopted rules to make 280 megahertz of C-band spectrum available
through an FCC-led auction. C-band spectrum is widely seen as a
critical swath of mid-band spectrum that could help drive American
leadership in 5G, the next generation of wireless connectivity. This
spectrum offers both geographic coverage and the capacity to transmit
large amounts of data--a combination that is appealing to entrepreneurs
and wireless consumers alike.
The decision meets each of the four priorities I've identified in
this proceeding. It frees up a significant amount of C-band spectrum
for 5G. It does so quickly. It generates revenue for the U.S. Treasury.
And it protects the services that are currently delivered using this
spectrum. The Commission will commence an auction later this year--on
December 8. I believe that a public auction, run by our outstanding
staff here at the FCC, is the best way to ensure that we assign this
spectrum in a fair, trusted, and transparent manner. The Commission has
a quarter-century track record of designing and implementing open and
transparent spectrum auctions to promote the development and deployment
of new technologies in all areas of the United States, including in
rural areas.
The Order establishes bidding credits for smaller entities and
rural service providers to facilitate their participation in the
auction and will, in turn, increase the availability of 5G service in
rural areas. The item also adopts Partial Economic Areas (PEAs) as the
geographic license area for the new flexible-use licenses. The
Commission has found that using PEAs--a smaller license area than some
may have wanted--encourages auction participation by a diverse group of
buyers and generates competition among large, regional, and small
carriers across various geographic areas.
The item is a win for innovators who want to introduce new services
in the C-band. It is a win for incumbents who will be fairly
compensated during this transition. And, most importantly, it is a win
for the American people, including those in rural America, who will
enjoy the rollout of new 5G services.
Question 2. Allowing Consumers to Challenge FCC Maps
I have been providing you with real coverage data from people on
the ground in West Virginia and a brief description of the challenges
they face personally, professionally, and economically as a result of
their unreliable broadband service. To this day, I have sent 25
individual letters that highlight the challenges that hard working West
Virginians are facing daily.
--Are you finding the data that we are sending to be useful and
beneficial for updating broadband coverage maps?
--When can the public expect to see a process in which they can
directly send the data included in these letters directly to
the FCC?
--What additional data would you require to ensure that these letters
are providing the information you need to update and create
accurate broadband maps?
Answer. I appreciate all feedback on our data collection efforts.
Knowing which Americans have access to broadband and which do not is
critically important to the Commission. That's why last August the
Commission adopted the Digital Opportunity Data Collection Report and
Order and Notice of Proposed Rulemaking. The Report and Order departs
from the census block-level reporting that the Commission adopted in
2013, and will instead collect granular, precise data about broadband
service availability.
For fixed broadband, providers will be required to submit polygons
depicting their actual service footprints or coverage areas using
technical reporting standards developed by our staff. For mobile
broadband, the Commission sought comment on using standardized radio
frequency propagation prediction and standardized coverage maps for
mobile services. The Commission also sought comment on ways to verify
carrier data with on-the-ground data, such as stationary and drive
testing, to ensure the quality of mobile broadband deployment maps.
To further ensure that these new granular broadband service
availability maps accurately reflect the facts on the ground, the
Universal Service Administrative Company is developing a portal for
direct input from State, local, and Tribal governments, along with
members of the public, on the map's accuracy. The Commission sought
comment on how to best collect that feedback and incorporate it into
the map. It also sought comment on the kinds of data that individuals
and entities wishing to dispute the map should submit, such as the
speeds offered at the consumer's location and the speed the at which
the consumer is currently subscribed.
Question 3. 6 Gigahertz (GHz) Band
Last year, your agency announced that it was considering a proposal
to open up 1,200 megahertz of spectrum in the 6 GHz band for different
types of unlicensed use. This band is utilized for microwave services
that support utilities, public safety, and wireless backhaul. I
strongly believe we must ensure that incumbent users are protected
before there are any changes in any band of spectrum and I am concerned
that there has not been enough testing of the proposed Automatic
Frequency Coordination (AFC) mitigation technology or meaningful
conversations with relevant Federal agencies like FERC to ensure this
proposal will not negatively impact the incumbent users.
--What assurance can you give me that incumbents that utilize this
band will not be harmed if this proposal moves forward?
--Have you or your staff discussed this proposal with FERC?
--Can you commit to further test the AFC technology in consultation
with FERC before moving forward with the proposal?
Answer. I have consistently stated that the Commission is committed
to protecting incumbent systems in the 6 GHz band from harmful
interference. The Commission's technical experts in our Office of
Engineering and Technology have spent considerable time reviewing the
substantial record that has been compiled in this proceeding and
meeting with interested stakeholders. The record reflects several
detailed technical studies and analyses relating to the potential
impact of unlicensed use on incumbent use of the 6 GHz band and
technical and operational methods to mitigate harmful interference. Our
Office of Engineering and Technology has been evaluating a variety of
issues, such as indoor and outdoor use cases and a variety of power
levels, to discern whether and to what extent unlicensed operations can
exist alongside incumbent uses. I can assure you that the Commission's
ultimate decision will be grounded in sound engineering analysis. And I
remain optimistic that we will be able to develop a set of technical
rules that will both safeguard incumbent users and allow for unlicensed
operations throughout the band.
The Commission has also been following the well-established
interagency process for receiving the views of other Federal agencies
with equities in this proceeding. That process to date has included
routine discussions and meetings with NTIA on behalf of other Federal
agencies and consultation with the Department of Energy and the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission. FCC personnel are regularly in contact
with their counterparts at FERC on this and other issues of concern to
both agencies.
Question 4. Low Power TV Stations
Low Power TV (LPTV) stations provide locally-oriented service to
small and rural communities. LPTV programming can be tailored to
viewers in a more localized manner and is less expensive and more
flexible than a traditional TV station. This carriage is optional for
satellite carriers, even though many customers in rural areas--like
those in my home state--rely on satellite service when cable does not
or cannot reach their home. WVUX, a local LPTV carrier in my home
county, has had difficulty getting carried by DirecTV or DISH. They
have sought relief from the FCC by petitioning for a Declaratory Ruling
that satellite carriers observe the must carry rules for qualified low-
power stations. Can I work with your office to receive an answer from
FCC for WVUX?
--Do you foresee benefits to rural areas in requiring satellite
carriers to carry the signals of local LPTV stations or local
public broadcasting?
--What would be the challenges in doing so?
--Can you make this change on your own or do you need congressional
clarification in order to do so?
Answer. The Media Bureau issued a Memorandum Opinion and Order on
October 24, 2019 that denied the petition for declaratory ruling and
demand for carriage of WVUX. In its decision, the Bureau indicated
that, as an LPTV station, WVUX does not have mandatory carriage rights
on satellite systems pursuant to section 338 of the Communications Act
even if the station may be qualified to be carried by cable systems
under a different provision of the Act. WVUX filed an Application for
Review of the Bureau's decision on November 22, 2019 and that AFR is
currently pending. I hope that the Bureau can provide its
recommendations for the full Commission's consideration in the near
term. As you know, I have long been a supporter of local broadcast
stations and the service that they provide to their communities--
whether the stations are full power or LPTV stations. However, Congress
has been explicit in its intent when it comes to mandatory carriage
issues and the Commission must faithfully apply the statutory
provisions as written. Of course, Congress is always free to modify the
Communications Act to provide LPTV stations with additional carriage
rights if it chooses to do so.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
With that, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:32 a.m., Thursday, October 17, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]