- WHAT'S NEXT FOR LEBANON? STABILITY AND SECURITY CHALLENGES
[Senate Hearing 115-758]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-758
WHAT'S NEXT FOR LEBANON?
STABILITY AND SECURITY CHALLENGES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON NEAR EAST,
SOUTH ASIA, CENTRAL ASIA,
AND COUNTERTERRORISM
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MARCH 21, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Relations
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web:
http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-832 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS
BOB CORKER, Tennessee, Chairman
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
MARCO RUBIO, Florida
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
CHRISTOPHER A. COONS, Delaware
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
TOM UDALL, New Mexico
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
CHRISTOPHER MURPHY, Connecticut
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
TIM KAINE, Virginia
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
Todd Womack, Staff Director
Jessica Lewis, Democratic Staff Director
John Dutton, Chief Clerk
SUBCOMMITTEE ON NEAR EAST, SOUTH ASIA,
CENTRAL ASIA, AND COUNTERTERRORISM
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho, Chairman
MARCO RUBIO, Florida
TIM KAINE, Virginia
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
CHRISTOPHER MURPHY, Connecticut
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Risch, Hon. James E., U.S. Senator From Idaho....................
1
Kaine, Hon. Tim, U.S. Senator From Virginia......................
2
Abrams, Hon. Elliott, Senior Fellow, Middle Eastern Studies,
Council on Foreign Relations, Washington, DC...................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
5
Malley, Robert, President and CEO, International Crisis Group,
Washington, DC.................................................
9
Prepared statement...........................................
11
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
``Lebanon is Boiling. Thousands of Americans Could Get Stuck in
the Middle of a War.'' by Elliott Abrams and Zachary Shapiro...
29
(iii)
WHAT'S NEXT FOR LEBANON? STABILITY AND SECURITY CHALLENGES
----------
Wednesday, March 21, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee on Near East, South Asia,
Central Asia, and Counterterrorism,
Committee on Foreign Relations,
Washington, DC
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:05 p.m., in
Room SD-419, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Jim Risch,
Chairman of the Subcommittee, presiding.
Present: Senators Risch [presiding], Young, Kaine, Murphy,
and Booker.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES E. RISCH,
U.S. SENATOR FROM IDAHO
Senator Risch. The subcommittee hearing will come to order.
And appreciate those of you hardy souls who have shown up.
And you can tell your grandkids you walked to work in snow that
was waist deep, uphill both ways. And it will at least be
partially true after today. So, thank you for coming.
This hearing is very timely, given a number of
international conferences on Lebanon and upcoming elections in
Lebanon in May. Lebanon has been a regional center for finance
and trade for centuries, and has always been an important
nation in the Middle East. But, it also sits in a very rough
neighborhood today, with many outside forces attempting to
upset the balance among its sectarian political forces.
Today, Lebanon forces--faces enormous challenges. Security
is first among those--these issues. Since 2006, the United
States has provided roughly 1.7 billion to Lebanese Armed
Forces and internal security forces. The recent conference in
Rome provided additional commitments of more than $500 million
for security assistance to Lebanon.
Recently, the Lebanese Prime Minister announced that the
Lebanese Armed Forces will increase their presence along the
border with Israel. This decision is welcome as long as the LAF
plays a role in decreasing the stockpiles of missiles and other
weapons that Hezbollah has been stockpiling and installing
along the border. But, I fear Hezbollah's behavior in the
disputed areas could lead to a new war between Israel and
Hezbollah.
The economy remains another priority for Lebanon's future.
With an ailing infrastructure, the country has lacked the tools
necessary to achieve economic growth. Added to this is a
massive refugee crisis. In a country of more than 4 million
people, Lebanon has been ill-equipped to absorb over 1 million
Syrian refugees in addition to a substantial Palestinian
refugee community. Lebanon desperately needs to update its
infrastructure if it hopes to achieve economic growth, but it
also needs to stabilize its debt and implement reforms in key
areas, such as the electricity sector and tackling corruption.
The Paris Conference next month will be an important indicator
of how much support exists for Lebanon.
Finally, a new election law is reshaping how to form
electorate--electoral alliances and sparking new coalitions.
With almost a thousand candidates for 128 seats in Parliament,
the May 6th elections will test whether this new law will help
move the country forward or if old alliances will dominate the
political landscape. Political stability will be important to
reach consensus on many of the domestic issues facing the
country.
Despite all of these issues, Lebanon is caught between many
actors in the region and have--that have a substantial impact
on Lebanon's future. Over the last several years, inaction and
poor decisions regarding Syria have had dangerous consequences.
Hezbollah, Iran, and other enemies have used this crisis to
expand their reach. I am especially worried that we do not
recognize the scale and regional reach of Hezbollah. Its
strength inside Lebanon has grown, but it has also sent
fighters to Syria, trainers to Iraq, and is supporting rebels
in Yemen. While Hezbollah may be a power unto itself
politically in Lebanon, it also serves as an emissary and
interpreter for Iran throughout the Arab world, rallying
militias and other fighters to destabilize countries and sow
chaos.
The United States, and indeed the world, has an important
role in helping Lebanon maintain its independence. We need to
have a comprehensive strategy to empower the Lebanese
government, limit the influence of Iran and Hezbollah, and
improve security for Israel. I hope this hearing will help us
understand how we can best support this goal.
Senator Kaine.
STATEMENT OF HON. TIM KAINE,
U.S. SENATOR FROM VIRGINIA
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I want to thank the Chairman for holding this hearing.
In Foreign Relations, we spend an awful lot of time on this
part of the world, but we do not spend a lot of time on
Lebanon. And I think both of us are concerned about a number of
items in the country, broader issues. And it is very, very good
to have the hearing. We have two wonderful witnesses today.
Prime Minister Hariri's brief resignation from Saudi Arabia
was so unusual, a number of months back, and it led to calls in
to our office from, sort of, all sides, raising the question
about what was going on in Lebanon. That temporary problem
seems to have abated, but, as the Chairman indicated, all kinds
of issues remain. The growing strength of Hezbollah, the
elections in May, the challenges of Hezbollah's growing
armaments in the south, to Israeli security and the massive
refugee problem that the Chairman discussed, all create
significant issues.
This has been a relationship--the U.S./Lebanon relationship
has had some strengths, especially the cooperation of the
United States with the Lebanese Armed Forces. I visited, I saw
the work that we do together in traditional and special forces.
The LAF may be one of the institutions in the country that does
the best job of integrating folks from different parts of this
challenging sectarian situation. And, while Hezbollah continues
to grow, the announcement about more LAF presence near the
border of Israel is positive. LAF has also played an important
role for us in helping fight terrorism in Lebanon. Those are
all the positives.
But, the concerns are those that the Chairman outlined: the
upcoming elections, the Rome Conference, and the timing of the
work that we are doing on the Armed Services Committee with
respect to the National Defense Authorizing Act, which always
includes this component of partnerships, is very important. I
do know that General Votel, the CENTCOM regional commander, as
well as Secretary Mattis are strong supporters of the U.S./LAF
military relationship, and I think that is an important thing
that we should try to make stronger.
But, this is a hearing where we can learn, you know, what
is going well, but what we need to change, what we need to
adjust. These are witnesses who are deeply skilled and have
some differences of opinion. That is actually helpful to us as
we grapple with this.
So, Mr. Chair, thanks, and I am glad we are able to do this
today.
Senator Risch. Thank you so much. It is an important
subject, as you have indicated.
We are joined today by two witnesses with strong resumes
and experience dealing with the Middle East:
Our first witness is Elliott Abrams, who is currently the
Senior Fellow for Middle Eastern Studies at the Council on
Foreign Relations. Previously, he served as Special Assistant
to President George W. Bush and Senior Director of the National
Security Council for Democracy, Human Rights, and International
Organizations, as well as Senior Director of the National
Security Council for Near East and North African Affairs,
finally, ending his tenure as Deputy National Security Advisor,
where he supervised U.S. policy in the Middle East for the
White House.
Our second witness is Rob Malley, who currently serves as
the President and CEO of the International Crisis Group. Prior
to his current position, he served as Special Assistant to
President Obama, heading the President's Counter-ISIL Campaign
as well as coordinating White House policy for the Middle East,
North Africa, and the Gulf region. In addition, he served as
Special Assistant to President Clinton for Arab-Israeli
Affairs, and Director for Near East and South Asian Affairs at
the National Security Council.
We certainly have diverse people here today, which I think
will help us as we struggle with the questions.
Gentlemen, we look forward to your testimony on this
important topic.
Mr. Abrams, we will start with you.
STATEMENT OF HON. ELLIOTT ABRAMS, SENIOR FELLOW, MIDDLE EASTERN
STUDIES, COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS, WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Abrams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for inviting
me here today.
And I should, I guess, say I have spent the day giving
people civics lessons, because people say, ``You cannot have a
hearing. The Government is closed.'' And then I have had to
explain, ``No, no, that is the executive branch. See, the
legislative branch is separate. They make''--it has been
interesting.
Senator Risch. You know, I have had the same challenge as I
have dealt with some of our European friends to explain to them
about the branches of government. They get lost sometimes and
think we only have a single branch of government. And it is not
the first branch, I might add.
Thank you.
Mr. Abrams. I would like to submit my full testimony for
the record, and an article I wrote a few days ago about the
need to prepare now for getting Americans out of harm's way if
there is another war in Lebanon.
Since about 2008, Lebanon has been in the grip of
Hezbollah, which is a terrorist organization backed and largely
controlled by Iran. I think U.S. policy largely fails to
acknowledge that fact. We consider or treat Lebanon as if it
were a friendly, sovereign, independent country whose
government can actually set its foreign and defense policy.
But, that is an illusion. That Lebanon no longer exists. Let me
talk about politics and then the army.
In May 2008, Hezbollah ended a government crisis over its
own powers by using its weapons to seize control of Beirut's
streets and, effectively, of the entire state. The New York
Times, back then, quoted one expert on Hezbollah concluding,
``This is effectively a coup.'' It is been about a decade
since, and Hezbollah's power has grown, and so has its
domination of Lebanon.
During the war in Syria for about the last 6 years,
Hezbollah has served as Iran's foreign legion and sent
thousands of Lebanese Shia across the border to fight.
Throughout 2017, Israeli officials have been warning that the
distinction between Hezbollah and Lebanon can no longer be
maintained. Hezbollah is, quite simply, running the country.
Yes, it leaves administrative matters to the government--paying
salaries, paving streets, collecting garbage--but there is no
important decision taken without Hezbollah's agreement.
Tony Badran, a research fellow here at the Foundation for
the Defense of Democracies, summed up the current situation,
quote, ``In terms of the actual balance of power, the actual
power on the ground, regardless of the politics, the cabinets,
regardless of the parliamentary majorities, it is Hezbollah.''
Lebanon's constitution provides for a division of power by
sect, but today there is really no balance of power. Hezbollah
prevented the selection of a president for 2 years, until it
could force the acceptance of the Christian closest to it,
Michel Aoun. Parliamentary elections are coming May 6th, and
there is a good chance they will help Hezbollah consolidate
power. The issues that should be under debate, how to recover
Lebanon's sovereignty and prevent Hezbollah from involving
Lebanon in foreign wars, can hardly be mentioned.
Let me just turn to the LAF in the time left. I would argue
that our assistance to the LAF is based on the roles it is
supposed to play under Security Council Resolutions 1559 and
1701. If the LAF were implementing those resolutions, it would
be intercepting Hezbollah weapons shipments coming from Iran
via Syria, it would be securing Lebanon's borders, it would be
preventing Hezbollah from parading its military equipment and
maintaining fixed bases, it would be preventing Hezbollah from
placing military equipment in schools and hospitals. But, in
real life, the LAF does none of those. If it were doing those
things, it would be worth the 1.7 billion that the Chairman
mentioned. You know, Lebanon is the fifth-largest recipient of
FMF.
But, it is not doing those things. On March 15th, the State
Department spokesman at the conference in Rome on Lebanon said
that we would renew our support because the aid we provide is,
quote, ``enabling the Lebanese government to assert its
authority throughout all of Lebanese territory,'' close quote.
But, that is a fantasy. It is not happening. In fact, the
relationship between the LAF and Hezbollah appears to be
growing closer as time passes.
I would argue that our military assistance to Lebanon
should be made dependent on pushing back on Hezbollah, on
regaining Lebanese sovereignty and independence. The price
Lebanon pays for Hezbollah should be made far clearer. The
advantages Hezbollah gains from its control of Lebanon should
be reduced and made far more controversial. So, I would argue
for a reassessment of that, of the basis for that military aid,
which I think is an assumption that the LAF is pushing back
against Hezbollah and protecting Lebanon in ways that are
simply contrary to fact.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Abrams follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Elliott Abrams
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, thank you for inviting
me here today. I would like to submit for the record both my full
testimony and an article I and a colleague wrote last week, entitled
``Lebanon is Boiling. Thousands of Americans Could Get Stuck in the
Middle of a War.''
Mr. Chairman, Lebanon has at least since 2008 been in the grip of
Hezbollah, a terrorist organization backed by Iran. In my view, U.S.
policy fails to acknowledge that fact--and we continue to act as if
Lebanon were a friendly, sovereign, and independent country whose
government can actually set its foreign and defense policy. But that is
an illusion: that Lebanon no longer exists.
I'd like to discuss Lebanese politics first, and then the Lebanese
army.
In May 2008, Hezbollah ended a government crisis over its own
powers by using its weapons--allegedly meant only to protect the
country from Israel--to seize control of Beirut's streets and
effectively of the entire state. The New York Times back then quoted
one expert on Hezbollah concluding ``This is effectively a coup.'' \1\
In the near decade since, Hezbollah's power has grown and so has
its domination of Lebanon. During the war in Syria since 2012,
Hezbollah has served as Iran's foreign legion and sent thousands of
Lebanese Shia across the border to fight. A story in The New York Times
last August summed up the current situation:
Hezbollah has rapidly expanded its realm of operations. It has
sent legions of fighters to Syria. It has sent trainers to
Iraq. It has backed rebels in Yemen. And it has helped organize
a battalion of militants from Afghanistan that can fight almost
anywhere. As a result, Hezbollah is not just a power unto
itself, but is one of the most important instruments in the
drive for regional supremacy by its sponsor: Iran. Hezbollah is
involved in nearly every fight that matters to Iran and, more
significantly, has helped recruit, train and arm an array of
new militant groups that are also advancing Iran's agenda.\2\
That story concluded that ``few checks remain on Hezbollah's
domestic power'' in Lebanon.
And throughout 2017, Israeli officials have been warning that the
distinction between Hezbollah and ``Lebanon'' can no longer be
maintained. Hezbollah is quite simply running the country. While it
leaves administrative matters like paying government salaries, paving
the roads, and collecting garbage to the state, no important decision
can be taken without Hezbollah's agreement. Tony Badran, a research
fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies who specializes in
Lebanon, summed up the current situation: ``In terms of the actual
balance of power, the actual power on the ground, regardless of the
politics, regardless of the Cabinets, regardless of the parliamentary
majorities: it's Hezbollah.'' \3\
Lebanon's constitution provides for a division of power by sect,
with a Shia parliamentary speaker, Christian president, and Sunni prime
minister. But today, there is no such division or balance of real
power. Hezbollah prevented the selection of a president for more than 2
years, until it could force acceptance of the Christian closest to it,
Michel Aoun. As an analyst at the Institute for National Security
Studies in Israel put it, ``Hezbollah has been very squarely backing
Aoun for president and this was always the deal between Aoun's party
and Hezbollah. Hezbollah has upheld its end of the deal. With this
election . . . you can see Hezbollah being consolidated in terms of its
political allies as well as its position in Lebanon.'' \4\
Similarly, today the Sunni prime minister, Saad Hariri, provides
cover to Hezbollah's domination of the state rather than a
counterbalance to that power. Hezbollah is part of Hariri's coalition
government--but Hezbollah, not the government, dominates.
Parliamentary elections will be held on May 6, and they will most
likely help Hezbollah consolidate power--because challenging Hezbollah
and running against it are simply too dangerous. The issues that should
be under debate, primarily how to recover Lebanon's sovereignty and
prevent Hezbollah from involving Lebanon in foreign wars, cannot be
mentioned. Some will argue that fear is not the only motivating factor,
and that apathy and fatigue also play key roles. The result is the
same: Hezbollah today faces no real opposition from Christian, Druze,
or Sunni party leaders.
Sadly, there is another way to measure Hezbollah's domination of
Lebanon: its ability to use the institutions of the state to punish
even rhetorical challenges. Hanin Ghaddar, an analyst at the Washington
Institute for Near East Policy, has been convicted by a Lebanese
military court for the ``crime'' of ``defaming'' the Lebanese army. The
sad story is told in full by the Washington Institute, and relates to
comments she made at a conference in Washington in 2014. What did she
say? That the Lebanese military targets Sunni groups while showing
preference to Shiite groups, such as Hezbollah. After a closed trial
held in absentia, she was sentenced to 6 months imprisonment. So much
for freedom of expression in Lebanon.
I would like now to turn to the Lebanese Armed Forces or ``LAF.''
U.S. assistance to the LAF is based on U.N. Security Council
Resolutions 1559 and 1701, which call for the disarmament of all
militias in Lebanon and the affirmation of state sovereignty and
independence. If the LAF were implementing 1559 and 1701, it would be
intercepting Hezbollah weapons shipments coming from Iran via Syria. It
would be securing Lebanon's borders. It would be preventing Hezbollah
from parading its military equipment and maintaining fixed bases. It
would be preventing Hezbollah from placing military equipment at
civilian sites like homes and schools. But in real life, the LAF does
none of these things.
If the LAF were doing these things it would certainly deserve the
$1.7 billion in aid that the United States has given it. That amount
includes $123 million in FY2017, and Lebanon is the fifth largest
recipient of foreign military financing (FMF). Our ambassador to
Lebanon, Elizabeth Richard, said publicly on October 31 of last year
that total support for the LAF from State Department and Defense
Department accounts totaled $160 million over the previous year.\5\ The
State Department's proposed budget for FY2018 zeroes out FMF for
Lebanon, which may suggest some doubt within the administration
regarding the LAF's achievements.
But on January 31, Acting Assistant Secretary of State David
Satterfield stated that ``We will sustain our efforts to support
legitimate state security institutions in Lebanon, such as the Lebanese
Armed Forces, which is the only legitimate force in Lebanon.'' And on
March 15, at a conference on Lebanon held in Rome, the State Department
``renewed its support'' and said that the aid we provide is ``enabling
the Lebanese government to . . . assert its authority throughout all of
Lebanese territory.''
That statement is a fantasy. A far more realistic view of the
situation is offered by Israel's Minister of Defense, Avigdor Liberman,
who recently stated that ``today, the Lebanese army has lost its
independence and is another unit in Hezbollah's apparatus, and
therefore, as far as we are concerned, the infrastructure of the
Lebanese army and the Lebanese state is one with the infrastructure of
Hezbollah.'' \6\
The relationship between the LAF and Hezbollah appears to be
growing and the notion that Hezbollah is a legitimate power is getting
ensconced in LAF doctrine. The analyst Tony Badran described this
development:
The LAF's synergetic relationship with Hezbollah isn't
haphazard. It's a reflection of the power configuration and the
Hezbollah-dominated political order in Beirut. It's also
codified in the LAF's doctrine. Namely, the LAF's doctrine
adopts Hezbollah's formulation and vocabulary about the group's
role and position in the state: ``This Resistance, which has
been supported by the government, the army and the civilians,
has led to the defeat of the enemy on Lebanon's land.'' The
combination of ``Resistance'' (that is, Hezbollah), ``Army,''
and ``civilians'' is an adaptation of Hezbollah's so-called
``Army-People-Resistance'' doctrine, the embodiment of the
Iranian revolutionary template, which in turn is adopted by the
Lebanese government in its official policy statement. This
doctrine licenses the LAF's joint deployment and extensive
coordination with Hezbollah. It fosters not just toleration but
also legitimization of so-called ``resistance'' militias and
paramilitary groups operating under Hezbollah's wing. And
overall, it instills the pro-Hezbollah culture in the LAF
officer corps.\7\
The LAF is increasingly intertwined with Hezbollah. David Schenker
of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy described the
situation this way:
In April 2017, Hezbollah brought more than a dozen
international journalists on a tour of Lebanon's frontier with
Israel, breezing through several checkpoints manned by national
intelligence organs and LAF units, suggesting a high degree of
coordination. The next month, Hezbollah turned over several of
its Syria border observation posts to the LAF . . . Finally, in
late June, the LAF sent 150 officer cadets to tour Hezbollah's
Mleeta war museum, near Nabatiyah, a shrine to the
organization's `resistance' credentials vis-a-vis Israel.\8\
As a Center for American Progress report stated, ``The Lebanese
government has repeatedly denied any coordination with Hezbollah.
However, events along the border make these claims increasingly
implausible. Reports of such coordination undercut the LAF's standing
and raise vexing questions for policymakers regarding the utility of
U.S. security assistance to Lebanon.'' \9\ The leader of Hezbollah,
Hassan Nasrallah, himself ``characterized the LAF as a `partner' and a
`pillar' in what Hezbollah has described as the `golden formula, which
means the resistance, the Army, and the people''' in the words of a
recent Congressional Research Service report.\10\
It is worth noting that in the face of Hezbollah's increasing
domination of the Lebanese state, Prime Minister Hariri last week
referred to Israel as ``the primary threat to Lebanon.'' \11\ That is
an adoption of the Hezbollah line and a justification for Hezbollah's
and Lebanon's absolute failure to implement Security Council
resolutions 1559 and 1701.
All of these developments should explain the tougher line toward
Lebanon being taken in the last year by Saudi Arabia. The Saudis are no
longer willing to prop up Lebanon while it serves as the base for
Hezbollah's military and terrorist activities in league with Iran.
Instead, they are asking what it will take for Lebanese to pressure
Hezbollah to cut back on its actions and to allow the Lebanese state to
govern again. What the Saudis are saying is, Enough--let's start
describing Lebanese reality instead of burying it. Let's stop financing
a situation that allows Hezbollah to feed off the Lebanese state,
dominate that state, and use it as a launching pad for terror and
aggression in the Middle East, all on Iran's behalf. Similarly, Israeli
officials and analysts are noting Hezbollah's increasing domination of
Lebanon and the great danger it creates--for Israel and for Lebanon.
And meanwhile, as I've noted, American officials appear determined to
avoid stating the facts and instead speak about Lebanon as if this were
not 2018 but the days right after the Cedar Revolution when true
national independence and sovereignty appeared possible.
There is of course no guarantee that this tougher approach will
succeed: Lebanese may be too terrified of Hezbollah. And success will
require action by the United States and its allies, particularly
France. If all of Lebanon's friends take the same approach, demanding
that Hezbollah's grip on the country and the state be limited, we may
embolden Lebanon's citizens and its politicians to protest Hezbollah's
chokehold. Economic assistance to Lebanon and military assistance to
its army should be made dependent on pushing back on Hezbollah and
regaining Lebanese independence. The price Lebanon pays for Hezbollah
should be made far clearer, and the advantages Hezbollah gains from its
control of Lebanon should be reduced--and made far more controversial.
Lebanese sovereignty and the prevention of Hezbollah domination of
the state are in fact demanded by U.N. Security Council Resolution
1701, adopted in August 2006 to end the war between Hezbollah and
Israel. It's worth recalling what started that war: an unprovoked
attack by Hezbollah into Israel, killing and kidnapping Israeli
soldiers.
Resolution 1701 includes these provisions:
Emphasizes the importance of the extension of the control of
the Government of Lebanon over all Lebanese territory [and] for
it to exercise its full sovereignty, so that there will be no
weapons without the consent of the Government of Lebanon and no
authority other than that of the Government of Lebanon . . .
Calls for . . . the disarmament of all armed groups in Lebanon,
so that, pursuant to the Lebanese cabinet decision of 27 July
2006, there will be no weapons or authority in Lebanon other
than that of the Lebanese State . . . \12\
Now, Hezbollah is once again thrusting Lebanon into deadly
conflicts in the region--including the risk of another war with Israel.
These dangers will not be avoided by burying our heads in the sand, nor
will Lebanon's sovereignty be restored by ignoring Hezbollah's
destruction of that sovereignty. A better way forward is to tell the
truth about the situation in Lebanon, and use both diplomatic and
economic pressure to undermine Hezbollah's iron grip.
The United States should reassess our military assistance and our
entire policy. After all, if our strategy has been aimed at
strengthening Lebanon's independence, we have failed. If our goal has
been to limit the power of Hezbollah and its integration into Iran's
regional system of military aggression, we have failed. If our goal has
been to strengthen Sunni, Druze, and Christian minorities in Lebanon,
we have failed. If we have tried to make the LAF a counterbalance to
Hezbollah, we have failed. Perhaps things would be even worse today
without our aid and our efforts, but that is a proposition that should
be examined and tested.
Is Lebanon closer to meeting the demands of Resolution 1701 than it
was a decade ago--closer to exercising sovereignty over its territory
and disarming militias and terrorist groups? I think not. And that's
why American strategy for Lebanon requires a careful reassessment.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear today.
----------------
Notes
\1\ Robert F. Worth and Nada Bakri, ``Hezbollah Seizes Swath of
Beirut From U.S.-Backed Lebanon Government,'' New York Times, May 10,
2008, http://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/10/world/middleeast/
10lebanon.html.
\2\ Ben Hubbard, ``Iran Out to Remake Mideast With Arab Enforcer:
Hezbollah,'' New York Times, August 27, 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/
2017/08/27/world/middleeast/hezbollah-iran-syria-israel-
lebanon.html?_r=1.
\3\ Jenna Lifhits, ``Lebanese PM's Resignation Magnifies
Congressional Scrutiny of Hezbollah,'' Weekly Standard, November 7,
2017, http://www.weeklystandard.com/lebanese-pms-resignation-magnifies-
congressional-scrutiny-of-hezbollah/article/2010377.
\4\ Reuters et al., ``Lebanon's New Pro-Hezbollah President Vows to
Retake `Israeli-Occupied' Land,'' Jerusalem Post, October 31, 2016,
http://www.jpost.com/Middle-East/Hezbollah-ally-Michel-Aoun-elected-
President-of-Lebanon-471301.
\5\ Jack Detsch, ``U.S. Sticks by Lebanese army despite Hariri
Resignation,'' Al-Monitor, November 6, 2017, https://www.al-
monitor.com/pulse/originals/2017/11/us-support-lebanon-army-hariri-
resignation-saudi-arabia.html.
\6\ Eldad Shavit, Insight No. 1027: Israel's Position on U.S.
Military Aid to the Lebanese Army (Tel Aviv: Institute for National
Security Studies, 2018), http://www.inss.org.il/publication/israels-
position-us-military-aid-lebanese-army/.
\7\ Tony Badran, ``American Policy in Lebanon Isn't Policy. It's
Poetry,'' Tablet, October 27, 2017, http://www.tabletmag.com/scroll/
248071/american-policy-in-lebanon-isnt-policy-its-poetry.
\8\ David Schenker, PolicyWatch 2840: U.S. Security Assistance to
Lebanon at Risk (Washington, DC: Washington Institute for Near East
Policy, 2017), http://www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/view/
u.s.-security-assistance-to-lebanon-at-risk.
\9\ Hardin Lang and Alia Awadallah, Playing the Long Game: U.S.
Counterterrorism Assistance for Lebanon (Washington, DC: Center for
American Progress, 2017), https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/
security/reports/2017/08/30/437853/playing-long-game/.
\10\ Carla E. Humud, Lebanon (CRS Report No. R44759) (Washington,
DC: Congressional Research Service, 2017), 11, https://fas.org/sgp/crs/
mideast/R44759.pdf.
\11\ Steve Scherer, ``Lebanon plans to boost army presence on
Israel border,'' Reuters, March 15, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/
article/us-lebanon-italy-conference/lebanon-plans-to-boost-army-
presence-on-israel-border-idUSKCN1GR2P0.
\12\ United Nations Security Council, Resolution 1701, Middle East,
S/RES/1701, para.3, para.8, https://www.un.org/en/sc/documents/
resolutions/2006.shtml.
Senator Risch. Thank you, Mr. Abrams.
Mr. Malley.
STATEMENT OF ROBERT MALLEY, PRESIDENT AND CEO, INTERNATIONAL
CRISIS GROUP, WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Malley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator Kaine, other
members of the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me today,
to talk about an important country that, as you say, is too
often overlooked.
Lebanon is an exceptional country, because it is both a
microcosm of the region and an exception to it. It is a
microcosm because so many things that ail the region, from
sectarian polarization to refugee flows to the role of Sunni
jihadism to the role of Iran, and to the role of a nonstate
actor and the weakness of a state, all of that is
characteristic of Lebanon.
But, at the same time, it is an exception because of the
pluralism, the tolerance, the multiconfessional politics, the
fact that it manages, for better or for worse, to have
relations with the U.S., with Iran, with Saudi Arabia. All
those things make Lebanon stand out in a region that suffers
from too little of all of that.
And when you think about it, the shocks that Lebanon has,
and continues to experience, from the wars that have--that
has--it has suffered, from the over a million refugees, as you
said, Mr. Chairman, about a quarter of its population, the
spillover of the Syrian conflict, in terms of jihadism, but
also sectarianism, and Hezbollah's role in that war. Most
countries would not have been able to survive that, let alone a
country as fragile and as polarized as Lebanon.
The fact that it held together is because of two things.
First, the memories of a very bloody civil war, but, second,
because it has this awkward and sometimes troubling, and often
quite troubling and disturbing balance between its relations
with Iran and the role that it has allowed and afforded to a
nonstate actor like Hezbollah. It is that balancing which gives
Hezbollah, as my good friend Elliott Abrams just said, an
outsized role in domestic politics and a veto on foreign
policy. It is that balance that has allowed Lebanon to survive
against the odds, as it is, and to be as resilient as it is.
But, it is an unsavory balance that also raises the
question that, as this subcommittee is examining, is that
Elliott just spoke about, that balance means--that unsavory
balance means that you have a nonstate actor that is an ally of
Iran, that is obviously our enemy, that is dominating local
politics. Nothing can be done against their will--governments
cannot be formed against their will, a president cannot be
chosen against their will--and that has hijacked their foreign
policy. And that is why there are some--and Elliott is among
them--who is arguing for a break from traditional U.S. policy,
which has been to try to balance Hezbollah's influence by
supporting independence or sovereign institutions--in
particular, the LAF--and trying to prevent a recurrence of an
Israeli/Hezbollah war. And I think Elliott has made a very
strong case about why the policies that we have put in place
have not fully achieved the goals that we would have liked to
see occur in Lebanon. And so, the idea would be--the contrary
idea would be, let us diminish Hezbollah, and therefore Iran's
role, by sanctioning, punishing, cutting off aid to
institutions like the LAF.
Now, in a word, as with so many of these theories in the
Middle East, it looks very good in practice--in theory; in
practice, it is wrongheaded and dangerous. I think we have
learned from experience that grand theories to try to change
and to disturb the equilibrium in a particular country--in this
case, Lebanon--often has unintended consequences with--which we
should think about very carefully and prudently before going
down that road.
In this case, if we were to cut off assistance and halt our
aid to the LAF, it could jeopardize Lebanon's stability. If we
provoked a confrontation between Hezbollah and the LAF, I think
we know who would prevail. It could intensify risks of war with
Israel. It would weaken those who we want to support, those who
count on independent institutions, who count on the LAF. It
would give a freer hand to Iran and Hezbollah to dominate the
LAF and other institutions. And, by creating chaos, it also
would help Iran, which has a real ability and has always
thrived on chaos in the region, whether it is in Yemen, Iraq,
Syria, and Lebanon.
And this is not just theory. I am not just speculating.
Saudi Arabia tried, at some point, as you know, to engineer
this kind of policy by forcing Prime Minister Hariri to resign
in order to force Lebanon to have this choice, ``Either you get
rid of Hezbollah or you get rid of our assistance. You cannot
get both.''
Now, I happened to be in Lebanon on the Monday after Prime
Minister Hariri was detained in Saudi Arabia. I happened to be
in Saudi Arabia last week, where I had a long meeting with
Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman. I came away from both those
meetings, one in November, the other last week, convinced that
the Saudi gambit had failed, and only slightly less convinced
that the Crown Prince, himself, realizes that it failed. And it
failed because Lebanon is a country where you cannot exclude
one constituency, like Hezbollah, however much we may not like
it. It has failed because all of the Lebanese, including the
Sunnis who are closest to Hariri, were against this gambit.
They told me, as they have told the Saudis, as they have told
U.S. officials, ``This is far too dangerous to continue. We
need to preserve the stability.''
So, in a few words, what is a better approach? Continue our
assistance to--and donor assistance--to Lebanon, ensuring that
the LAF and other institutions, in particular, can be
strengthened as a counterweight for Hezbollah. When we help the
LAF, make sure that we tell them clearly that there are certain
lines that they cannot cross, in terms of cooperation with the
LAF. Use our--that leverage to get the institutions to work in
the right direction. Avoid escalation between Hezbollah and
Israel. And there are some--I do not have time here but we have
some recommendations, in the International Crisis Group report,
on this.
And then, a last point, which may be beyond the remit of
this hearing, but I think it is relevant, which is to try to
de-escalate tensions in the region and our policies towards
Iran, our policies on the Iran nuclear deal, our policies
toward Saudi Arabia, which we should support, but not enable.
All those, unfortunately, in my--in our opinion, are going in
the wrong direction.
So, this is not a grand agenda. It is not as inspirational
or transformative as some may like. It is more of the status
quo, maintaining our support, maintaining that policy. But, I
think Lebanon is too weak, too vulnerable, too susceptible to
destabilization to afford grand aspirations. It is not a
country where grand dreams are made. It is a country which we
have learned, Israel has learned, the French have learned--it
is a country where grand dreams are--crash.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Malley follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert Malley
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Kaine, and members of the Committee.
First, let me express my deep appreciation for the invitation to
testify before you and discuss how best to support security and
stability in Lebanon.
I am the President and CEO of the International Crisis Group, a
non-governmental organization that conducts field-based research on 40
conflicts and vulnerable countries and monitors another 30 around the
world. I previously also had the honor of serving in the White House
under both Presidents Clinton and then Obama, most recently as his
Senior Adviser for the Counter-ISIL Campaign and White House
Coordinator for the Middle East, North Africa, and the Gulf region. My
government and Crisis Group roles entail different mandates, interests
to pursue, and interlocutors with which we can engage; in particular,
Crisis Group has the ability to talk to people on all sides of the
Lebanese divide, Hezbollah included. Today, I am speaking in my
capacity as head of Crisis Group whose overriding goal is to resolve
and prevent deadly conflict around the globe.
You will likely have heard from others that the solution to
diminishing Hezbollah, and by extension Iranian influence, lies in
punishing the Lebanese state, sanctioning it, and conditioning support
to its institutions and national army on an end to the Shiite
movement's wholly disproportionate role. But Crisis Group's field work
and analysis--as well as my own experience--paints a different picture.
To drop our assistance to Lebanese state institutions and force a
confrontation among Lebanese would produce precisely the opposite of
what advocates of this approach purport to achieve. It would jeopardize
Lebanon's stability; potentially prompt a domestic showdown in which
Hezbollah's superior cohesion and militarily might would prevail;
intensify risks of war with Israel; and imperil what remains of
Lebanon's state institutions. Besides the enormous human cost entailed,
such chaos and violence would come a time when the region already is
experiencing far too much of both and would play into the hands of Iran
and its allies that thrive on them.
1.
Mr. Chairman, to begin, a few words about Lebanon, a unique case in
the region--both a microcosm of the Middle East, but also a striking
exception to it. Lebanon has participated in, experienced and suffered
from the Israeli-Arab conflict, the pernicious influence of
sectarianism, the rise of militant jihadism, interference from regional
actors, and dramatic refugee flows. The region's more powerful actors
use it, variously, as a venue for their proxy wars, an arena in which
to play out the Arab-Israeli conflict, and a testing ground for Saudi-
Iranian rivalry.
Yet Lebanon also is that rarest of examples of what so much of the
Middle East is lacking: pluralism, tolerance, consensus-based politics,
and an ability to maintain relations with the U.S., Iran, and Saudi
Arabia. The shocks Lebanon has experienced--from more than a million
Syrian refugees, or a quarter of its population, who've poured in
through Lebanon's eastern border, in addition to hundreds of thousands
of Palestinian refugees; to a vicious war next door; to the sectarian
tensions generated by that war and Hezbollah's direct involvement in
it; to the rise of jihadi militancy--would have destabilized even a
sturdy country, let alone one as polarized along political and
confessional lines. The fact that it continues to hold together in
large part is due to memories of the recent civil war but also to the
delicate and at times unsavory domestic and foreign balancing act in
which it constantly engages.
Its resilience, in other words, has come at a price, including a
power-sharing arrangement prone to paralysis, fragmentation along clan,
family, regional, social and ideological lines, corruption and vast
patronage networks, vulnerability to outside influence and, most
notably, the persistent weakness of the central state and its
coexistence with a powerful non-state armed actor closely allied with
Iran that enjoys outsized influence. But that price ought not make us
ignore the achievement of building and preserving a relatively stable
and diverse entity in an exceptionally violent and polarized part of
the world and in the wake of an extraordinarily long and bloody civil
war. And it must not make us forget the overriding U.S. interest in
preserving its stability, helping it cope with the strains causes by
the inflow of Syrian refugees, strengthening its national institutions
and independence, and avoiding another costly war with Israel.
That once may have been a relatively uncontentious view. No more.
My friend and fellow witness, Elliot Abrams, as well as senior
officials from Saudi Arabia, advance a different view. They argue that
the time has come to rip the mask off a government that, in their view,
has simply become a convenient cover for Hezbollah's and, it follows,
Iran's agenda in the region. In Abrams' words,
Economic assistance to Lebanon and military assistance to its
army should be made dependent on pushing back on Hezbollah and
regaining Lebanese independence. The price Lebanon pays for
Hezbollah should be made far clearer, and the advantages
Hezbollah gains from its control of Lebanon should be reduced--
and made far more controversial.
He concludes: ``The United States should reassess our military
assistance and our entire policy''.
That might sound good on paper but is highly risky and inadvisable
in practice. Saudi Arabia toyed with this approach late last November,
when it unceremoniously compelled Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri
to resign in a bid to force his country to choose between continued
Saudi assistance and Lebanon's stability on the one hand and Hezbollah
continued outsized role on the other. I happened to be in Lebanon the
day after Hariri was held up in Riyadh, and I happened to be in Riyadh
last week meeting with Crown Prince Mohammed
Bin Salman, on the eve of his visit to the U.S. I came away from
both convinced that the Saudi gambit had backfired, and only slightly
less convinced that the Crown Prince realizes it. Indeed, since those
days, the Kingdom has reverted to a more realistic and pragmatic
approach, maintaining ties to Lebanon without a fundamental change in
the delicate political balance among Hariri, Hezbollah, and other
forces that govern the country.
It's what the U.S. administration also concluded after an animated
debate at that time, when sounder minds that saw value in protecting
Lebanon's stability and supporting its institutions prevailed over
those who argued for the more hazardous option of fully backing the
Saudi gambit. It's what I'd like to convince members of this committee
of today.
2.
Mr. Chairman, potential threats to Lebanon's resilience could
emanate from three distinct sources. The first is a stark disruption in
the domestic balance of power which, frustrating and troubling as it
may be, has preserved stability against the odds. A second danger is
the outbreak of another war between Israel and Hezbollah, whose
relations are governed by a regime of mutual deterrence that keeps
conflict but one misstep or miscalculation away. The third peril comes
from a regional environment that currently is experiencing far too many
sources of tension and far too little diplomacy. Let me address each in
turn.
As for the domestic equilibrium: Lebanon's relative stability, as I
noted, has been purchased at a disturbing cost. It has entailed
accommodating an armed movement, Hezbollah, founded with active
participation and funding from Iran, with the explicit mission of
fighting against the Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon at the time
and that has been a loyal Iranian ally ever since. Hezbollah, which has
developed strong social roots by successfully exploiting the historical
marginalization of the Shiite community, acts with considerable
autonomy in Lebanese affairs. Today, it holds 12 parliamentary seats
and, together with the closely aligned Amal movement, largely
monopolizes the Shiite vote in Lebanon's sectarian political system.
But while Hezbollah is thus a political actor that represents the
choice and preferences of a sizable Lebanese constituency, as expressed
in consecutive elections deemed largely free and fair (2005 and 2009),
this, as you know all too well, is only part of the picture. The group
has the capacity to maintain, equip and deploy its own militia
fighters. It engages and cooperates with state institutions at its own
discretion, and it maintains the de facto ability to block actions by
political institutions that do not align with its agenda. It takes
direct action in foreign theaters such as Syria to promote its agenda.
In other words, the two secondary ministries (industry, youth and
sport) it presently holds hardly reflects its actual power. Its massive
military and organizational strength has discouraged or quelled any
attempt to challenge it. It has resorted to arms in the past to make
this clear and has demonstrated that it will not tolerate any
accommodation by the Lebanese state with Israel, nor will it permit any
alignment between Lebanon with regional actors that are opposed to the
so-called ``axis of resistance.'' Indeed, in the past, Lebanese
politicians who advanced policies contrary to this agenda were the
target of assassinations in which Hezbollah's role is widely suspected.
As other Lebanese parties have learned at their expense, at times
violently, there is no government, let alone a sustainable one without
Hezbollah's participation and support.
The question for this subcommittee and for the U.S. more broadly,
is what to do about this far from satisfactory reality. That was the
question Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman asked and answered last
November. As he saw it, and as he and other Saudi officials told me,
for Hariri to preside over a government that included Hezbollah meant
allowing one of Riyadh's closest allies to cooperate with Tehran's most
loyal partner, and thus to empower and--given various forms of Saudi
economic assistance, from the employment of Lebanese workers to its
deposits in Lebanese banks, to its import of Lebanese products--
indirectly subsidize both Iran and Hezbollah. MBS viewed this as an
irrational and counter-productive arrangement and, just 2 days before I
coincidentally was to meet with Hariri in Beirut, held him against his
will in Riyadh and got him to announce his resignation. As I wrote from
Beirut at the time, ``That [Hariri] made the statement from Riyadh told
much of the story; that he delivered it with the genuineness of one
forced to read his own prison sentence told the rest. The decision was
announced by the Lebanese prime minister but it was made in Saudi
Arabia.'' While to this day Saudi officials deny this and maintain
Hariri's resignation was entirely voluntary, few--in Lebanon, in the
region, in Europe, or in the U.S. administration--take that denial at
face value.
The gambit failed, and it failed in large part because Lebanese--
whether Sunni, Christian or Shiite, and whether they support or decry
Hezbollah--resented such brazen foreign interference and feared the
destabilizing impact of such a disruption of their political order. It
failed, too, because most Lebanese understand that, as of now at least,
keeping Hezbollah within the government is a better guarantor of peace
than forcing it out, and that an inclusive power-sharing arrangement is
more stable than an exclusive one.
Indeed, by and large, Hezbollah's agenda today is one of
maintaining internal stability. We should be clear-eyed about why it
does so: Hezbollah prizes calm because the status quo serves the
organization well. On one hand, formal Lebanese state sovereignty
provides a legal umbrella under which it can operate despite terrorist
designations, without that state exerting real influence, let alone
control over its actions. Preserving stability and state functionality
also allows Hezbollah to focus on its military agenda and creates an
environment in which its constituents can benefit from state services.
Hezbollah has also shown a readiness to cooperate with political
rivals and state institutions on security matters. With Hezbollah's
quiet support, the last several years have seen Lebanon absorb large
numbers of Sunni refugees from the Syrian conflict without significant
sectarian violence. Hezbollah was also a force for restraint after a
series of jihadi attacks against Shiite neighborhoods in the southern
suburbs of Beirut between 2012 and 2015.
Hezbollah's benefiting from the status quo and cooperating with the
Lebanese Armed Forces (or LAF) in combatting jihadists is, of course,
part of the problem. But it's also part of the reality we need to take
into account in seeking to address it--namely that any effort to break
the current governing alliance risks tearing Lebanon down and exposing
to a greater jihadist threat. In offering you this picture, I do not
mean to suggest any level of comfort with Hezbollah's status as an
armed and unaccountable state within a state. But it is important to
have a clear sense of how the group is operating on the ground, and
what an effort to exclude it or sanction Lebanese institutions would
provoke.
3.
Mr. Chairman, the picture I have just painted counsels in favor of
continued donor assistance to the Lebanese state, rather than treating
it as a pariah. While one ought not underestimate the role Hezbollah
plays in Lebanese political life, and particularly in its foreign
policy, it is not coterminous with the Lebanese state, and the Lebanese
state cannot be reduced to, or should be held responsible for, the
actions of an actor that has largely usurped its foreign policy.
Furthermore, punishing the Lebanese state and weakening its
institutions by withholding support likely would not inflict
substantial harm on Hezbollah, which may be appropriating some of this
support but does not rely on it. It would, however, disproportionately
affect those Lebanese who attempt to defend what remains of the
autonomy of state institutions, and their capacity to enable governance
and participation in sectors that have not been captured by Hezbollah.
As a Lebanese academic once quipped: ``People say that Hezbollah is a
state within a state, but in reality it's a state within a failed
state''. Getting that state to function better and with more autonomy
will not rein in Hezbollah in the short term, but may narrow their base
of support further down the road. By contrast, cutting off all support
to and cooperation with the LAF would leave Iran and its allies without
competition.
The Lebanese army and other security forces form an important
bulwark against the influence of jihadi elements in Lebanon, defeating
ISIS and AQ-affiliated groups. Investing in these institutions is
likely to be particularly important following the impending defeat of
jihadi elements in Syria, which may prompt such groups to move to
ungoverned or weakly controlled areas of neighboring countries like
Lebanon. By supporting Lebanese institutions, the U.S. and donors more
broadly can support stabilization of the perimeter of the Syrian
conflict, help prevent spillover effects, and help provide security for
the vast Syrian refugee community that currently resides in Lebanon.
But there should be no expectation that Lebanese state security
agencies will face down Hezbollah militarily. For one, even with much
better equipment and training than they have today, these forces and
agencies will not be a match to the size, equipment and combat
experience of Hezbollah, in particular after the latter's
participation, and training acquired, in the Syrian conflict. More
importantly still, Lebanese security institutions comprise a cross-
section of Lebanese society, and a significant part of their personnel,
if put to the test, should be expected to place loyalty to the
sectarian community to which they belong over loyalty to the Lebanese
state. An open confrontation between Hezbollah, which enjoys the
overwhelming support of the Shiite community, and any state security
institution will almost certainly lead to the fracturing of the latter
into its sectarian components, and initiate a sectarian civil war from
which Hezbollah is likely to emerge victorious. Such a course in any
event almost certainly would be rejected by the security establishment
itself, as well as by the majority of political actors, including
Hezbollah's opponents.
Following the upcoming elections in May, the emergence of yet
another ``national unity government'', in which Hezbollah and its
allies will be included, is highly probable. Hezbollah has expressed
the clear intention to continue the current, broad political alliance
that enabled the unblocking of the political/constitutional impasse in
late 2016. The U.S. administration should accept this irrespective of
its view of the organization, as an adversarial government formation
would likely return Lebanon to the paralysis that characterized its
politics prior to 2016, and potentially would be destabilizing, without
affecting the behavior of the organization and Lebanon's regional
posture.
Finally, the U.S., and other international donors, should continue
and if possible enhance support for Syrian refugees. Lebanon is bearing
a huge burden remarkably well, but there are clear signs of strain. It
is critical to continue financial support of humanitarian agencies to
prevent existing tensions between refugees and host communities from
escalating, and the Lebanese authorities from responding to popular
pressure by pushing for unsafe returns to Syria.
4.
Mr. Chairman, the second threat facing Lebanon, as I mentioned, is
another Israeli-Hezbollah war.
Although Israel and Hezbollah face each other across Lebanon's
southern border, and although tensions are mounting regarding the
precise path of Israel's fence and the delineation of the Lebanese and
Israeli maritime Exclusive Economic Zones, few in Lebanon seem to
believe such a war is imminent. Both protagonists have cause for self-
restraint. Hezbollah knows that a provocation on its part would be met
by devastating Israeli force. And the very reason Israel wishes to
forcefully strike Hezbollah is the reason that it is inhibited from
doing so--namely the prospect of a barrage of missiles on its urban
centers. While Israel still possesses far greater ability to inflict
pain, Hezbollah possesses far greater capacity to absorb it, which
means that any large-scale Israeli operation runs the risk of being
open-ended.
At bottom, and despite the huge disparity in military power, each
party recognizes in the other a formidable adversary and that any
conflict likely would be far more destructive than their last military
confrontation in 2006. On the one hand, according to Israel's own
assessments, Hezbollah had some 16,000 missiles on the eve of the 2006
war and holds today 130,000 missiles, including some with more advanced
capacities. On the other hand, Israeli officials have made clear that,
should a war break out, this time they would make little distinction
between Hezbollah and the state behind which it hides. In the words of
a senior Israeli military commander,
If a war breaks out in the northern arena we need to act with
full force from the beginning. What we could do in 34 days
during the second Lebanon war we can now do in 48 to 60 hours.
The growth of our strength has not been linear. This is
potential power unimaginable in its scope, much different to
what we have seen in the past and far greater than people
estimate.
In a similar vein, last October, Defense Minister Avigdor Lieberman
warned, ``today, the Lebanese army has lost its independence and is
another unit in Hezbollah's apparatus, and therefore, as far as we are
concerned, the infrastructure of the Lebanese army and the Lebanese
state is one with the infrastructure of Hezbollah.''
There are other reasons why war may not be imminent. The presence
of United Nations peacekeepers (the UNIFIL mission continues to patrol
the area between the Litani river and the Israel-Lebanon border with a
total of 10,838 troops) and the existence of established channels for
communication and mediation of disputes helps manage the risk of an
accidental escalation. Because both Israel and Hezbollah have
understood the de facto ``rules of the game,'' mutual deterrence has
worked for the past 12 years to keep the peace on that border. The
recently more vocal maritime dispute between the two countries already
secured constructive U.S. mediation efforts, led by the State
Department, and is unlikely to lead to war.
Yet any sense of complacency would be misplaced. Those rules of the
game have been challenged by significant changes in the ground, most
notably the Syrian conflict and attendant growth of Iran's and
Hezbollah's presence in that country. In response, Israel has described
several redlines the crossing of which already has, or will prompt a
military response. First, Israel has made clear it would not accept
Hezbollah developing the indigenous capacity to build high-precision
missiles whether in Lebanon or Syria. Against the backdrop of Israel's
successes in blocking convoys with high-precision missiles from Syria,
Israeli officials claim Hezbollah has attempted to build subterranean
high-precision missile factories in both countries. If Israel were to
destroy such a factory, Hezbollah and its allies may forcefully react,
potentially triggering a major conflict.
Second, Israel is determined to prevent Hezbollah or Shiite
militias from approaching the 1974 armistice line in southwest Syria
and setting up offensive infrastructure in its vicinity. Yet if the
Syrian regime were to seek to retake the southwest, it likely would do
so with support from Hezbollah which could mean hundreds of Hezbollah
fighters adjacent to the Israeli-Syrian fence. Israel fears that troops
operating from this area, which has no Shiite population, would be
harder to deter than Hezbollah forces operating from southern Lebanon,
where any firefight with Israeli forces would produce large numbers of
casualties among the organization's core constituency.
Third, and more broadly, Israel wants to prevent its rivals from
consolidating a permanent military presence anywhere in Syria, which,
it fears, would strengthen their hand in future wars as well as their
influence in Lebanon, Jordan and the Palestinian arena. Iran is of
particular concern: Israel's redlines seek to block it from
establishing an airport, naval port, military base, or permanent
presence of militias. Israel has already demonstrated its resolve to
disrupt the construction of this sort of major military infrastructure.
Under virtually any of these scenarios, including those originally
limited to Syria, the risk of war spreading to Lebanon would be
considerable. If a tit-for-tat encounter were to begin in the
southwest, and pressure to build in Israel to conduct a more robust
response, it would have to choose among a series of bad options: target
Hezbollah in Lebanon; strike Syrian targets in an effort to force
Damascus or Moscow to rein in Hezbollah; or, should strain mount to
levels it deems unbearable, launch an incursion into Syria to push
Hezbollah back. All have the potential to trigger a wider war. And, as
noted, the odds of that war being far more intense, bloody and costly
than the last confrontation that occurred in 2006 would be high.
The region already had one close call. In February 2018, Israel
responded to the intrusion of an Iranian drone into its airspace with
airstrikes against alleged Iranian bases in Syria. During that attack,
Israel lost an F16 fighter jet and responded by destroying a part of
the Syrian anti-aircraft defenses. The chain of events demonstrates the
potential for rapid escalation in the southern Syria theater. Were
Hezbollah involved in such a cycle of escalation, it almost certainly
would spill into an all-out confrontation in Lebanon.
It is often said, in both Israel and in Lebanon, that the next war
is no longer a matter of ``if'' but of ``when''. Israel, from this
perspective simply cannot accept the presence of a large, armed non-
state actors on its borders whose ability to inflict pain would, over
time, significantly limit Israel's freedom of maneuver. And Hezbollah
would feel no choice but to react, lest it lose what is left of its
``resistance'' credentials. The trendline of the past four decades or
so provides fodder for this view. Since 1978, Israel and Lebanon have
been involved in three major confrontations, and the current lull--some
12 years of relative calm--has been the longest since 1978.
For various reasons, the U.S. enjoys only modest ability to prevent
such an occurrence but it should use whatever influence it retains.
Together with Russia and Jordan, it is a co-signatory of the
southwestern ceasefire agreement, which includes limitations on Iranian
and Hezbollah presence in the area. In a recent report, Crisis Group
recommended steps to bolster this arrangement and decrease risks of a
Syrian regime attempt to retake the southwest--and thus reduce the odds
of an Israeli-Hezbollah war. In reality, however, Russia has the most
important role to play in that effort. Alone among major players, it
enjoys good relations with all parties involved--Syria, Israel, Iran
and Hezbollah--and all these regional actors in turn feel some
obligation to accommodate Russian concerns. Moscow reportedly stepped
in directly in early February to keep the confrontation triggered by
the drone incursion from spinning wholly out of control. But it can and
should do more: rather than rushing to contain such flare-ups, Russia
should facilitate channels of mediation and the establishment of rules
of the game that would prevent such escalation from occurring in the
first place. The U.S. should be clear with Russia on what those rules
should be, and what Israel's redlines are.
5.
The third threat to Lebanon's stability is one that would appear
beyond this hearing's remit, but it is not. I am referring to the
broader regional context. Instability and conflict in the Middle East
is nothing new. What is new, however, is Iran's unusually far-reaching
regional role, an unusually apprehensive Israel, an unusually assertive
Saudi leadership and, of course, an unusual U.S. president. As for
Iran: For several years now, it has successfully exploited regional
chaos to spread or enhance its influence in Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and
Yemen. As for Israel: For months now, it has been sounding alarm bells
about Hezbollah's and Iran's growing footprint in Syria, and more
particularly about the Lebanese movement's potential capacity to
indigenously produce precision-guided missiles.
As for the new Saudi leadership: MBS is convinced that Iran for too
long has viewed Saudi Arabia as a punching bag, and that Saudi Arabia
for too long has obliged. He sees Tehran possessing far less money,
military equipment, or powerful international allies than Riyadh, yet
nonetheless on the ascent, exerting or expanding control over Baghdad,
Damascus, Beirut, and Sanaa. He believes that only by more forcefully
and aggressively pushing back--whether in Yemen, Iraq, or Lebanon--can
Saudi Arabia and its partners halt Iran and turn the tide.
As for the U.S.: Unpredictable and inconstant in so many ways,
President Trump has been consistent in one regard at least, which is a
belligerency toward Iran that has become the hallmark of his
administration's Mideast policy. U.S. officials evoke his willingness
to take action against Iran to restore the U.S. credibility and
deterrence he feels his predecessor frittered away. To which one might
add the administration's calling into question the Iranian nuclear deal
and considering ramping up sanctions against Tehran, which
unnecessarily heightens tensions. In this, the U.S. approach appears to
be very much of a piece with the kingdom's: dismissive of diplomatic
engagement with Tehran and persuaded of the need to establish a new
balance of power.
In such a tense environment, conflict is always but one step away,
and confrontation in one arena quickly could spread to another. While
the nuclear deal, by design, was tailored to exclusively address
concerns over Iran's nuclear program, the implications of its demise
may become manifest not only in stepped-up Iranian efforts to enrich
uranium but in asymmetric responses by Tehran, targeting U.S. forces
deployed in close proximity to Iranian local partners in Iraq, Syria or
Afghanistan. Economic sanctions against Iran might have effects in
Syria's Deir el-Zour province, where U.S.-backed Syrian Democratic
Forces and Iranian-backed Shiite militias compete over territory that
has strategic value and energy resources. Another missile strike fired
by Huthis in Yemen toward a Saudi or Emirati city or an inadvertent
clash in the Strait of Hormuz could provide justification for direct
U.S. retaliation on Iranian soil, or for new sanctions that could
jeopardise the JCPOA. All of which could--given its susceptibility to
regional dynamics--quickly drag Lebanon into a regional escalation.
Missing from this picture is any hint of diplomacy--between Iran
and Saudi Arabia or between Iran and the U.S. Rather, the region faces
a free for all in which the only operative restraint on one's actions
is nervousness over what it might provoke. That's hardly reassuring and
ought to change. That need not mean halting efforts to push back
against Iranian destabilizing activities. But it would mean halting
efforts to undo the Iranian nuclear deal and resuming at least some of
the high-level U.S.-Iranian engagement that existed in recent years.
6.
This, then, is the complex reality of Lebanon and Hezbollah. A
surprisingly resilient but nevertheless fragile Lebanese state coexists
with an autonomous armed actor, Hezbollah, that is fixed in its
opposition to Israel and alliance with Iran; a tense Israeli-Hezbollah
relationship that is a single mistake or misinterpreted signal away
from a very dangerous confrontation; and regional context rife with
conflict trigger points and devoid of diplomacy.
Mr. Chairman, given this picture, the lesson--unsatisfying as it
might seem--is that outside actors, the U.S. among them, should deal
cautiously with Lebanese affairs; bolster the central government and
its institutions, notably the LAF; mitigate risks of a new Israel-
Hezbollah confrontation; reduce regional tensions through diplomatic
engagement, including with Iran, all the while the putting aside more
ambitious goals.
This is not necessarily the most inspiring or transformational of
agendas. But Lebanon is too weak, too vulnerable, too fragile, too
finely balanced to be the vehicle for a transformative agenda. Lebanon
is not the place where grand dreams are made. It's where they crash.
Senator Risch. Thank you, to both of you.
You have both raised some questions that I think we ought
to explore a little bit. And that is--Mr. Abrams, you noted, as
I did in my opening statement, that there are elections, May--
what is it?--6th? May 12th? And there are 1,000 people running.
And your suggestion was that perhaps Hezbollah will make gains
in those elections. What are your thoughts? I want to hear both
of your thoughts on this. Do you think the people of Lebanon
have a clear vision of the effects of electing a terrorist--a
designated terrorist organization to be the government of the
country? We have a model there with--in--obviously, in Gaza.
And, in my mind, I see parallels there, that if, indeed, the
electorate makes that choice--and, of course, they can make a
choice that they want to make--some bad things are going to
happen. Your thoughts, please.
Mr. Abrams. I think they certainly recognize the nature of
the coalition government they have had, of which--today--of
which Hezbollah is a part. And certainly everybody in Lebanon
recognizes that Hezbollah has, let us call it, extra-
constitutional powers just by virtue of the fact that it has
the guns. But, I think they do not have a sense that--of the
price they are paying, because we do not set a price.
I was struck, in Rob's testimony, that he said, you know,
in a sense--another version of what I said, that is, he said,
``We need to set limits.'' And I basically said, ``Unless there
are limits, we should not give them any money.'' I think we are
saying, in that sense, the same thing. We ought to be saying to
the LAF and to the--more generally, the people of Lebanon,
``Certain things are not permissible, and they will cause us to
walk away.'' And we have actually not done that. I mean, in the
speech that Secretary Tillerson made in Beirut, he just
applauded. Everything was just wonderful in Lebanon. There was
no sense that--yes, he attacked Hezbollah, but he did not say,
nor did we say at the Rome Conference, ``The following things
are unacceptable to us, and they are going to have to change.''
So, unless we say that, I think Lebanese will not get that
message.
Senator Risch. Mr. Malley, you may have a different view.
Mr. Malley. Well, first of all, I think the elections are
not going to change much of--on the political equilibrium in
the country. This is a finely balanced--they have a new
electoral law, but in--I think we are going to see a replica of
what we see today. It is going to be a national unity
government. Those are the only ones that work. Lebanon
experienced, in the past, an attempt to exclude one party or
the other. It does not work. And, in fact, their basic--their
constitution kind of requires that every constituency be
represented. Hezbollah has a constituency among Shiites. It is,
by far, the most powerful movement among Shia, with Amal, which
is its ally. So, they will have that support and its--and we
will not be able to diminish that support, even if we were to
threaten a cutoff in aid. Hezbollah simply is too powerful
among its constituents.
And it is true, as Elliott says, it is--Lebanese may not
know the price they pay by voting for Hezbollah. I think they
would continue--the Shiites will continue to vote for them.
They do know the price of trying to confront Hezbollah. For
better or for worse, they have experience in the past.
Hezbollah is a stronger party. And the army, itself, would
splinter if there was a confrontation, because many Shia and
others in the army would join Hezbollah.
So, I think we have to be very realistic about what can be
achieved and how our threats would play, or not, on Lebanese
theater. My understanding, from talking to U.S. officials, is
that they--we do tell the LAF. Of course, they are doing more,
they are cooperating more, or they are working more with
Hezbollah than as--than we might like. In some cases, because
they had to cooperate with them to get rid of ISIS and get rid
of al Qaeda on the border, they have worked together. But, we
do set certain lines about how much we do not want them to
cooperate. And the truth is, if we were not there, if we did
not have that leverage, that cooperation and that sort of--the
takeover by Hezbollah of the LAF would be--would probably be
far more extensive than we are seeing today.
So, this is not a comfortable situation, but it is the
reality of Lebanon today, that there is no politics without
Hezbollah, there is no equilibrium or balance or stability
without Hezbollah. And either we decide that we are going to
leave the--Lebanon and the Lebanese to that dominance and to
Iran, and we are not going to play a role, or we are going to
have to try to find a way to shape it as we go along.
Senator Risch. Mr. Abrams, do you want to take a minute to
respond?
Mr. Abrams. Yeah, I just--I think there is a strawman being
built here. I did not suggest cutting off Lebanon without a
cent. I did not suggest breaking relations. I did not suggest
that we end our economic assistance.
I do think, though, that--you know, that Rob is operating
on a theory, which is that if we significantly diminish our
military aid, then there will be more cooperation between the
LAF and Hezbollah. You know, we do not give them the whole
budget. The budget--we probably give about 10 or 20 percent of
the LAF and ISF budget. So, this is operating on a theory. And
I think we would be better off saying certain things are just
not acceptable, and some of those things are things that they
have done--handing bases over from the LAF to Hezbollah,
watching them parade, making no effort, really, to push back.
Now, maybe they cannot push back, but then why are we paying
for it?
Senator Risch. Senator Kaine.
Senator Kaine. You know, these are great discussions. So,
let me just pick up on that. Because it is the case that Mr.
Abrams was not talking about a cut, he is talking about with
the right limitations. But, I would say it is also the case
that Mr. Malley is not just advocating a theory, or at least
not just his own theory, because what he is advocating would be
what Secretary Tillerson advocates and also what General Votel
and Secretary Mattis advocate.
But, let me ask you a hard question, Mr. Malley. So, if we
pursue this direction, the--you know, the Malley/Votel/Mattis/
Tillerson--what is the long game? Hezbollah continues to grow,
you know, a little bit stronger, a little bit stronger, a
little bit stronger. What is the path to something better? What
is the path to something where Israel can feel more secure with
its next-door neighbor or there is a better chance of, you
know, a Lebanon that can deal with its internal challenges more
successfully?
Mr. Malley.
Mr. Malley. It is a great question. And I do not think it
is going to be resolved by us dealing with Lebanon. This is a
big question having to do with Iran's policy in the region,
which is why I think the third point that I made, which is, we
have to--we have to push back against Iran. I do not think
doing it without diplomacy, without engagement, is going to get
us where we want to go. But, it is a big problem that--you
know, administration after administration, the ones that
Elliott served and the ones I served in, have not been able to
tackle, which is, What do we do about Iran's role in the
region? What do we do about the existence of an armed militia,
like Hezbollah, with 100,000 missiles? That is a real problem.
But, it is not by--I do not think--and I am not saying that
Elliott is suggesting it--it is not by cutting off aid, or
threatening to cut off aid to the LAF, that we are going to
address that issue. That is going to take a transformation in
the region. It may take events beyond our control that might
happen in Iran, that would happen in Lebanon.
Senator Kaine. How about--there is legislation pending
before the committee on additional Hezbollah-related sanctions.
So, say we leave the LAF funding and other economic support
steady to show that a continued partnership--what about the
viability of additional sanctions? I think there is a Rubio-
Shaheen bill that has been pending.
Mr. Malley. So, I am not familiar with the details of that
bill. I have seen other bills in the past. I think one question
is, Is it going to--I think we have sanctioned Hezbollah.
Senator Kaine. Right.
Mr. Malley. Again, different administrations have,
including the ones in which I served. The question is, are we
also affecting Lebanon's economy? And we have to be careful
that we do not affect ordinary Lebanese. And Lebanese in--I am
sure you know it, because you get those phone calls--Sunni,
Christian, and Shia, who say, ``Be careful. Our banking
sector''----
Senator Kaine. Right.
Mr. Malley.----``is teetering.'' And so, we have to just be
careful about that.
But, I will say, not--you know, this is not a position
against sanctions. We have to be realistic about what it is
going to achieve. Sanctions are not going to diminish
Hezbollah's power. Their power does not depend on whether the
U.S. is providing, or others are providing, forms of
assistance. There may be an initial, ``Why do we want''--as
Elliott says, ``Well, are we supporting them--why should we be
supporting Lebanon if it is giving this kind of cover to
Hezbollah?'' But, again, that is not going to resolve the very
big question you ask, which is a question we have been trying
to grapple with for a long time, but not resolving, which is--
--
Senator Kaine. Here is a big question that I grapple with.
And when I go to Lebanon or elsewhere, when I go to southern
Turkey or Iraq or Jordan, one of the questions I hear, but
especially in Lebanon, is, ``We feel like we are just, you
know, being trampled on by a Iranian-Saudi proxy war.'' People
really feel like they are under the thumb of a big proxy war.
And they--you know, the people I talk to are very upset about
Iranian influence, but they are also upset about Saudi
influence. The reaction to this forced, you know, resignation--
I know that Prime Minister Hariri's popularity has really been
boosted in the aftermath of this, because there was a strong
reaction in Lebanon against, you know, a foreign government
trying to decide who the PM should be.
How do you think Prime--either of you--how can, or likely
will, the Prime Minister use that boost to try to make
improvements? Or is that something that is just temporary, that
is going to fade and does not give him any really increased
ability to make improvements?
Mr. Abrams. Well, that would be my judgment about it. I do
not think you will see much of a change. I think he did have a
boost in popularity, but I do not think, even in the Sunni
community, he is viewed as a kind of strong leader, let us say,
that his father was.
Mr. Malley. I do not necessarily disagree. I think he did
get a boost. I think that boost is probably going to be
temporary, as political boosts often are in many situations.
But, I think that the point you made--and, again, I happened to
be in Lebanon at the time--Sunnis who are very close to Hariri,
who are very anti-Hezbollah, who are very pro-American, were
saying, ``How could Saudi Arabia do this? It is making us look
bad. It is making us look like puppets.'' And that is why I
think, with pressure from here and from the French and others,
the Crown Prince reversed that decision, which I think was
wise, because it was backfiring.
Senator Kaine. All right. I will stop right there, let
others ask.
Senator Risch. Senator Young.
Senator Young. Well, thank you, gentlemen, for being here
today. You have had an interesting back-and-forth, and it is
already been instructive for me.
There seems to be some common agreement that our assistance
to the LAF--more generally, to Lebanon--should be conditional
upon certain good behavior. There perhaps is disagreement about
the tactics we employ, but I think, foundationally, you have
both agreed that--actually, you have explicitly stated that was
the case.
So, my question is, Is it feasible for, say, our State
Department to establish achievable, verifiable conditions, to
lay those out, to make those very clear to the Lebanese? And,
if so, what would you regard as some of those--the most
important benchmarks or conditions that need to be achieved?
Mr. Malley. So, as you say, I think, you know, neither one
of us would want to give carte blanche and say they can do
whatever they want. If, tomorrow, the LAF were completely under
the control of Hezbollah, I do not--I think it would be hard to
argue for continued assistance. I think where we would differ
is, I think where we are today, and where the State Department
and the--and General Votel and Secretary Mattis are, is that--
where we are today, that is a right balance. I do not know that
we want to be as explicit. I think it is the kind of thing, as
I understand it and from my experience, that we work directly
with the LAF, and we say there are some things, in terms of the
degree of coordination and cooperation with Hezbollah that
would cross the line. It is more we know when we see it rather
than red lines, which then may lead Hezbollah to try to cross
them.
So, I think there are steps about how closely the LAF and
Hezbollah coordinate, how much Hezbollah has direction, in
terms of the decisions that the LAF is making. But, I would--I
think, again, where we differ is that today I do not think that
we should be at a point where we say that, if the status quo
were to continue, then Lebanon should see implications, in
terms of the degree of our assistance.
Senator Young. So, Mr. Abrams, do you have different
thoughts about the extent we should--
Mr. Abrams. Yeah, I would say----
Senator Young. --we should be explicit about what
constitutes good behavior? And then, secondarily, would it be
feasible, to borrow, actually, a construct that Senator Kaine
put forward in a different setting, to perhaps put some money
in escrow until the Lebanese come into good behavior?
Mr. Abrams. I think that is----
Senator Young. This is a different context----
Mr. Abrams. Yeah. I think it is a very interesting idea,
because I think there are some things--I do not mean that we
should shout them from the rooftops. We can say them privately
to the LAF. It will become known to Hezbollah within about 10
minutes. We do not want to see any visible cooperation between
those two. And you do see visible cooperation. That is just one
example.
I would like to take a look at the question of promotions
within the LAF, where I believe Hezbollah has pretty much a
veto power, which is really--really ought to be unacceptable to
us.
So, I think there are things that we could talk about to
the LAF in private that we would set as more or less red lines,
or at least as things that we are going to consider at the top
of the list if we are going to release the escrow fund, for
example.
Senator Young. Let me pivot to Hezbollah and its threat to
Israel. Mr. Abrams, how has Hezbollah's rocket and missile
arsenal changed since the 2006 war, in terms of size of the
arsenal and the range of the missiles?
Mr. Abrams. It is generally believed that the arsenal is
something like five or six times as large, from 10- to 20,000
to 100- to 150,000 missiles. And in 2006, they were really dumb
bombs. Now Hezbollah has at least a few thousand targetable
rockets that can go after a powerplant, a desalination plant,
the IDF headquarters. This is why Israel is spending so much
effort trying to prevent Iran from getting more of those to
Hezbollah or creating a precision weapons factory in Syria or
Lebanon. So, the level of danger has risen considerably.
Senator Young. I can only imagine how Americans would feel
if we were under a similar situation, where our most populous
cities were under a threat of--a continuous threat, as are the
Israelis. What might we do, as a government, that we are not
doing to assist the Israelis, our strongest ally in the region,
dealing with this threat?
Mr. Abrams. I think you are doing it, actually.
Senator Young. Okay.
Mr. Abrams. I mean, one thing is to make sure that we pre-
position munitions in Israel so that you do not have to have
the kind of airlift we needed in 1973. Another is to join with
the Israelis in building the various forms of rocket and
missile defense that have been very useful to them already, and
can be very useful to us, as well. And Congress has been really
quite generous in financing that.
Senator Young. Thank you.
Senator Risch. Mr. Malley, briefly, do you agree with Mr.
Abrams' assessment of the situation regarding the rockets in
Lebanon?
Mr. Malley. I think that is an uncontroversial--I mean, I
think people generally agree with it. That is the size of
Hezbollah. I think the real question is, what is the risk of
war? The International Crisis Group has the ability to talk to
all parties. I think our assessment, having spoken to
leadership in Israel and in--and among Hezbollah, is that
neither side wants a war right now, precisely because of this
balance of deterrence, what Hezbollah calls ``balance of
terror,'' that Hezbollah knows it would be decimated if it
provoked Israel. But, Israel also knows that, if it had to face
100,000 rockets pouring on its cities, that would be very
difficult. I think they would do it if they felt they had to,
but neither side right now is itching for a fight.
Senator Young. Thank you, Mr. Malley.
Senator Risch. Senator Murphy.
Senator Murphy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I think it would be a mistake if we left this hearing
viewing Lebanon through the prism of ``a problem child.'' It
has challenges, it has an alliance in connection to Hezbollah
and Iran that causes difficulties for us. But, we would wish
for the existence of a Lebanon-like political arrangements on
many of its neighbors. This is a multiethnic, pluralistic,
coalition government. It is a nation that is, by and large,
stable, free from military/civil conflict. And it is also, by
the way, hosting 1.5 million Syrian refugees, which equals one-
quarter of the country's population. Without Lebanon's
agreements to host those refugees, our military operations in
Syria would be in a very different position today.
And so, I think this is a very useful conversation about
how we try to prompt Lebanon to move in a different direction
with respect to its relationship with Hezbollah. But, I think
it is important to celebrate the successes of a country that
should have collapsed by now, given all of the challenges that
it confronts, and could be a model for other nations with
respect to how it has been able to weave together people of
different faiths and different ethnic backgrounds.
And, with that in mind, I wanted to ask you, Mr. Malley, to
maybe expand on your third point. You said, ``Listen, the
future of Lebanon is really much more about this broader
contest.'' And what the Saudis did is really extraordinary. It
may have backfired, and they may have pulled back, thanks, in
part, to some intervention from the United States and others,
but it begs the question what their next gambit may be and how
the new positioning by this administration, as a relatively
unconditional supporter of the Saudis' regional plays, will
affect the decision they make a year from now, or 2 years from
now.
Should we worry about MBS' emboldened position and his next
attempt to try to force the hands of the Lebanese? Is this it?
Are they just back in their corner, or are we perhaps--should
we be thinking about getting ready for another potentially
destabilizing effort inside Lebanon?
Mr. Malley. Well, first of all, thank you, Senator Murphy,
for what you said at the beginning, which is exactly my view. I
said, at the beginning of my testimony, there is so much that
Lebanon is an exception to the rest of the region, and that we
need to support the pluralistic, tolerant, multiconfessional.
Also, as you say, Lebanon has too often been the arena for the
struggles of other. Whether it is regional neighbors, whether
it is others, it has been the victim of power politics by
regional and international actors, and they have always paid a
very heavy price. And I think we now can--this is one of the
longest stretches of time where Lebanon has not been the victim
of those conflicts, if you--since the second Israeli/Hezbollah
war in 2006. And that is--that is, again, something to be, not
just celebrated, but to be supported.
I spoke earlier about Saudi Arabia's gambit. I believe it
backfired. I also said I was in Saudi Arabia last week, where I
met with the Crown Prince. My sense--but, this is just my
words, not his--I think that he realizes that the gambit
backfired, and they have a--they have now reverted to a more
pragmatic approach of, basically, status quo ante of work,
trying to support those institutions in Lebanon that are
sovereign and independent.
How long that would last, he still--I think, still
believes, deep down, sort of as Elliott would say, that there
is something wrong with this picture. Why are we supporting a
country in which Hezbollah is a--not just a partner, but the
dominant partner?
And that brings me to the issue of U.S. policy. I have
nothing against supporting Saudi Arabia. I do think there is a
problem when we enable them, and enable their worst instincts.
And I think that has been a trend in Yemen, it has been a trend
in their--at the beginning of this Lebanese adventure. It has
been a trend in their conflict--their dispute with Qatar. I
think support has to come with good advice, and support has to
come with trying to channel Saudi--the renewed vision for the
region, channel it in the right direction. And I hope--and, in
this case, as you know well, after a first supportive--
expression of support by the administration for what was--what
had gone on between Saudi Arabia and Lebanon, there was an--
strong pushback by Assistant Secretary Satterfield--Acting
Assistant Secretary Satterfield. I think that needs to
continue. We need to tell the Crown Prince, ``Here are some
things that you ought not to do.''
Senator Murphy. Let me try to sneak in a question to you,
Mr. Abrams. You can take a stick approach with the LAF and with
the Lebanese government, and you can take a carrot approach. I
wanted to ask you about--because we have got a proposed budget
that, you know, will not see the light of day here from the
Trump administration, that proposes, you know, wiping out 56
percent of the bilateral aid that we give to Lebanon. But, what
about a concerted effort to try to reach out to the Shia
populations in Lebanon to convince them that Iran is not only--
is not their only friend, is not their only protectorate, that
they have other places to turn? The Iranians have done this
effectively throughout the region. In Bahrain, they reached out
and convinced the Shia populations that the only way that they
could gain protection as a minority population was to turn to
Iran. What about using additional assistance, rather than just
the threat of cutting off assistance, especially with respect
to the Shia population, to try to give them a choice?
Mr. Abrams. Well, I would like to see us make an effort to
get more Shia away from Hezbollah. And I think it is very hard
to measure what percentage of the Shia population actually does
not support Hezbollah. It is not zero. But I do not know if we
are really equipped to do it. I do not know if we really know
how to do that. I would like to see us do it in Bahrain, as
well, which is another hearing. But I do think that we should
be thinking about ways to get the Shia population to see the
problem more clearly, and to begin to turn away from Hezbollah.
The problem you run into there is Hezbollah's power, which does
not primarily come from speeches, it comes from--primarily from
the fact that they have the guns.
Senator Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Risch. Senator Booker.
Senator Booker. Thank you so much.
Mr. Malley, just real quick, the instability in southern
Lebanon, the incredible influx of refugees, the poverty amongst
the populations there, to me it creates an environment where
radicalism much more easily takes root. And I am wondering, in
that context, with all the levers that the United States has,
how important is, you know, USAID's education efforts going on
there, trying to service children? Could you just sort of let--
help me understand, in terms of--as we think about all these
levers that we have, the importance of doing direct support to
poor populations, particularly children, education, things like
that?
Mr. Malley. Thank you, Senator Booker.
I think this piggybacks on the question that Senator Murphy
asked, and I think it is absolutely right. We--where do we have
value added? We have value added in many things that are soft
power--our economy, our support for refugees, our support for
programs on the ground, which right now in southern Lebanon--I
mean, where does Hezbollah's strength originally come from?
From the fact that they were the vehicle for the empowerment of
the community, the Shiites, who felt disempowered and
marginalized. Others need to step in. Again, that is what
Senator Murphy said.
And the broader point here, which relates to Hezbollah and
Iran's influence, if there is one lesson I think we could take
from the last 15 or more years, is that instability, chaos,
that is what benefits Iran. That was true in Lebanon, it was
true in--it is true in Yemen today, it is true in Syria, it was
definitely true in Iraq. Whereas our value, our strength comes
from when we could support institutions, when our economic
strength comes into play, where our social programs come into
play. We should not be promoting instability. And again, I am
not saying that is what my friend Elliott is advocating, but
some of these policies could lead--and what the Crown Prince of
Saudi Arabia had tried at one point--could lead to instability,
and that instability not only helps radicalism, it also
supports the efforts of a country like Iran that knows how to
prosper on chaos.
Senator Booker. Do you want to comment on that?
Mr. Abrams. Just one brief comment. And that is, I agree
with that, but I do think that, on the economic side, we have
to take a careful look at the Lebanese banking system, which
has often been used by Hezbollah. And, I mean, hundreds of
millions of dollars come into Hezbollah, some from Iran, but
many from illegal activities, including narcotics trafficking,
primarily in Latin America. And a lot of that goes through the
Lebanese banking system. So, while I agree that it is fragile,
if it is a criminal enterprise, it needs to be investigated and
sanctioned by the United States. That is what our laws are
there for. So, I would not give them a pass on that.
Senator Booker. So, can I drill down on that a little bit
more? Because, obviously, I think that Shaheen-Rubio did a
pretty good job with helping us get more at the Lebanese banks
to--trying to stop Hezbollah, these payments. But, what I am
hearing and my staff is hearing is that the way that Hezbollah
is moving these days is more in bulk cash payments, not through
banking systems. They are using them for weapons transfers. And
so, are the banks really the center of what we should be
focusing our--that tool in our toolbox, the--our efforts at
sanctioning--are we, in some ways, not getting into the root of
the problem with the way that Hezbollah is moving its
resources?
Mr. Abrams. I would not say there is a root. I would not
say that the banks are the only way they are doing it. But--and
I am not seeing the intel, these days. You are. But, I do not
think that the Lebanese banking system gets a pass on this.
Hezbollah is there and continues to use that banking system.
Senator Booker. Mr. Malley, you want to comment on that at
all?
Mr. Malley. So, I mean, I--again, I think we have,
historically, sanctioned Lebanese banks. Obviously, Hezbollah
will find ways to circumvent that. They will always look for
ways. I think we just have to be careful--and when we go after
the banks, to make sure that--and my understanding is that the
Treasury Department is--feels like there has been progress
made. That is--again, I do not get the intelligence briefings,
either. We just have to be careful that we are not drowning the
country, even as we are trying to hit Hezbollah. Because this
is a fragile country, and their banking sector is pivotal for
their economy. I think there are steps we can take. Maybe there
is more that we could take. But, let us not go there with a
sledge hammer and wreck up the country in the process.
Senator Booker. And then, just finally, I have a worry
about just the--with the Iranian drone coming over and doing an
incursion into Israel, with heightened tensions, with the
instability that I see in the aftermath of the major conflicts
in Syria, Iran's influence in Syria--I just have this--a
growing concern that one of the things we should be looking at,
put the JCPOA aside, is just a conflict between Israel--a
direct conflict between Israel and Iran. Can you let me--help
me understand how realistic my concerns are and what we should
be thinking about, in terms of not allowing such a conflict to
take place?
Mr. Abrams. Well, I think you would get a proxy conflict,
in a sense, between Hezbollah, backed by Iran, and Israel. And
I think that is the--what we are all worried about. When I
travel to Israel, I hear less and less about the Iran nuclear
question or about Palestinian questions, and more and more
about the northern front--Syria and Hezbollah. I think we do
need to take a look at the question of Americans in Lebanon.
There are something like 15- to 25,000. What happens to them if
such a war breaks out? How do we protect them? How do we
evacuate them? But, I am less worried about a direct conflict
than I am about--
Senator Booker. Proxy fight.
Mr. Abrams. Yup.
Mr. Malley. If you do not mind, I think it is a fair--it is
certainly a fair concern. The more likely fight is between
Hezbollah and Israel, but the region today, I would say, is
both more integrated and more polarized than it has ever been.
In other words, it is very polarized. We obviously know that
the dispute between Saudi Arabia and Iran, between Israel and
Iran, between us and Iran. But, it is also very integrated. In
other words, what happens in Lebanon will quickly spread to
Syria, and vice versa. What happens in Yemen could spread to
Iran, could spread to Syria, could spread to Lebanon, could
spread to Israel. This is a place where you could light the
match one place and the whole region could be ablaze. And it
could well be that Iran and Israel will find themselves, as
they almost did with the episode of the drone, directly at
loggerheads.
I think the answer to this--and it goes, again, to the
question that Senator Kaine was asking--How do we get to this
broader problem of the Middle East? We are going to have to do
what we are doing to try to push back, but we have to get
engaged in diplomacy. There is going to have to be a new
regional architecture for this region. It is not simply going
to appear. Our pushback is not going to stop Iranian influence,
it is not going to destroy the 100,000 missiles. We are going
to have to think of how we get to real diplomacy, which means
carrots and sticks, which means pressure, but also engagement.
And we have dropped that second part.
Senator Risch. Thank you very much.
Gentlemen, we have got a vote going to go up. Senator Kaine
and I each will close this out with a question. Hopefully, you
can have a brief answer, because we do have a vote starting.
So, Senator Kaine, you want to go first?
Senator Kaine. Yeah, just really quickly.
I wanted to ask about the refugee issue. I mean, I--what
Lebanon has done, given the size of its population, with this
massive Syrian refugee population, is pretty amazing. As the
Chair mentioned, there is already a longstanding Palestinian
refugee community.
So, Mr. Malley, I sort of asked you this question, and I am
going to ask you, in your ICG role, sort of, if we play down
the road the politics in Lebanon, that is one thing, but let us
play down the road this, you know, million-plus refugees. I am
not sure they are going back to Syria anytime soon. They impose
significant challenges, even as Lebanon has been pretty
welcoming of them. What do we need to do, as an international
community? And how do you see the long-term presence of this
sizable number of Syrian refugees as, you know, shaping the
future in Lebanon?
Mr. Malley. As you say, there is between 1- and 1.5
million. It is a quarter of the population.
Senator Kaine. Yeah.
Mr. Malley. Almost staggering, the numbers. So, very
quickly, we need to provide support for the refugees. We also
need to be very aware of the fact that it is creating sectarian
tensions within Lebanon. And that--and so, we have to be very
supportive and have social programs, employment programs to
make sure the refugees do not become a drain.
And, my last point, yes, returning Syria, it may be a long-
term aspiration. We have to make sure that it is done
voluntarily. There is often a tendency in Lebanon to think that
they should kick them out because of the imbalance they are
creating on the sectarian spectrum. I think we have to be clear
to the Lebanese that is an--unacceptable.
Senator Kaine. Thank you.
Senator Risch. Let me close with this. U.N. Security
Council Resolution 1701 and 2373 were pretty clear--not pretty
clear, very clear--that the U.N. force in Lebanon was to assist
the Lebanese government in creating an area free of any armed
personnel, assets, and weapons, other than those of the
Government of Lebanon and/or those of UNIFIL, obviously to the
elimination of Hezbollah weapons. How do you assess--I hear a
lot of criticism from the Israelis about that. How do each of
you--as briefly as you can, tell me how successful that has
been and whether you agree that it is not working very well.
Mr. Abrams. Well, I think it clearly has not worked. The
goal has been to have Lebanese government sovereignty over the
full territory, no militias, no terrorist groups. And, since
the passage of those resolutions, I would say Hezbollah is more
powerful. Also, at the end of the 2006 war, we, the United
States, tried very hard to enlarge and improve and empower
UNIFIL, for the same reasons, really. And I would say that has
failed, too.
So, if we have been trying since 2006 to create a situation
in which the state has more control of the territory of
Lebanon, and Hezbollah's power is diminished, we have failed.
Senator Risch. Mr. Malley.
Mr. Malley. It is clear. 1701 are words on paper; they are
not going to be translated on the ground, and they are not
going to be translated anytime soon, for clear reason. Israel
was not--was not able, in 2006, to completely destroy
Hezbollah. It is certainly not the Lebanese Army, it is not
UNIFIL that is going to be able to do it. So, we are going to
have to live with the situation, where we have a resolution
that is aspirational. But, Lebanon is simply, as I said--I will
conclude with what I started with--it is too weak, it is too
vulnerable for us to impose on that country, on that army, to
try to do what greater powers have been unable to do.
Senator Risch. Thanks, to both of you. And I think I speak
for the committee and for the Ranking Member, we want to thank
you for appearing here today, particularly under the
circumstances we have with the weather.
But, the record will remain open until close of business on
Friday for any additional questions that Senators may have.
Again, thank you for coming here. I think this has been
very productive.
This committee will be adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:00 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
----------
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
``Lebanon is Boiling. Thousands of Americans Could Get Stuck in the
Middle of a War.'' by Elliott Abrams and Zachary Shapiro
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]