- REVIEW OF E-RULEMAKING COMMENT SYSTEMS
[Senate Hearing 116-114]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-114
REVIEW OF E-RULEMAKING COMMENT SYSTEMS
=======================================================================
JOINT HEARING
BEFORE THE
PERMANENT SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
and the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
REGULATORY AFFAIRS AND MANAGEMENT
of the
COMMITTEE ON
HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
OCTOBER 24, 2019
__________
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-895 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin, Chairman
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
RICK SCOTT, Florida
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Gabrielle D'Adamo Singer, Staff Director
David M. Weinberg, Minority Staff Director
Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
Thomas Spino, Hearing Clerk
PERMANENT SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio Chairman
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
Andrew Dockham, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
John Kilvington, Minority Staff Director
Kate Kielceski, Chief Clerk
SUBCOMMITTEE ON REGULATORY AFFAIRS AND FEDERAL MANAGEMENT
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma, Chairman
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
RICK SCOTT, Florida
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
Chris White, Staff Director
James D. Mann, Senior Counsel
Eric A. Bursch, Minority Staff Director
Mallory B. Nersesian, Subcommittee and Document Clerk
C O N T E N T S
------
Opening statements:
Page
Senator Portman..............................................
1
Senator Lankford.............................................
4
Senator Sinema...............................................
5
Senator Romney...............................................
6
Senator Hawley...............................................
16
Prepared statements:
Senator Portman..............................................
31
Senator Carper...............................................
35
Senator Lankford.............................................
37
Senator Sinema...............................................
39
WITNESSES
Thursday, October 24, 2019
Elizabeth Angerman, Principal Deputy Associate Administrator,
Office of Government-Wide Policy, U.S. General Services
Administration.................................................
7
Dominic Mancini, Acting Director, Office of Information and
Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget............
9
Ashley Boizelle, Deputy General Counsel, Federal Communications
Commission.....................................................
10
Seto J. Bagdoyan, Director of Audits, Forensic Audits and
Investigative Service, U.S. Government Accountability Office...
12
Alphabetical List of Witnesses
Angerman, Elizabeth:
Testimony....................................................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
40
Bagdoyan, Seto J.:
Testimony....................................................
12
Prepared statement...........................................
51
Boizelle, Ashley:
Testimony....................................................
10
Prepared statement...........................................
47
Mancini, Dominic:
Testimony....................................................
9
Prepared statement...........................................
44
APPENDIX
Staff Report and Appendix........................................
64
Number of FCC Filings Chart......................................
215
Regulations.gov chart............................................
216
Federal Communications Commission Chart..........................
217
REVIEW OF E-RULEMAKING COMMENT SYSTEMS
----------
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 24, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations,
and Subcommittee on Regulatory,
Affairs and Federal Management,
of the Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m.,
in room SD-342, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Rob
Portman and James Lankford, Chairmen of the Subcommittees,
presiding.
Present: Senators Portman, Lankford, Romney, Hawley, Scott,
Sinema, and Hassan.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PORTMAN\1\
Senator Portman. Welcome, everybody. This is a joint
hearing of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations (PSI)
and the Regulatory Affairs and Federal Management (RAFM)
Subcommittee. I hope it is a practice we will continue. I think
it makes a lot of sense. PSI, which is the investigative
Subcommittee, has issued a report\2\ today that is of great
importance in ensuring Americans can have a voice in Federal
regulations, so I think it is appropriate that we have a
combined hearing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Portman appear in the
Appendix on page 31.
\2\ The report referenced by Senator Portman appears in the
Appendix on page 64.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I want to welcome Chairman James Lankford and Ranking
Member Kyrsten Sinema. They are on the Regulatory Affairs
Subcommittee.
With regard to PSI, the Ranking Member is Tom Carper. He
was looking forward to his hearing. He and his staff were very
engaged in the report. He is unable to be here because he is in
Delaware this morning attending a funeral for a very close
friend of his. He sends his regrets to our witnesses, and he
asked that I submit his opening statement for the record,\3\
which I do now, without objection. He also, by the way,
submitted plenty of questions that I think Senator Sinema and I
will both be asking to be sure that his voice is heard in this
hearing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The prepared statement of Senator Carper appear in the Appendix
on page 35.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As members of a free and open democracy, it is critical
that American citizens be able to influence and inform the laws
and regulations that govern them. I think we all agree with
that.
Whether agencies are setting guidelines on the safety of
the food we eat, regulating the emissions standards of the cars
we drive, or adjusting the fees we pay to visit our national
parks, the agency rulemaking process has a big impact on
Americans' lives.
That is why over 70 years ago, the U.S. Congress gave the
American people the ability to comment directly to Federal
agencies on proposed rules so agencies would consider the views
of the people who will be most directly affected by them.
When that system is working well, government agencies can
get constructive feedback before they finalize their rules.
More importantly, it gives the rulemaking process greater
transparency the public deserves and lets Americans have their
say.
With the rise of the Internet over the past few decades,
Congress aimed to modernize that commenting process. In 2002,
we passed a law requiring the Federal commenting system to be
put online with the goal of giving more Americans an easier way
to have a voice. That resulted in the platform Regulations.gov
and other agency platforms to accept comments.
It was a good idea. Americans should be able to communicate
easily with their government about the issues that affect them.
What we have found here at the Permanent Subcommittee is
that, to be frank, we got complacent. Over the years, across
both Republican and Democrat administrations, these systems
have become outdated and wide open to abuse. What is worse,
right now there is no game plan in Congress or in the agencies
for how we can correct this moving forward.
Many of these problems are not new. As witnesses know well,
the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) issued a report
back in 2003 noting that it was difficult to search
Regulations.gov and that proposed rules and other documents are
not posted using consistent terminology. These were similar
issues to those raised by the Administrative Conference, which
is the Federal body that offers improvements to the
administrative process, in its December 2018 report.
Regarding that same GAO report, by the way, back in 2003,
former Senator Joe Lieberman noted that the GAO had found the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) had made the least
progress of all major regulatory agencies in using
Regulations.gov, which, he said, ``raises questions about why
EPA was designated the lead agency for the administration's e-
rulemaking initiative.'' He may have been prescient.
Regulations.gov was transferred from EPA to the General
Services Administration (GSA) only 24 days ago. It took a
while, but it has happened. That is, again, one reason it is
hopeful to me that we may have some changes, and it is an
appropriate time for us to have this hearing.
The report that Senator Carper and I put out today should
be a wakeup call to all of us, in the agencies and here in
Congress. It shows just how broken these commenting systems
have become.
To name a few examples in our report:
Thousands of comments submitted under stolen identities
with no recourse for the identity theft victim to remove the
comment from the system;
Comments posted by dead people, including Elvis Presley,
Richard Nixon, and many others;
Comments containing the entire text of the 1,225-page novel
``War and Peace'';
Comments containing threats of violence against government
officials and comments with excessive profanity.
For one notable rulemaking relating to the repeal of net
neutrality, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) comment
system contains 17,482 ``F'' words--a record.
What is really ironic is that the FCC is the agency that
polices our television and radio airwaves, of course, and they
are the ones who fine broadcasters thousands of dollars for
airing profanity, but now that same type of content, profanity,
sits on their own comment platform.
That is just part of the broader problem the FCC has had
with their comment system. Most of the comments on the FCC
platform are just noise that do not advance the rulemaking
process. That includes a half million comments traced to
Russian email addresses. Let me repeat that: 500,000 comments
traced to Russian email addresses.
On top of that, nearly 8 million comments came from email
domains associated with FakeMailGenerator.com. Eight million.
Even though these problems have been clear since at least 2017,
the FCC has not taken steps to address them.
The Wall Street Journal found that in that same 2017 FCC
proceeding, in a random sample of 2,757 comments, 72 percent of
respondents they surveyed had not submitted the comments that
were posted under their names. This was a Wall Street Journal
investigation showing that 72 percent of the time respondents
said, ``That was not my comment.''
The Pew Research Center analyzed the 24 million comments
the FCC received on this rulemaking and found that only about 6
percent of all of the comments were individual, unique
comments. The other 94 percent were submitted multiple times--
in some cases, hundreds of thousands of times.
Pew also found that some commenters posted computer viruses
as comments, and the FCC left those comments on its platforms.
Pew said that meant that members of the public trying to review
those comments would end up having their computers infected by
malware on a government site. An FCC Commissioner we
interviewed for our report confirmed this finding.
While the FCC has its own comment platform, the rest of the
government uses Regulations.gov, which is run by a committee
led by the General Services Administration and the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB). Just like the FCC's system,
Regulations.gov has been abused and overrun with spam.
We repeatedly found comments posted on Regulations.gov
using stolen identities. When we followed up on this with a
dozen agencies that use Regulations.gov, we found none of them
reported taking steps to prevent comments from being posted
under stolen identities. None of them. In fact, only the
Commodities Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), reported that it
flagged comments posted under false identities for law
enforcement.
Part of the problem is that right now, each agency that
uses Regulations.gov has its own policies regarding whether to
remove or redact a comment, so there are currently no
consistent guidelines for removing abusive or spammed comments
from the site.
This needs to change. The notice and comment process is a
crucial part of our regulatory system, and it should function
with integrity and consistency.
At its best, the comment process allows everyday Americans
to be heard by their government, ensures that agencies write
rules based on the best information possible, and helps inspire
public confidence in the rulemaking process.
At its worst, clogging the system with unrelated, false,
and profane comments keeps legitimate comments from being heard
and misleads the public and sometimes the agencies regarding
public sentiment about a proposed rule.
We have to be better than that to ensure that a thoughtful,
real comment is not lost, like a needle in a haystack.
We are not here to point fingers for letting this happen.
As I said earlier, this is an issue where both parties in
Congress and the past three Administrations have dropped the
ball over the years. My hope instead is that this hearing will
be the start of a serious bipartisan conversation about
improving these systems. I hope to work with all of the
witnesses here and my colleagues on this panel to help build on
the report's findings to produce legislative solutions to some
of these problems.
I appreciate the fact that the Subcommittee on Regulatory
Affairs and Federal Management is here, and I would now like to
ask the Chairman of that Subcommittee, Senator James Lankford,
for his opening statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR LANKFORD\1\
Senator Lankford. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for
pulling this together, for the report that is here, for the
witnesses, and your own individual preparation for this. This
is one of those things that is behind the scenes that just
needs to get solved. Americans want to know that when they can
comment, the comments are heard, that they have the ability to
be able to have those comments read, and that they do not get
lost in the stack of other comments that are not helpful in the
process, that are intentionally designed to be able to distract
rather than actually to be able to help the process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Lankford appears in the
Appendix on page 37.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This whole table knows and many people here know about the
Administrative Procedures Act (APA). It allows interested
persons an opportunity to participate in the rulemaking
process. That is a good gift to Americans so that they know
they are actually being heard.
The Administrative Procedures Act's legislative history
shows it was designed to be the minimum agencies were required
to be able to provide for actual engagement. We have had
Executive Orders (EO) 12866 and 13563 allowing additional rules
to be able to get involved to be able to find ways for more
people to be involved in the process. That is helpful.
Today we are talking about are there actually road blocks
in the process actually contributing, not just an easier way to
contribute but the road blocks to actually getting involved.
There are multiple websites to be able to navigate through.
If anyone is not a professional in trying to be able to work
their way through Regulations.gov at times, it is difficult to
be able to find out whether this is a proposed rule, whether it
is a finalized rule, whether there is additional information
somewhere else on it, or find out what comments were made.
If someone manages to wade through all these issues and
actually submit a comment, then hope they the agency has not
already made up its mind, and they want to know did that
comment get there in time and is it actually going to be heard.
To address this problem, Senator Sinema and I introduced
the Early Participation in Regulations Act, which would require
an advanced notice for major rules. That bill passed out of
this Committee with bipartisan support. Our focus was not to
try to get less comment but to get earlier comment and make it
substantial, so that we would know that every entity, when they
are thinking through a rule, they have the ability to be able
to actually be heard in the process and get it heard.
I agree completely and I am not going to repeat the things
that Senator Portman was saying about all of the issues that
are currently going through the system, especially in the FCC,
the number of foul words that are in it, the death threats that
are in it. I only have one thing to be able to push back on. He
mentioned that there are comments that are there from dead
people as well, and he mentioned Richard Nixon and Elvis
Presley. I can go with him on President Nixon being gone, but I
am still holding out for Elvis Presley still being alive.
[Laughter.]
We will just put that one in dispute as well.
Thanks for holding this hearing. It is a much needed topic.
Senator Portman. Great. Hope springs eternal on Elvis.
Senator Sinema.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SINEMA\1\
Senator Sinema. Thank you, Chairman Portman.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Sinema appears in the
Appendix on page 39.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, I want to offer my condolences to Tom for the loss
of his dear friend, and our thoughts are with him today.
Thank you to all of our witnesses for being here today.
When I hear from Arizonans and Arizona business owners, they
tell me how difficult it can be to make sure their voices are
heard in the regulatory process. They want to be good actors in
their communities, but complex and burdensome rules coming out
of Washington can make it more difficult for them to thrive.
Hardworking Arizonans want to comply with sensible rules,
but they also want to be heard when Washington makes rules that
affect their bottom lines. It is frustrating when Washington
does not seem to listen. This is why the regulatory comment
system is so incredibly important to our democracy. It is the
one time in our regulatory process where small business owners
and everyday citizens can talk directly to the people who are
making the rules.
The comment system lets everyday Arizonans tell Washington
that there is a better way to do something or a cheaper system
that works just as well. Perhaps they have developed a company
best practice that goes beyond the requirements in the proposed
rule. We must protect the commenting systems from abuse by bad
actors posting with these stolen names. We must stop bot farms,
whether down the street or across the globe, from interfering
with such an important government function.
We must also make sure that no proposed fix to the system
gets in the way of allowing any person or business to provide
opinions, studies, or data to an agency and help improve the
final rule. I am looking forward to hearing from our witnesses
today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Senator Sinema. Thanks for
being here.
Senator Romney, would you like to make an opening
statement?
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ROMNEY
Senator Romney. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
the opportunity to be here today, and I appreciate the
witnesses and their willingness to focus on this important
issue.
I represent a State with millions of acres of Federal land.
About 70 percent of our State in Utah is Federal land, and
obviously, the integrity of the commenting system is very
important to the residents of our State because when agencies
like the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) are going to issue
rules, these comments can have an impact on these rules.
Individuals in many cases feel that people off in Washington
are making decisions that affect their lives in a very dramatic
way, but their voices are not heard. Clearly, when there are
reams and reams of fake comments being made, people who have a
legitimate concern feel that their particular voice is not
being heard.
I would specifically request that as you consider the
adjustments necessary to protect the integrity of our comment
system, you give consideration to situations like this where,
in rural parts of our country--and I am thinking of rural parts
of my own State--it is very important for people to have their
voice heard and to know that it is being heard by people that
are far away that may not be terribly familiar with their
circumstances and how a rule might dramatically affect their
life.
I would hope that there is some way for those people whose
lives are dramatically affected to have a very clear and
convincing voice as rulemaking is being considered, and the
need to remove from our system fake voices would give people
who feel that they are not connected with decisionmaking in a
real way a much stronger voice and a much greater confidence
that people were listening to them and that Washington actually
cared about the interests of people in rural Utah, in rural
Missouri, in rural corners of our Nation as a whole.
I just want to underscore, Mr. Chairman, and to each of the
people who are testifying today, that this capacity of the
American people to comment on a potential rule is critical and
elemental as part of their conviction that our democracy is
working and that Washington and the government is intent on
being aware of their concerns and reaching decisions that
actually are in the best interests of themselves and of our
Nation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Senator Romney.
Senator Hassan is going to hold off until questions, and
let us now welcome our witnesses this morning.
Ms. Beth Angerman is here, Principal Deputy Associate
Administrator for the Office of Government-Wide Policy at the
General Services Administration.
Mr. Dominic Mancini is here. He is the Acting Director of
the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) at the
Office of Management and Budget.
Ms. Ashley Boizelle is here. She is the Deputy General
Counsel (GC) of the Federal Communications Commission.
Mr. Seto Bagdoyan is here. He is the Director of the
Forensic Audits and Investigative Service team at the
Government Accountability Office.
We thank you all for being here. We in this Subcommittee
have a rule to swear in our witnesses, so at this time I would
ask for you to please stand and raise your right hand. Do you
swear that the testimony you will give before the Subcommittee
will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you, God?
Ms. Angerman. I do.
Mr. Mancini. I do.
Ms. Boizelle. I do.
Mr. Bagdoyan. I do.
Senator Portman. Thank you all. Please be seated. Let the
record reflect the witnesses all answered in the affirmative.
We will be using a timing system today. All of your written
testimony will be printed in the record entirely, and we would
ask you to try to limit your oral testimony to 5 minutes.
Ms. Angerman, we will hear from you first.
TESTIMONY OF ELIZABETH ANGERMAN,\1\ PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSOCIATE
ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE OF GOVERNMENT-WIDE POLICY, U.S. GENERAL
SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
Ms. Angerman. Thank you very much. Good morning, Chairmen,
Ranking Members, and the other Members of the Subcommittees. My
name is Beth Angerman, and I am the Principal Deputy Associate
Administrator for the Office of Government-wide Policy at GSA.
Thank you for inviting me here today to discuss GSA's recent
assignment as the Managing Partner for the e-Rulemaking Program
and GSA's plans to effectively execute this important and new
area of responsibility.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Ms. Angerman appears in the Appendix
on page 40.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While the Environmental Protection Agency has managed this
program since 2002, on July 1, 2019, the OMB announced that GSA
was to become the new Managing Partner for the program. GSA was
selected as the Managing Partner because the Administration
recognized the important synergies that could be achieved by
moving the e-Rulemaking Program to GSA. This transition became
effective October 1, 2019.
OMB made the decision to designate GSA as the Managing
Partner as, one, it is consistent with the President's
Management Agenda's goal for Centralized Mission Support
Capabilities in the Federal Government; two, allows GSA to
leverage its technology modernization expertise; and, three,
builds on the Regulatory Information Service Center (RISC),
which supports the Unified Regulatory Agenda and is already
housed at GSA.
To manage e-rulemaking, GSA has established the Office of
Regulation Management under my office. This will enable GSA to
create a more integrated and streamlined Federal rulemaking
program using modernized technology.
GSA's overarching vision for Rulemaking Modernization is
three-fold:
First, to better integrate data and information technology
(IT) between the program and other systems to support data
analytics;
Second, to apply innovative technology solutions to promote
public access, accountability, and transparency;
Third, to provide a quality shared service to modernize and
standardize the technology platform while also reducing
duplication.
With that in mind, the e-rulemaking program is a shared
service that provides the public with one-stop access to review
electronic dockets and electronically submit comments on
proposed rulemaking for multiple Federal agencies. It is
compromised of both the Federal Docket Management System
(FDMS), used by partner agencies to create electronic dockets,
and Regulations.gov, which allows the public to interact with
those dockets.
Participation is voluntary, and the shared service is
funded through interagency agreements with those that
participate. As of today, there are 221 Federal rulemaking
organizations, including subcomponents of agencies using our e-
rulemaking program.
After an agency has posted a docket, a member of the public
may participate in the development of a proposed rule by
entering a comment and/or uploading relevant files through
Regulations.gov. The requirements for submitting information
vary greatly by agency. Some agencies require multiple fields,
such as name and address. Other agencies allow for anonymous
comments. GSA provides a shared technology service that allows
participating agencies to configure the information flow to the
needs of their rulemaking policies and processes.
GSA's primary focus since assuming ownership has been to
ensure continuity of service to agency partners and the public.
However, GSA recognizes our responsibility to deliver a secure,
innovative, and modern platform to agencies, the public, OMB,
and other stakeholders. We have already awarded a contract to
assess the current technology platform and design a road map
for modernization, both for the e-rulemaking and RISC programs.
The study aims to identify strategies to improve the customer
experience, better leverage data for analytics, improve
interactions with other rulemaking technology in other
agencies, and research emerging concerns around public
comments.
As GSA embarks on this technology modernization initiative,
it is our intent to engage with agencies, Congress, and the
public to better understand their priorities and concerns as we
design a road map to improve the efficiency and effectiveness
of the program. An initial version of that road map should be
complete by the end of fiscal year (FY) 2020.
In conclusion, GSA is proud and honored to have been asked
to take on the role of Managing Partner for e-rulemaking. GSA's
establishment of a new Office of Regulation Management
recognizes the high value placed on the integrity of the
regulatory process as a foundation of our Nation's democratic
system and our deep respect for the importance of this program
as a cornerstone of our democratic process.
Thank you again, and I look forward to your questions.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Ms. Angerman. Mr. Mancini.
TESTIMONY OF DOMINIC MANCINI,\1\ ACTING DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF
INFORMATION AND REGULATORY AFFAIRS, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND
BUDGET
Mr. Mancini. Thank you, and good morning, Chairman Portman,
Chairman Lankford, Ranking Member Sinema, and other Members of
the Subcommittees. I have proudly served as a career civil
servant since my first job as an economist at the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) in 2000. Among my current duties, I serve
as the Co-Chair of the e-Rulemaking Executive Steering
Committee.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Mancini appears in the Appendix
on page 44.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since the enactment of the 2002 E-Government Act and the
establishment of the e-rulemaking program in 2003, the
interagency Executive Steering Committee has helped to set
long-term strategies, goals, and technologies that support the
vision and mission of the program. It is in that capacity that
I thank you for the opportunity to speak about how the Federal
regulatory system endeavors to provide all Americans and
interested stakeholders a meaningful opportunity to participate
in the regulatory development process.
I will briefly touch on a few general characteristics of
the system and recent e-rulemaking updates and highlights.
E-rulemaking is provided as a shared service that is funded
by the partner agencies with an average annual budget of
approximately $8 million and a funding mechanism reflective of
each agency's usage of the system. In addition to the Steering
Committee, much of the work is done one step down in the
Advisory Board, and most major decisions, such as budget levels
and allocations, and major projects, things of this nature, are
subject to a majority vote in both the Board and the Committee.
To give you a sense of the scope of the system, in fiscal
year 2019, the agencies opened over 330,000 dockets for
regulations and related policies and collected about 1 million
public comments to Regulations.gov. The usage of the system
generally goes up each year; however, the number of comments is
usually driven by a few large rulemakings. As an example, a few
months ago we did do a brief review that suggested that about
80 percent of proposed rules received ten or fewer public
comments.
As you are probably aware, on October 1st of this year, the
General Services Administration, as we have discussed before,
recently became the Managing Partner of e-rulemaking. The
transition has been successful, and I look forward to working
closely with our new partners on the opportunities and
challenges ahead.
As the Steering Committee considers how to improve e-
rulemaking, GSA leadership, as the program management office
and co-chair, gives me great confidence because of the
technology expertise and mission support functions that GSA has
already demonstrated. This includes, as mentioned, our long-
time partnership with GSA's Regulatory Information Service
Center in managing RegInfo.gov, the website that discloses to
the public information about reviews of significant regulations
and information collections and manages the semiannual Unified
Regulatory Agenda.
The Executive Steering Committee Co-Chairs are both very
interested in looking for ways to improve e-rulemaking to
increase the functionality of commenting and to improve the
interaction between the distinct regulatory systems run by the
Federal Government. To that end, as already mentioned, GSA has
engaged in a study to look at opportunities for modernization.
Finally, I would like to briefly discuss challenges
regarding the ability of the commenting process to continue to
be an effective way for the public to express their views. We
know that modern technologies both provide an opportunity for
the public to participate in the regulatory process in a much
more accessible way and also has lowered the cost of engaging
in mass mailing and related activities, some of them
problematic, that have challenged the agencies. The Executive
Steering Committee and agency members of the e-rulemaking
community are always looking for ways to improve the usability,
security, and integrity of the platform for receiving comments
from the public. The system does provide tools to the agencies
that handle some of these types of comments, and we look
forward to working with a variety of stakeholders to consider
potential enhancements.
We have been and are going to continue to take a good look
at issues such as technologies and policies associated with the
attribution of comments and other modern challenges to the
commenting process. I think the mission statement on the front
of Regulations.gov sums it up well. It says, ``Make a
difference. Submit your comments and let your voice be heard.''
My goal, one I am confident the interagency community shares,
is to ensure that we continue to effectively provide the public
that opportunity.
Thank you again for inviting me here today, and I would be
happy to answer any questions you have about the e-rulemaking
program.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Mr. Mancini. Ms. Boizelle.
TESTIMONY OF ASHLEY BOIZELLE,\1\ DEPUTY GENERAL COUNSEL,
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
Ms. Boizelle. Thank you. Good morning, Chairmen Portman and
Lankford, Ranking Member Sinema, and other Members of the
Subcommittees. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today
about how the FCC uses the Electronic Comment Filing System
(ECFS), to collect and review public comments in its
rulemaking.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Ms. Boizelle appears in the Appendix
on page 47.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Like other Federal agencies, the FCC adheres to the notice-
and-comment rulemaking framework Congress established in the
Administrative Procedure Act of 1946. In conducting
rulemakings, we are guided by our legal obligations to provide
interested individuals with a meaningful opportunity to comment
on our proposals and to respond to their significant factual,
legal, and policy arguments when we make final decisions. ECFS
helps us achieve these objectives by facilitating the intake,
posting, retrieval, and review of public comments.
From its inception in 1998, 4 years before the E-Government
Act, ECFS has been designed to maximize public participation in
rulemaking by making the filing, posting, and retrieval of
comments as easy, inclusive, and accessible as possible. To
assist in this effort, we offer an ECFS user guide that
provides step-by-step instructions for submitting comments. In
addition, ECFS is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to
file or access comments. It accepts short express comments via
a text box and longer standard comments in most file formats.
It automatically posts submissions to the docket for the
public's consideration. Once posted, ECFS enables users and
agency staff to search for and review comments via keyword and
full text searches.
ECFS's openness is a product both of our legal obligations
and many decades of rulemaking experience, the lesson of which
is that robust public input means better regulatory policy. We
also understand, however, that the more open the system is to
the public, the more opportunity there is for mischief. We
actively monitor ECFS to ensure that it is both accessible and
secure, and that the system's openness does not impede the
public's or our ability to use the system for its intended
purpose.
Among other updates, we have worked to ensure sufficient
network capacity to prevent system disruptions and improved
ECFS's search capabilities so those looking to review and
respond to substantive comments can find relevant materials.
When we review comments, we focus on their contents rather
than the number for and against a specific position. An agency
rulemaking is not a public opinion survey, nor is a filer's
identity generally critical to our analysis. It is the
substance of comments that matters, and in particular, what
they have to say about our proposals. By serving as the
repository for our rulemaking records, ECFS is integral to our
efforts to consider relevant material in these proceedings,
address significant issues commenters have raised, and base our
decisions on record evidence. Even in rulemakings with millions
of comments, ECFS has enabled us to comply with these
requirements and successfully defend our actions in Federal
court.
Although ECFS has served us well throughout its history, we
know that it can be improved. Over the past 3 years, the FCC's
information technology staff has implemented various changes to
enhance the system's functionality and security. Even more
importantly, we have lodged a fulsome review to revamp ECFS
from the ground up. A cross-bureau working group is leading
this effort and is now in the process of convening roundtables
with external stakeholders to ensure that the next generation
of ECFS is even more accessible, secure, and resilient than the
current system.
Among other things, we are exploring changes like the
implementation of CAPTCHA to distinguish human filers from
bots, tools to authenticate identities, and the creation of
docket home pages that highlight comment deadlines and links to
major filings.
As we move ahead with our system overhaul, the Commission
will carefully consider the guidance of the performance audit
conducted by GAO and the recommendations of the FCC's Inspector
General and these Subcommittees. We are committed to using all
available resources to ensure that ECFS is a strong, dynamic,
and user-friendly platform.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. I
look forward to answering your questions.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Ms. Boizelle. Mr. Bagdoyan.
TESTIMONY OF SETO J. BAGDOYAN,\1\ DIRECTOR OF AUDITS, FORENSIC
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIVE SERVICE, U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
Mr. Bagdoyan. Thank you. Chairmen Portman and Lankford,
Ranking Member Sinema, Members of the Subcommittees, I am
pleased to appear before you today to discuss GAO's June 2019
report on identity information in public comments during
Federal rulemaking. As part of our overall review which you
have requested, this is the first of two planned reports by my
team. Complementary data analytics work continues on the
identity characteristics of all public comments submitted to
the 10 selected agencies we reviewed over a 5-year period. We
expect to report on our results in the fall of 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Bagdoyan appears in the Appendix
on page 51.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federal agencies publish on average about 3,700 proposed
rules yearly and are generally required to provide interested
persons an opportunity to comment on these rules. In recent
years, some high-profile rulemakings have received extremely
large numbers of public comments raising questions about how
agencies manage the identity information associated with such
comments.
The APA governs the manner in which many Federal agencies
develop and issue regulations, which includes the public
comment process. While the APA does not require the disclosure
of identifying information from a commenter, agencies may
choose to collect this information.
Today I will highlight our report's four principal
takeaways regarding how the ten selected agencies we reviewed
handle identity information and public comments during proposed
rulemaking.
First, Regulations.gov and agency-specific comment websites
collect some identity information, such as name and email
address, from commenters who choose to provide it and these
websites also accept anonymous comments. In this regard, the
APA does not require commenters to disclose identity
information when submitting comments. In addition, agencies
have no obligation under the APA to verify the identity of
commenters should they submit such information with their
comments.
Second, 7 of the 10 selected agencies have some internal
guidance associated with the identity of commenters, but the
content and level of detail varies, reflecting the differences
among the agencies. The guidance most frequently relates to the
comment intake or response to comment phases of the overall
public comment process.
Third, within the discretion afforded them by the APA
selected agencies' treatment of commenters' identity
information also varies, particularly when posting duplicate
comments which are identical or near-identical comment text
with varied identity information. Generally, agencies told us
that they, one, post all comments within the comment system or,
two, maintain some comments outside of the system such as in
email file archives.
However, within these broad categories, posting practices
vary considerably, even within the same agency or rulemaking
docket, and identity information is inconsistently presented on
public websites. For instance, one agency posts a single
example of duplicate comments, then indicates the total number
of comments received; whereas, another agency posts every
duplicate comment individually with no indication of the total
number of duplicates received.
Fourth, selected agencies do not clearly communicate their
practices for posting comments and identity information.
According to key practices for transparently reporting
government data, Federal Government websites should disclose
data sources and limitations to help public users make informed
decisions about how to utilize such data. Without transparency
on posting practices, public users of the comment websites
could draw inaccurate conclusions about comments, including who
submitted a particular comment or how many individuals
commented on an issue. This could limit users' ability to
participate in the rulemaking process in a meaningful manner.
In our June report, we made eight recommendations to eight
different agencies in our review to more clearly communicate to
the public their policies for posting comments and associated
identity information to Regulations.gov and agency-specific
comment websites. The agencies generally agreed with the
recommendations and described actions they planned to take to
implement them. At least one agency has actually completed such
action.
By more clearly communicating their posting policies,
particularly regarding identity information and duplicate
comments, the agencies in our review could help public users
make informed decisions about how to use comment data as well
as provide insights about how comments may have informed the
rulemaking process.
Chairmen Portman and Lankford, Ranking Member Sinema,
Members of the Subcommittee, this concludes my remarks. I look
forward to your questions.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Mr. Bagdoyan. I appreciate your
response to our request for the report. I think it is very
helpful information for this hearing and for the possibility of
us finding some bipartisan solutions going forward.
Some of our colleagues have other responsibilities, so
since I will be here until the end, I will defer to them.
Senator Lankford, would you like to go now or would you----
Senator Lankford. I can defer to Josh if he wants to go.
Senator Portman. Let us go first to Senator Sinema. I know
she has another Committee where she is supposed to be right
now. Senator Sinema?
Senator Sinema. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate that.
When I am home, I hear a lot of concerns from Arizonans
because they want low-cost quality health care. They want their
family and friends to be physically safe and financially
secure, protecting from fraudsters and scammers. They want
their kids to get good educations, and they want the
opportunity to work hard, build successful lives, and create
businesses. They do not want to spend all their time drafting
comment letters to the Federal Government when a Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking is published in the Federal Register.
Whether as individuals or members of community
organizations and advocacy groups, Arizonans expect government,
government groups, and government regulations to work for them.
When we have a concern, Arizonans expect their voice to be
heard. Sign-on comments are an important piece in the
functioning of the representative democracy, and it must be
afforded the attention and care that it deserves.
My first question is for Mr. Mancini. As we discuss ways to
improve the commenting process so that it is not abused or
manipulated by bad actors, what can agencies do today to make
sure that legitimate commenters are better heard?
Mr. Mancini. Thank you, Senator, for that question. I do
think that as the Co-Chair of the Executive Steering Committee
I would like to say that I will defer to the particular
agencies on their particular policies, but I do think that in
most cases the agencies have the ability to identify and
discuss mass mailing campaigns, for instance, in which they can
say whether something is 60 or 70 percent like the model
versions. This has always been the case. My recommendation
because of some of the issues that we have been talking about
here, are that actually the system, if they are able to
identify all these other activities, an individualized comment
that is personal and not duplicative of other comments actually
does get a decent amount of attention now. We, as an
organization, believe that the agencies actually look forward
to seeing those types of individualized comments.
I take your point about how that might be more difficult
than to depend on an advocacy organization, but those are the
types of comments that are not duplicative, that still can
stand out in rulemaking records.
Senator Sinema. Thank you. What additional direction can
OMB provide agencies to make sure that they are taking account
of all serious and relevant comments while filtering out
submissions that are irrelevant to the issue at hand?
Mr. Mancini. Thank you again for that question. I have seen
the report this morning. I have not digested it. I do think it
has very interesting recommendations regarding whether we
should provide more guidance on this issue, and we are going to
take that very seriously.
As my Co-Chair said, and as I mentioned, we do like to try
to drive toward consensus in the agencies, but I can tell you
that us providing more guidance to systematize and to make sure
that the agencies have a policy in place I think that is a
relatively good recommendation that we are going to take
seriously.
Senator Sinema. Thank you.
My next question is for Ms. Boizelle. In order to provide
greater understanding and access by private citizens to
comments that are already submitted by the Electronic Comment
Filing System, what additional authority or guidance do you
need to make sure that you are complying with the
Administrative Procedures Act and the E-Government Act while
filtering out those fraudulent or irrelevant comments?
Ms. Boizelle. Thank you, Senator, for that question. The
Committee's report is very helpful in that regard, as is the
GAO report on agency comment systems. We believe that we have
the tools to improve the Electronic Comment Filing System so
that comments are received, posted, and easily accessed once
they appear on public dockets.
We believe that that is really a matter of search
functionality and that if we can deploy our resources to
optimize the search functionality on our platform, individuals
looking to access comments that have already been submitted and
respond to those comments will be able to do so.
Senator Sinema. Thank you.
My next question is for Mr. Bagdoyan. The GAO report you
discussed in your testimony highlights that duplicative
comments, mass mailings, and letters with more than one
signatory received different treatment depending on the agency
because of the discretion that is afforded under current law.
As we know, many people do not have the time or energy to write
their own comment letters, and so when they join a campaign,
they may not know how the group will package their comments,
but they do expect the agency to account for their comments and
their opinions.
The report noted the procedures at the EPA, the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), and sub-agencies located
within the Department of Labor, so for those audited agencies
without guidance, how do they handle duplicative comments, mass
mailings, or letters with more than one signatory?
Mr. Bagdoyan. Sure. Thanks for your question, Senator. I
would respond that the six remaining ones essentially operate
on an institutional knowledge basis, past practice and
experience, again, using their discretion under their
interpretation of the APA. I would leave it at that. They
employ a variety of formats and measures as we describe in our
report from June 2019. It is basically how they have chosen to
do business in this regard.
Senator Sinema. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, my final question is for Mr. Mancini again.
As the Co-Chair of the Executive Steering Council of the
Federal Docket Management System, has there been or is there
now more discussion regarding standardization across agencies
to treat these kinds of mass mailings and comments?
Mr. Mancini. We have had a significant amount of discussion
about that issue, including a couple of the recommendations in
the report that we have been discussing. We have not made any
major changes to the system at this time, but, yes, we have
taken these issues seriously and have actually done, for
instance, a technology review to at least ensure that the
current tools that we have can at the least identify even some
of the potential technologies that we are talking about here,
can identify comments that are actually generated through some
sort of automated process.
Senator Sinema. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Senator Sinema. Senator Hawley.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HAWLEY
Senator Hawley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to you
and Chairman Lankford for holding this hearing today and for
this important work and for the Subcommittee's report, which
is, I think, eye-opening and also terrifying.
I am perhaps more familiar with the comment and rulemaking
procedure and the comment submission process than I might
otherwise like to be, having formerly practiced in this area of
law when I was in private practice. It is troubling that the
rulemaking process for Federal agencies has become so
inundated, as the report sets out, with profane, abusive, and
sometimes downright fraudulent commentary. I think today's
hearing is very important.
Mr. Bagdoyan, let me start with you and pick up on
something that Senator Sinema was asking just a second ago. In
June of this year, your agency made recommendations to eight
other Federal agencies about how they might improve their
comment posting policies. As of today, as I understand it, only
one of those eight has actually implemented any of your
recommendations, although I gather that all of them mostly
agreed with the recommendations that the GAO issued. Can you
tell me, is there any indication that the other agencies will
follow GAO recommendations? If so, when?
Mr. Bagdoyan. Sure. Thank you, Senator Hawley, for your
question. I will mention that the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) is one agency that has taken action. They have
provided us with sufficient documentation for us to make a
judgment that they have met that recommendation as intended.
We have an extensive tracking process for how agencies
implement our recommendations. It sometimes takes a number of
years for them to get around to doing that. We measure progress
on intervals as frequently as 6 months where we work through
our agency liaisons to get information on the latest status of
how they will implement recommendations. We take them at their
word that they did agree, and that was a sincere agreement, of
course. Then we, as I said, use the formal follow up process
that we have. We track them electronically. We update them. I
have to sign off on the status when it comes in. Then we employ
old-fashioned pestering, actually, to get them to comply.
Senator Hawley. We will be happy to join you in that
pestering, so we will continue to monitor the progress there.
Thank you for the work that your agency has done on this.
Ms. Boizelle, let me turn to you. The report that the
Subcommittee is discussing today was initiated after the FCC,
as you know, received nearly 24 million comments in just one
rulemaking proceeding back in 2017, which is just
extraordinary.
Let me just ask you, is it true that almost 8 million of
those came from email addresses that were associated with, I
think it is, FakeMailGenerator.com? Is that right?
Ms. Boizelle. That is our understanding, yes.
Senator Hawley. Is it true that more than 500,000 of the
comments were associated with Russian email addresses?
Ms. Boizelle. That is my understanding, yes.
Senator Hawley. Is it true that more than 2 million
comments submitted to the proceedings used stolen identities?
Ms. Boizelle. I believe you are referring to a recent
article, and that is my understanding based on those
allegations.
Senator Hawley. Now, the Subcommittee report notes that
your agency has a general policy that it should, and I am
quoting now, ``accept and post online all comments it receives,
including duplicates and near-duplicates and comments
containing copyrighted, profane, and irrelevant material.'' The
report also notes that the FCC has accepted and posted files,
some of which contained viruses, which, of course, are
dangerous to the general public.
In your written testimony, you note that the FCC's
Electronic Comment Filing System has been designed to maximize
participation by making the submission and posting of comments
as easy and inclusive as possible. I wonder if you could just
speak to some of the tradeoffs you think that policy engenders
and presents to us given the threats and abuses that we are
seeing.
Ms. Boizelle. Yes, thank you for that question, and I would
be happy to address it. We have historically adopted a policy
that errs on the side of openness and inclusiveness and
accessibility out of a desire to afford members of the public
the opportunity to meaningfully participate in our rulemakings.
We believe that public input is of great value.
We understand that values like openness must be balanced
against other values, and sometimes those values are competing
values like security. We are presently evaluating the balance
that we have historically struck and exploring how to
recalibrate that balance to better address the issues that the
Subcommittee report identified.
Senator Hawley. Can you be a little more specific on that?
What specifically are you considering, what steps are you
considering to ensure that you separate real feedback from
fake, fraudulent, and sometimes in the case of viruses
downright threatening comments, posts, ``participation''?
Ms. Boizelle. Sure. Well, we have convened a cross-bureau
working group at the FCC, and they have been tasked with
overhauling ECFS to address the issues identified in the
Committee's report and covered in various media outlets.
They are currently convening roundtables with external
stakeholders to explore solutions to the various issues that
have been identified to ensure that we address them, but that
the platform remains user-friendly. Some of those possibilities
include CAPTCHA, like I mentioned during my oral testimony,
identity authentication, and optimizing our search
functionality to enable people to screen out profane,
offensive, or threatening comments. We are exploring a variety
of options, and we are committed to ensuring, as I said, that
the next generation of ECFS does strike a better balance
between openness and security.
Senator Hawley. Thank you very much. Thank you all for
being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Portman. Great questions. Senator Lankford.
Senator Lankford. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Thanks to you
all for your preparation on this. There is a lot to be able to
dig into, so let me try to just randomly jump in here as we
can.
As I go through Regulations.gov and the FCC programs you do
find obviously a lot of helpful comments from people who are
actually going through it, trying to contribute, trying to be
able to get in exactly what it is designed for. You also find a
lot of folks who just have an opinion on it one way or the
other. They want to be able to voice their opinion, like it, do
not like it. They are not necessarily helpful in helping design
the comments to be helpful for, but they want to be able to
contribute and to be able to engage. Then you do find, as
Senator Hawley had mentioned, individuals that have posted
viruses to it. Clearly, that is an opinion as well, that they
just want to carry out whatever they choose to be able to carry
out when they choose to come to the site, foul language, Elvis
Presley, noting it multiple times, by the way, putting in
different comments, proving he is still alive, that is right,
because he is still posting on Regulations.gov.
The challenge that we have here is trying to figure out how
to get to the public interest and how to also be able to get to
allowing comment and interaction among people to say, ``I saw
this comment. That is a good idea. Let me comment on that
comment.''
Now, I wish this was something that was only at
Regulations.gov. You can go to any one of our Facebook pages,
pick any one of us, and see the comments that are posted there
and also see a lot of energetic involvement. This is not just
an issue with the comments around all these sites. What we are
trying to figure out is how to be able to allow the American
people to still be able to engage and, as you mentioned, Ms.
Boizelle, to try to be able to allow people to put their
comments there, but also filter through and be able to find
what is helpful in it.
Let me just ask some basic ideas. You talked before about
the famous ``I am not a robot'' filtering here to be able to
identify how to be able to filter out bots. Is that in process
at this point?
Ms. Boizelle. We are not currently using CAPTCHA, but it is
under consideration by our working group as a means of
distinguishing human filers from bots.
Senator Lankford. OK. Is that a conversation for
Regulations.gov?
Ms. Angerman. Yes, GSA is currently looking at all of the
options available to us to address some of these issues.
Senator Lankford. OK, but that is one of the considerations
there?
Ms. Angerman. Yes, sir.
Senator Lankford. For the FCC, is there a consideration of
joining Regulations.gov, cooperating together on that? Or is
there a need to be able to keep those two separate since
Regulations.gov does cover so many other agencies?
Ms. Boizelle. We believe that the Electronic Comment Filing
System is the right tool for the FCC. It was designed by the
FCC to meet our unique needs. We handle rulemakings and comment
volumes of a different scale than many of our peer agencies. In
addition to that, we use robust reply comment periods, and we
have a robust ex parte process in which people are permitted to
meet with Commissioners after a comment period closes and then
file summaries of those meetings on the docket.
We have slightly different needs than other agencies, and
ECFS has been tailored to satisfy those needs. We obviously
also have a lot of experience with our comment platform, as do
our external stakeholders. We are not presently considering
joining Regulations.gov because we believe that ECFS can be
improved to address----
Senator Lankford. Is FCC still allowing executable files to
be uploaded into the system, not just a Word file or a PDF but
executable files as well?
Ms. Boizelle. I am really glad that you asked that
question. No. In fact, our IT staff combed through ECFS, and
they were not able to identify any executable files. As of
September 2017, we stopped accepting them, and all submissions
are screened----
Senator Lankford. As of September 17th of this year?
Ms. Boizelle. As of September 2017.
Senator Lankford. 2017.
Ms. Boizelle. We stopped accepting any executable files.
Our IT staff looked at ECFS, looked at legacy submissions, and
was not able to identify any infected executable files. At this
time all submissions are screened by anti-virus software.
Senator Lankford. Good.
Ms. Boizelle. Anything infected is quarantined and not
posted to a public docket. If anyone has information about
files that are infected on our dockets, we would greatly
appreciate being directed to those files so that we can rectify
them.
Senator Lankford. Great. Thank you for that. That would be
helpful.
Do you all allow executable files in Regulators.gov?
Ms. Angerman. No, we do not.
Senator Lankford. The question here is, as you mentioned,
Ms. Boizelle, it does not matter who the name is. It is the
comment. We are looking for the quality of the information to
try to be able to get that information in. Is there a need to
be able to help the American public to be able to filter this
out? Because you have systems to be able to go through it, you
have staff that can go through it, and to be able to say, OK,
that is not relevant, that is not relevant, this is relevant.
If individuals looking at the comments want to be able to
comment on other comments and say, ``That is a good idea, let
me add to it,'' they have to go through at times thousands, or
millions on a rare occasion, to be able to look through all
those comments.
Is there a need to be able to have an opportunity for
individuals to say if you want to just comment agree/disagree
like a Facebook page and just say like/do not like, is there a
need to be able to allow people to say, ``I like this, do not
like this''? They are not making a comment, they are just
making a reference on it, but if you really want to make a
helpful comment we want your text on that? Would that help
people to say, ``I express my opinion, but I really do not have
something to contribute,'' that also helps other people to be
able to look at comments?
Ms. Boizelle. It might be useful to individuals looking to
express support for or opposition to a particular agency
proposal. We treat agency rulemakings as a process that focuses
on the substance of comments rather than the number of comments
in support or in opposition. It is well established that
rulemaking is not intended to be----
Senator Lankford. It is not a vote----
Ms. Boizelle [continuing]. A plebiscite. While it may be of
utility to people looking to weigh in with respect to our
review of substantive comments in the record, I do not think
that it would make an enormous difference.
Senator Lankford. OK. What about that idea?
Ms. Angerman. I would agree, and I also think that is one
of the things that GSA is prioritizing in our new role, is to
really engage with the user community and the public and others
who actually use the site to figure out what would make it a
more user-friendly experience.
Senator Lankford. OK. Do you all do any kind of two-factor
authentication or verification of the identity in the sense
that if a person is going to contribute a comment, they would
also contribute an email address, and then they would get a
code basically delivered to that email address to make sure it
is real, and so if there is going to be interaction between the
agencies and this individual, we know this is actually a real
working email address that they gave us and we cannot verify
whether that is that person's name or not, but at least we have
some way of contacting back and a working address?
Ms. Angerman. Certainly, two-factor authentication and
other options are things that we will be looking at over the
course of the modernization assessment that we have already
begun.
Senator Lankford. What about Advance Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking (ANPRM) as you all start thinking this through? Does
that help? Not help? Have you seen any kinds of trends?
Obviously, you have been at this all of less than a month at
this point. Do we have to look at helpful comments coming in
early or comments coming in later? Which one are a greater
asset to the agencies as they are going through--advanced early
comments or comments after the proposed rule?
Ms. Angerman. I do not know yet, but it is certainly
something that we will go back and investigate.
Senator Lankford. OK. Let me defer back, and I may have a
couple of follow up questions as well.
Senator Portman. Great questions. This is a difficult area
because, as has been noted this morning, when you are accepting
comments online, particularly when you are asking for
consistency between the agencies, which is something Mr.
Bagdoyan has referenced, you are going to run into this
difficult issue. It is sort of a tightrope. You want to allow
for people to express themselves, and yet you want to be sure
that the legitimate, real comments, as opposed to comments that
are not legitimate, are getting through.
Let me start with one of the issues that is clearly a
problem, and I think that chart\1\ that is up there probably is
about this, which is false identities. People are stealing
other people's identities and then issuing comments. By the
way, we found examples of this with regard to our colleagues.
We found that Senator McConnell had submitted some comments. We
asked him if they were his, and he says they were not, but also
other colleagues. As we noted earlier, that includes Donald
Trump, Barack Obama, my favorite, LeBron James, and a number of
other people. Identity theft is an issue again that is not only
found with regard to comments to the Federal agencies and it is
a difficult issue, but we have to figure out a way to deal with
it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The chart referenced by Senator Portman appears in the Appendix
on page 215.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The FCC has responded by telling people who complain that
they should write their own comment, as I understand it. In
other words, if you actually find out that your identity has
been taken and that your name has been used, the response has
been, make your own comment. A number of those people do not
have a comment to make. They do not have an opinion on the
rule, so that does not seem very satisfying. I do not think
anyone should be required to engage in a regulatory comment
period just because their identity was stolen if they do not
otherwise choose to.
Our report found that no agency except for CFTC reported
these complaints to law enforcement. That seems to me to be an
issue. If you know that it is identity theft, why wouldn't you
report that?
What should Regulations.gov and what should the FCC do
about that? Do you need any additional authorities from
Congress to be able to report the identity theft? Ms. Angerman.
Ms. Angerman. Thank you for that question. GSA's role is to
provide the service to the agencies, the rulemaking agencies,
to be able to support their own rulemaking processes, which I
think we have highlighted they vary greatly in terms of the
kinds of data that agencies require. What GSA's role can be in
that context is to ensure that when we are alerted to there
being any sort of issue, whether it is a false identity or
whether it is a threat, we ensure that our help desk is very
attentive to those and immediately let the rulemaking agency
know when something has been flagged to us so that they can
institute their own processes in terms of how they choose to
escalate or address that problem.
Senator Portman. OK, but you are not answering the question
about whether you believe that it should be standard policy if
someone identifies that there is an identity that has been
stolen, that that be reported to law enforcement. Is that
something you think makes sense as you are looking at the
policy?
Ms. Angerman. I think it would make sense, but GSA is not
in the role to weigh in on whether law enforcement or any of
those agencies should become involved.
Senator Portman. This goes to you, Mr. Mancini. Again,
thank you for being here, and as you may know, since I had this
discussion with OMB, I think OMB can play a bigger policy role
here. I appreciated your comments earlier about the need to
have a consensus-driven process and work with all the
stakeholders. Ultimately there needs to be a policy decision
made here. If you need additional authorities, I think Congress
is very interested, particularly after the GAO work and after
this report, to try to be helpful. Do you think that an agency
should report claims to law enforcement?
Mr. Mancini. Again, actually, Senator, I am a little bit
hesitant as, for many good reasons, OMB does not usually opine
on enforcement decisions of that nature. I do think, however,
that--I think that you have identified a potentially good need
to have more general policies in this area across the
government. I think that the ultimate decision about what a
person has discovered--I think your report mentioned CFPB as
well--I think really does, for good reasons, reside at the
agency itself. I would be happy to take this back to the
Steering Committee, I think, if we can standardize that a
little bit more.
Senator Portman. I think that is a good idea, standardize
it a little bit more. In fact, I think standardization, another
topic more broadly that was raised by Mr. Bagdoyan this
morning, is important. It seems to me that people ought to
know, if they are submitting comments to the FCC, submitting
comments to the EPA, or submitting comments to other agencies
or departments, that they are being treated equally. In other
words, there is a consistent policy of the Federal Government.
Mr. Bagdoyan, maybe you can comment on that. You indicated
that you had made suggestions to several agencies, and one
actually complied. Part of what you are trying to do, as I
understand it, is to try to drive some consistency and
standardization across the agencies.
Mr. Bagdoyan. Right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You are
absolutely right. The recommendations in our June 2019 report
we view as a starting point, if you will. Our ongoing work, as
I mentioned earlier, involves very extensive data analytics.
For example, we have a survey ongoing of actual commenters who
we are approaching to see whether they made the comment
associated with their identity or not. We are hoping that will
provide us with insight into what else might have to be done.
Parallel to that, we are actually crunching, so to speak, data
related to approximately--right now not a final count, I must
admit--about 60 million comments that were submitted to the 10
agencies during the 5-year period I mentioned, 2013 to 2017. As
you can imagine, that is a considerable lift, so that is
another source for us to obtain insights about what really went
on here. The survey respondents have been generous with their
responses. I think the response rate is very good. We will be
able to project, as things stand right now, the results of that
survey. We are optimistic that we will have a lot more to work
with to develop additional recommendations if necessary.
Senator Portman. We would be very interested in seeing the
results of that survey. We talked about the Wall Street
Journal's work on this, investigative reporting, and I think
the number was 72 percent, if I recall correctly, of people who
said, ``That was not me.''
Mr. Bagdoyan. Right. Our final report will come out in the
fall of next year, but, of course, we have been in touch with
staff over the past year, actually, filling them in as to where
we are, and we would be happy to come up and chat some more
about where we are with that.
Senator Portman. Our goal is to end up with policy
suggestions and legislation that actually helps you to be able
to do your jobs, and that data would be very helpful in that
regard.
In terms of consistency, Ms. Boizelle, understanding your
comment that the FCC is different than other agencies in some
regards, it seems to me that consistency makes sense. Let us
assume that you do have your separate approach to this and that
the other agencies are under a now GSA-driven process and that
OMB and others providing policy guidance are ensuring they have
consistency. Shouldn't you be talking to each other? One of the
things that drives me crazy is that it seems to me that you are
off doing your own thing, and yet you have a process that Ms.
Angerman talked about today with Regulations.gov, and you are
not sharing best practices and you are not cooperating. Doesn't
that make sense at a minimum?
Ms. Boizelle. Absolutely. There is great value in
interagency communication and coordination. My understanding is
that our IT staff does have monthly and weekly conversations
with IT folks at other agencies. I do not know what the scope
of the communication is, but I absolutely agree. We support
coordination on these issues.
Senator Portman. Mr. Mancini has something to say.
Mr. Mancini. I will add that one thing that I will take
from this conference is we actually have had a good bit of
discussion--I will refer to the technical folks--about CAPTCHA,
and that is--we were talking before the hearing that maybe as
soon as we get through this that we need to have a serious
conversation about that because there are some tradeoffs in
that technology, but that is one specific area in which I think
that we really need to get to the bottom of where they can
provide technology that just stopped kind of the non-human
interaction with it. I will definitely go forward on that.
Senator Portman. I think that is a great example of where
sharing best practices and analysis and coming up with a
consistent approach would be in the interest of people who have
legitimate comments to be made.
Let us talk about CAPTCHA for a second. We talked about the
500,000 emails received from Russian email addresses. We did
not talk about the fact that there is lots of evidence that
bots are involved here. As an example, the Pew analysis found
that on nine occasions, more than 75,000 comments were
submitted at the very same second, which looks like an
automated spamming campaign to me. This was the restoring
Internet freedom proposal. There is no question that millions
of fake comments are coming in, and you talked a little bit
today about to keep bots from posting on your platforms, it
might make sense to install CAPTCHA or other software, not just
to focus on CAPTCHA, the one that most of us are aware of. A
lot of us have to use it a lot in order to access a website's
platforms.
Why would we not turn to that? What is the negative? It is
used constantly in service organizations around the world, not
just in government agencies but for-profit entities. What is
the negative to using it? Is it cost? Is there better
technology out there? Why would you not want to use that kind
of software to be able to ensure you have a person at the other
end of the comment? Ms. Boizelle, then Mr. Mancini, and Ms.
Angerman.
Ms. Boizelle. As I said, we are considering CAPTCHA. We do
understand the problem of bot submissions spamming our ECFS
dockets. It has been described to me that sometimes bot
communications are comparable to a modern postcard campaign,
and so my understanding, limited as it is in the technological
context, is that bots are not always inherently nefarious.
Nonetheless, we agree that there is an opportunity for
significant abuse and mischief, and we are exploring ways to
limit bot activity on our dockets.
In addition to CAPTCHA, we also are exploring whether to
eliminate an open application programming interface which we
use to allow the submission of mass comments from entities like
grassroots organizations, and we are considering eliminating
that option because now we believe that our system can accept
submissions from organizations like that without dealing with
machine-to-machine communication.
Senator Portman. Mr. Mancini, do you agree that bots are
not inherently bad?
Mr. Mancini. I really do not have a general opinion about
that. I will say that in the e-rulemaking community there was
one instance--I believe it was FDA so I will defer to them if
they have more details about this--that was a similar
situation. They were getting bot traffic, and it was really
overwhelming the system, and they actually turned off some
access to the system, and apparently the help desk at EPA at
the time got a call, and it was apparently a legitimate--well,
they said they were a legitimate person wanting to comment and
provide a mass mailing campaign. That said, we do have one
example. One example certainly is not a trend.
We have seriously considered and are continuing to
seriously consider some sort of human verification process. I
will say--and maybe it was the technology, and, again, I will
defer to the Program Management Office (PMO)--that one of the
technologies, the CAPTCHA technology that they were looking at,
actually there were online work-arounds that you could
purchase, that you could actually spoof the CAPTCHA, something
like a 90-percent success rate, which I will note is probably a
lot higher than I actually do when I have to use one of our
human things.
The short version, it is not an easy question to answer
from a technology point of view, and the PMO and the agencies
have been looking at this. We have not really found that one
that strikes the balance yet.
Senator Portman. Senator Lankford.
Senator Lankford. It is very helpful to be able to get the
insight on this. Let me walk through just a couple of the
questions that I have.
Ms. Angerman, you had mentioned before that not every
agency has the same amount of information that they are pulling
in. Some are getting names; some are not getting names. Some
are getting addresses; some are not. Can you give me the
extremes of one side that does very little and one side that
does a lot? What do you see the most that is gathered?
Ms. Angerman. Thank you for the question. The extremes are
an agency could just require the comment itself and no other--
--
Senator Lankford. No name, totally anonymous.
Ms. Angerman. Totally anonymous. Some require a name, but
there is little validation, the point of this discussion, to
verify that that name is a person who is alive or is actually
attributable to the person making the comment. If they decide
that they want to require a name, they can also opt to provide
address and other information, email as well.
Senator Lankford. Is that made public?
Ms. Angerman. It is up to the agency, ultimately, to
decide, the rulemaking agency to decide what information is
made public as a result of the comment process.
Senator Lankford. OK. Do any of the agencies ask if you are
an American citizen that is making the comment?
Ms. Angerman. I do not believe that that is a question on
Regulations.gov
Senator Lankford. Does that matter?
Ms. Angerman. At this point it has not been raised to my
knowledge that the Steering Committee has made that a
requirement for the system.
Senator Lankford. In the protection of the personally
identifiable information (PII), for those that do gather
information but are not making it public at that point, is
there any standard for how that information has to be protected
to make sure someone cannot get through the system to be able
to get access to that?
Ms. Angerman. GSA is the custodian of the data, which means
we are responsible for ensuring that the data is protected,
that there is disaster recovery in place, that there is
continuous monitoring and auditing of the system. Ultimately,
the data itself and the comments are owned by the rulemaking
agency.
Senator Lankford. Are the comments posted immediately, or
is there some filtering where someone looks at it and evaluates
before this goes live, or they just type it in, push the
button, and it goes live immediately?
Ms. Angerman. No, there is a whole process that the agency
goes through. Those are the analytics and the procedures that
they implement as they are evaluating the comments.
Senator Lankford. How long is the delay before that comment
goes live?
Ms. Angerman. It is unique to each agency.
Senator Lankford. Give me extremes on that. Two minutes?
Twenty days? Or is it----
Ms. Angerman. I think that would be a very good example of
the extremes.
Senator Lankford. OK. FCC, is that the same? Do they go
live immediately or are they filtered, reviewed by someone
before they go live?
Ms. Boizelle. They are not posted immediately, but it is an
automated process, so it is done without human intervention.
Comments that are filed are posted every 2 hours.
Senator Lankford. OK. They are just all pooled together and
then put up all at once every 2 hours to be able to----
Ms. Boizelle. Correct.
Senator Lankford. Foul language comments, attacks on Ajit
Pai, which we had tons of that come in, personal attacks,
threats on his life, those are automatic. No one is kind of
filtering through those to be able to say, hey, that is really
not relevant?
Ms. Boizelle. That is correct.
Senator Lankford. Is that something that can and should be
fixed? Obviously when you get a massive amount of people that
start making comments, that makes it much more difficult to be
able to go through and be able to filter that. Is there a need
for some human interaction?
Ms. Boizelle. As you indicated, the volume of comments
makes putting human eyes on each of them untenable in most
circumstances.
Senator Lankford. I am struggling through the comment that
has been made about mass mail campaigns, and when I go through
Regulators.gov, there will be times--and some rules will have
every single name on it, and some of them will list mass mail
campaign, and then you can go into that and start seeing all
the names that are identified and such. If this is not really a
vote, like I prefer/I do not prefer, but you are really looking
for comments, and really it is more ideas, how can this be
improved? How do we need to make sure that there are changes
and things that we need to pay attention to before we finish
this rule? Why does it matter about a mass mail campaign? Is it
really a head count issue quietly in some of the agencies? Is
it just about improving the quality of the regulation?
Mr. Mancini. I think as mentioned before, as a general
matter it is not a vote. It is about the quality. I will answer
in part with an anecdote, though. We did have in the
Administrative Conference of the United States a conference on
this issue. I think it was about this time last year. There
were a lot of discussions about how to discourage that kind of
mass mailing campaign and that it is not actually a useful
input into the rulemaking process.
Then someone in the audience said, ``Well, look, I am an
advocacy organization, and I actually value the ability for my
constituents to participate, even if for just support or
something like that.'' That was actually a learning experience
for me because I think that there is in the public--and, again,
I am not going to speak to whether it is useful for influencing
the rulemaking, to actually just express their views in that
way.
I do think that some of the challenge that we have heard is
that, for instance, a perfectly legitimate advocacy
organization can have an attachment that everyone has agreed
that they have signed on to this, but there is also modern
versions of that and maybe not nefarious versions of that where
they mix and match the comments, they make it look like it's
more of a grassroots uprising. I think the term is
``astroturfing.'' I think that is the challenge--what we have
heard is actually support for maintaining that ability, just
express their opinions in the rulemaking process with limiting
the worse ways that that can be done.
Senator Lankford. Right. If we all marched over today to
the National Archives, they would take us to giant petitions
that used to come to Congress where people would literally go
around different States when Congress was discussing a law in
the 1800s, and they would get people to sign names on those
petitions, and often there would be false names of exactly what
we are talking about today. This is not something new. They
would send the petition up to Congress and would store it
there, and someone would deliver it in a speech and say here is
the petition of how many thousands of people oppose this or
support this. I have no issue with that. That is a beneficial
thing, and it has always been around since the beginning of our
republic.
The challenge that I have is when we are talking about
rulemaking, we want the interaction of people that have ideas,
that say, hey, there is a better way to do this, there is some
engagement. This person gave a really good idea. I want to
comment on their really good idea. Here is something that could
even be improved on that because that helps regulators put out
better regulations.
What I am trying to figure out is how we can sort this
comment process and say there are people's opinions that are
here, like/do not like, support/do not support from ideas, and
to be able to figure out how we can keep that interaction. If
that is something that you all can consider as you are going
through the process, but also helping people understand, hey,
this is not a big massive vote. A regulation comes from
statute, and so this regulation is coming in some form because
a statute requires it. If you want to express I like/do not
like, go back to our offices, which people are not shy to do
either, and to say change the statute. This is really about
making a better regulation. Does that make sense? Somehow to be
able to make that clear to people, but then to say this is
resulting from a statute that we are carrying this out. It is
not just an up-down that is coming from it, but here is a way
to be able to improve it. Make sense?
Mr. Mancini. Thank you, Senator. That makes a lot of sense.
I am going to take what we have talked about at this hearing
and absolutely try to gather the Executive Steering Committee
and see if there are better ways, because I think that the
agencies in an ideal world are already striving to do that, to
try to clearly identify those that are part of the mass mailing
campaigns, for whatever legitimate reason, from the individual
``here are the insights I want to provide'' kind of comments. I
think we are taking this very seriously. I think we can think
about enhancements on that point.
Senator Lankford. For the agencies to be able to filter,
that is one thing. For the American public, for them to be able
to interact is a different thing, because it is harder if there
are 500 comments on something for them to go through each one
and to be able to filter, hey, that is not relevant, not
relevant, especially when you have to open each one of them up
and to be able to go through it, because in Regulators.gov you
are only getting the first couple of lines there, and so you
have to open each one up and determine is this just a comment
or is this an idea beneath it. It is a much slower process for
them than it would be for the agencies. If we are going to have
interaction, help the American people to have interaction, but
just know this is a vote, whether I like it/do not like it,
this is an idea, and we can have interactions over here.
Anyway, grateful for that.
Ms. Angerman, do you have any comment on that?
Ms. Angerman. I just want to say I think that is an
excellent kind of definition of human-centered design. One of
the reasons we are really excited to have this program at GSA
is that we are really leaning forward at implementing human-
centered design with many of the other services that we
deliver, and I think we can do the same with this program.
Senator Lankford. OK. Senator Portman, thanks for pulling
all this together. You and I both requested this, but you
really led on requesting the initial study on this, and I
appreciate you taking the lead on this.
Senator Portman. Thank you. As I said at the outset, this
is an issue that certainly goes across our two Subcommittees--
one, the investigative one, and two, the way in which our
regulatory system can work better. More broadly, this affects
our democracy in fundamental ways, so I appreciate the
witnesses being here today. I think we have been able to
identify a number of the problems. I think the report does a
good job with that. I think most Americans would be shocked to
learn about the abuse of the system, for instance, the Wall
Street Journal survey that 72 percent of the people who were
asked, ``Did you submit this comment?'' said, ``It was not
me.'' The identity theft issue is obviously one we have to
focus on, allowing people access, but at the same time not
having their comments be diluted by comments that are not real,
that are fake comments.
I know, Mr. Bagdoyan, you are going to do additional
surveys. We are going to be eager to get your information about
what has been the history here and how can we solve these
issues.
Another thing we have talked about a lot today is
consistency and cooperation and best practices. You have 43
agencies, I think, that you are working with, and of those 43
agencies, there are dozens of different approaches to these
issues. How do you deal with profane comments? How do you deal
with comments that are unrelated? How do you deal with identity
theft? It seems to me consistency is the right thing to do both
with regard to being sure it is the best approach, the best
practices, but also for people who are interested in
commenting, they are not just interested in commenting at the
FCC or the EPA. They are interested in commenting typically
with other agencies, and they would need to know that there is
a consistent way they can get their voices heard. I think that
is one thing that has come out of this.
Mr. Mancini, you talked about the willingness to sit down
now with your task force and talk about the issues that have
been discussed in the report and in today's hearing. I
appreciate that. We also want to hear from you on legislative
ideas. As I said earlier, I think OMB can play a more
substantive role on the policy side, and you should not be shy
about doing that. In my view, the consensus-driven process is a
difficult one. I realize that. It requires leadership. I am
also pleased that there has been a transfer made from EPA to
GSA because I agree with what Ms. Angerman said earlier, which
is that you have this broader responsibility and function, and
you indicated in response to Chairman Lankford's comments, you
also have other projects that you are undertaking to try to--
you said ``human-centered,'' meaning about people. We really
want to hear from people and not have their comments be less
impactful because of all the noise. This is a challenge area.
We want to be helpful. We expect to stay in touch with you. We
are going to be moving forward with some legislative ideas, and
we need your input for that.
I want to thank my colleagues, particularly Chairman
Lankford, for joining us today and for pursuing this, and we
look forward to working with you going forward.
This hearing is now over.
[Whereupon, at 11:27 a.m., the Subcommittees were
adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]