- THE NONPOINT SOURCE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM UNDER THE CLEAN WATER ACT: PERSPECTIVES FROM STATES
[Senate Hearing 116-157]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-157
THE NONPOINT SOURCE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM UNDER THE CLEAN WATER ACT:
PERSPECTIVES FROM STATES
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON
ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JANUARY 8, 2020
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-944 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming, Chairman
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware,
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
Ranking Member
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JONI ERNST, Iowa
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
Richard M. Russell, Majority Staff Director
Mary Frances Repko, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
JANUARY 8, 2020
OPENING STATEMENTS
Barrasso, Hon. John, U.S. Senator from the State of Wyoming......
1
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware..
3
WITNESSES
Zygmunt, Jennifer, Nonpoint Source Program Coordinator, Wyoming
Department of Environmental Quality............................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
10
Grumbles, Hon. Ben, Secretary of the Environment, Maryland
Department of the Environment..................................
43
Prepared statement...........................................
45
Responses to additional questions from Senator Cardin........
57
Response to an additional question from Senator Sanders......
61
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL
Statement by the Association of Clean Water Administrators,
January 9, 2020................................................
80
Letter to Senators Barrasso and Carper from the Clean Water for
All Coalition et al., January 22, 2020.........................
84
Letter to Senators Barrasso and Carper from the Mississippi River
Collaborative, January 22, 2020................................
87
Letter to Senators Barrasso and Carper from the American
Fisheries Society, January 23, 2020............................
98
THE NONPOINT SOURCE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM UNDER THE CLEAN WATER ACT:
PERSPECTIVES FROM STATES
----------
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 8, 2020
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Environment and Public Works,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m. in
room 406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Barrasso
(Chairman of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Barrasso, Carper, Inhofe, Capito, Braun,
Rounds, Sullivan, Boozman, Wicker, Ernst, Cardin, Merkley,
Gillibrand, and Van Hollen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN BARRASSO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING
Senator Barrasso. Good morning. I call this hearing to
order.
I would like to wish you all a happy new year. Welcome back
to everyone on the Committee.
As Chairman, I look forward to another very productive
year.
I will tell you, Senator Carper, I have this incredible
list of things that we have done for the last year, working
together in partnership, very successful. The staff has put it
together, and it shows that we are a Committee that works and
gets things done.
Last year, we advanced bipartisan transportation
infrastructure legislation. This year, the full Senate will
pass that legislation, so we can build better roads and bridges
and highways. We will be working on legislation to support
critical water infrastructure as well, such as dams and locks
and levees.
We will also continue to work together to advance
legislation and protect America's air, our water, our wildlife.
This Committee has a proven track record of working across
the aisle to get important legislation done, and I look forward
to having that continue in 2020 and working in partnership with
you.
Today's hearing is a great way to start the year by
examining a popular program that improves water quality through
cooperation, not regulation. This program is the Nonpoint
Source Management Program under the Clean Water Act.
Established in 1987, the program recognizes that controlling
water pollution is not a one size fits all issue.
Nonpoint sources are ones that do not come out of a pipe or
a confined source. They are everywhere, runoffs from roads in
urban
[[Page 2]]
areas, to water from agricultural operations, to sediment from
construction sites, and eroding stream banks.
For this reason, Congress correctly recognized that the
best way to address these nonpoint source pollutions is to
empower States. States come up with solutions that work for
them. Washington provides grant funding for States to implement
their programs. States must secure our funding to leverage
those Federal dollars.
The program is more than 30 years old. It has seen many
successes, and we want to make sure it is working as
effectively as possible. That is why we are having this hearing
today.
We are honored to welcome two experts from very different
parts of the country, but both who realize just how very
important this is.
We have from Wyoming, Jennifer Zygmunt, who is the Nonpoint
Source Program Coordinator at the Wyoming Department of
Environmental Quality. Wyoming has some of the cleanest water
and air and land in the country. Wyoming is the home of the
headwaters that supply water throughout the country. The four
major river basins fed by Wyoming are the Missouri-Mississippi,
the Green-Colorado, the Snake-Columbia, and the Great Salt
Lake.
Wyoming also uses a variety of industries that rely on
water supply and re-use, including energy production, ranching,
and farming. Effective conservation and cleanup of water in
Wyoming requires flexibility plus a deep understanding of our
water systems. The Nonpoint Source Program was designed to do
just that, to give States flexibility to manage water and to
reduce pollution in a way that is best suited to the States'
needs.
From 1999 to 2018--about 20 years--Wyoming funded 164
projects under its Nonpoint Source Management Program. As a
result of the program, 15 streams and river segments--more than
187 miles in length--are now clean.
In 2018, Wyoming completed six projects. Those projects
reduced sediment, reduced nitrogen, reduced phosphorus and E.
coli loading in Wyoming's rivers and streams. Sediment loading
alone fell by more than 40,000 tons per year.
The USEPA has published a number of Wyoming's nonpoint
source projects as model success stories. One EPA published
example occurred near my hometown of Casper, Wyoming, where
yesterday the wind was blowing 79 miles an hour. And they
closed down the Federal Government because they thought it
might snow.
[Laughter.]
Senator Barrasso. Well, who are these people?
Parts of Wyoming have naturally high levels of selenium in
the soil. Several years of cooperative work between the Natrona
County Conservation District, the State of Wyoming, local
landowners, and a number of other organizations led to selenium
levels falling in the North Platte River. Selenium levels in
the river dramatically decreased due to the education, due to
outreach, and voluntary implementation of best management
practices.
These efforts included converting hundreds of acres from
flood irrigation to sprinkler irrigation and replacing open
irrigation ditches with underground pipelines. A 36 mile
segment of the North Platte River now meets water quality
criteria for selenium.
[[Page 3]]
I look forward to hearing more about Wyoming's successes
through this program during today's testimony.
I also look forward to hearing from Secretary Ben Grumbles
from Maryland. We have two Maryland Senators on this Committee.
This is a very critical Committee, and we are happy to have you
here to testify.
I know that both of the Senators from Maryland are here to
listen very closely to what you have to say, because Maryland,
as you know and this Committee is constantly reminded, is home
to the Chesapeake Bay. Maryland has critical challenges. I know
that, Secretary Grumbles, you will discuss those.
Now I would like to turn to Ranking Member Carper for his
opening remarks.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS R. CARPER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to say I approve this message with respect to
your opening statement. I am very proud of what we accomplished
last year. I want to shout out to our bipartisan staff, and not
just the majority and minority staff, but the folks who work
for each of our members on our Committee of handling the
environmental portfolio.
We got a lot done. We have a few things still left to do on
our table and on our list, but we look forward to working on
all of those.
I want to welcome our witnesses.
Jennifer, have you always been a Zygmunt? I would hold onto
that name. I bet you have some great nicknames.
Any favorite albums by David Bowie? One comes to mind:
Ziggy Stardust. There is a lot of good fun to be had with your
name, but we will play it straight here today.
And Ben Grumbles, that is a good name to play with as well.
[Laughter.]
Senator Carper. We are not going to go there, because Chris
Van Hollen told me that you never grumble; you are just a
delight to be around. You are our neighbor on the Delmarva
Peninsula, and we love working with you.
Right behind me is Christophe Tulou, who used to be my
Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources. You may
recall I was Governor. We greatly value our partnership with
your State.
I suspect we all know that our States are beset by
continuing drinking water challenges: dead zones in the Gulf of
Mexico and the Chesapeake Bay, hazardous algae blooms off the
coast of Florida, and in our Great Lakes, continuing non-
attainment of water quality standards in rivers and lakes and
estuaries in every State across our Union.
These events are often devastating, not only to ecosystems
and to human health, but also to local economies. For example,
a 2009 study published in the Journal of Environmental Science
and Technology calculated the combined cost of freshwater
nutrient overloads in the U.S. at $2.2 billion annually. I will
say that again: $2.2 billion annually--I had no idea it was
that large--with losses in
[[Page 4]]
recreational water use and waterfront real estate values and
drinking water.
In response to a 2011 toxic algae bloom in Lake Erie--
Toledo's primary drinking water source--the city issued a 3 day
drinking water ban that affected over a half-million residents.
The city has since invested more than $1 billion on water
treatment upgrades and pollution remediation projects.
Florida spent $17.3 million in emergency funding in 2018 in
response to harmful algae blooms; $17.3 million.
In July 2019, massive harmful algae blooms off the Gulf of
Mexico coast forced Mississippi to close all of its beaches.
Can you imagine what that would be like, to close all of our
beaches in Delmarva?
We know these challenges well in our home States of
Delaware and Maryland and our southernmost county in Delaware,
Sussex County, which is home to more chickens than any other
county in the Nation, I think. Last time we counted, 400
chickens for every person in Delaware, and a lot of them are in
Sussex.
With the robust production of corn, soybeans, and
vegetables to feed the chickens, constituents must contend with
unhealthy levels of nitrate in their well water too often. That
nitrate is a legacy of decades of intensive agriculture, and
until the last couple of decades, a lack of understanding and
appreciation for the adverse effects this nutrient can have on
the health of our babies and the quality of our invaluable
coastal waters.
And along and around our inland bays, too many of those
same Delawareans are also living with highly polluted
estuaries. They bloom with algae in warmer months, resulting in
dead zones, occasional toxic algae blooms, and consequently,
fish kills and stench.
Though several Federal programs exist to mitigate these
sources of nonpoint source pollution, Section 319 of the Clean
Water Act is our primary defense against this pollution.
Given the very real ecological, economic, and public health
impacts associated with nonpoint source pollution, we either
must do a better job with the tools we have or find more
effective and expeditious means to reduce the nutrient sediment
and other pollutants that flow off of our lands and into our
waters. Maybe we need to do both.
I am particularly interested to learn how well the Clean
Water Act Section 319 Program and other provisions of law
actually arm our States in their efforts to meet their water
quality goals, especially in the Chesapeake Bay watershed. As
an upstream State in that watershed, Delaware is acutely aware
of Maryland's and Virginia's expectations that we all do our
part to reduce pollution in our States, pollution loading, and
assist with the restoration of the iconic treasure that is the
Chesapeake Bay.
At one point, Delaware was not doing enough. We are doing a
whole lot better now, and can we do more? Yes, probably so, and
we will.
But it is time for some other upstream States like the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to step up and clean up the water
that they send down the Susquehanna River to the Chesapeake.
This is essential, as our downstream neighbors have little
recourse if up
[[Page 5]]
stream States fail to act on and meet their good neighbor
expectations.
In that regard, Mr. Chairman, our States of Delaware and
Wyoming share similar a circumstance. We lie at the headwaters
of rivers and streams that are critical to the health of
ecosystems and communities downstream. Given that nonpoint
source pollution is the No. 1 cause of non-attainment across
our country, I am also very interested to learn whether Section
319 is keeping our waters clean and serving the needs of
downstream communities and neighboring States.
Let me close with this. While the 319 Program has certainly
resulted in demonstrable successes, we continue to struggle
with many of the same nonpoint source pollution problems that
we did decades ago.
More troubling, our changing climate has made the problems
even worse. According to a recent CRS report, scientific
research indicates that in recent years, the frequency and
geographic distribution of harmful algae blooms have been
increasing nationally and globally.
Climate change is exacerbating these problems as heavier
and more frequent rainfall increases runoff into our rivers.
Clearly, we have plenty of work ahead of us. We must make
sure our nonpoint source pollution programs are able to respond
to our new climate reality, and I hope this hearing will give
us insights into how to do both.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Senator Carper.
We are now going to hear from our witnesses.
I am pleased to introduce Jennifer Zygmunt, who is the
Nonpoint Source Program Coordinator for the Wyoming Department
of Environmental Quality. A native of Casper, she spent some
time in New Mexico before heading back to Wyoming, and we are
very glad that she did.
She graduated from the University of Wyoming in 2003 with a
degree in botany and a minor in environment and natural
resources. After graduation, she joined the department, where
she wrote permits under the State's Clean Water Act Discharge
Permit Program, and she did this for 5 years. For the last 11
years, she has managed the Nonpoint Source Program.
We thank you for your public service in protecting water
quality for all the people of Wyoming. We are honored that you
are here to testify today before the Committee and to share
your expertise with us. I know you have much to tell us about
Wyoming's strong record of environmental protection and
restoration through its nonpoint source program, and we look
forward in a few moments to hearing your input on how we in
Congress can make sure Washington works even better with
Wyoming and other States to protect our Nation's water quality
in the future.
Before you start, we are also honored to welcome Mr. Ben
Grumbles, Maryland's Secretary of the Environment. We have
strong Maryland representation on this Committee.
Senator Cardin, as the senior Senator from Maryland, would
you like to say a few words first? And then I will be happy to
call on Senator Van Hollen as well.
Senator Cardin. Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, thank you
very much for the courtesy of being able to introduce Ben
Grumbles, with my colleague, Senator Van Hollen. Particularly,
thank you for holding this hearing on Section 319. Wyoming and
Maryland indeed have a common need for clean water, and we are
proud of the actions of both of our States as leaders on clean
water.
I am delighted to welcome Ben Grumbles, Maryland's
Secretary of Environment. His duties include serving as
Chairman of the Governor's Chesapeake Bay Cabinet and Chair of
the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, RGGI. Ben has served as
the Assistant Administrator for Water at the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency from 2003 to 2009, and as Director of the
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, and as
environmental counsel and a senior staff member of the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee and Science
Committee in the U.S. House of Representatives.
So he has a great deal of experience at the State level,
but also understands the Federal level from his experience
there, and both branches of Government, the executive and
legislative branches. He also was President of the U.S. Water
Alliance, an environmental non-profit organization that
educates the public on the value of water and the need for
integrative and innovative solutions.
Section 319, as we will hear today, is a vital source of
resources for us to deal with nonpoint source management. In
our State, it is important in regard to how we deal with
developers, local officials, and farmers to deal with water
quality. Both the Chairman and Ranking Member have mentioned
the Chesapeake Bay, and Section 319 provides sources for help
in dealing with our commitment to the Chesapeake Bay.
One more word about Ben Grumbles and the Bay program. He is
our leader in the State on the Bay, and he is following in a
great tradition of really nonpartisan leadership in our State
in our commitment to the Chesapeake Bay. He has shown
incredible innovation and leadership, and we are very proud of
what he has been able to demonstrate that we can do in
Maryland, working with our partners in the surrounding States.
The key to the Chesapeake Bay Program was that it was
developed by the local governments. It started 40 years ago,
and it was from the ground up. It was not from the Federal
Government down. It was the local governments that came up with
plans based upon best science and the political realities of
their State as to what they could do to save the Chesapeake
Bay.
Then they joined together. The States surrounding the
Chesapeake Bay said, We have got to do this collectively. It
was later that we involved the Federal Government. We involved
the Federal Government for two main reasons, and I think
Secretary Grumbles is very much aware of that.
First of all, we need help funding, funding sources. The
Chesapeake Bay has been the beneficiary of the direct funding
from the Federal Government as well as programs such as Section
319. But we also need someone to make sure that all
stakeholders--and that means the farmers, the developers, the
local governments, and all regions, all States--were doing
their fair share, so that we had a committed program that all
of us were doing our share.
[[Page 7]]
That is where the enforcement by EPA has become so
critically important, including the TMDLs. Secretary Grumbles,
I think, can speak to how all this has worked well and the
progress we have made, but we need all of our tools working
together, and that is why Section 319 is a very important
program and one that I hope, as we look at reauthorization
programs, how we can expand and improve Section 319.
I thank Secretary Grumbles for being here.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Cardin.
Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, with respect to the accolades about Secretary
Grumbles, I am just going to say, amen to that.
Thank you and our partners around this table on both sides
of the aisle for working with Senator Cardin and myself,
Senator Capito, and other members of the Bay States to provide
the support that we need as a country to this national
treasure. Secretary Grumbles has been a big part of that.
We will get into this a little more later, but both Senator
Cardin and Senator Carper mentioned the Chesapeake Bay
Agreement and the need to enforce it. We have voluntary tools,
but we decided in the Bay Agreement that when necessary, we
ultimately need to have more leverage and more enforcement to
make sure that all of the members of that multi-State
jurisdiction take their responsibilities seriously and meet
their reduction goals.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having this hearing. This is a
very important voluntary program, Section 319. We need to use
all the tools at our disposal when we are addressing these
issues.
Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Van Hollen.
I want to remind the witnesses that your full written
testimony will be made part of the official hearing record, so
we ask that you try to keep your statements to 5 minutes, so we
have time for questions. I look forward to hearing from both of
you.
Ms. Zygmunt, please begin.
STATEMENT OF JENNIFER ZYGMUNT, NONPOINT SOURCE PROGRAM
COORDINATOR, WYOMING DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
Ms. Zygmunt. Good morning, Chairman Barrasso, Ranking
Member Carper, and honorable members of the Committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to provide testimony for the Wyoming
Department of Environmental Quality Nonpoint Source Program,
which I have had the privilege of managing for the past 11
years.
You will find detailed background information on our
program in my written testimony. For more information on recent
program accomplishments, I encourage you to review our 2018
annual report, which is available online in an RJAS story map
format.
Overall, the Wyoming DEQ believes that the Section 319
program is functioning effectively. We would like to highlight
several aspects of the program that we feel are important to
its success.
First, national program guidance has provided sufficient
flexibility to allow Wyoming to manage its nonpoint source
program according to the needs of our State.
[[Page 8]]
We appreciate areas of flexibility that were incorporated
into the guidance during its 2013 revision. As one example, the
increased ability to protect healthy waters in addition to
restoring impaired waters has helped support important river
restoration projects in Wyoming, expanding partnerships with
Wyoming Game and Fish Department, conservation districts, and
Trout Unlimited. We continue to advocate for revisions to
program guidance that support flexibility so that States can
best address their priority water quality issues.
Second, the DEQ believes that a voluntary approach to
nonpoint source pollution management is the most effective
approach. While often challenging, bringing stakeholders
together in a spirit of collaboration promotes partnerships,
information sharing, and innovation. Projects with multiple
benefits are the most likely to succeed in the long term, and
the voluntary approach helps identify such win-win situations.
As one example, over 36 miles of the North Platte River
were recently restored to meeting water quality standards.
Converting flood irrigation to sprinkler irrigation in the
watershed not only improved water quality, but it increased
agricultural production, and it saved farmers money by reducing
water usage and labor costs.
The importance of partnerships and local leadership and the
successful voluntary approach cannot be overstated. Finding
common goals with other agencies, organizations, and
individuals is key to success.
Some of DEQ's most important partnerships are those with
the Wyoming Association of Conservation Districts, our 34
individual conservation districts, and local members of those
districts. As local government entities with the authority to
lead watershed planning and restoration efforts, conservation
districts sponsor the majority of our 319 projects, and they
provide an important link between the DEQ and our local
stakeholders.
Finally, though a challenging part of the program, the
collection of data to evaluate the program's effectiveness is
important. The program's primary measure of success--the number
of water bodies restored to meeting standards--emphasizes
accountability and provides a meaningful communication tool
with the public.
While the DEQ believes the program is operating
effectively, we respectfully offer the following
recommendations for further program improvement. Of highest
priority, we recommend that EPA evaluates ways to streamline
the 319 grant application and award process to avoid delays in
awarding grants to States. Having a definitive timeframe for
when grants will be awarded will improve our ability to notify
sponsors of anticipated project start dates, allowing sponsors
to better plan projects and coordinate their non-Federal
sources of match.
We appreciate that EPA Region 8 has heard our concerns on
this subject and is taking steps to determine if improvements
can be made. We encourage that this conversation happens at the
national level as well.
Our second recommendation is that if the 319 allocation
formula is reevaluated, it needs to be done with careful
consideration and input from all States. While changes to the
formula would benefit some States, they could be detrimental to
others. The DEQ has in
[[Page 9]]
cluded in its written testimony some suggested factors for
consideration if the formula is reevaluated.
Finally, the DEQ recommends that nationally, EPA and NRCS
continue to gather and evaluate State feedback to determine how
the Federal National Water Quality Initiative can be improved.
The DEQ's partnership with our Wyoming NRCS is a critical
partnership for us. With the common goal of water quality
improvement, both agencies are committed to working together to
improve delivery of conservation programs, including the
National Water Quality Initiative.
While the initiative has resulted in positive outcomes in
Wyoming, new requirements under the initiative have put
additional burden on limited DEQ staff, and it has been
challenging to meet those requirements. Further national
initiatives with NRCS should stem from significant outreach to
States and should allow flexibility in how States best pursue
partnerships with their NRCS counterparts.
Thank you again for the opportunity to be here, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Zygmunt follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Well, thanks so very much for your
thoughtful testimony.
We will have questions in a moment, but first I would like
to turn to Mr. Grumbles.
Please proceed.
STATEMENT OF HON. BEN GRUMBLES, SECRETARY OF THE ENVIRONMENT,
MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT
Mr. Grumbles. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
Ranking Member Carper. What an honor it is to appear before you
today.
Our Nation is stronger when the Senate Environment and
Public Works Committee is working together in a bipartisan
manner for environmental progress. The 319 Program is an
outstanding example of a critical effort that involves
partnerships, nationally, State based, regionally, and locally.
It really is an honor to appear before you. I am Governor
Hogan's Environment Secretary for Maryland, and as very kindly
mentioned by Senators Cardin and Van Hollen, I also get to
serve as the head of the Chesapeake Bay Program Partnership's
Principal Staff Committee of Environment and Agriculture and
Natural Resources Secretaries.
This hearing is important because it gives us an
opportunity to tout what is working very well and also explore
tweaks and possible revisions to make this program even
stronger. Because the Nonpoint Source Program is only going to
grow in importance and need in meeting our clean water
fishable, swimmable goals.
I also want to emphasize, Mr. Chairman, how proud it is for
me to appear before a committee where Senator Capito, Senator
Boozman, everyone works together to put funding in the right
place. We are so appreciative of the recent efforts to boost
the funding of programs, including for the Chesapeake Bay.
Senator, I work well with Austin Caperton, and Senator
Carper, you know that Shawn Garvin is a real leader, and we all
work together to make progress for the Chesapeake Bay Program.
But Mr. Chairman, the 319 Program is an integral component
to local, State, and regional progress. So it is an honor to
appear before you on that.
Governor Hogan, as the Chairman of the National Governors
Association, puts a real emphasis on infrastructure, a
foundation for success, advancing repair, enhancement, and
modernization of our Nation's infrastructure, including aging
water systems, through innovative public-private partnerships,
smarter technologies, and a strong focus on resilience. A key
to successful infrastructure programs is a holistic, integrated
approach that also includes increased focus and attention on
runoff and nonpoint source pollution.
One of the things I really want to emphasize here is that
in Maryland, we see the value of local progress for clean water
and coordinating on a regional basis. The Governor and the
State of Maryland together in a totally bipartisan manner have
made strong commitments. We are seeing real progress for the
Chesapeake Bay, not only in reducing the point sources that are
regu
[[Page 44]]
lated under the Clean Water Act, but also the nonpoint source
pollution.
While we have made significant progress in our Bay
restoration efforts, we will not be able to fully restore the
health of the Bay, a national and ecological treasure with
economic value exceeding $1 trillion, unless all of our State
partners and the District of Columbia also meet their
commitments. We must ensure that we all factor in the impacts
of climate change into our efforts to reduce nonpoint source
pollution, as changes in rainfall patterns that increase runoff
into the Bay threaten to undermine progress.
The other point I want to make is that 319 is something to
be proud of. My hat is off to EPA and USDA and other Federal
agencies who make it work well. It is a holistic approach to
tackle water pollution problems on a watershed basis.
We value partnerships. It is not just with Federal
agencies. It is with nonprofit organizations, like the
Chesapeake Conservancy, with their Precision Conservation
Initiative, and the Nature Conservancy, and other organizations
that team up with States, and Trout Unlimited, as Jennifer
mentioned.
But for us in the Chesapeake Bay, the key is to ensure that
we focus on what is really needed. For us, the nonpoint source
and stormwater challenges are among the greatest, and that is
why we need all of the States and the EPA to step up and play
their appropriate roles.
I want to emphasize the role of the EPA. Maryland considers
EPA to be the key to our partnerships for the Chesapeake Bay
and the TMDL.
Pennsylvania in particular has fallen short--woefully
fallen short--and so we would strongly encourage additional
funding for nonpoint source pollution for all of the States,
streamlining in the process, but also for the interstate
umpire, the EPA, to have the courage to step up and use the
regulatory backstops that are available. It is not an
aspirational role; it is an enforceable TMDL. We think that
with a stronger 319 Program, and with EPA stepping up, that
would be very important.
I would just like to emphasize, Mr. Chairman, that Maryland
is fully prepared and will push the EPA to use its appropriate
authority so that we can all make progress. We look forward to
the discussions about how to continue to improve the 319
Program.
Thank you for your leadership on this matter.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Grumbles follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Thank you for your testimony.
Thank you both for your testimony.
We will start with some questions.
If I could start with you, Ms. Zygmunt, EPA regularly
publishes success stories of particularly effective nonpoint
source projects, nationally recognized Wyoming's 14 projects,
including the one you mentioned with the North Platte River
restoration project. In your experience, and you have done this
for a while, what are the key factors in designing a project
and implementing a project that make a project really
overwhelmingly successful?
Ms. Zygmunt. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the question.
That is a very good question, and one that we ask ourselves
often, and it is a question that needs to be asked often. Why
do we see success? How can we build that success?
In terms of the ingredients that make a successful project,
in my experience in Wyoming, first, you need that local
champion, whether it is an individual, an organization, an
agency that sees the need for some solutions to a problem and
takes the initiative to make it happen.
Part of my job is building that local capacity so that we
have these champions on the ground. Often in Wyoming, that is a
conservation district, but it may also be a nonprofit
organization, or other folks as well.
Those champions, water quality might be their focus, it
might not, but they need to look beyond water quality. What are
the other benefits that bring in partners into the watershed to
make improvements, these win-win situations? Perhaps it is
helping out the agricultural producers, perhaps it is helping
hunting groups, recreation groups, fishing groups.
There are many reasons why people will come to the table.
Water quality is just one of the reasons, and I think you need
to find those projects where we are benefiting water quality,
but we are finding solutions to other problems at the same
time.
When you can bring everybody to the table, you build those
partnerships which are critical for coordination. You need that
coordination to make the dollars on the ground go further, make
sure you are not duplicating efforts, and then you just need
commitment over time.
This is a point that again, in my experience, it often
takes decades to start seeing improvements from our projects.
It is not always an immediate response. Sometimes you have to
try many different practices before you find the right
combination that results in water quality improvement.
Some of the nonpoint source pollution problems that we deal
with in Wyoming are legacy impacts going back hundreds of
years, and they are not going to be fixed overnight. It takes
time to mobilize the resources, it takes time to implement the
projects, and it just takes time to work with nature and let
those projects become effective and get the data to show
effectiveness.
And that being the last component of a successful project
is that you have to monitor, you have to go out and look for
data. I think we have to get beyond the point of just hoping
that what we are doing is working. It is an important part of
the program that we
[[Page 64]]
evaluate it whether it is water quality data, range data, many
ways that you can look for issues.
Senator Barrasso. There is a funding issue as well because,
and we heard this from Senator Cardin as well, in order to
have--these things have started as a ground up. But in order to
receive Federal funding, you have to seek out other funds. How
does Wyoming secure resources to leverage the dollars that it
receives from the EPA?
Ms. Zygmunt. Yes. Thank you for the question. We do require
non-Federal match for all of our Wyoming projects. We require a
40 percent minimum match. As an easy example, if your total
project costs just $100,000, $60,000 could be 319 funds. The
sponsor would need to show that 40 percent, $40,000 is coming
from a non-Federal source.
Really, one of the most important sources of match in
Wyoming are from our landowners, either cash contributions to a
project or in kind services, meaning they volunteer their time
or they volunteer their equipment toward a project.
We don't advocate for 100 percent cost share. It is our
philosophy for the conservation districts working with these
producers that when we are working with agricultural producers,
that they have skin in the game, so to speak, that they are
contributing to the project as well. I think that is a very
important point to make is that they are contributing their own
resources and their own time to these projects.
We have local sources of funding, again the conservation
districts, their time, if they have a local mill levy that
provides them support, is a common source of match as well as
city and county funds. Other State agencies that are critical
for us showing non-Federal match would be Wyoming Game and Fish
Department and several other agencies.
Senator Barrasso. One last question as we talk about the
319 funds. According to the Government Accountability Office,
the formula is weighed heavily toward State population, as well
as the number of acres and agriculture crop production. If we
were to update the formula, what suggestions would you make to
ensure that each State receives a fair share of the funding?
Ms. Zygmunt. If the formula is updated, I think for
Wyoming, some other factors that we would suggest be considered
is that in addition to population size, we account for the
number of tourists that come to Wyoming. We have under 600,000
in terms of our State's population. In 2018 we had over 4
million visitations to State parks, over 8 million to our
national parks, monuments, and historic sites. That is not
something that is considered, but obviously that level of
tourism has the potential to impact our water quality.
I would also recommend that we consider increased weight
for ranch land and grazing activities in addition to cropland
acreage. I think as a headwater State, we would advocate for
consideration of the benefits of protecting water quality at
the source.
Finally, the emphasis on population size makes it hard for
some of our smaller communities. All but two of our cities are
under 50,000 people. It can be hard for them to find the local
resources
[[Page 65]]
to address some of these problems, so I think a factor to help
some of our smaller communities would be good.
Senator Barrasso. Thanks. Very, very helpful.
Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Thank you. I love it when the witnesses
say, ``thank you for that question.'' We have some people over
here that may have three or four rounds of questions. Every
question, they will say ``thank you for that question.'' Even
the lousy questions, they will still say ``thank you'' for
that, so thank you for thanking us.
I want to look for some consensus here, a little bit of
agreement. I want each of you to give me maybe at least one,
maybe two areas of agreement, most important areas of
agreement, that we could use to improve the 319 Program to
better address the NPS pollution, problems that our States
face. Just two areas where you think you agree that are really
important. Go ahead.
Do you want to go first, Jennifer?
Ms. Zygmunt. Yes. So in terms of improved areas of
agreement, I would have to say our first would be our
partnership with Wyoming NRCS. That is an evolving partnership,
but we have common goals. We have had improved dialogue in
recent years about how to prioritize.
Obviously, they have many resource concerns beyond just
water quality. We have had much better conversations with them
in recent years about how to prioritize water quality or to
coordinate that with some of their other conservation programs.
As important in Wyoming, our evolving partnership with the
Wyoming Association of Conservation Districts, because of our
reliance on the districts to help connect us to the local
level, implement these projects. Our partnership with the
conservation districts is one that we routinely coordinate
with, maintain, and try to improve over time.
Senator Carper. All right. Stick to your guns.
Secretary Grumbles, do you agree with that?
Mr. Grumbles. Thank you for the questions.
Senator Carper. Oh, you are welcome, you are welcome.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Grumbles. And I really mean it.
I do agree. I agree with just about everything that Wyoming
DEQ is saying, although when it come to an allotment formula,
we may have some disagreements. On the tourism component,
though, that sounds very exciting as a criterion.
We certainly--I think there is common agreement that the
319 Program is a tremendously impactful and wise investment,
and so that program from a Federal funding perspective should
grow.
I also think there is agreement that flexibility is
absolutely needed with any partnership program that doesn't
rely on heavy regulatory controls. Partnerships are key, so you
need to continue to boost innovation.
I think there is also agreement that for 319, the key is to
tap into this exciting new world of smarter information
technology, affordable sensing programs, remote sensing, really
being be able to target where those dollars are best spent and
working with agriculture and other sectors where it is really
needed.
[[Page 66]]
I would agree that this is a good program. The less
paperwork, the more streamlining in the application process, I
think, would also be something that States would uniformly
agree is a good way to go with this critically important
Program 319.
Senator Carper. All right, thank you.
Ellicott City is a town that my wife and some of her
friends visited a year or so ago. They went shortly after--I
don't know if they are 1,000 year floods or 500 year floods,
that occurred within like, months of each other.
Mr. Grumbles. More than 500 year floods.
Senator Carper. Yes, there you go. The folks in Ellicott
City think that climate change is real, and that it had
something to do with the flooding that is going on.
I have been intrigued. Delaware punches above its weight in
farming. We do a lot of farming in Sussex County, and frankly,
in Kent County and some in New Castle County.
I am always looking for ways, as my colleagues know, to
find ways to do good things for our planet, including
addressing climate change and create economic value. I am
intrigued by the ideas of encouraging farmers to use carbon
capture in the soils that they grow crops in, in order to take
the carbon out of the air and provide economic opportunity,
better soils, to grow crops, of all kinds.
Would you all just comment on that? Is that something that
you are mindful of, thinking at all about?
Mr. Grumbles. Yes. First of all, I was caught in that
Ellicott City flood and had to be rescued, eventually. It is a
powerful reminder in an urban environment that flood control,
flood prevention, and increasingly wild weather in this area
needs to be taken seriously. That is why we are proud that we
are supporting climate resiliency efforts to help engage not
only in urban retrofits, but also in smarter planning upstream
and throughout the watershed.
Carbon capture sequestration is critically important,
whether you are wearing the water pollution control hat or the
climate change hat. Because it is all about healthy soils and
finding ways to make agriculture more productive and also
mitigate the risks of climate change by reducing carbon dioxide
that is in the air through the healthy soil.
We are putting a real emphasis--Governor Hogan is--on
healthy soils initiatives, and working with agriculture, not
against, to be real leaders in reducing carbon pollution and
increasing the health of our soils.
Senator Carper. My time is expired, Ms. Zygmunt. Anything
quickly you could add to this, just briefly?
Ms. Zygmunt. Yes. I agree, the soil health initiative is
fascinating. We are seeing farmers in Wyoming that are starting
to learn more about it, starting to implement techniques. That,
and other practices I think are a great part of the 319 Program
in that we are building resiliency from many angles.
A lot of the projects that we do are going to stabilize
riparian areas, helping with flood control, off channel water
that we do with ranchers helps during droughts.
Climate variability is not new in Wyoming. It is something
that we deal with regularly; droughts, floods, wildfires.
Regardless of
[[Page 67]]
the reason, the increased resiliency from our projects, I
think, benefits for many reasons.
Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman, I think I keep coming back to
something that we talked about just a little bit in other
hearings. There is something good here for farmers, and I would
like to say it is possible to do good things for our planet and
add economic value, and this is one way to do that.
I know farmers can--there are always good stories like
that, I think our first was. But they can be better stories,
and we can figure how to help facilitate that in the end.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Carper.
Senator Capito.
Senator Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank both of you for being here today. The 319 Program is
critical, we talked about, to the water quality of my State of
West Virginia; under its non-regulatory framework, Federal,
State, and local governments partner with private groups and
individuals to implement these programs. We do have a great DEP
administrator in Austin Caperton, I am glad to know you are
working with him.
Senator Carper. Sorry to interrupt. Is he related to Gaston
Caperton?
Senator Capito. He is cousins, yes. It is West Virginia, we
are all cousins.
[Laughter.]
Senator Capito. In any event, the two prevalent major
nonpoint sources in our State are bacteria and then acid mine
drainage, which we have dealt with, and done very well
actually. Down the way from where I live, the Coal River Group
has utilized the 319 grant funding to help homeowners repair
their septic systems. This is something we have worked on in
this Committee, with getting people to get their septic systems
up to quality, so that they don't become a bigger problem or
age or leak or other things.
So now, the Coal River, they have a great kayaking
business; they have great water festivals on the Coal River,
and it is been a direct, I think, result from the 319 Program.
In terms of the Chesapeake Bay, West Virginia is one of the
headwaters of the Chesapeake Bay, and we have worked well, I
think, to get our total maximum daily load down, thanks to the
319 Program. It is been very helpful with that.
On that issue, I would like to ask you, Secretary Grumbles,
you mentioned working with other States. I have a two-part
question.
No. 1, I don't know the answer to this question. Does the
319 Program allow you to do a regional approach where you could
apply for funding as a region of States? Or is it mostly State
to State, and then how do you coordinate that when you are on
the border? You want to do a project near Hagerstown,
Martinsburg, Shepherdstown, that type of thing.
That is my first question. Go ahead.
Mr. Grumbles. My answer to that is yes. We use the 319
Program to partner with other States in the Chesapeake Bay
watershed. So 319 funds for Maryland can be used in a
partnership program with West Virginia or with other States
that are above us or beside us.
[[Page 68]]
Senator Capito. So, does the funding come, like the West
Virginia 319 Program uses their funding to partner with the
funding from Maryland, so to speak?
Mr. Grumbles. Yes.
Senator Capito. Right. So one of the issues, I think,
particularly in that region, and particularly with the
Chesapeake Bay, is there is not a lot of population in the West
Virginia part. I realize when you get into Maryland, you have
got more population driven into that area when you start
getting into the more populated parts of the Bay.
I think this has been an issue, not an issue, but something
to look at in terms of funding, because of the heavy impacts
that a less inhabited part, a more rural part of West Virginia
is going to have on a more inhabited place, places in and
around the Chesapeake Bay.
Would you consider, would you see, is there enough
flexibility built into the program to be able to help that
rural community? I think this is what you were talking about in
Wyoming. I don't know how you see that issue.
Mr. Grumbles. I think it is important to look at that and
work with the Committee on trying to build as much flexibility
into that in the spirit of source water protection and working
upstream where you get the most bang for your buck and
leveraging those dollars.
I just want to make sure the Committee understand that the
319 Program, when you use the allotment for it--Maryland only
gets $2 million, but we have put up over $75 million of our
money into that program, and it just leverages tremendous
broader partnerships. I think that the key of having
flexibility, working with local or smaller populated
communities upstream is where we see some real value
downstream.
Senator Capito. In Wyoming, I think you mentioned that you
have a headwater, you are a headwater State as well. The
discussion we are having in terms of being able to fund those
projects in terms of impacts further downstream, do you have an
opinion on that?
Ms. Zygmunt. Yes. I would agree with Secretary Grumbles. I
do think we have the flexibility to address both those issues,
working with rural communities and having interstate
coordination as needed.
In Wyoming, interstate coordination is very important. We
haven't had as much formal coordination in the 319 Program. I
routinely talk with my other State counterparts when we have
got projects on the border with other States, we were letting
them know what we are doing, seeing if we can encourage
projects downstream as well. They are obviously very interested
when we are doing projects upstream.
I absolutely feel that we have the flexibility that we need
to work with our other States and to bring resources to our
smaller communities.
Senator Capito. I don't have another question, but if I
did, I would have asked about the capacity building. I think
this is an issue in all types of water treatment, no matter
whether you are looking at a nonsource point, or whether you
are looking at a rural
[[Page 69]]
water system, the technical expertise, I think, is something we
really need to work on here to spur that on.
Mr. Grumbles. Can I just simply say, thank you for
mentioning acid mine drainage. In Western Maryland, we are very
proud as well, just like West Virginia, of using different
technologies to reduce acid mine drainage and using 319 dollars
for that. It is one of our true success stories, and we might
have learned it from West Virginia, but it is certainly another
reason to support the flexibility and continued flow of Federal
support for 319 Programs like acid mine drainage mitigation.
Senator Capito. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Capito.
Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank both of you, as witnesses.
I think this hearing highlights the importance of the
Section 319 Program to address nonpoint source pollution.
Another important program in that regard is the Rural
Conservation Partnership Program, and I want to thank Senator
Boozman for working with Senator Capito, Senator Cardin,
myself, and others to increase the mandatory funding on the
Farm Bill for that, because that is also vitally important to
protect watersheds like the Chesapeake Bay.
I would like to zero in on something Secretary Grumbles
commented on in his statement, and that is the current state of
the Chesapeake Bay Agreement, which essentially puts different
States on what we call a pollution diet, right? The TMDL is the
total maximum daily load. As part of the Chesapeake Bay
Agreement, some of the key States agreed that they would hit
certain pollution reduction targets.
We just saw from EPA's analysis in December that the State
of Pennsylvania is falling very far short on some of those key
pollution reduction targets. There were some alarming
statements made recently by the head of the EPA's Chesapeake
Bay Program suggesting that those pollution targets that States
are supposed to achieve by 2025 are purely ``aspirational,''
and that they are not enforceable, which, I think is dead wrong
when you look at the agreement.
Secretary Grumbles, my first question is, have you gotten
any clarification from EPA since that comment was made, as to
whether they believe that the agreement is enforceable?
Mr. Grumbles. EPA issued a statement that backed away from
using that word, aspirational, and underscored that they are
committed to working with each of the States to meet their
goals by 2025. We are still very concerned about that. We
absolutely believe that it is not just aspirational, it is
enforceable, and it is not just informational, it is integral
to our success for 2025.
We understand full well that nonpoint source pollution is
not regulated directly under the Clean Water Act. But when you
have a TMDL and the uniqueness of the Chesapeake Bay TMDL,
which is like no other in the country with these watershed
implementation plans that are then integrated into the 303(E),
the continuing planning process, there are some real
commitments and respon
[[Page 70]]
sibilities and obligations that EPA has to implement the EPA
Chesapeake Bay TMDL beyond aspirational.
Senator Van Hollen. I want to make it clear that I think
all of the members of the Chesapeake Bay States would like to
work with the State of Pennsylvania to help it achieve its
targets. We would like to see additional Federal resources,
whether it is from the Rural Conservation Program or other
programs go to Pennsylvania to address these issues.
But ultimately, as of today, Pennsylvania is not on course
to meet its targets, and we need assurances from EPA that it
will play its role to ultimately enforce those targets. I am
drafting a letter with Senator Cardin and others to make it
clear to EPA that that is our understanding of what it means,
and that understanding is actually affirmed by the Third U.S.
District Court of Appeals decision. This has been litigated
before, has it not?
Mr. Grumbles. It has. It is over a 5-year period from the
2013 decision to a 2016 Supreme Court letting it stand. The
Chesapeake Bay TMDL is lawful; EPA has an important role.
We are not trying to make the Nonpoint Source Program
regulatory. It is through the context of the TMDL there is a
clear and distinct responsibility of the interstate umpire to
step in and take actions when a State like Pennsylvania is not
even meeting 75 percent of its commitment. When it is going to
be hundreds of millions of dollars, and they don't have the
plan, we need intervention on that front and still work
together as partners, but we need intervention and leadership.
Senator Van Hollen. Right. No, I don't think anyone is
suggesting, just to be clear, making the Section 319 Program a
mandatory program. This is a distinct agreement under the TMDL
among the States, and a Third U.S. District Court of Appeals
judge has already said that this creates enforceable rights and
obligations.
I just want to say to you, Mr. Secretary, and to the
Governor, that if we don't get assurances from the EPA in short
order, that they are going to enforce these targets and come up
with a realistic plan for hitting those targets, then we are
going to have to sue EPA to do its job and enforce the
agreement. I believe you agree, do you not?
Mr. Grumbles. Yes. And the Governor agrees. The Governor
feels very strongly about this.
Senator Van Hollen. I just think this has come to a boil
now with the statements that were made recently by the head of
the EPA's Chesapeake Bay Program, and so this is a moment we
need absolute clarity and an enforceable program to hit the
targets in 2025.
Thank you.
Senator Rounds [presiding]. Thank you.
I think now what you will see is part of the
dysfunctionality within the Senate as we now move in and out to
try to get down and vote, so we will be passing the
Chairmanship back and forth and around. Those individuals who
are leaving are not doing it out of disrespect, but simply
because they have to go and vote and try to get back in an
orderly fashion.
Ms. Zygmunt, like Wyoming, South Dakota is a farming and
ranching State with a relatively small population, but a fairly
good
[[Page 71]]
size. Looking at Section 319--and we utilize 319 in South
Dakota just like you do in Wyoming--I think there has been a
question as to whether or not there is an appropriateness or
whether or not there should be modifications to the existing
formula with regard to two particular items. That is, the
amount of ag land; that is, within the formula itself, versus
the weighted credibility given to the population of the
particular State.
In many cases, where you find, since this is a nonpoint
source pollution program, the question is, should this be based
or should we reconsider the formula funding to perhaps provide
some additional credibility or weighting to the ag acres that
are under production? I would like your thoughts.
If you could re-do the formula; you have been doing this
for more than 11 years now, in Wyoming. What would you see with
regard to not so much, would you consider a fairer formula? It
hasn't been changed since the beginning. What would you see
with regard to other areas that might be considered as we
consider a fair distribution formula?
Ms. Zygmunt. Thank you, Senator, for that question.
I think I have trouble answering that question nationally,
in terms of what is fair. I can definitely speak for Wyoming,
in that yes, agricultural land use is one of our key land uses
that we need to address nonpoint source from. Most of our
success stories have involved an agricultural component.
If I am just looking at Wyoming, and if I had a pot of
money, and I had to come up with the formula to distribute the
money in Wyoming, agricultural land use would be one of the top
factors that I would consider in terms of what needs are where.
But it is not the only factor, and whether or not it should be
weighted more or less, I have trouble speaking to that beyond
Wyoming.
One of the good aspects of the 319 Program is that we are
able to address nonpoint sources of pollution from other
sources. The urban related sources in Wyoming, sometimes there
is not funding to help communities out with those sources.
Septic systems are another issue in Wyoming that we can help
with.
So agriculture is important in Wyoming. I see that being
one of our top priorities, but there are other sources in parts
of the State that 319 has the flexibility to address. Within
the State, that flexibility is very important.
Ag as a factor, as I mentioned in my statement previously,
I would recommend if the formula were reevaluated to add more
weight to the rangeland, grazing aspect of it, not just
irrigated cropland.
Senator Rounds. Thank you. I am also curious. In your
testimony, you state that partnerships with the agricultural
community are important for successful nonpoint source
pollution mitigation. In your testimony, you have also included
supporting documents highlighting your success in reducing
levels of selenium in local waters flowing through the North
Platte River.
Can you talk a little bit about the success of this
voluntary program, and nobody is talking about making it a
mandatory program, but can you talk about how the ag community
and the rural communities feel about this being a voluntary
program?
[[Page 72]]
Ms. Zygmunt. Yes, in Wyoming, absolutely, there is support
for our program being voluntary. Again, that is what we have
found to be most effective. It builds the most trust with our
agricultural community, and again, our conservation districts
are key in building that link between the 319 Program and the
local producers. The conservation districts are the folks out
there talking with producers, talking about the program,
explaining what 319 is. It is my job to help build that trust
with the conservation district to facilitate that discussion,
provide the district with the resources that they need so that
they can take the next step working with the producers.
Yes, absolutely, support for the voluntary approach in the
conservation districts are key to building that trust with the
ag community. Thank you.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Senator Merkley.
Senator Merkley. Thank you. Coordinator Zygmunt, do you
have much challenge with phosphorus in Wyoming as a runoff that
affects waterway quality?
Ms. Zygmunt. It is a newer issue for us. Nutrients,
including phosphorus, is an issue. It is not one that we have
done a lot of monitoring for to date. We are in the process of
developing numeric nutrient criteria, but we are seeing harmful
algal blooms within the State and are working on a response
plan for those. We are in the process of developing a bigger
nutrient program right now. Our focus has been on sediment and
bacteria, but we are heading that way.
Senator Merkley. Secretary Grumbles, is that an issue for
you in Maryland?
Mr. Grumbles. It is. It is also an opportunity. It is a
very important issue, as Senator Carper knows, in the Delmarva
Peninsula, phosphorus management. Governor Hogan is very proud
of the fact that we updated the science and put in place strong
regulations to reduce potential phosphorus.
Senator Merkley. The reason I ask both of you is because
algal blooms across the country are affecting almost every
State, most certainly the warmer water. The nutrient runoff is
causing lots of troubles in our lakes and waterways in Oregon.
There is some very complex chemistry that is occurring. For
example, Diamond Lake has a significant phosphorus that was
driving an algal bloom, but when the invasive tui chub fish was
removed from the lake, then the zooplankton ate the algae, and
the water clarity increased to a depth of over 20 feet from
about 2 or 3 feet. It just cleared up the algae because of
changing the chemistry, even with the same phosphorus load.
We have another lake, Klamath Lake, where we have
endangered suckers. We are having a really complex challenge
with it, where you have one algae bloom that fixes nitrogen,
and then a second algae bloom that uses that nitrogen, and it
produces a range of toxins. It is not really just two algaes;
there is a whole suite of different algaes, but I am crudely
describing it. We have a species there, the fathead minnow,
that has become 80 percent of the mass in the lake.
[[Page 73]]
As I see these issues, they are so complex. Shouldn't we
have kind of a national algae team that understands and is
learning from each and everybody's experience and challenges in
Wyoming and Maryland and Oregon to kind of help everyone else,
including ourselves understand these issues better and how to
address them?
Mr. Grumbles. Yes.
Senator Merkley. We don't really have that, at least I
haven't seen that, like experts at the national level on algae
that can come to Oregon and help us understand, because we have
very different challenges in lakes that are not that far apart.
I think this is the main thing I wanted to address because
in terms of our nonpoint, we have sediment issues and so on and
so forth as well, but this is one that is really changing the
chemistry of the lake. The algae near the surface is creating
warmer temperatures in the lake. It is also decreasing the
sunlight going deeper into the lake. Not only does it produce
toxins, but when it dies, it strips oxygen from the lake.
We have multitudinous sources of phosphorus, including
natural background phosphorus, tail water from irrigation
operations, former wetlands that are drying out and release a
lot of phosphorus when it rains.
I am just thinking, in addition to these moneys, it would
be great to have a real team of experts on the biochemistry of
lakes and the interaction with aquatic zooplankton, algae,
invasive species, and so forth to help us address these
challenges.
Ms. Zygmunt. Senator, I think that is a very good point.
Like I said, we are in the initial stages of building an
improved harmful algal bloom response strategy in Wyoming. We
have prioritized one of our reservoirs for proactive nutrient
reduction efforts. It is a very high rec use reservoir, so it
is very important for us to address the recurring algal blooms
that are occurring there.
As one example, the University of Wyoming has put together
a team that hopefully will get some funding to do a detailed
study on that reservoir to understand that complexity and help
answer some of the questions particularly that we are getting
from stakeholders about with the blooms are occurring and the
best way to address them.
It is a complex issue, and I think there is definitely a
need to have support for technical assistance to understand it
so that we can mitigate it most effectively. We are seeing some
assistance through the University of Wyoming, and we are also
attending regional conferences when they become available. I
know upcoming in February, there is a Midwest conference on
harmful algal blooms where we will be participating to learn
from other State resources.
Mr. Grumbles. Senator, I would just simply add, I know
there has been a national effort on harmful algal bloom
research and control. Perhaps what you are suggesting is there
needs to be more at the national, Federal level of the many
excellent research scientific agencies that are there.
I can tell you that from a regional and State perspective,
we absolutely agree that nutrients, particularly phosphorus,
need good strong science and integrated partnerships and find
ways to reduce unacceptable or excess levels of phosphorus and
repurpose that
[[Page 74]]
phosphorus and use voluntary as well as regulatory tools, not
just in agriculture, but in the wastewater community through
enhanced wastewater treatment technologies, but not lose sight
of the importance of the phosphorus loading, which is a big
part of our Chesapeake Bay challenge.
Senator Merkley. We are looking at how can you cost
effectively strip algae, harvest algae from the lake, removing
that algae and the phosphorus. We are looking at how much can
the wetlands reduce it. We are looking at the whole range of
things.
What has really struck me is, for example, in aquarium
studies of how toxins affect the fish, we only have limited
toxins that are relevant to the range of toxins produced by the
algae to even be able to test, so there is a big scientific gap
here that we need to focus more on.
I will just close by noting that the amount of funding for
this program has gone down significantly over time, and it
seems to be that the challenges are getting greater. Maybe we
should be increasing funding for it.
Thanks.
Senator Barrasso [presiding]. Senator Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and we appreciate
you all being here very, very much.
Ms. Zygmunt, the State of New Hampshire in comments
collected by the Association of Clean Water Administrators
suggested that an audit should be performed on reporting
requirements to detect any redundant reporting done by the
States to EPA. Do you believe that there are areas of the 319
process that can be streamlined, and can you give some examples
of that, perhaps?
Ms. Zygmunt. Yes. Thank you, Senator. Overall, I feel like
we have worked in recent years to evaluate reporting
requirements. Right now, I don't feel like the reporting
requirements that we have as a program are onerous.
Senator Boozman. Good.
Ms. Zygmunt. I have worked at the next step to help my
project sponsors with that reporting step. If I make their job
easier, it makes my job easier, it makes the EPA's job easier.
It is definitely a team effort.
Right now, I don't have any immediate suggestions for
streamlining reporting. I think it is an ongoing process.
EPA is coming up with some very good tools, such as ``How's
My Waterway,'' which will be an excellent tool to get more
information to the public about water quality. It will pull
information from the main data base that we use to track our
319 projects, which is good, but it will require us to go and
make sure that we are keeping our data entry up to date, making
sure that it is thorough and sound and it is what we would want
to present to the public.
I think there are some upcoming requirements that we just
need to have conversation with EPA about in terms of how to
make that most effective.
Senator Boozman. Very good. That is good to hear.
Secretary Grumbles, it is good to see you. The Secretary
was one of my former predecessors, is that right? Former
predecessor?
[Laughter.]
[[Page 75]]
Senator Boozman. Anyway, a Congressman that he served under
and worked for, and I just want to compliment you. It is so
good to hear the two Senators from Maryland be here and
compliment you on your hard work. The fact that you are so well
respected on both sides of the aisle, that is a great example
for all of us.
We do appreciate all you do. I know that you work very,
very hard. Nobody understands the issues better than you, and
the fact that you make it, especially with these water issues
that are so, so very important. These are areas that we can
find common ground on. We all want to get it done in a logical
way, and you have really set the pace in that regard, so give
yourself a pat on the back.
I have got a quick question for you because I have got to
run and vote. Aside from providing additional money to the 319
Program, how can we leverage more funding for nonpoint source
pollution projects?
Mr. Grumbles. Thank you, Senator. The key to innovation is
being willing to find ways to bring in additional partnerships
and market based solutions, one of the best ways to leverage
additional funding through the 319 Program.
We should get a boost in funding, but the best way to
leverage is by using market based strategies, creating
incentives, such as water quality trading or pay for
performance contracting, where with the knowledge that is
gained through the 319 Program and the science of the
technologies of being able to see, wow, we will get some really
good progress in water quality, that can then help create
incentives for unregulated players to come to the table and
come up with ways to reduce the pollution, whether it is acid
runoff from mining or excess phosphorus or nitrogen or algae or
green infrastructure.
The best way to leverage is to invite more partners to the
table and reward them through market based strategies like
water quality trading or pay for performance contracting.
Senator Boozman. Very good. Thank you, and we do appreciate
both of you very, very much.
Senator Barrasso. Thanks, Senator Boozman.
Senator Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding
this hearing today.
Clean water is a basic human right, and assuring that all
Americans have access to it for their families must be a top
priority for all of us. New York State has a strong record when
it comes to protecting our water. New York City has a water
supply providing unfiltered, clean drinking water for 9 million
New Yorkers.
However, our State continues to face the challenge of
ensuring that our water stays safe and clean. Harmful algal
blooms and other water quality problems associated with
nutrient runoff and fertilizer use threatens our lakes.
We are spending record amounts of money to clean up the
Long Island Sound and reduce its nitrogen load. New York State
is also committed to partner to doing our part to clean up the
Chesapeake Bay, and we will meet the 2025 targets in New York's
watershed implementation plan.
[[Page 76]]
One of the biggest water quality challenges we face has to
do with the growing problem of PFAS contamination. That is an
issue that is affecting New York, the whole country, and it is
creating great concern.
I am very concerned about the prospect of PFAS chemicals
entering our water bodies through nonpoint source pollution due
to the use of sludge from water treatment facilities as a
fertilizer on agricultural croplands. We are essentially taking
PFAS pollution from point sources and turning it into nonpoint
source pollution through agricultural runoff and groundwater
contamination. This hurts our farmers, who now must deal with
PFAS contamination on their land. It potentially harms the
public by contaminating food and water.
This is happening in States from Maine to Michigan to New
Mexico.
Secretary Grumbles and Ms. Zygmunt, are your States taking
any action to detect and address nonpoint source pollution from
PFAS?
Mr. Grumbles. Well, Senator, I know that for us in Maryland
and the Maryland Department of the Environment, we are looking
very carefully at potential biosolids land application of
sewage sludge as a potential source. Our Water Office and our
Land and Management Office are looking at this.
The first step is to see, are there indications of a
problem. Because we are, in working with other States like New
York, or States around the country, know that there is growing
evidence of real concern about PFAS, and not just from a point
source, but from nonpoint sources.
So it is on our radar screen, and we are committed to
learning more and partnering for pollution prevention.
Ms. Zygmunt. Thank you, Senator. My short answer is that
no, PFAS has not made its way to our nonpoint source program at
this time. We have other staff in our water quality division
that are working on PFAS issues. It is beyond my area of
expertise at the moment, but I would be happy to get more
information for you from the staff in terms of what efforts
they have made and where they are at.
Senator Gillibrand. Great. And what can be done on a
Federal level to support more awareness and action at the State
and local levels to address the issue?
Mr. Grumbles. I certainly can say as a member of the
Environmental Council of the States, ECOS, which is all the
State directors and commissioners on environment, that every
single meeting our group has from the director of Wyoming DEQ,
to our State, to New York, Basil Seggos, the commissioner, we
talk about and develop strategies and compare notes on
regulatory tools and science based tools.
The answer is a continued, strong commitment on Federal
agencies like EPA to keep moving forward on the science and the
communication and the necessary regulatory tools to reduce the
threat from PFAS chemicals.
Senator Gillibrand. What impacts do you anticipate that
increased precipitation will have on the amount of pollution
entering
[[Page 77]]
our water bodies and our ability to implement measures to
address pollution?
Mr. Grumbles. This is a question separate from PFAS,
although, everything can be connected.
Senator Gillibrand. Correct.
Mr. Grumbles. Well, as Jennifer mentioned, and as I
certainly mentioned in our testimony, a key component of a
successful water program is resilience and taking into account
weather and precipitation.
New York participates in the Chesapeake Bay TMDL, and I am
proud to say that we all have agreed to factor in climate
resiliency, specifically because it becomes--it is a multiple--
the increased precipitation in some regions, like here in the
Mid-Atlantic, including snowmelt. Basically precipitation
becomes a threat multiplier in terms of pollutants that are on
the land, urban, suburban, rural.
We are factoring in a narrative and numeric criteria to the
Chesapeake Bay pollution budget specifically dealing with the
anticipated increase in precipitation in our region.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, witnesses.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Braun.
Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have been a lifelong conservationist. I have been worried
about the state of the air quality and water quality since I
have been a kid. I was able to move back to my hometown and
actually practice what I preach.
When it comes to nonpoint sources, we employ riparian
buffers, cover crops, no-till farming, a lot of different
methods, and I think somebody earlier mentioned that farmers
are the true stewards of the land.
I also look at air quality and water quality to where air
quality, we make great strides, but we are largely at the mercy
of what the rest of the world does. When it comes to water
quality, we can really have impact within our own country.
When it comes to, I have heard, first of all, Section 319,
I think it is worked very well. The skin in the game that you
mentioned is important.
What is the current state of the health of waterways? And I
would like you to also talk about point source and nonpoint
source, and tell me what your opinion is from where it is now
versus what it was 10 to 15 years ago. I would like to hear
from both of you on that.
Mr. Grumbles. What an awesome question. Thank you. EPA
definitely and other Federal agencies need to follow up on that
question about national standards and trends. I can say without
hesitation that our Nation has made tremendous progress on
water quality over the last several decades, unbelievable
progress, in terms of reducing toxic pollutions and
conventional pollutants. So we are on the right track.
But I can also say without hesitation that in some areas,
it can be increasing, localized increasing urbanization, or
some pollution source that isn't adequately controlled or
managed, or with emerging evidence of contaminants that hadn't
previously been focused
[[Page 78]]
on that are problems. There is a mission not yet accomplished,
for sure.
We often say, and the point source, the regulated,
particularly industrial and municipal, that we have made
tremendous strides. Maryland has absolutely been a leader in
reducing pollution from industrial and wastewater treatment
plants with very costly technologies to reduce the nutrients
and the pollutants.
But we also know that there are some increasing trends with
new contaminants or chemicals, as the Senator from New York
mentioned, that are new challenges for us because our science
is getting better, our ability to detect challenges.
On the nonpoint source front, the story is still true, that
because of the diverse and diffuse nature of the pollution,
that is going to continue to be a challenge, and we just need,
more than ever, new tools, not just regulatory tools, but
partnership tools that are better local and place based. It is
really important to not declare victory on the water quality
front, and with climate change, the more extreme weather
conditions, that brings a whole lot of additional challenges
that weren't as big in the past.
I would just conclude with, we are making real progress,
but we absolutely need to focus more and more on nonpoint
source runoff and smart, market based strategies and ways and
also emerging contaminants of concern.
Senator Braun. Jennifer, briefly comment, because I want to
come back to you with a question before my time expires. Go
ahead.
Ms. Zygmunt. Thank you, Senator. Yes, speaking for Wyoming,
overall, we are blessed with great water quality. We have our
challenges. I think we are seeing improvement, as shown by our
success stories.
As Secretary Grumble said, we have those emerging
contaminants coming up that cause us to adapt and learn new
techniques and new methods to deal with them.
We also see changing land use, and that is something that,
in Wyoming, causes us to adapt as well. In some parts of the
State, we are seeing a lot of rural subdivisions, so whereas
previously, maybe you worked with one or two large ranchers,
now we are working with maybe 50 small acreage landowners.
It is changes like that that continually keep you
challenged, keep you on your toes, and another reason why we
need flexibility in the program to adapt to those over time. I
think we are seeing improvement. One of the indicators that I
have seen over my 11 years in this program is that I see an
accelerated buy in into new ways of doing things. People are
open to new ideas. Ranchers and farmers are more willing to do
something different than they have done in the past, to see if
it will improve resources and improve the agricultural
production.
Senator Braun. Very quickly, and this is a particular
question. Riparian buffers are, to me, a poor replacement for
forestation that would go deeper into the watersheds. Can we
ever have meaningful impact on water quality, especially in
agricultural States, if we are just looking at riparian buffers
versus what has caused it over time to where we have deforested
across main watersheds?
You start, and then give me a quick follow up.
[[Page 79]]
Ms. Zygmunt. Sure. I believe riparian buffers are a
critical management practice. They are a very small part of
Wyoming, but they are critical for water quality and for
wildlife habitat. We see a lot of benefits when we improve our
riparian areas to water quality, providing a filter for runoff
before it reaches a stream, providing shade to reduce
temperature within the stream.
Riparian buffers are a critical practice of what we do in
Wyoming. So yes, I do think they are a great practice.
Mr. Grumbles. I think your question, obviously, prompts the
response of, we have got to have a broader, more holistic
approach to forest conservation, looking up into river basins
for green infrastructure conservation and protection and source
water protection. We get into trouble when we rely solely on
end of pipe or edge of field solutions. But riparian buffers
are very important, a critically important tool; they just
can't be the only tool.
Senator Braun. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thanks, Senator Braun.
This was very interesting and informative.
Fourteen Senators showed up. We are in the middle of a
vote, so people have been coming and going, but that is quite a
successful attendance, which shows the importance of what you
are doing.
No one else is here to ask questions, but they may submit
written questions, so you can expect those.
The hearing record is going to be open for the next 2
weeks.
We are very grateful for your time and your testimony.
Very, very helpful on this very important issue.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:31 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]