- SEMI-ANNUAL TESTIMONY ON THE FEDERAL RESERVE'S SUPERVISION AND REGULATION OF THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
SEMI-ANNUAL TESTIMONY ON THE FEDERAL
RESERVE'S SUPERVISION AND REGULATION
OF THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
NOVEMBER 14, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services
Serial No. 115-122
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
32-971 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES
JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,
MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman
Member
PETER T. KING, New York
CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California
NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL POSEY, Florida
MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan
STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
AL GREEN, Texas
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina
KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
ANDY BARR, Kentucky
JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania
BILL FOSTER, Illinois
LUKE MESSER, Indiana
DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine
JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
MIA LOVE, Utah
DENNY HECK, Washington
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
JUAN VARGAS, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota
JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
RUBEN KIHUEN, Nevada
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
TED BUDD, North Carolina
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
Shannon McGahn, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on:
November 14, 2018............................................
1
Appendix:
November 14, 2018............................................
47
WITNESSES
Wednesday, November 14, 2018
Quarles, Hon. Randal, Vice Chairman for Supervision, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System........................
6
APPENDIX
Prepared statements:
Quarles, Hon. Randal.........................................
48
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
Meeks, Hon. Gregory:
Letter from the Honorable Chris Van Hollen...................
56
Letter from the Congressional Black Caucus...................
59
SEMI-ANNUAL TESTIMONY ON THE FEDERAL
RESERVE'S SUPERVISION AND REGULATION
OF THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
----------
Wednesday, November 14, 2018
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeb Hensarling
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hensarling, McHenry, Royce, Lucas,
Posey, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Stivers, Hultgren, Pittenger,
Wagner, Barr, Rothfus, Tipton, Williams, Poliquin, Hill, Emmer,
Zeldin, Trott, Loudermilk, Mooney, MacArthur, Davidson, Budd,
Kustoff, Hollingsworth, Waters, Maloney, Velazquez, Sherman,
Meeks, Lynch, Scott, Green, Moore, Perlmutter, Foster, Kildee,
Delaney, Beatty, Vargas, Crist, and Kihuen.
Chairman Hensarling. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time, and all Members will have
5 legislative days within which to submit extraneous materials
to the Chair for inclusion in the record.
This hearing is for the purpose of receiving the ``Semi-
annual Testimony on the Federal Reserve's Supervision and
Regulation of the Financial System.''
Before beginning my opening statement, don't turn on the
clock quite yet. I wish to make a couple of introductory
comments.
I have been in Congress for 16 years now and seen a number
of elections come and go. Sometimes my party wins; sometimes it
loses. It is a little bit more fun when we win. But I want to
acknowledge and congratulate my friends on the other side of
the aisle for their victory. Although I am retiring and will
not be here in the next Congress, I know that not all of my
side will acquiesce in your agenda. But please be assured I
will do everything today to ensure that there will be an
efficient and peaceful transfer of power. We respect the will
of the people.
I do not wish to get involved in the inner sanctum of the
Democratic Caucus, so I know that we do not yet know who will
chair this committee, although I have a pretty good idea. And I
would just like to acknowledge the Ranking Member's long time
participation, her leadership on this committee, her leadership
of the other party. And should that be the will of her caucus,
I certainly would congratulate her on her accomplishment. And
enjoyed those times. Wish it would have been a few more where
we have managed to work on a bipartisan basis.
But, again, privately I told her that the majority side
stands ready and prepared to do everything possible for there
to be an efficient and peaceful transfer of power on this
committee, and I wish to acknowledge that and, again,
congratulate my friends on the other side of the aisle.
I now recognize myself for 3 minutes to give an opening
statement.
This morning we welcome back, for his semi-annual
testimony, the Honorable Randy Quarles, the Federal Reserve's
Vice Chairman for Supervision.
As we know all too well, the Dodd-Frank Act dramatically
increased the Fed's power way beyond its traditional monetary
policy and responsibilities. Through so-called heightened
prudential standards, the Fed can functionally now control the
largest financial institutions in our economy, which is most
disconcerting. Increased capital and liquidity standards, as
long as they are not counterproductive or duplicative, add to
stability. Regulatory complexity and micromanagement do not. If
not properly tailored and calibrated, both hinder economic
growth.
Two weeks ago, the Fed proposed changes to the supervisory
requirements for some financial institutions. These proposals
are the direct result of the House-led deregulatory and pro-
growth provisions contained in the Economic Growth, Regulatory
Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. These proposals are a most
welcome sign of progress. But to be clear, they do not yet
represent success. If they represent the Fed's final offerings,
it is pretty thin gruel.
There is clearly a direct connection between sluggish
economic growth and the regulatory tsunami we experienced for
nearly 2 decades prior to President Trump taking office.
Studies, including one by the Mercatus Center, found that
regulatory drag on the economy can be attributed to a loss in
real income of approximately $13,000 for every American, a
staggering figure.
We should note that, while total overall regulatory
restrictions have increased by nearly 20 percent since 1997,
regulatory restrictions on finance and insurance have increased
by a whopping 72 percent. This is why this committee has
devoted so much time and attention to legislation, much of it
bipartisan, that properly tailors financial regulation.
Certainly, we can never lose site of systemic risk, but
neither can we lose site of economic growth which today has led
to the lowest unemployment rate in 50 years, the greatest wage
increases in a decade, and a resurgence of optimism by both
consumers and businesses.
The Vice Chairman previously has expressed his support for
a comprehensive evaluation and improvement of the post-crisis
regulatory regime. Guided by the principles of transparency,
efficiency, and simplicity of regulations, these are indeed
laudable principles. I would suggest including one other. The
principle that the rule of law not be supplanted by the
arbitrary discretion of regulators. That means keeping
regulators out of the Boardroom, both literally and
figuratively, and kept out of management decisions.
While I am pleased to see the Fed's willingness to better
tailor, perform cost benefit analysis, implement prudential
regulatory risk adjustments, and propose amendments to the
Volcker Rule, each of these as they stand should again be
viewed simply as first steps and insufficient to truly propel
our economy to sustain 4 percent economic growth.
Vice Chairman Quarles, again, I look forward to your
testimony today and exploring with you the importance in
assuring each of the Federal Reserve's proposals arrive at
results that truly are transparent, efficient, and simple.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of the
committee, the gentlelady from California, for 4 minutes for an
opening statement.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And allow me
to take a few minutes to say that I have appreciated the
opportunity to work with you. We did not always agree on
everything, but I am always amused that the press can't seem to
get our relationship right. Sometimes our Members can't even
get it right. We have Members from the opposite side of the
aisle who say I am the worst thing since you know what, and
others who say, well, you know, I get along with her pretty
well, and she keeps her word.
And so let me just say this, let's keep them confused. I
like it that way. As a matter of fact, the more confused they
are, the better I have an opportunity to have some wins.
But I thank you for your offer to be of assistance in
transition. And as you know, while it is thought that I would
chair this committee, we have not gone through our formal
processes yet, and I welcome the opportunity and appreciate it,
certainly, to have the support from my colleagues on this side
of the aisle to chair this committee.
And I look forward to working with you in any and every way
that I can, and other Members of our committee, to make sure
that we have the kind of transition that serves the people of
this country.
Thank you very much.
So, Mr. Chairman, this is the first hearing since the 2018
midterm election in which voters gave Democrats the majority in
the U.S. House of Representatives' next Congress. Of course,
that also means changes in committee leadership and in the
agenda for the committee.
Given the expressed desire by the American people for a
change, I do feel it is appropriate to discuss Dodd-Frank and
the harmful effects of the current committee majority to weaken
and roll back parts of this law.
These efforts include those by some to weaken capital
standards for our largest banks. As we can see in one of the
slides before us, capital standards are an effective method to
prevent bank failures. Make no mistake, come January in this
committee, the days of this committee, weakening regulations
and putting our economy, once again, at risk of another
financial crisis will come to an end.
Dodd-Frank created the position of Vice Chairman for
Supervision at the Fed as one of the several actions in the law
to help rectify the Fed's inadequate supervision and
enforcement prior to the financial crisis. It is essential that
the Fed keeps a watchful eye on the financial institutions it
supervises and makes strong use of its existing enforcement
tools to crack down on institutions that break the law.
I must say that I am concerned about proposals the Fed has
put forth this year to reduce capital and liquidities
requirements for the largest financial institutions, which
would weaken strong safeguards established by Dodd-Frank to
protect the U.S. economy from another costly financial crisis.
That is why, in September, I and 18 other Democratic Members
sent a letter to Federal Reserve Board Chairman Powell urging
the Fed to maintain strong capital requirements for global
systemically important banks.
The current higher capital standards and related regulatory
improvements required by Dodd-Frank have strengthened the
resiliency of the largest banks as well as the entire financial
system without undermining economic growth.
In fact, bank lending to businesses has increased 80
percent since 2010, and banks of all sizes are making record
profits. On average, they have made $167 billion in profit
annually the last 3 years. As we saw in the last crisis, it is
the average hardworking Americans that will suffer the
consequences if Washington deregulates Wall Street mega banks
again.
I look forward to discussing these and other matters with
Vice Chairman Quarles today, and I thank you. And I yield back
the remainder of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Luetkemeyer, the Chairman of the Financial Institutions and
Consumer Credit Subcommittee, for 1 minute.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, Vice
Chairman Quarles. Thank you for joining us today and for the
steps you have taken to rightsize regulation.
As we have discussed, it is imperative we take a more
practical approach to supervision, one that extends from the
top down to each member of your staff in D.C. and to every
examiner in the field. On the topic of enhanced Prudential
Standards, the Federal Reserve has a strong system in place
with a systemic risk score indicator. Your latest proposal goes
in a different direction, but I am glad to see you are taking a
more risk-based approach to regulation.
More should be done. And I encourage you to remain flexible
going forward to revisit arbitrary thresholds and drive Federal
Reserve supervision to an even more risk-based approach taken
on an institution-by-institution basis. That should include
tailoring for U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign
banks and more accommodations for smaller institutions that do
not pose any systemic risk.
I thank you for taking on this responsibility, and I yield
back to the Chair.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Kildee, the Vice Ranking Member, for 1 minute.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I first want to say that I appreciate the comments you and
the Ranking Member made about this committee and about one
another. And on behalf of the confused, I am happy to hear that
you are working well together.
I would like to welcome Vice Chairman Quarles. We are
looking forward to your testimony.
When you were here in April, I asked about how the Federal
Reserve could ensure the effectiveness of the Community
Reinvestment Act (CRA), because it is so important that there
is equity in how the financial system works. To that end, the
recent move by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
(Office of the Comptroller of the Currency) to update the
Community Reinvestment Act is concerning. I would like to hear
from you how the Federal Reserve will use its authority to
ensure that, in this update, the Community Reinvestment Act is
not weakened.
The CRA is important to ensuring credit availability in
older industrial communities, in particular, like my hometown
of Flint that I know the Members here have heard me discuss in
the past. That community is really a troubled community and
could benefit greatly from the efforts under the Community
Reinvestment Act.
It is important that in a time of reduced supervision of
community and regional banks that financial agencies modernize
and strengthen the CRA to ensure that banks meet their
obligations to provide credit and economic development
opportunities to these underserved low- and moderate-income
communities.
So thank you for being here. I look forward to your
testimony and particularly addressing those questions.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Huizenga, the Chairman of the Capital Markets Subcommittee, for
1 minute.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I echo the--at
least the confused part of my colleague from Michigan as well,
so I look forward to working with him on trying to unclutter
those things.
But earlier this year, Vice Chair Quarles, you mentioned
that the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies had
completed the bulk of the work in this post-crisis regulation.
And on February 22 you said, quote, ``now is an imminently
natural and expected time to step back and assess those
efforts. It is our responsibility to ensure that they are
working as intended. And given the breadth and complexity of
this new body of regulation, it is inevitable that we are
available to improve them, especially with the benefit of
experience and hindsight,'' closed quote.
So moving forward during your appearance in this committee
in April, you discussed the Fed's commitment to tailoring
regulations for these smaller financial institutions to ensure
that regulations are not overly burdensome and while also
ensuring safety and soundness.
Last month, the Federal Reserve voted 3-1 to honor that
commitment by streamlining and tailoring those enhanced
supervision requirements for both regional and larger banks.
These reforms take into consideration banks based on size as
well as other risk factors instead of an arbitrary $50 billion
threshold regardless of any actual risk to the financial
system.
We have also seen positive movement on reforming Section
619, the Volcker Rule, which you called detrimental to our
capital markets here in the U.S. I agree with your assessment
that Volcker is, quote, ``an example of a complex regulation
that is not working well,'' end quote.
It is my hope that regulators, including the Fed, will
continue to work toward a more simplified rule that is better
tailored to our financial institutions.
And I look forward to working with you. Thank you, and I
yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
We now again welcome the Vice Chairman for Supervision of
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Mr. Randy
Quarles. He has appeared before our committee before, so needs
no introduction. Again, Mr. Quarles, welcome. You are now
recognized for 5 minutes for your testimony.
You need to turn on the microphone there. And bring it
close to you, please.
There we go.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RANDAL K. QUARLES
Mr. Quarles. Does this work?
Chairman Hensarling. That will work. Thank you.
Mr. Quarles. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, Members of the
committee, I appreciate this opportunity to testify on the
Federal Reserve's regulation and supervision of the financial
system.
My prepared remarks address two main topics: Our efforts to
improve regulatory transparency and our progress in making the
post-crisis regulatory framework simpler and more efficient.
I am mindful that this semi-annual testimony, like my
position as Vice Chairman for Supervision, is grounded in
Congress' efforts to strengthen and improve the Nation's
regulatory framework following the financial crisis.
This testimony reflects a critical element of those
efforts, the desire, and a need for greater transparency.
Transparency is part of the foundation of public accountability
and a cornerstone of due process, as the Chairman referred to
in his remarks this morning. It is also a key to a well-
functioning regulatory system and an essential aspect of safety
and soundness as well as financial stability.
Transparency provides firms clarity on the letter and
spirit of their obligations, it provides supervisors with
exposure to a diversity of perspectives, and it provides
markets with insight into the condition of regulated firms
which fosters market discipline. Transparency increases public
confidence in the role of the financial system to support
credit, investment, and economic growth.
The Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps since my
last testimony to further increase transparency and to provide
more information about our supervisory activities to both
regulated institutions and to the public.
We recently improved our supervisory rating system for
large financial institutions, better aligning our ratings with
the supervisory feedback that those firms receive. With our
fellow banking agencies, we clarified that supervisory guidance
is a tool to enhance the transparency of supervisory
expectations and should never be the basis of an enforcement
action.
And we expect shortly to make final a set of measures to
increase visibility into the Board's supervisory stress testing
program, including more granular descriptions of our models,
more information about the design of our scenarios, and more
detail about the outcomes we project.
The report that accompanies my testimony today is another
tool to keep Congress and the public informed about our work,
about the banking system, and about the role that both play in
supporting the broader economy. As the report shows and as my
written testimony discusses, the banking sector remains in
strong condition in line with strong U.S. economic performance
with lending growth, fewer nonperforming loans, and strong
overall profitability.
We are, however, very much aware of the dangers of
complacency, and our report lists several priority areas of
risk we will continue to monitor closely, including cyber and
IT risks, that supervise firms of all sizes.
Improving regulatory efficiency is another core element of
our current efforts. Tailoring regulation and supervision to
risk has been a programmatic goal of Federal Reserve policy for
more than 2 decades. The motivations are clear. Supervisory
resources are not limitless, and supervision is not costless
either to the public or to supervised institutions. Activities
and firms that pose the greatest risk should receive the most
scrutiny. And where the risk is lower, the regulatory burden
should be lower as well.
This principle-guided Congress and the agencies in
designing the post-crisis regulatory framework, and it has
guided our implementation of the Economic Growth Regulatory
Relief and Consumer Protection Act.
On this front, as my written testimony details, we have
made substantial progress. Our most significant step came 2
weeks ago when then Board issued two proposals to better align
prudential standards with the risk profile of regulated
institutions.
These proposals would significantly reduce regulatory
compliance requirements for firms in the lowest risk category,
including most institutions with between $100 billion and $250
billion in assets. Firms with $250 billion or more in assets or
firms with assets between $100 and $250 billion that meet a
risk threshold will face reduced liquidity requirements. The
proposals would largely maintain existing requirements for the
largest and most complex firms.
These new categories draw on our experience administering
enhanced prudential requirements and other post-crisis
measures, and they move toward a more risk-sensitive nuanced
framework where riskier activities and a larger systemic
footprint correspond to higher supervisory and regulatory
requirements.
I have detailed several other efforts to improve regulatory
efficiency in my written testimony including simplifying and
tailoring requirements under the Volcker Rule. Our work to
improve regulatory efficiency is not done, and we expect to
make additional progress in the months ahead on a number of
issues. In particular, we are working with our counterparts at
the OCC and FDIC (Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation) on a
community bank leverage ratio proposal.
I look forward to making progress on that and other efforts
and to participating in the committee's oversight of our work.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Quarles can be found on page
48 of the Appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before yielding to myself for questions, I failed to
announce to the committee that we will excuse the witness no
later than 1 o'clock today.
I now yield myself 5 minutes for questions.
Again, Vice Chairman Quarles, thank you for your appearance
today. I could spend my limited 5 minutes heralding your
progress, or I can spend my 5 minutes talking about your
shortcomings. I think I will talk about your shortcomings.
So in your last appearance before the committee, you said
that the Board of Governors had the authority to jettison the
qualitative aspect of CCAR. And what I have noticed is that the
qualitative aspect has only fallen off for the lowest of the
four tiers that we now operate under. I am disappointed to find
this. I don't understand why that qualitative aspect is there.
I do not understand why the quantitative aspect of the test is
not sufficient.
Can you, please, illuminate to me, if you have the power to
jettison, why is it still there?
Mr. Quarles. So I guess the short answer is we do have the
power to jettison, and I believe that the time has come for us
to move the qualitative objection into our regular supervisory
engagement with firms as opposed to a separate process. We have
already done that, as you know, for the smaller firms. There
has been significant progress among all the firms with their
capital planning measures, with the seriousness and ability
that they approach their part of the stress test. And given
that, I think that it is appropriate for us to look at that
part of the firm's practices, as we look at many other of their
practices, as part of our general evaluation of the firm's risk
management, of their capital planning, and include that in
their overall ratings, but not as a separate process. I think--
Chairman Hensarling. Well, again, many are still fearful
that it is subject to abuse and can intertwine the Fed and
management decisions of the banks.
Next, we have spoken about this matter both publicly and
privately. Many on this side of the aisle have advocated that
we have full transparency with respect to the models of the
stress test. And I must admit that I am still somewhat
uncertain as to exactly what will be released about these
tests. And a foundational principle is the rule of law, and the
rule of law works best when you actually know what the law is.
We haven't known. It has been a gotcha kind of game.
So can you be more precise? Because after I have seen the
proposed rule, I think many people are still unclear what the
Fed intends to share with respect to the stress test.
Mr. Quarles. So I break that into two or three areas. One
is transparency about our models. And up to now there has been
limited transparency about the models that the Fed uses to
evaluate the performance of banks' portfolios in the stress
test.
We have proposed being much more granular about what we
reveal about those models, and specifically the loss function
with respect to different categories of assets and what losses
we expect to see in response to particular stresses. Banks will
be able to have a better understanding, then, of how their
models compare with at least those loss functions of ours.
We have also described in the measures that we have
proposed and are making final that this process will continue.
We will continue to get more transparent with each iteration of
the stress test. So there will be certain models about which
more transparency is given in the next cycle. After that, more
transparency about certain other aspects of our models.
Another aspect, though, as to which transparency is
important, is the design of the scenarios themselves as opposed
to the models. That is a more complicated question, and we will
be seeking very vigorous input from the public about how we can
get, in a practical way, more input on the scenario design. We
will be doing that over the course of this coming year.
Chairman Hensarling. So in your tenure on the Fed, Vice
Chairman Quarles, have you concluded that there is a nexus
between fixed-income markets, volatility, and illiquidity in
the Volcker Rule?
Mr. Quarles. Yes. So I couldn't quantify it for you. I
think that the efforts that various economists have made to
quantify that have pointed in different directions. But I think
it is inarguable from the experience of market participants.
Chairman Hensarling. Are you familiar with H.R. 4798,
legislation by Mr. Hill and Mr. Foster, bipartisan legislation
that passed the House with over 300 votes that would help
simplify Volcker by unifying under one rulemaking authority and
one regulatory authority? Are you familiar with that
legislation?
Mr. Quarles. I am.
Chairman Hensarling. Is that something that the Fed,
through an interagency agreement, could enter into on its own?
Mr. Quarles. It would require interagency agreement, but,
certainly, the agencies could agree to operate in that fashion.
Chairman Hensarling. I think it is your term and not mine,
but I think that you haven't quite demurkified the Volcker Rule
yet.
And I see my time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
Before I get into my question, as you know, California
residents have been dealing with some of the most devastating
wildfires it has ever seen in the past few years. In
communicating with banks you regulate, I believe the Fed and
other regulators have previously encouraged flexibility to help
customers who have been affected by the disasters.
Do you know of any steps that the Fed is taking to be
helpful in this emergency?
Mr. Quarles. I don't know that we have taken any steps yet,
but those are logical things for us to consider.
Ms. Waters. I would certainly encourage that.
Mr. Quarles. I will be happy to report to you on what that
is we--
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
Vice Chairman Quarles, response to a follow up question
from our April hearing, you wrote, and I quote, ``the
regulatory reforms that were in place in the wake of the
financial crisis have helped to make the U.S. financial system
stronger and more resilient. As I have stated publicly on
several occasions, I believe that the core regulatory reforms,
heightened capital, and liquidity standards, stress testing,
and resolution planning should be preserved. My focus is not
deregulation,'' end of quote.
Now--and yet the Fed appears to be deregulating the largest
banks anyway. Regulatory experts on both sides of the aisle, as
well as community banks and others, have criticized several of
the Fed's proposals arguing that they will materially reduce
bank capital and liquidity reserves for the largest banks.
Former Governor Brainard voted against these proposals
noting the recent tailoring proposal would reduce high quality
liquid assets held by large banks by about $70 billion.
Former FDIC Chairman Gruenberg and Vice Chair Hoenig
opposed the leverage proposal as it would reduce bank capital
by more than $120 billion. And just the other day, former Fed
Vice Chair Fischer said the deregulation effort is, and I
quote, ``something that I find extremely worrisome.''
What is your response to the many critics that argue that
those proposals ignore lessons from the last crisis and will
make our financial system less safe?
Mr. Quarles. So I think that quantitatively those
assessments are off the mark. It has been a principle of ours,
as we focus on recalibrating, in order to ensure that the
incentives that face the financial sector are appropriately
lined and that they don't actually increase risk in the sector,
that we not reduce the resiliency, including the capital
resiliency or the liquidity resiliency of the system. And I
think that we have done that.
The various proposals, for example, that affect capital
affect it by less than 1 percent, 1 percentage point. One of
the criticisms that you pointed out from the FDIC that was with
respect to a measure that would reduce the capital in the
aggregate system by 4/100 of 1 percent. These are not material
amounts.
The liquidity tailoring that we proposed just a couple of
weeks ago, for example, I think that that is an implementation
of the instruction from Congress that we shall tailor. I think
it is a recognition of differing risk. It does not affect the
largest banks in the system. And it would reduce the overall
high quality liquid assets in the system by 2 to 2-1/2 percent.
There is still trillions of dollars more liquidity in the
system than there was before the crisis. We have added $3
trillion of liquidity. Multiples of liquidity that existed
before the crisis. And these tailoring proposals, I think, have
a significant benefit in reducing compliance burden on less
complex and less systemically risky firms. But they do not
materially affect the resilience of the system.
Ms. Waters. Well, that is interesting.
Now, did you work with Governor Brainard to resolve her
concerns?
Mr. Quarles. Yes.
Ms. Waters. You just made a very strong argument here that
there is no significant reduction in capital based on what you
are doing.
So you had that conversation with Governor Brainard?
Mr. Quarles. Absolutely. And we have taken her comments
into account. I would be quite confident that she would say we
have a robust process.
Ms. Waters. As you know, I and 18 of my Democratic
colleagues wrote the Fed urging you not to weaken capital rules
for the globally systemically important banks. And since you
are saying that you are not doing that, will you commit to this
committee here today that you will not be reducing capital
levels at the global systemically important banks in any
significant way?
Mr. Quarles. So it is not our intention. Indeed, it is the
opposite of our intention, to affect the total loss-absorbing
capacity of the largest firms. Capital is an important part of
that, and there is a general framework that affects their
resiliency and their loss absorbancy. And I think that we
should not be looking to change that. Both Chairman Powell and
I have said a number of times we think it is just about right.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
In the Fed's Supervision and Regulation Report released
last week, it was troubling to see the report noted that there
are 795 pending supervisory actions against the 12 biggest
banks. And most of these supervisory actions relate to
shortcomings with the banks' governance and controls, including
the lack of compliance with laws and regulations. While the
report claims progress has been made since the number of
pending supervisory actions is down from about 1,000 in 2013,
nearly 800 pending supervisory actions is still a lot. That
averages out to 66 pending supervisory actions at each of these
mega banks.
Does this data suggest that mega banks are too large to
manage? Why or why not?
Mr. Quarles. So I think that if you look at that
information in context over the--since the financial crisis,
there has been very material progress in the banks on their
capital and liquidity, which is exactly what we would have
wanted them to focus on in the first instance. And there has
been a dramatic improvement in that.
Now that that is in a much better place, they are turning
their resources to addressing questions of governance. And we
have seen those MRAs and MRIAs about governance begin to come
down. I think we would expect to see them continue to come down
at a strong clip given that their resources can now be focused
principally on those.
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. McHenry, Vice Chairman of the committee.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Vice Chair Quarles. Thank you for
being here.
So I just want to tick through a couple of these questions
about your speech in particular.
So removing the leverage ratio from the stress test capital
requirements, is that more or less regulation or just different
regulation?
Mr. Quarles. So I would not view that as a--in any way, as
a weakening of regulation. I think that is an appropriate
alignment of regulation.
Mr. McHenry. In light of the fact that we are so far
distant from the financial crisis, and you have economic data
to indicate you can make that change?
Mr. Quarles. Yes. I think that--I think that conceptually
there is a difference between--the stress test is a very--is a
firm specific risk-based test. The leverage ratio is intended
to be nonrisk sensitive and to serve as a backstop. And so when
you put that into the stress test, you are really confusing the
two things.
Mr. McHenry. Which, basically, admits that your stress test
isn't as good as you think it is in many respects.
Mr. Quarles. It is not doing what it was designed to do if
you have a post stress--
Mr. McHenry. So two more things, just very quickly.
Greater transparency for the stress test process, is that
more or less regulation?
Mr. Quarles. That is just more transparency.
Mr. McHenry. OK. More transparency.
And the end game of the public shaming for those that pass
or fail stress tests and this public ingredient, is that more
or less or just different regulation?
Mr. Quarles. I think that is refinement. It is not
relaxation.
Mr. McHenry. So I appreciate your speech. And I think
outlining the updates that you are seeking to make post-crisis
and now with Dodd-Frank as fully implemented as it is going to
be and having this economic data so you can actually shift and
make sure that the Fed is doing the right and appropriate thing
given the current market.
But one thing in particular. I noticed in your inaugural
report on supervision and regulation, a great deal of
discussion about the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) and anti-money
laundering (AML) and the compliance and data and information
technology pieces of that, which I find really interesting. Can
you walk us through the basic challenges banks are facing
regarding technology, and particularly partnering with
technology companies.
Mr. Quarles. Well, I think there are both challenges and
opportunities. Particularly in this area of Bank Secrecy Act
and anti-money laundering compliance, there are a lot of
opportunities for banks to use machine learning and big data
management that did not exist at the time that our current
regulatory framework was put into place that would be of
benefit to us as the government, to law enforcement. Would be
more efficient use of bank resources.
So I am very supportive of efforts to help the banks do
that, which I think they are quite willing to do.
Mr. McHenry. So, in admission that banks are struggling to
manage data and IT risk as well as this BSA/AML compliance, why
not encourage banks to actually partner with technology
companies to get ahead of the curve? Why not the Fed lean in on
encouraging that so that we can have banks keep pace with the
rest of the technology sector?
Mr. Quarles. Well, that is an interesting thought. We
certainly are trying not to be a disincentive to business
decisions that banks might make in that respect. We do want to
be sure that where there are those partnerships that we, as
regulators and all those responsible for the system, understand
what risk there might be in those partnerships. But I don't
think there is any reason for us to stand in the way of those
partnerships.
Interesting question of whether we should encourage them as
to how we ought to effect those business decisions of the
firms. But certainly, at the very least, we should not
discourage them.
Mr. McHenry. Right. But there is a mixed message here.
So you have Governor Brainard discouraging banks and
partnering with innovation companies and the admission that
with AI and the technology sector moving dramatically forward.
And this dissident piece of information, or dissident voices in
the Fed around technology, it seems like, for banks, it is
damned if you do, damned if you don't, right? That the Fed will
take a harsh look at new technology.
But their consumers, my constituents, their customers are
desirous of the best technology and that technology ensuring
these institutions are safe and sound. So I think you have to
do better in encouraging the use of technology, or we are going
to have a riskier banking sector.
I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Mrs.
Maloney, Ranking Member on our Capital Markets Subcommittee.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters. And thank you, Vice Chairman Randal Quarles, for your
public service.
Very painful to many of us is the memory of a financial
crisis where we lost $13 trillion of household wealth, 9
million jobs, millions of homes, and unemployment was at 10
percent. And I am proud of the way that we bounded back as a
country. Our economy is getting stronger every day. Bank
profits are now higher than they have ever been, $173 billion,
I believe the highest ever.
So we bounded back. And it is good that the banks are
working and that the economy is humming. But I am very
concerned about any effort to roll back the stress test that,
in many ways, has guaranteed this financial success in safety
and soundness in our banking system.
So my first question is, in the Fed's recent tailoring
proposal, the Fed proposed to give regulatory relief to banks
that are over $250 billion in assets, the so-called Category 3
banks. And one of the main ways the Fed is proposing to give
these banks relief is by allowing them to hold less liquidity
by scaling back two liquidity rules for the Category 3 banks.
So I am concerned about this. If the system is working, why do
we want to deregulate?
First, what evidence do you have that Category 3 banks are
currently holding too much liquidity? And second, seeing as one
of the liquidity rules that the Fed is proposing to scale back
has not even been finalized yet, how did you conclude that a
regulation that hasn't even been implemented was already too
burdensome for the banks for Category 3?
Mr. Quarles. So to begin, the first point, I guess I would
make in response to that question, is that we have, in thinking
about our tailoring proposals for banks of any size and any
level of complexity, had, as a first principle, that we do not
want to affect the resiliency of the system. We are not seeking
to relax or impair the resiliency of the system, including
overall liquidity.
And the quantitative consequence of our liquidity proposals
is, as I had said to Ranking Member Waters, our expectation is
that, depending on where we finally calibrate that liquidity
tailoring, it would be between 2 and 2-1/2 percent of the
overall liquidity in the system.
So I don't think that we have, again, in any material way
effected that liquidity. There has been a huge increase in
liquidity in the system since before the crises. Trillions of
dollars. This is a small reduction.
But I do think that tailoring is something that applies
across the continuum of banks. The legislation requires us now
to tailor. The language in Section 1652a was changed from we
may tailor to we shall tailor.
And in thinking about appropriate tailoring, I do think
that liquidity for that category of banks is somewhere we could
do it. And we saw that we could do it in a way that would be a
reduction of burden and implementation of congressional intent
but not an impairment of resiliency of the system.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, in your speech last Friday, you said
that you wanted to remove the so-called stress leverage buffer
from the Fed's proposed overhaul of the stress test regime. But
the leverage buffer was intended to replace the requirement for
banks to meet a minimum leverage ratio even in a period of
stress. And so my question is: By removing the leverage buffer,
wouldn't you be saying that banks are--no longer have to meet
any leverage environment in the stress test?
Mr. Quarles. Well, banks would still be subject to a
leverage requirement, so I may have--I certainly don't want to
have confused that issue.
Mrs. Maloney. But not in the stress test. I am talking
about the stress test.
Mr. Quarles. That's right, because--
Mrs. Maloney. In the stress steps there would still be a
leverage requirement?
Mr. Quarles. No, because the stress test is one thing, and
a leverage requirement is another. The leverage requirement is
designed to be a backstop to our risk-based measures.
Mrs. Maloney. Right. So why take the backstop out?
Mr. Quarles. But we are not. So the backstop would remain.
The leverage ratio would still be there as a backstop. It is
just that in the risk stress test, the risk measures would be
risk measures and the leverage measures would be leverage
measures.
Mrs. Maloney. I have to say that I find that troubling. The
leverage ratio has been the binding capital requirement for all
of our largest banks in the past two stress tests. So removing
this leverage buffer could significantly weaken the stress
test, in my view, and I am opposed to it.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Luetkemeyer, Chairman of our Financial Institutions
Subcommittee.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Vice Chairman Quarles, again, thank you for being here.
As you know, this committee passed a bill introduced by Mr.
Lucas to require financial regulators to recognize the
exposure-reducing nature of client margin for clear
derivatives. The Fed's SA-CCAR proposal recognizes that client
margin for clear derivatives reduces the bank's exposure, yet
the Federal Reserve chose to propose a rule without recognition
of that fact.
This is a priority for me and for other Members of this
committee. And I hope you will work on this issue. I think
that, if I am not mistaken, Mr. Lucas has some questions with
regard to that, so I won't go into detail on it. But this is a
concern I just want to put on your radar.
My first question deals with their inter-affiliate margin
requirements. This a conversation we had recently. And I
appreciate you taking my call and discussing it with me.
As you know, I am a firm believer in capital requirements.
But I think it is important those requirements make sense and
don't necessarily tie up capital. We have a system in place
that requires firms to post margin multiple times on the same
transaction. The amount of unnecessary locked-up capital is
even more concerning when you consider that U.S. financial
institutions are isolated.
European and Asian regulators do not similarly propose
initial margin, as you well know. Nor does the CFTC (Commodity
Futures Trading Commission) for non-bank entities. To that
extent, I think it is important that you look at this issue.
And along that line, I guess the question is, do you believe
this initial margin is still warranted? Would you agree that
the policy needs to be revisited? And would you commit to
making this a regulatory priority in reducing or eliminating
inter-affiliate initial margin?
Mr. Quarles. So as we have discussed, and as you note, we
are isolated in doing this. No other country has that treatment
of inter-affiliate margin. The CFTC doesn't have that
treatment. I do think that it is something that we have to look
at closely. We are still having discussions internally at the
Federal Reserve. But for me it is a priority to address that
question, and I personally share your view.
The Fed, as you know, has rules, Section 23 of the Federal
Reserve Act and Regulation W that implements that deal with
affiliate transactions and protecting against exposures that
are created by affiliate transactions. And it may be--may well
be possible that that which has existed for decades, that
framework, may be entirely satisfactory and allow us to move
into compliance with the rest of the world.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. One of the reasons for the question, as
you know, is to get you on record here so we can begin the
discussion so we can continue to follow up on it. And we
appreciate your response.
Thank you very much.
With regards to CECL (current expected credit loss), which
is, to me--I am extremely concerned about it. This rule
fundamentally changes accounting practice of banks, especially
small banks. And I think we had--that can have, I think,
serious consequences.
We have roughly 5,200 banks altogether, and there is
roughly probably over 5,000 of them that are smaller banks.
Most of those probably are privately owned, not publicly owned.
And yet this is what this standard is supposed to be focusing
on is investment--the ability of investors to better see a
picture of the financial institution's standing, which really
makes no sense when you have a bank that is privately held.
This--again, I just can't get my head wrapped around it. So
I guess my question to you is seeing the impact on most of our
banks, would be, I think, a negative, what is your concern with
it? Do you have any concerns with it? Where do you think we
need to go with this? Are you willing to work with us? Or do
you think it is a great thing? And I want to move on.
Mr. Quarles. Well, I am always in favor of measures that
make more transparent the position of any financial
institution. But I do agree with you that the implications of
CECL for small firms, for large firms are not currently deeply
understood. And we need to have time to understand them.
So we have proposed a phased-in implementation of CECL in
how that affects--how that works with our regulatory capital
regime. And we think that will give us time to see how it is
working in operation before it gets plugged into the regulatory
capital regime--allow us to see whether there are any changes.
I don't know that there are. Continue to work with you and the
committee on questions of what CECL implementation means.
For the larger firms, I think that--it is a little
interesting. Those firms that are affected by the stress test,
CECL could actually be a wash, because to the extent it means a
larger reserve at the outset of the period of stress, then you
will chew through that reserve before you chew through other
things in the stress test, and it can be a one-to-one offset.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I see some ramifications of this that,
here we have increased costs for doing business for banks. And
when they increase costs, they have one of two things that they
do. Either they pass those costs along to the consumer, or they
do away with certain services that cost them this extra money,
as we have seen with small-dollar lending, as we have seen with
home mortgages.
So are we going to restrict the ability of banks to offer
services? When that happens, you are talking about hurting the
CRA regulation, our compliance.
And so to me it has lots and lots of ramifications. I am
very concerned about it, and we are certainly going to follow
up.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Quarles. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Vice Chairman Quarles, when you last came here before this
committee in April, you and I spoke about the Community
Reinvestment Act. During our conversation, you told me that you
expect there to be a joint rulemaking between the OCC, the Fed,
and the FDIC to modernize the CRA.
When the OCC released its ANPR (advanced notice of proposed
rulemaking) in August, the Fed and the FDIC choose not to sign
on. Why was there not a joint rulemaking like you originally
anticipated? And what can you tell us about the Fed's decision
not to sign on?
Mr. Quarles. Well, actually, I do still expect there to be
a joint rulemaking. The OCC has come out with an advanced
notice of proposed rulemaking, a series of questions. And both
the Fed and the FDIC--well, I guess I shouldn't speak for the
FDIC. But we did participate in the crafting of that ANPR, and
we certainly will work with the OCC in developing an NPR post
that is--
Ms. Velazquez. And that includes FDIC?
Mr. Quarles. Well, I can't speak for the FDIC. But we are
working together on it. We have been, and so I expect that to
continue.
It has been a joint process. The OCC did go out singly with
its ANPR, but we are encouraging people to comment on the ANPR.
We are receiving comments, although we haven't signed on to the
ANPR, people who are commenting on the OCC's ANPR are sending
in those comments to us effectively. And we will work together
on further CRA work with the OCC.
Ms. Velazquez. Would that mean that you will not release
your own proposal? It will be a joint rulemaking?
Mr. Quarles. That is my expectation currently, yes. We are
all expecting that that would be a joint rulemaking.
Ms. Velazquez. In public remarks made earlier this year,
Comptroller Otting stated that the OCC will be working with the
FDIC and the Fed to update and improve the BSA/AML's rules and
processes.
What is the current state of that joint effort, and what
are the prospects for reform?
Mr. Quarles. Well, I think the prospects for reform are
good. Again, we are working together. The banking agencies
together with Treasury and FinCEN have a very active process in
reviewing both the banking agencies' examination and
enforcement practices with respect to BSA/AML as well as
Treasury and FinCEN's rulemaking on BSA/AML. And I think we
will see some material benefit out of that.
Ms. Velazquez. Sure.
Going back to your exchange with Congressman McHenry, I
would like to ask you, based on the report, the Fed's
Supervision and Regulation Report on those areas where it
discusses witnesses such as governance and controls, including
BSA/AML programs internal audit functions, IT risk management,
and cybersecurity, what can you tell us about the results of
that study? And do you find them disturbing?
Mr. Quarles. Well, as I indicated, there is a lot to be
done that the banks still need to do with respect to risk
management and some of these governance and controls issues.
But I don't find--I don't find it surprising that there is
still much to be done. The banks are making progress on
addressing our supervisory expectations in those areas. They
did devote, appropriately and with our encouragement, the most
resources initially to capital and liquidity ensuring that
those foundational aspects were taken care of to resolution
issues, enormous amounts of resources devoted to resolution.
So now that we move into these governance matters, we are
seeing those come down. We are obviously not complacent about
it. We are very engaged with the banks on it. But it is not as
though there is foot dragging or impossible management problems
at these firms at all, it is a question of prioritization and
things moving about, I think as we all would have expected.
Ms. Velazquez. Do you think that better coordination
between foreign banks and the Fed is needed?
Mr. Quarles. We have pretty good--I would say that our--
again, our supervision of foreign banks is not deficient. We
have good cooperation with their home country supervisors,
which is important in understanding their overall positions.
The foreign banks, because we only recently imposed the so-
called intermediate holding company requirement, which requires
them to organize their non-banking activities in a way that
applies many of these Fed rules, that is fairly recent. And so
they haven't had as much experience as the domestic banks, but
I think they are getting there.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Huizenga, Chairman of our Capital Markets Subcommittee.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Chair Quarles,
thank you. I appreciate you being here.
I want to touch on two things: Volcker Rule and then
covered funds.
Needless to say, many people believe that the Volcker Rule
was a solution in search of a problem and that the
implementation of it--I have deep concerns about how the
implementation of the rule has been affecting U.S. financial
institutions and ultimately liquidity in the market. We have
seen it--definitely have seen a decline in the market liquidity
while not really experiencing actual market stability that was
promised, right?
So earlier this year, as part of 2155, the banking
regulatory relief bill that was passed and signed into law, a
provision was included to relieve banks under $10 billion in
total assets from having to comply with the Volcker Rule, which
I think was absolutely on target. And even though the Volcker
Rule is part of the Bank Holding Company Act, it also applies
to industrial banks. And that is where I am concerned, because
it is another type of banking charter that has its own
statutory framework and a separate set of rules.
But these industrial banks are used by a variety of
different companies, and where it is actually oftentimes a
small part of it. Michigan, we have an energy company that has
a small ILC (industrial loan company). It is the larger
companies that might have this as a portion of what they do.
And the overall consolidation of the industry, really, I think
has made these even more important.
So I am aware that some of these banks have not been able
to take advantage of the relief that we have provided, because
under a total consolidated asset test, the parent companies
exceed the thresholds themselves.
So the intent of making sure that these smaller industrial
banks have the same relief as community banks and these other
institutions below $10 billion hasn't actually come into
effect. So you are now burdening these companies with still
having to comply with Volcker.
So I am curious, what are your plans to address this? Do
you think--first of all, do you think this makes sense? Do you
see that there is a problem there? And then what are we going
to be doing to change that? And I just want to encourage you to
do so, but I would like to have some concrete steps on how that
might happen.
Mr. Quarles. Sure. I appreciate that.
So I do think that is an issue. What you have described is
an issue. We are working through how to address it given the
restrictions of the law and the terms of the law. But I do
think that it is something that--it is an anomaly. Related to
that, though, are questions of control. And one of the--so
there is the question of the application of the Volcker Rule to
these ILCs, but there are also questions of interpretations of
control around the ILCs. I have heard that from some people who
are concerned about this issue. And we do have a separate
project that is underway at the Federal Reserve to rationalize
and make more transparent some of these control rules. I think
the two together--I don't know what the answer is as we talk
about here, but I think we should continue to talk about it.
And we are thinking about this question in both of those
contexts.
Mr. Huizenga. And do you believe that you currently are
able to address this? Or do we need to address this
legislatively for clarity?
Mr. Quarles. I don't know the answer to that question
today, but I'll get back to you with--
Mr. Huizenga. Let's make sure we continue to work on that.
And real quickly in the last minute here. Covered funds.
Working together Chairman Hensarling and Subcommittee Chairman
Luetkemeyer and I wrote a letter to--including to Chair Powell,
the various regulators outlining our concerns with that. And
without objection, Mr. Chair, I would like submit that letter
to the record.
Chairman Hensarling. Without objection.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you to my friend from Colorado. You may
be jumping the gun a little bit, but the--I am eating into my
own time here.
So while the--we stated--or, I am sorry, Chairman Powell,
when he was before the committee, stated that the banks'
engagement in covered funds does not pose safety and soundness
concerns and that our banks are able to invest in any number of
companies--both credit and equity investments via their balance
sheets.
Can you explain to me the rationale that would exist for
allowing banks to make an investment on their balance sheet
while preventing it in a fund structure. And wouldn't doing it
through a fund structure make the investment even safer because
the investment has more investors than just one bank alone?
Mr. Quarles. No. I think that is a very sensible way to
think about it. It would be, and we have in our Volcker Rule
proposal, as you know, we have requested questions, asked for
comments on how to treat covered funds, and that is an
important part of what the next step will be.
Mr. Huizenga. Hopefully we have your commitment you are
going to continue to work on the covered funds and address
this. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. I wonder if we could put up the charts that we
have arranged. Yes, Mr. Quarles, behind you are going to be two
charts during the next 5 minutes. I have a friend who I don't
take theological advice from very often who claims that there
is a special place in hell for those who used statistics that
are not inflation adjusted. The Fed has now hit its 2-percent
inflation target, and this chart shows that if you use the
unadjusted phony statistics, you can show that, from the first
quarter of this Administration, we have seen an increase in
wages for those with high school degrees or diplomas. But if
you inflation adjust the statistics and use the real numbers,
the real wage for high school graduates has slightly declined
over this Administration. We will also see a chart later about
our trade deficit with China, which has increased over the last
7 months.
Now for some bipartisan questions.
In recent years, there has been a growing number of
cybercriminals targeting real estate transactions using wire
fraud to steal home buyers' down payments. Cybercriminals do
this by hacking into the email accounts of home buyers, real
estate agents, lenders, et cetera, and send false wire
instructions to home buyers to steal their downpayment. Under
these spoofing email cybercrimes, consumers have been scammed
out of about $12 billion since 2013, and the FBI says that
these scams are up sharply.
Mr. Quarles, you may know that fraud in real estate
transactions is a growing problem, and much of it is done
through wire transfers. These scams are effective because there
is no requirement that the name of the individual intended to
receive a wire transfer actually matches the name on the
account that the funds are deposited into. Has the Federal
Reserve considered requiring banks and other financial
institutions to apply payee matching when initiating a wire
transfer?
Mr. Quarles. So we have not implemented that, but we are
considering that. We have a number of active efforts within the
payment system group at the Fed to address questions related to
wire transfer.
Mr. Sherman. I hope you would go back and light a fire
under them because this is important.
Mr. Quarles. Absolutely.
Mr. Sherman. We have provided in legislation significant
relief to small community banks, but for that to work, you have
to define the term, ``tangible equity capital.'' When are you
going to provide a definition?
Mr. Quarles. Soon.
Mr. Sherman. Very soon would be the better answer.
Mr. Quarles. So we are working on that as part of our
implementation.
Mr. Sherman. OK. Another similar question, Congress
provided the Federal Reserve with clear instructions to remove
regional banks from the enhanced prudential standards unless
they designated that bank as systemically risky. For that to
work you need to address capital and liquidity rules in a
comprehensive manner. You have provided clear liquidity rules
for the large banks. When will you propose new capital rules
for regional lenders?
Mr. Quarles. For the smaller banks, we have. Our proposal--
Mr. Sherman. But my focus here is on the regional banks.
Mr. Quarles. And for the whole continuum, our tailoring
proposal at the end of October was intended at least--and so,
if it is deficient, please let us know--but it was intended to
create a framework, if we will, for all banks as to when
enhanced prudential standards would apply to them.
Mr. Sherman. In the questions for the record, I will detail
the areas that still need to be fleshed out for these
regulations to be effective.
Mr. Quarles. I appreciate that.
Mr. Sherman. And, finally, I think you need to codify the
activities-based approach to nonbank SIFI (systemically
important financial institution) designations, and I wonder
whether that is on track.
Mr. Quarles. So the FSOC (Financial Stability Oversight
Council) is very much engaged in a pretty robust process in
thinking about how to implement an activities-based approach.
Mr. Sherman. Do you think they will get there soon?
Mr. Quarles. I do, yes. I both think they will get there
soon and that the process will be well done. It is a tricky
thing to do, but I think that it will be done well.
Mr. Sherman. So summarize your answers to my questions with
the word ``soon.''
Mr. Quarles. Soon.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman is expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Barr, Chairman of our Monetary Policy and Trade Subcommittee.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Governor Quarles, for returning to the
committee as required by the Dodd-Frank law, and I appreciate
your work, and I appreciate your commitment to reviewing and
correcting some of these perhaps well-intentioned regulations
but obviously overly burdensome regulations that are making it
more expensive for Americans to access the capital they need to
continue to grow our economy. There was no doubt that, in the
wake of the financial crisis, some of these financial rules
were needed to change, but in some instances, Congress and the
Federal Reserve overcorrected, as you have acknowledged. Your
efforts and those of others at the Federal Reserve fixing these
problems are to be applauded, and we appreciate that work. I do
want to focus on the October 31 tailoring proposal. And in
particular one of the areas where we saw maybe an
overcorrection was the impact that these new post-Dodd-Frank
regulations were having on small business lending by banks. We
have seen that, because of the strict capital liquidity
requirements that were put into place, we have seen a pretty
significant decline in small business lending. C&I lending
maybe remained healthy, but what we saw was that loans less
than a million dollars dropped from 2-1/2 percent of GDP in
2001 to 1.7 percent in 2017, and such loans make up a smaller
proportion of total bank assets, dropping from 4 percent in
2001 to 2.1 percent in 2016.
So, given that small business formation and access--small
business access to capital is really critical, can you tell us
what you anticipate the new proposals, the impact of the new
proposals, tailoring, could have on banks' capacity for small
business lending?
Mr. Quarles. So I can't quantify that for you today, but we
would be happy to try to do that so you have some
quantification. I think that it is unarguable, however, that
small business lending, a particular source of small business
lending comes from smaller and regional banks and that, to the
extent that we have subjected those institutions to levels of
regulation that are more appropriate for much larger
institutions, you are going to have a disproportionate effect
on small business lending, and so our proposal should address
that.
Mr. Barr. Is your tailoring proposal enough to revive small
business lending back to levels that we saw previously?
Mr. Quarles. There are a number of reasons for the decline
in small business lending or the effects on small business
lending, so I wouldn't want to say that these tailoring
proposals--they will have an effect. Will they be enough to
completely address the issue? I wouldn't want to say here
today.
Mr. Barr. Let me move on to the absence in the tailoring
proposal to address foreign banking organizations. As you know,
international banks represent approximately 20 percent of
banking assets and one third of all loans to businesses in the
United States. Obviously, they contribute in major ways to U.S.
economic growth. International banks comprise two of the top
three commercial agricultural lenders in the United States and
as the former acting comptroller of the currency noted,
international banks, and I am quoting here, are also an
important potential source of stability to our economy. In
times of financial stress in the United States, the global
operations of international banks may well be healthy and
stable.
As you know, in recent years, international banks have been
subjected to duplicative and overlapping regulations. You
responded to a letter to several Members of Congress. Recently,
in a letter dated October 26, you noted that the Board
recognizes the important role of FBOs in the U.S. financial
sector. You said that the Board's enhanced prudential standards
generally treat an intermediate holding company of a foreign
banking organization similarly. But is that the case and are
you all in your proposal to level the playing field--tell us a
little bit more about your intentions in that regard because we
want to be able to, number one, facilitate that foreign direct
investment and not disadvantage the U.S. in very competitive
global marketplace.
Mr. Quarles. So I completely agree with all of the points
you made about the importance of foreign banks to our domestic
economy, and that has been true for decades, and it is,
therefore, very much in our interest to ensure that their
participation is facilitated.
We--but they are different cats, so they aren't identical
to domestic banks, and we are going to go through a process
where we consider how to ensure we have a level playing field
but that takes account of their differences.
Mr. Barr. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I would like to submit for the record a letter that
I sent with a number of my Congressional Black Caucus
colleagues, as well as a letter from Senator Van Hollen, urging
the Fed to move quickly on its faster payment initiative.
Chairman Hensarling. Without objection.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you.
Mr. Vice Chairman, the Federal Reserve recently solicited
comments on its proper role in implementing a faster payment
system in the United States. Given the potential consumer
benefits, I urge the Fed move more quickly on this initiative,
but I am also sympathetic though to some concerns that some of
the consumer groups and advocates brought to my attention who
argue that faster payments may also mean faster fraud,
especially for vulnerable individuals like our seniors. So my
question to you is, from a supervisory standpoint, what do you
believe the Fed's proper role will be in preventing fraud
within a faster payments regime?
Mr. Quarles. So, obviously, it is up to the Federal Reserve
to enforce the antifraud laws on those institutions that we
supervise, that we have the legal authority to do that for. We
have been very active in doing that and will continue to do so,
whether those payments are being affected through the
traditional payment system or through a new technologically
advanced payment system.
Mr. Meeks. Let me also, one of the issues that--I want to
move with the time that I have. The OCC has issued an ANPR on
modernizing CRA, and the agency solicited opinions on the
concept of a more metric-based system for CRA ratings. And
while consistency in CRA ratings is important, there are
important qualitative factors that CRA examiners consider that
cannot fully be measured by a formula ratio. Would you concur
with that?
Mr. Quarles. I think those are important considerations.
Mr. Meeks. So, in fairly assessing the qualitative factors
required at a certain level of an examiner's discretion, a
purely metric-based CRA rating system, in fact, can tie the
hands of examiners. Are you concerned with the CRA's proposals
that are overly prescriptive and can limit examiner discretion
when it comes to assessing the innovativeness and
responsiveness of CRA lending?
Mr. Quarles. So I do think we need to think carefully about
how to ensure that we have uniform treatment as well as how to
ensure that we have a real reinvigoration of the CRA. My
concern with respect to the current administration of the CRA
is, as I think I said in my last appearance here, it has become
a little ossified and formulaic. And communities themselves
will benefit if we can be more creative about that.
At the same time, we do also want to ensure that we have
regulatory measures that treat similar banks similarly and that
we have a framework that does that.
Mr. Meeks. And, last, Mr. Vice Chair, we have been working
very closely because we know I am seeing a lot of banking
deserts coming up, and the cure to that is to make sure we can
keep small and community banks in communities and make sure
that they are able to afford it. And in my conversations with a
few of them, BSA becomes very costly, and I am concerned,
therefore, about the impact that these costs may have on these
banks and credit unions also, which have higher compliance
costs relative to their larger competitors, and I know that the
Fed has sent some recent guidance on how the banks can share
BSA, but to a lot, it is still not clear. Do you think the Fed
can do more to--as far as a guide to the institutions? Because
they are nervous. They want to make sure it is clear to them,
especially the smaller banks with less exposure on how to
lawfully share a BSA office.
Mr. Quarles. So we do intend having taken that joint action
with the other regulators and allowing sharing of resources
with suspected BSA/AML, we will be engaged with our supervisors
and with the banks to ensure that they understand what it is
that they can do, but we are very supportive of efforts to both
take advantage of the cost reductions that come from using new
technologies and reducing the costs in general of effective
BSA/AML compliance.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Rothfus.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Vice Chairman Quarles, one of the key provisions in S. 2155
that was intended to help spur economic growth is the Home
Owners Loan Act (HOLA) flexibility provision, Section 206, that
originated with legislation I introduced. That section gives
institutions chartered under HOLA greater flexibility in
meeting the changing borrowing needs of the communities that
they serve. I want to commend Comptroller Otting and his staff
for moving quickly on regulations to implement this provision
with a proposed rule already published and comments due next
week. I also understand that the Federal Reserve is considering
what issues, if any, may exist when institutions that are
organized as savings and loan holding companies exercise the
provisions under Section 206. I would hope that both the OCC
and the Fed would adhere as closely as possible to the
congressional intent to provide meaningful flexibility to HOLA-
chartered institutions, including S&L holding companies, while
avoiding unnecessary costs or legal complications that would
impede the provision of needed services to their communities.
To that end, I would urge the staff at the Federal Reserve to
work closely with the OCC staff to ensure a coordinated
approach that provides the flexibility intended by the
statutory provision. Can you share any detail on the issues the
Board is reviewing and how you might address them?
Mr. Quarles. Well, we are working closely with the OCC on
that question. We haven't come to detailed views as to how we
will implement that provision, but we certainly intend to hew
to the congressional intent.
Mr. Rothfus. I appreciate that and look forward to
following up. In your testimony, you highlighted the importance
of improving regulatory inefficiency. You also wrote that,
quote, ``supervisory resources are not limitless, and
supervision is not costless either to the public or to
supervised institutions.'' I certainly agree with this view.
That is why I introduced the legislation, H.R. 5059 with
Representative Beatty, to address inefficiencies in the
supervision of insurance savings and loan holding companies
(ISLHCs). As you may know, this bill passed the House of
Representatives by a voice vote earlier this year.
Unfortunately, the regulatory inefficiency continues to drive
ISLHCs out of business of banking. Though your support on Fed
supervision and regulation claims that the Fed has worked
closely with departments of insurance and the National
Association of Insurance Commissioners to tailor supervision of
ISLHCs, I have not seen much evidence of this. Are you
concerned that ISLHCs continue to debank?
Mr. Quarles. It certainly isn't the objective of our
supervision to have that effect. There is no reason that it
should, and we need to continue to work at the Fed to ensure
that our, again, as part of our general tailoring that our
supervisory engagement with these firms is appropriate to the
actual size--
Mr. Rothfus. Are there any specific actions that can be
taken to that end to ensure that these institutions aren't
debanking?
Mr. Quarles. Other than ensuring again that our supervisory
engagement is appropriate, I don't think that there are
specific changes, but I am aware of issues that we have had
that we are trying to address. They aren't regulatory or
quantitative. They are more in the nature of qualitative, and
we are trying to address them.
Mr. Rothfus. I appreciate your awareness of the issue and
look forward to following up.
S. 2155 contains Section 402(b) the provision that exempted
cash deposits placed at central banks by custody banks from the
supplemental leverage ratio. The provision was not only part of
S. 2155 but also passed the Financial Services Committee as
H.R. 2121, the Pension Endowment and Mutual Fund Access to
Banking Act, by unanimous vote. Given the strong support for
this provision, can you give us an update on when Section
402(b) will be implemented?
Mr. Quarles. An exact date I can't give you, but we do
expect that to be soon.
Mr. Rothfus. Any update on the Federal Reserve Board's
enhanced supplemental leverage ratio proposal and how that
proposal would work with section 402(b)?
Mr. Quarles. So what we need to do in thinking about our
proposal with respect to the enhanced supplemental leverage
ratio is to ensure that if we implement that, that there isn't
double counting. So there is a statutory provision that affects
some firms. Our provision would have affected all firms. If we
simply implement that without any adjustment, then you would
have some double counting for the firms that are covered by the
congressional action. That would not be our intention. That is
also a little tricky to figure out. My expectation would be
that we will first implement the clear congressional
instruction and then work on refining ours to address that
double counting issue.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you.
I appreciate that, and I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts,
Mr. Lynch.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Vice
Chairman. Let me follow up on the gentleman from Pennsylvania's
question there regarding the bill we passed recently. Our
version was 2121. The Senate bill was 2155. And the idea was
that we would reduce the--we would count--we would exempt
deposits made by custodial banks when they park their money at
the Fed, which you got 60 votes in this committee, which is
highly unusual, and we are still waiting for that to happen. So
I just want to register my support for Mr. Rothfus' comments
and urge you to be diligent in making sure that that happens.
Mr. Quarles. So I appreciate that, and while I would only
offer the--behind my ``soon'' with respect to implementation
that on the tailoring proposal that was the heart of EGRRCPA, I
do think that our implementing--our proposal to implement that
was done with a speed that was almost unprecedented in the
history of the Fed. So ``soon'' is not a way of putting things
off but of generally saying I do think that will be implemented
soon.
Mr. Lynch. All right. Fair enough. Let me ask you, do you
think there are any nonbank systemically important financial
institutions in the country?
Let me give you a for-instance. OK. So, for instance,
Prudential, largest insurance company in the United States,
approaching a trillion dollars in assets, FSOC recently
dedesignated them as a SIFI, and yet when you look at
Prudential, they hadn't undertaken any large-scale
restructuring since their SIFI designation. In fact, they got
considerably larger. I think they have grown 17 percent in the
last 5 years. And in its dedesignation, FSOC found that
Prudential had not significantly increased its total market
exposure investment--I am sorry, did not significantly decrease
its total market exposure. They didn't decrease their
investment portfolio or market share, and they didn't address
issues of resolvability in case something went wrong. And yet
they were dedesignated. And I am just curious what is the
thinking there?
Mr. Quarles. Well--
Mr. Lynch. Let me ask you, what I see is--because
Prudential did little to nothing except get bigger and more
complicated, more complex, but FSOC changed. FSOC changed, the
people on FSOC changed, and I think that is the difference
here. That is the difference, and that is not good for America.
That is not good for the United States' economic system, and
you can tell me why I am wrong, if you will.
Mr. Quarles. So, one of the principles that we have been
talking about here is that it is not merely size, but that
there are a variety of other factors that need to be taken into
account in determining the systemic--
Mr. Lynch. Let me just say that Fortune magazine says that
Prudential Insurance Company is changing the world. They are
interconnected. They are complex. They are huge, like I say,
approaching a trillion dollars in assets. And if they are not a
systemically important financial institution--nonbank, but they
certainly have the exposure, the market share, all the things
that made us designate it to begin with, and, not unlike--well,
not unlike AIG, although AIG was making some bad bets, but they
are still colossal, and I just--it just--
Mr. Quarles. They are big, but size alone does not
determine systemic importance. It was a very careful decision.
I was actually very pleased with the precision and depth of the
analysis that went into the decision to dedesignate Prudential.
As I had indicated earlier, I am, with the work that is being
done on thinking about how we could look at activities that
would cut across all firms--because it certainly is the case
that nonbanking firms can be engaged in activities that have
systemic consequence, we need to have a good framework for
understanding when that would be and how we would--
Mr. Lynch. Let me just reclaim a little bit of time I have
left. The two-step analysis is that we look at the nature,
scope, size, scale, concentration, interconnectedness on mix of
activities of the nonbank financial company that might pose a
threat to the financial stability of the United States, and
none of that analysis that you came up with at all addressed
the first question and nobody--we put a two-step procedure, and
FSOC never addressed the second step that Congress laid out
there.
I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr.
Lucas.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Vice Chair Quarles, I
am curious as to the Fed's progress on the mortgage servicing
rights (MSRs) rulemaking. Last year, regulators passed a
proposed rule that allowed banks to keep a greater portion of
the MSRs under Basel III, but it seems the rule was placed on
the back burner during the Senate 2155 debate. I also hear from
my constituent banks there may be more relief coming in the
rule. I would like to be able to tell my constituents that help
is on the way. Is it possible to release something close to
last year's proposed rule as an interim rule while you and the
OCC work on something more final? Barring that, I would love to
hear of when you think the rule will be completed.
Mr. Quarles. So you are actually--it is quite astute that
in our effort to ensure that we implemented 2155 promptly, that
a lot of resources went into that and some things stepped to
the side, but we are reengaging with all of those now, and I do
expect that we can make that rule final soon--not too distant
future.
Mr. Lucas. That would be good. My next question was
previewed earlier by Mr. Luetkemeyer, and I had mentioned to
you that I serve on both this committee and the Ag Committee,
and as you know, my many farmers and ranchers use derivative
markets to hedge their bets. When they need to access the
cleared market, they must post margin to a clearing member,
such as bank, and I have argued for a while that the capital
rules covering this margin lead to unhealthy derivatives
markets. Prudential regulators should offset such margin when
calculating the supplemental leverage ratio. And as you
mentioned earlier, this committee has approved a bill by Mr.
Luetkemeyer to legislatively mandate such an offset. This idea
has bipartisan support too, and the current Democratic CFTC
members have publicly identified capital rules as inhibiting a
healthy cleared market--derivatives market, I should say. And
even further, the Europeans have found a solution to this issue
that is expected by the end of the year. I was wondering or I
am wondering why the Fed's recent leverage ratio methodology
includes merely a question asking for input on the idea of an
offset for cleared margin client. It seems like the Fed has
enough evidence already to solve this on its own. Given
everything Congress, the CFTC, and the Europeans have stated
about the need for this policy, what information does the Fed
hope to receive that it does not already have?
Mr. Quarles. Well, I think that there is always more
information that we can gain, but I agree with you that my
personal view is that we ought to be open to changing our
treatment of initial margin in this way. We have rules at the
Fed, in particular 23(a) and (b) and regulation W that
implement them, that address some of these concerns, and we
ought to use those.
Mr. Lucas. Absolutely, and I would agree with you on the
need to be fully prepared for the next step, but it seems to me
like we are ready for that step to be taken care of.
One last note regarding margin rules: Mr. Luetkemeyer
mentioned inter-affiliate margin. I appreciated your response
to him about making this a priority for you, and I will note
further that not only is the United States isolated in
requiring this, but even other regulators here, like the CFTC,
don't require it. In fact, former Chairman, CFTC Chairman,
Massad identified initial margin as a very costly and not very
effective way to enhance risk management that was better meant
for lowering risk on trades between unaffiliated parties. I
admit to having my disagreements with the Chairman on many
things, but his opinion on this topic speaks volumes for me. So
please make it a priority going forward during your tenure
because I truly believe relief is needed.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, in the spirit of brevity, I
will yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Quarles, let me just ask you, as you noticed,
several Members of our committee are concerned about the Fed's
interpretation of what we passed in S. 2155, and you may have
addressed some of this along the way, but I want to get a
little clarity here regarding regional banks and what the
intent was so that we are clear. Most of the regional banks in
our country are in the South, where I come from, and so we want
to make sure that it is clear. And in that bill, we ask you to
remove them from that requirement of the enhanced prudential
standards, and you did this: You propose a tailored framework,
but you didn't remove the EPS designation, and you only clearly
address liquidity rules, but you did not do anything specific
about capital planning. And capital planning is extremely
important, but you failed to provide the clarity for our
regional bankers, and in that way, it could be interpreted you
really sidestepped the intent of the bill. So I want to give
you a chance to respond to that. And very quickly, let us know,
when can we expect the Fed to propose new capital rules for our
regional banks?
Mr. Quarles. So I appreciate the opportunity to clarify
that. It is our--I think that that will come as we make final
the tailoring proposal, which again, it is our intention to
move as promptly on that at making it final as we did in
proposing it. We are gathering comments right now on questions
such as how we ought to approach capital planning for the firms
that are in that category. We will evaluate those comments, but
it is also very, very much our intent to hew to the
congressional intent in making it final.
Mr. Scott. Absolutely. We certainly want you to clarify
that. Now let me go to your speech to the Brookings Institute
regarding the stress test. And our stress tests are very
important for the financial stability of our country. Now, what
you said in your speech was that your proposals will give the
banks more information about the test in advance, including,
and I quote here, you said ``additional details on the
supervisory stress test models and results of and portfolios of
hypothetical loans and associated loss ratios,'' and this
sounds very much like you are going to be giving away the exact
questions on the stress test ahead of time. Can you explain how
you are not doing that?
Mr. Quarles. So there are a couple of--I think there are
maybe three important things to say about that. One, it is
because we are a democracy and the due process requirements of
people who are subject to rules from the Fed, because of our
accountability our need to be clear to you and to the public
about what it is that we are doing, I think it is a very high
bar for us to be less than fully transparent around anything we
do, and that includes the stress test. I do think that that bar
is met in the case of some lack of transparency around the
stress test. I won't chew up your time by going into all the
details about that, but I think we can be much more transparent
than we have been in the past without giving away the test. We
are only talking about making clear broad categories of assets,
what our loss function is on broad categories of assets, not
every single, not with deep precision as to each category, but
broader categories of assets.
And, second, we are talking about the models as opposed to
the scenarios, and the scenario design, the differing scenarios
each year, is really what is more akin to the test that is
being provided, and the models are more akin to the textbook.
Mr. Scott. Well, let me ask you, but doesn't that mean that
if you are going to give out hypothetical portfolios ahead of
time, that they will be able to figure out exactly the
questions that are going to be on the test ahead of time?
Mr. Quarles. No, I don't think so because that will--the
scenarios each year that we test them against will differ from
year to year. So they won't really be able to respond to that.
Mr. Scott. Well, thank you. Give my regards to Chairman
Powell, won't you?
Mr. Quarles. I will do that.
Mr. Scott. He is doing a great job.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Colorado, Mr.
Tipton.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Vice Chairman Quarles, thank you for being here. I
come from rural Colorado.
Mr. Quarles. So do I.
Mr. Tipton. Great spot to be from. And a lot of our banks
are obviously community banks, small businesses that are there,
and as the Chairman has often noted, capitalism will not work
without capital. But our small banks have had a terrifically
difficult time being able to deal with a lot of the regulatory
burdens from the trickle down of Dodd-Frank. During your
testimony, you cited that the Federal Reserve is working
diligently with the OCC and the FDIC to be able to reduce some
of the reporting burdens coming down to our community bank
organizations while preserving the effective oversight. And
would you describe a little bit how these efforts to be able to
reduce the compliance burdens on our smaller institutions will
extend past banks to the benefit of the everyday consumers, the
people that I worry about in my district that are just trying
to be able to earn a living for the financial service products
that they need?
Mr. Quarles. Sure. Absolutely. The ability, particularly of
smaller banks, to provide credit to small businesses--and in
rural areas, we know that small banks have a particular role in
doing that--and the purpose of these banks is to provide
support to the real economy to everyday people who are engaged
in their businesses. To the extent that we can reduce the
compliance burden, the cost that these banks face in their
businesses without in any way undermining the safety and
soundness of the system, then we increase their ability to
provide credit to the real economy and particularly in these
areas of the economy--small business and rural areas.
Mr. Tipton. So you are comfortable we are going to be able
to make sure that we do have the regulatory compliance in place
for these small banks, but also recognizing those costs will be
passed on to the consumers, so the more we can reduce that the
better we can create a win-win for our communities.
Mr. Quarles. Absolutely.
Mr. Tipton. Great. The Federal Reserve has also recently
put forward some proposals to be able to tailor the prudential
standards, and the model that has been laid out by the Board
has several different tiers, as I know you are aware, from the
smaller institutions above $50 billion in assets scaled all the
way up to our global institutions, as well. These scaled
requirements, could you explain why you feel that that is
important for the supervisory scheme of the Fed to be able to
divide it up into the tiers?
Mr. Quarles. Because I think that it is important generally
that the nature and character of our regulation match the
nature and character of the firms that are being regulated so
that firms that have more systemic consequence, that are more
complex, that are engaged in riskier activities should be
subject to regulation that addresses those, and firms that are
simpler, smaller, and less systemically consequential should be
subject to regulation that is appropriate to that. That will
inevitably be less costly regulation, and yet, even though you
can have less costly regulation, then you ensure that the
system as a whole is operating most efficiently, that you get
the safety in the system that you want with the least cost
across the horizon of firms.
Mr. Tipton. Great. I appreciate that. And you know, in
September, Craig Phillips, Counselor to Treasury Secretary
Mnuchin, he argued that the U.S. fintech industry risks being
left behind if regulators don't provide proper coordination
guidance to the industry to be able to keep it competitive with
the rest of the world, and speaking about the growth of opening
banking regimes globally, Phillips stated, ``There is a huge
competitive threat if we don't get the investment right. There
is a risk that the U.S. will fall behind, and with that, a risk
that jobs will go elsewhere.''
What measures do you believe we can take to make sure that
the U.S. fintech industry does stay competitive with the rest
of the world, and do these need to be statutorily or
regulatorily implemented?
Mr. Quarles. Oh, I do think there could be measures that
are both statutory and regulatory that help that. The main
thing I think the regulators can do is try to ensure that the
regulatory steps that we take to ensure the safety of the
firm--the safety of the system are again calibrated to be as
efficient as possible and to not impose unnecessary costs,
particularly on small startup firms. Obviously, we do need to
be concerned about compliance. There will be some costs that
are inevitable, but we always ought to be looking to ensure
that we again have calibrated the measures to the real risks
that we perceive as opposed to being excessively costly.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes another gentleman from Colorado,
Mr. Perlmutter.
Mr. Perlmutter. Mr. Vice Chair, great to have you here.
A statement and then a couple, three questions for you. So
the first statement, and I would disappoint the Chair if I
didn't bring this up, is now we are at about 47, 48 States that
have some level of marijuana use, and our banking laws and
generally the Controlled Substances Act are not in line with
all of these different States. And it is something that I want
to make sure we get the State laws and the Federal laws to be
aligned. And a lot of this comes to the intersection of the
banking sector and to the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve. Number one.
Number two, just some very general questions. We have had
about 100 months of job growth, 80 or so under President Obama,
the last 20 under President Trump. One, is this sustainable,
and, two, what clouds do you see on the horizon, if any?
Mr. Quarles. So I do think that is sustainable with the
right measures. We have a very strong economy currently. We are
bringing people back into the labor force. We have a low
unemployment rate, but that has not been associated with
excessively high inflation, really high inflation at all. We
have hit our target, but we are not exceeding it. There are--
there is some interesting work that has been done that changing
educational attainment of the U.S. workforce has actually been
affecting the natural rate of unemployment, the level of
unemployment--the level at which unemployment can fall without
increasing inflation. It may be materially less than we have
estimated in the past, and that may explain some of what we are
seeing, but my general assessment certainly is that we can
continue this strong economy and this strong labor market for
some period of time.
Mr. Perlmutter. OK. So let's go into this education
question and the workforce generally. So, obviously between
globalization but primarily automation, we see tremendous
technological strides being made. Do you as the Vice Chair or
does the Federal Reserve generally, are you keeping an eye and
are you concerned about the potential for automation, in
particular eliminating whole occupations, really having a
dampening effect on the labor force that could be harmful
generally?
Mr. Quarles. So, obviously, we do look at that. That is I
think more of a much longer-term issue. History would tell us
to be optimistic about that, that the application of technology
in the past, although it has changed the character of the labor
force--it has changed what people do--it generally hasn't
eliminated the need for human work, but it has made humans much
more productive. I think that that, at least in the early
stages, is what we are continuing to see here, and certainly,
in the very near term, the very strong demand for labor in our
current economy would cause us to be optimistic as well.
Mr. Perlmutter. Last question on cryptocurrencies and
digital currencies. How does the Federal Reserve take in these
new currencies, bitcoin or Ethereum or whatever it might be,
how do you--does that get added into the monetary supply,
subtracted from the monetary supply? How do you look at that in
terms of liquidity and how much there is to spend out there?
Mr. Quarles. So, currently, the characteristics of all
those cryptocurrencies would not lead one to consider them--
Mr. Perlmutter. As a currency.
Mr. Quarles. --money yet. They really aren't money yet.
They are an asset. In fact, I think internationally we have
taken to calling them crypto assets as opposed to
cryptocurrencies. They are an asset that has been highly
volatile in price, which makes them less appealing even as a
store of value and certainly not as a payment mechanism. There
are issues, and because of that, there are issues around
criminal activity and consumer protection that I think we ought
to be appropriately concerned about. Ten, 20 years down the
road, do either some of these assets or some assets like these,
do they have a role in the payment system? They could evolve
some way. There is nothing inherently defective about them, I
don't think, but at this point, they don't really factor into
our consideration of the money supply.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman is expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Stivers.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you Mr. Vice Chair. I am over here. Good to see you.
Right behind Mr. Hill there. I appreciate you being here. I saw
one of your speeches earlier in the year where you talked a
little bit about the cybersecurity threat and you talked
about--you attributed it in part to poor technology hygiene and
said we need to work to be a step ahead of those who would
steal or have other nefarious intents with cyber, and I totally
agree with you. If you look at the history of the industrial
revolution, what we did was we created as a society worker's
compensation insurance that increased and improved industrial
hygiene. I believe that there is a way to use cybersecurity
insurance to do the same thing. The problem with the static
standard is the day that you create a static standard, it is
essentially out of date. So we have to figure out how to create
a dynamic standard, and one of the benefits of cyber insurance,
if we create the right safe harbors for folks and create the
right coverages that make sure that it really covers the
liabilities, then it can create--the underwriting for that
cyber insurance can create that dynamic standard, and I would
ask that you guys think of that, and I am curious if it is
something that you have looked at as a way to mitigate and
create a dynamic standard in cybersecurity protections and
avoid some of these petty jurisdictional issues we are fighting
now between the committee across the hall.
Mr. Quarles. So I think that is a really interesting idea.
I myself have not given thought to it. I am sure there must be
some folks on the staff of the Fed who have, and I am actually
adding it to my to do list now to go back and find them because
I think that many aspects of what you just said are
interesting.
Mr. Stivers. I would love to sit down privately and talk to
you guys and work with you guys on this. I think it is
something that will help build private capacity. I think it is
something that will help increase the technology hygiene and
create active and passive defenses that we can price so people
understand how much they want to invest in that based on what
their premiums would be. It creates a pricing mechanism to
create the right incentives in cyber investment, and that is
one of the concerns that some companies have had is, how do you
price what you are willing to do? And it would put a price on
it. So just an idea that is one of the things obviously
insurance does; it is a pricing mechanism. So I hope you will
go back and take a look at it, and I love the dynamic nature of
it. And I know from your speeches, you have talked about that.
Switching subjects to one other thing that I know Mr.
Luetkemeyer and Mr. Lucas brought up, the inter-affiliate
margin issue. I just want to ask you to look at that. While
inter-affiliate swaps don't have all the hassles that other
swaps do, this whole idea of additional counterparty exposure
that isn't really there has led to $29 billion being locked up
in margin that doesn't really need to happen, and that is money
that could be used to help those firms create jobs and help
those firms create capital in our system that would echo and
help our economy that is now growing, but there is still a
great need for capital, and I hope you will take a look at it.
And we are ready to work with you. It has been a bipartisan
issue, and I want to work with you guys going forward to try to
get to the right answer on that.
Mr. Quarles. I appreciate that. Very much looking forward
to working with you on it, and as I had indicated, I do think
that it is something that is ripe for us to consider.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you. I yield back the balance of my
time, Mr. Chairman, now that Mr. Royce is here.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Green.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the Ranking Member as well, and I thank the witness
for appearing today.
I would like to visit with you briefly about the CRA. As
you know, it was developed and put in place, if you will, in
1977 to deal with redlining, and I think that it has been quite
effective. I am looking at at least one indication that some $2
trillion in small business and community development loans have
been made since 1996.
The CRA is used to evaluate applications for future
merging, charters, acquisitions, bank openings, and deposit
facilities. Do we have a record that you can share with us of
the number of mergers that have been held up or that have been
denied because of the CRA?
Mr. Quarles. I don't have those figures for you today, but
they are obtainable.
Mr. Green. I would like to have them, if I may. Do you know
of any merger currently--this would just be from your
recollection--that is being held up because of CRA?
Mr. Quarles. I am not aware of one that is currently being
held up.
Mr. Green. A charter that is being held up because of CRA?
Mr. Quarles. No.
Mr. Green. Acquisition?
Mr. Quarles. Again, I am not aware of anything.
Mr. Green. Bank opening?
Mr. Quarles. No.
Mr. Green. Deposit facility? I mention these to you, Mr.
Vice Chairman, because we hear a lot of complaints about the
CRA, but I am not finding the empirical evidence to indicate
that there is a lot of suffering because of it. I think that it
is doing a lot of good, and I think that banks are--most of
them are getting satisfactory reports about 98 percent. So, if
the banks are getting satisfactory reports and CRA seems to be
working fairly well, the question becomes why would we change
it such that it might be weakened to some extent? Now weakened
depends upon your point of view, of course, but I am concerned
about the OCC and some of the actions that are taking place. I
want to see businesses blossom, especially small businesses,
but I am also concerned about the other aspects of CRA, and I
just don't see the need to make the changes. I am open to a
review and someone working with me, but I am not finding the
empirical evidence of the necessity to weaken it, and perhaps
you can give me some additional thoughts.
Mr. Quarles. So I would completely agree with you. I don't
think that we should be weakening the CRA. My view is almost
because of--I mean, the banks do comply with the CRA, and they
have a good record of compliance for all the reasons that you
cite, but it has become a little formulaic. Both our
supervisors and the banks themselves know that if they do X, Y,
and Z, they will pass. And X, Y, and Z has become just a little
unimaginative. And I think that you can actually have more
effect in really supporting the low- and moderate-income
portions of the communities that banks serve by taking this
opportunity to reinvigorate the CRA. So I view this CRA reform
movement that the OCC has taken the lead on but that the other
banking agencies, including the Fed, have participated in and
not reluctantly from that viewpoint as a way to really make the
CRA achieve the objectives that were identified in 1977 in a
way that is continuing to be relevant in the 21st century, not
to weaken it at all. I do think that if we work together, we
can do that, and I would be delighted to work with you on that.
Mr. Green. Well, I am appreciative, and I respect your
response. The term that you have used is ``reinvigorate,'' and
I think that is a good term. I tend to think of strengthening
it, and maybe we are saying the same things, and it may be a
question of semantics, but I am amenable to working with you
and others to strengthen it. I think that you are right, we can
do more. It can better serve the communities. Especially given
that we are going to online banking now, there will be some
questions that we will have to resolve that we haven't
confronted, and also we are losing a lot of the brick-and-
mortar facilities. Banks are moving to centralized locations
for the most part, and then they will have online facilities.
So I think that we do have to think about these things, but I
want to think about them from the rationale that we had in 1977
when we instituted the CRA. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Royce, Chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much, and just to
recap here in September 2008, your former boss Treasury
Secretary Paulson declared that the U.S. Government would step
in and place Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in conservatorship and
provide enough taxpayer support for the GSEs to fulfill our
financial obligations. We effectively nationalized the GSEs in
2008. As you know, shortly after, the Fed embarked on an asset
purchase program that included well over 1 trillion of
mortgage-backed securities from the now effectively
nationalized GSEs. Today, there is talk that this
Administration may seek to release the GSEs from
conservatorship. A release of the GSEs out of conservatorship
would reverse that structure that was put in place in 2008 and
would raise some serious issues from a monetary policy
standpoint I think for all of us. Instead of purchasing assets
from two government-owned and controlled companies, you would
be purchasing assets from companies owned and operated by
private shareholders.
As a member of the FOMC, you have thought about what it
would mean for the Fed's current portfolio and the future
purchases should these institutions return to being privately
owned and controlled companies. I know you have, and you might
want to share your thoughts on some of this. And before we get
to that, let me say that I regret that we were not able to
resolve this issue during my time here in Congress, but I would
like to caution against making a bad situation worse. If talks
about releasing the GSEs from conservatorship ever reach you at
the Fed I sincerely hope that you will recognize the important
role the Fed has played in this space dating back to the
1990's. I had many conversations with Alan Greenspan on the
need for systemic risk regulation over the GSEs into the early
2000's. And, in fact, I had legislation here that we were not
able to pass in order to try to control that systemic risk and
in order to try to reduce the leverage in those portfolios.
I hope that you consider the potential impact on monetary
policy and consider the massive moral hazard problem, which is
the thing that worries me most about all of this, that would be
created by releasing these companies back to shareholder
control. We have seen politics and short-term profits went out
over good policy when it comes to the GSEs in the past. I hope
this Administration and this Congress have learned something
from this failed duopoly and do the hard work necessary to
reform our housing finance system, but in the interim, there is
your role in this, and so, if I could ask you to respond, I
would greatly appreciate it.
Mr. Quarles. So thank you.
Certainly, with respect to the GSEs, in my earlier Treasury
service, that was a topic that I gave a lot of thought to and
very much share your concern that we need to ensure that the
risk around those institutions is appropriately handled and the
structure of them does not create systemic risk in our
financial system.
Mr. Royce. Well, the reason it is so important is that the
moral hazard that was created by that and--it was not the only
factor. But certainly, at 100-to-1 leverage, it became a key
factor. And the fact that so many other institutions held this
as basically in their--under the law as equivalent of cash--
Mr. Quarles. Right.
Mr. Royce. --meant that suddenly they were undercapitalized
so that when housing finance went down, it meant that
eventually the financial system nearly went down. And so now we
find ourselves with this reality also that once these
institutions that are neither--that really have an opaque
structure where the investor doesn't know who really owns them
but presumes that the government will bail out the
consequences--and, of course, that has been proved--it creates
an inability to price risk for these institutions. So, at this
point, I was looking for some assurance in terms of your
leadership in trying to do something to prevent that
catastrophe from occurring again.
Mr. Quarles. It is something that we give thought to as we
consider the normalization of our balance sheet, definitely.
Mr. Royce. Thank you. Mr. Quarles, thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Arkansas, Mr.
Hill.
Mr. Hill. I thank the Chairman for the time. I appreciate
Mr. Quarles being here. It is good to see you before the
committee. I appreciate your service.
I want to echo something that Mr. Lucas discussed with you,
which is mortgage servicing rights. I have been in Congress for
2 terms, 4 years, and this has been a topic that we have talked
about for all those 4 years with no progress. And in your role
in the private sector and now as Vice Chairman of the Fed, do
you acknowledge that mortgage servicing rights are an
acceptable banking practice for a commercial bank or a bank
holding company to be in that business?
Mr. Quarles. Absolutely.
Mr. Hill. And don't you agree that Basel III and the
resulting--results of that have driven that business out of the
depository institution sector into shadow banking and other
investors?
Mr. Quarles. It has certainly been a material factor, yes.
Mr. Hill. Yes.
So we have--I know the default answer today from the Fed is
soon.
Mr. Quarles. Soon.
Mr. Hill. But I would invite you to commit that we will
have our mortgage servicing rights regulatory proposal out
before the end of the year. Is that possible?
Mr. Quarles. I don't know that it will be possible before
the end of the year, but we are not talking about before the
end of next year. So it will be sooner than--it will be soon.
Mr. Hill. So now I have gotten you to say ``sooner'' rather
than ``soon.'' That is good. I like that. Thank you.
We also talked about--earlier today about Volcker. And you
were asked, I think by the Chairman, an interesting proposal,
which is on this idea of harmonization.
Could the interagency process though the SIFI act with
leadership from the Fed really push regulatorily what I have
tried to push legislatively, which is harmonization with the
Fed as the leader among equals on that topic? Because we have
serious record over the past--since the passage of Dodd-Frank
of misinterpretation and conflicting interpretation of this
rule. I don't think it is going to be resolved by Volcker 2.0.
I really don't. I think these are hard issues. I think they are
made difficult by the statute itself. I don't believe the
agencies are going to be able to wordsmith their way around the
statute.
So this harmonization piece that was left out of 2155 I
think is really an important issue.
Do you believe that is realistic, that the agencies could
work together? When I say ``the agencies,'' I don't mean
banking. I mean CFTC and SEC as well.
Mr. Quarles. So it is certainly not impossible. The work
right now on simplifying Volcker is, I think, proceeding very
well. And that is--while it is being pushed by the Fed, all the
agencies are participating equally, and I think exactly as one
would want and as exactly as one would expect under the--if the
proposed legislation were in effect.
And so I would think that one could move that at least in
the initial circumstances. You could maybe see that happening.
I am not sure how sustainable it would be over many different
administrations, different people sitting in these seats. The
current group of regulators works very well together for a
whole variety of reasons. I don't know that that would be a
sustainable solution, although it could be a near-term one.
Mr. Hill. Well, I certainly will work in the remainder of
this Congress and early in the next Congress to push this
harmonization idea. We had 300 votes for that in this House.
And so I want to make sure that, on a bipartisan basis, that we
can move that forward.
I also heard you address with Mr. Luetkemeyer CECL. And I
was pleased to read in the last couple weeks that suddenly
Jamie Dimon at JPMorgan Chase has learned about CECL. I was
pleased to hear his comments on that.
In meetings with the district bank presidents around the
country, they don't seem to have that issue brought to their
table, and I would encourage you to reach out to the district
bank presidents and proactively ask for comments about CECL. I
think the Feds should take a leadership role in dealing with
FASB (Financial Accounting Standards Board) pronouncements and
not treat that as something over here because of the severe
impact on compliance costs for your institutions you supervise
and the unintended consequences of it as it relates to capital
where, as you noted a few minutes ago, it could be essentially
a redundant exercise to what we are already doing. So I would
urge you to do that.
And I thank you for appearing today. And I yield back the
balance of my time, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Loudermilk.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for being here today. And I trust you
received the letter I sent on September 28 with most of the
Republicans regarding the SIFI regulations. And I am looking
forward to your response soon. And my questioning is going to
be around that area.
Do regional banks with less than $250 billion in assets
currently pose a systemic risk to the economy?
Mr. Quarles. I would say, with the current configuration of
their activities, none of them individually does, no.
Mr. Loudermilk. OK. And that is my feeling, and especially
working with a lot of the banks, especially regional banks back
home. And I agree. I think with most of the data the Fed has,
it shows they don't pose a systemic risk.
And so some of the concerns--and I appreciate my colleague
bringing up CECL--is it appears that there may be a pro-
cyclical effect that CECL may have in that incentivizing making
loans in a strong economy but decentivizing those loans in a
downward economy. I understand maybe you have the same feelings
about that, that you mentioned in a speech. Can you elaborate?
Mr. Quarles. So I think that we need to understand much
better than we do what the effects of CECL would be, both the
so-called day one effects and then the longer-term effects,
including effects during a period of stress.
We have gotten a lot of input already with respect to what
that would be, but a lot of it points in different directions,
which is one of the reasons why we have said that--for how CECL
reserving relates to our capital requirements, we are going to
phase that in so that we can have more experience with how it
actually operates in practice before it actually begins to
affect, essentially add to the loss absorbency with our capital
regime. So we will be studying that and phasing it in over time
so we can see how that works because I think there is a lot
that we don't really know.
Mr. Loudermilk. OK. And I appreciate that.
Last question, and it actually looks like I may have a
little time to reserve back for once.
Some of the banks that I talk to back home have concerns
that, if the Federal Reserve banks will actually abide by the
changes to the SIFI regulation when they are supervising banks,
the concern that it may not flow; these changes may not flow
all the way down. Can you commit that that will happen with
these updated changes?
Mr. Quarles. Yes. We are devoting a lot of resources to
ensure that these supervisory messages flow throughout system.
As you can appreciate, that is a lot of work. It is not a
question of turning on a switch, but it is work that we are
very much engaged in.
Mr. Loudermilk. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from West Virginia,
Mr. Mooney.
Mr. Mooney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Quarles, good see you again.
The Trump Administration has frozen implementation of Basel
III's punitive treatment of mortgage servicing assets.
What are your long-term plans for MSAs? And will you be
returning to the treatment of MSAs to pre-Basel III for
community banks?
Mr. Quarles. So we have a proposal out that would
significantly increase from Basel III the proportion of
mortgage servicing assets that can count for capital. It would
not go all the way back to--the proposal would not go all the
way back to pre-Basel III levels, but it is a material
increase. And we are in the--we are gathering comments and in
the process of evaluating those comments to determine whether
there should be additional changes.
Mr. Mooney. OK. Well, I have been working on my, with my
staff, on legislation to support community banks, who are,
frankly, suffering under these Basel III absurd treatment of
these assets. And I would like to work with you, take a look at
the draft legislation when I get it, and possibly recommend
some improvements so we can get community banks lending again.
Mr. Quarles. Very much I would be delighted with you on
that.
Mr. Mooney. And then one additional question, really from
my friend from New York, Congressman John Faso. He successfully
sponsored an amendment to the CHOICE Act, which would have
restored the ability of directors of a bank organized as a
mutual holding company by resolution to waive dividend
returning to the status quo prior to Dodd-Frank. Unfortunately,
this provision was not included in our Dodd-Frank reform passed
earlier this year. So Representative Faso had sent you a letter
in May 2018 whether the Fed can undertake a review of its
regulation to remove this unnecessary impediment to MHC
operations.
Can you advise on the status of his request or whether you
believe this change can and should be made?
Mr. Quarles. So we are looking into that. It is a
complicated situation, but we are looking into what can be
done.
Some of it isn't really even legal interpretation or
changes that we can make as opposed to changes in practice, but
I don't have a resolution for you today, but we are working on
it.
Mr. Mooney. OK. It is a long, three-page letter. I have a
copy of it I can leave with you if you want to review it again.
Mr. Quarles. It is on my desk.
Mr. Mooney. You got it?
OK. Thank you.
Mr. Quarles. Because it is extremely interesting. It is not
easy.
Mr. Mooney. Again, I appreciate your good work.
And, Mr. Chairman, that exhausts my time. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Davidson.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Quarles, thank you for your testimony. Thanks for the
service that you are doing for our country in your role as Vice
Chairman of the Federal Reserve.
And it is an incredibly important role in the regulatory
environment and, in fact, has taken a strong international
component. We have talked a lot about Basel. We have talked
about the importance of clarity on Volcker and, frankly, the
implementation of the major reform that we were able to
successfully pass through the House, the Senate, and get the
signature on it. So I trust you guys are fairly busy.
One of the areas I have taken a strong interest in is
crypto assets. While the U.S. is a global leader in the
financial sector, my fear is that we are losing ground to other
prominent nations, such as Singapore, Switzerland, and the
U.K., due to lack of legislation and regulatory clarity with
these assets.
I was pleased to hear you use the phrase ``crypto assets,''
because it recognizes they are not generally currencies, and,
in fact, there are all sorts of varieties: Crypto securities,
crypto commodities, and certainly things that approach
currencies.
One of the big challenges for them to be currencies,
however, is ubiquity. And it is hard to have ubiquity without
regulatory certainty.
I was quite alarmed, however, when you talked about
something over a 10-year, 20-year horizon on something that
could be used in a payment system. And the reality is, if you
look at the way a ripple can settle in seconds versus the
payment system we are using today, you are in the process of
dealing with that. I believe that open blockchain technology
offers solutions.
Could you talk about the intersection of that that is real
time, something you are actively working on in payment systems,
and open blockchain versus one that I think you guys are
contemplating that would be quite closed and controlled?
Mr. Quarles. So, with respect to--so I completely agree
with you that the technology--not just the blockchain
technology, although that is obviously very important, but then
the specific application of the blockchain to some of these
crypto assets is--I think there is a lot that is quite
interesting about that.
My only point was that, currently, until society gets a
handle on how they are going to value these, it makes it
difficult for any of these assets, whatever their technological
advantage is, to be the type of store of value or constant--to
have--for users to have enough confidence in their continued
value to really be a substitute for currency. Over time, I
could see that happening.
On the payment system, what we are trying to do is to
catalyze the private sector to come to solutions there because
of limitations on our own authority, a view of what is the
appropriate role of the Government/Federal Reserve versus
private sector solutions. So we are trying to catalyze private
sector solutions as much as possible.
And so it really will be up to them how they take advantage
of some of these technological advances and which of them they
think are most--
Mr. Davidson. Thank you for that. Because I think a lot of
people will be encouraged to hear that you are not looking at
contemplating crowding out the private sector there.
Mr. Quarles. Right.
Mr. Davidson. And, to the factor of volatility, certainty,
without regulatory certainty, we are likely to see more
volatility.
And, last, on that, there are now stablecoins that are out
there. They are essentially like pegged currencies, so it takes
away the volatility that would be inherent.
As my time is rapidly winding down, I would just add to the
dialog that has already occurred on CECL and the role of FASB.
I do believe that FASB has had market distorting
pronouncements. And to the extent that the Fed can join the SEC
in being a buffer against irrational actions by FASB, we would
greatly appreciate your efforts there.
I would like to yield the balance of my time, Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Budd.
Mr. Budd. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Quarles, good to see you again. Again, thank you
for your hard work.
I want to start with CECL, or the current expected credit
loss, and discuss that a little bit. I think my colleague Mr.
Hill from Arkansas mentioned that just a few moments ago.
But you have said in the past that regulators seem to agree
that, in times of stress, the CECL accounting standard will add
pro-cyclicality to the banking system. So I know that
regulators have proposed phasing in over 3 years the regulatory
capital impact at the time of adoption.
However, due to the increased pro-cyclicality, in my view,
the phase-in would have little effect if the economy goes into
a slowdown shortly after it were to be adopted.
So can you tell us, is there any consideration being given
to an ongoing add-back to regulatory capital for the impact of
CECL until this new regime, one that is CECL responsive, can be
agreed on? And if so, how long do you think it will take to
finalize a capital plan like that?
Mr. Quarles. So there is not a concrete plan to have an
interim capital add-back to account for CECL. But obviously we
are looking at, during this phase-in period--and one reason for
the long phase-in period is for us to consider what responses
there ought to be for us to see how CECL operates in practice
and then to consider whether there ought to be a response.
If we saw that there was a negative effect that we saw
happening more quickly than during this phase-in period,
perhaps because of changes in the macro economy, then we would
accelerate what it is that we were doing.
Mr. Budd. OK. Or slow it down, depending on what would be
needed?
Mr. Quarles. Right.
Mr. Budd. I want to switch over now to a smaller part of
your portfolio: Insurance oversight. And I know that you have
extensive knowledge of the way that the international standard
setting and regulatory cooperation is done. I know that you are
familiar with the concept of mutual recognition.
One of the areas where a large bipartisan majority of this
committee is trying to achieve mutual recognition is for our
State-based insurance regulatory system with the IAIS
(International Association of Insurance Supervisors) on their
development of an international capital standard, ICS.
The IAIS, through both their actions and words, has
repeatedly made it clear that their goal is to force changes to
the entire U.S. State-based insurance regulatory system to make
our insurance solvency regime look exactly like Europe's
through Solvency II. I find this unacceptable for our U.S.
insurance consumers, our markets, and our industries.
There has been a publicly released document from the IAIS
detailing an agreement reached in Kuala Lumpur, and this was in
November 2017, the IAIS proclaims that the base parameters of
the ICS are going to be Eurocentric. The release also does
leave the door open to having the U.S. system formally
recognized by the IAIS. But numerous statements from them and
their officials make it clear that is not their goal and that
their end goal is to, in fact, force significant changes to the
U.S. system.
So my question is this: Will you commit to us today to
stand up to European members of the IAIS who are attempting to
use that forum to force us to adopt their system? I will let
you--that was a long question, so I will let you--give you a
few moments.
Mr. Quarles. So the Fed in its--which sits on the IAIS, as
you know, has been working very closely with the State
regulators' so-called Team USA approach in ensuring that the
building-block approach to capital, which reflects the U.S.
system, is accepted in the IAIS. And I think that that is--I
actually think that that process is working reasonably well.
The reports that I get from our delegation are that they--
that--well, it is a process that the IAIS is--that they are
reasonably happy with how that is proceeding. In any event, we
are very committed to it, and we are working with the State
regulators on it. And certainly that is not over.
Mr. Budd. I want to add just another piece to that
question. So would you commit today that you will not allow the
Federal Reserve to be part of any final agreement on the ICS
that does not formally recognize the U.S. system of insurance
regulation, one that has worked well for us for the for last
150 years?
Mr. Quarles. I mean, we certainly wouldn't have the ability
to commit to anything that would change our domestic insurance
system at all, so--
Mr. Budd. OK. Chairman, my time is nearly expired. I yield
back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Mr.
Hollingsworth.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Happy Wednesday. I am glad that you were
here and have reached what I think is the end of the line, like
Little Round Top at Gettysburg, you have reached the end.
I wanted to work through two questions, two very separate
questions. You had an earlier exchange with Representative Barr
talking about some foreign banks that operate in the United
States and how you had recently issued guidelines, I think on
October 31, around regional banks, or what I consider regional
banks, that are domestic and providing some updated guidance or
views on what that updated guidance may look like, right? And I
think you referenced that these foreign banks that are
operating in the United States aren't identical to those
domestic operating banks, and so there may need to be some
deviations from that or some further reviews.
First, do you have a timeline of what that further review
may look like? And then, second, do you know of any deviations
that may exist or need to exist for these foreign bank--I think
in previous testimony and a lot of speeches you have expounded
the philosophy that banks should be competing on a level
playing field and the importance of foreign banks operating in
the United States for consumers, for borrowers, for depositors,
and how we want to maintain that level playing field.
So I am curious about those two things.
Mr. Quarles. So, on the timeline, I think we should have a
proposal for you early next year.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Great.
Mr. Quarles. With respect to the foreign banks, the
tailoring for the foreign banks.
With respect to specific differences, again, as you stated,
as I have stated and completely agree with, the foreign banks
are an important part of our domestic financial system, and so
we need to ensure that there is a level playing field for them.
They are different than a domestic bank of the same size for a
few reasons. So the foreign banks are organized. You have the
intermediate holding company that contains the nonbank assets
that are enhanced potential standards directly applied to. But
they operate--there is always a branch of the larger parent
that also operates in the United States, isn't directly covered
by that regime. They can exchange assets. They operate in
concert to some extent. That, again, changes a little bit the
character of how they think about them. They are part of a
larger global organization. That can be stability enhancing.
Mr. Hollingsworth. It can be positive; it can be negative.
Mr. Quarles. It can be positive; it can be negative. And so
you need to think about that.
So I don't view it as a one-for-one transposition if you
have an intermediate holding company of X size, it ought to be
treated exactly the same as a domestic holding company of X
size in order for there to be a level playing field, because
there are those differences.
Mr. Hollingsworth. So I just want to encourage that even if
there are deviations in the mechanics by which you arrive, the
goal is to arrive at the same place.
Mr. Quarles. Precisely.
Mr. Hollingsworth. OK. And I just want to make sure that we
continue to encourage that. I want them to be able to compete
on a level playing field even if there are mechanical
differences in how we arrive at that.
Second question, far afield from that. Much has been talked
about large banks, large institutions, and some of the work
that has been requested or has not been requested in how we
might further fine-tune and make more efficient the regulatory
environment. I think everybody here concurs that we want to
watch our large institutions closely, but I am really, really
concerned about how we are layering on surcharges and looks and
reviews on top of reviews and how those begin to pile up and
create really distortionary effects for our larger
institutions. So, again, trying to create an environment where
we can get to more efficient regulation at the super large
institutions as well.
Do you see that there is any opportunity to be able to make
that more efficient, more transparent and, thus, more effective
both for those that are regulated and consumers that are a big
part of the consumer base for those large institutions?
Mr. Quarles. I do. I think that some of the changes that I
have talked about recently, evolution of our stress-testing
practices, which are very important for the largest
institutions, and changes in those practices can happen that
significantly reduce regulatory burden on those institutions
without affecting their resiliency or the overall loss
absorbency of the firms or of the system.
I do think we need to think about the international level
playing field for our largest firms and not so much--I mean,
certainly it is important whether the playing field is fair to
them, to domestic U.S. firms, but for the systemic reason that,
if you have an unlevel playing field, you will have risky
activities moving to the weakest parts of that system, which it
may not be our firms but that ultimately we in the U.S. may
suffer from if you get these systemic imbalances that result
from regulatory incentives we create. So we need to be thinking
all of that through.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Right.
I just want to make sure and continue to encourage you, as
we look at how we manage the regulatory framework for our super
large institutions, that we don't layer in redundancy after
redundancy without point--and we continue to try to make a
framework that is clear, transparent, but also efficient, and
to remember that millions of depositors, millions of consumers,
millions of borrowers do business with these large banks every
single day. And it is important to those to make sure that we
continue to get to a more efficient framework, not just a
larger, more redundant one.
So thank you so much.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
There are no other Members remaining in the queue. Thus, I
would like to thank the witness for his testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
Governor Quarles, we would ask that you respond as promptly
as you are able.
This hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:34 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
November 14, 2018
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]