- MODERNIZING FOOD AID: IMPROVING EFFECTIVENESS AND SAVING LIVES
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
MODERNIZING FOOD AID: IMPROVING EFFECTIVENESS AND SAVING LIVES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 14, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-108
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-654PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
Amy Porter, Chief of Staff
Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director
Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
WITNESSES
The Honorable Andrew Natsios, executive professor, The Bush
School of Government and Public Service, Texas A&M University
(former Administrator, U.S. Agency for International
Development)...................................................
4
Erin Lentz, Ph.D., assistant professor of public affairs, Lyndon
B. Johnson School of Public Affairs, The University of Texas at
Austin.........................................................
17
The Honorable Dan Glickman, distinguished fellow of global food
and agriculture, Chicago Council on Global Affairs (former
Secretary, U.S. Department of Agriculture).....................
25
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
The Honorable Andrew Natsios: Prepared statement.................
7
Erin Lentz, Ph.D.: Prepared statement............................
19
The Honorable Dan Glickman: Prepared statement...................
28
APPENDIX
Hearing notice...................................................
62
Hearing minutes..................................................
63
The Honorable Edward R. Royce, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California, and chairman, Committee on Foreign
Affairs: Material submitted for the record.....................
65
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........
70
MODERNIZING FOOD AID: IMPROVING EFFECTIVENESS AND SAVING LIVES
----------
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 2018
House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:10 a.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. We will ask now that the committee comes to
order. This hearing today is on food aid reform and this
committee's long work to strengthen foreign assistance, and we
do that in order to have an effective way to advance our
interests and our values around the world. Properly
implemented, these relatively small investments can strengthen
our national security and can support the development of
democratic governments and strong market economies overseas.
So last month with committee leadership, the House passed
the African Growth and Opportunity Act, and the MCA
Modernization Act off the floor, which promises to create new
opportunities for U.S. trade and investment. It has the promise
of sparking private sector-led growth, particularly in Africa.
And last Congress, we enacted the Foreign Aid Transparency and
Accountability Act to identify what is and what is not working.
And I want to, again, thank Judge Poe for his leadership on
that bill.
This committee also led the way on pushing for reforms to
one of the central elements of our foreign assistance, and that
is the Food for Peace Act. These reforms enabled USAID to chip
away at monetization and provided limited flexibility for NGOs
to use market-based tools.
But much remains to be done to truly modernize the Food for
Peace Act. We must, in my view, completely end this inefficient
process known as monetization, where local aid groups sell
donated U.S. food to support their operations. This policy,
along with requirements that all aid provided through Food for
Peace be purchased from U.S. farmers and sent overseas by U.S.
shippers, that process harms local markets. And more
importantly, it slows our response to emergencies.
These restrictions also needlessly drive up costs by
modernizing the Food for Peace Act and prioritizing flexibility
and efficiency, we can free up $300 million, and this will
enable us to reach almost 10 million more men, women, and
children, who would otherwise face starvation in places like
Syria and Yemen, northern Nigeria and Somalia.
Hunger in countries such as these fuels conflict; it fuels
instability. So helping people get the food they need not only
helps save lives, it also strengthens U.S. national security.
Modernizing U.S. food assistance will also help reach people
immediately after disaster strikes. It does that by allowing us
to purchase food closer to the areas in crisis.
Under current law it takes about 14 weeks for U.S. food to
reach those in need. As I saw with many members of this
committee when we traveled to the Philippines right after the
cyclone--it was that typhoon Haiyan, as I recall--we don't have
14 weeks. Certainly, the people there did not have 14 weeks to
wait for us to respond to the disaster of that magnitude. So we
saw the flexibility that had been put in place with a pilot
program we had supported in this committee, where people were
able to get that food immediately. As we were landing, they
were being fed. We need the flexibility to purchase food in the
region and get it to impacted areas within hours, not within 14
weeks. Saving time means saving lives.
Additional reforms are also worth considering. In South
Sudan, committee staff here saw how others provide assistance
through secured debit cards, which recipients use to purchase
the food locally in a crisis area like that. Providing
assistance this way helps build economic infrastructure that
can endure after aid ends. That said, no one is talking about
completely cutting the American farmer out of their food aid
programs.
Our food aid programs are here to stay, and in places that
suffer from cyclical drought, like Ethiopia, then food grown in
the U.S. is critical, but this is not always the case, and that
is what we are talking about here today.
Sometimes we need to provide U.S. commodities. Other times,
we will need to buy local, or we will need to use vouchers.
More often than not, we will need to do both, but we cannot
keep supporting outdated, unnecessary, expensive requirements.
Such deliberate, unjustified waste does not serve our national
interests. It certainly doesn't save lives in the types of
crisis we most often see. So I now turn to our ranking member,
Eliot Engel, who has been a partner in these aid efforts for
his remarks.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for calling this hearing. And to our distinguished witnesses,
welcome to the Foreign Affairs Committee. I want to welcome all
of you, especially my good friend and former colleague,
Secretary Glickman. It is nice to have you here again, and we
are grateful for all the witnesses' time and willingness to
share your expertise with our members.
I am glad we are focusing on food aid today, because this
is an effort on the administration's chopping block,
unfortunately, like so many of our other diplomatic and
developmental priorities. The administration's budget
eliminates the Food for Peace account. I think that is a
terrible idea, it would hurt hungry people, that shows a lack
of understanding about why the Food for Peace program is so
important to our foreign policy.
Since 1954 Food for Peace has fed more than 4 billion
people, that is billion with a ``B'' in 150-plus countries all
over the world. With our country's tremendous blessing of
agricultural resources helping famine-stricken and malnourished
people around the world is simply the right thing to do.
Perhaps no better effort shows America's generosity of spirit
than Food for Peace. For decades, it has been a model of what
American leadership should look like. There is also a
tremendous amount of goodwill that flows from those helping
those in need. People who benefit from this aid understand that
they have a friend in the United States, that we want people
everywhere to thrive and get ahead.
Well-fed populations are healthier populations. Healthier
populations mean stronger countries. Better partners for the
U.S. on the global stage. At a time when our standing in the
world has plummeted, and American leadership has taken a back
seat, the idea of slashing investments and diplomacy and
development, frankly, is just baffling. I think Congress should
reject the proposal to eliminate the Food for Peace program. I
think we should, frankly, take the administration's entire
international affairs budget proposal and look at it very
carefully and toss it if we have to.
Now does this mean that the Food for Peace program is
perfect? Of course not. I agree with what the chairman said
about things that we need to do to make it better. For
instance, even though it is the largest food program in the
world, Food for Peace lags behind other countries in terms of
response time in crisis situations. When we ship food from the
U.S., it can slow down the delivery of assistance by as much as
4 months, and cost up to 50 percent more than sources of food
closer to those in need.
So we need to take stock of what is working and what isn't
so that we can streamline and modernize this effort. We need to
strike the right balance among a number of factors, quickly
getting food, as the chairman pointed out, to those who need it
most, making good use of the taxpayer's dollars and keeping the
American farmer at the center of things when it comes to how we
source food aid.
So we do need to modernize the Food for Peace Act, but we
must be careful not to throw the baby out with the bath water.
So I look forward to hearing from our witnesses. I know you all
have a wealth of ideas that will help us improve this program
and policy going forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Royce. I also thank, just for the record here, Mr.
Chabot and Joe Wilson and Congressmen Sherman, Kennedy, Messer,
Randy Webber, for going with us on that trip to the Philippines
right after the typhoon, and also, on our subsequent trip or
another trip to the Philippines, Mr. Engel, Mr. Meeks, Mr.
Marino, and Mr. Salmon, as we worked on this issue.
This morning, we are pleased to be joined by a
distinguished panel. Professor Andrew Natsios currently serves
at Texas A&M as executive professor at the Bush School of
Government and Public Service. He is director of the Scowcroft
Institute of International Affairs. And from 2001 to 2006, of
course, he served as Administrator of the U.S. Agency for
International Development. Having served on the front lines of
some of the deadliest humanitarian emergencies of our time,
including the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, the 2003 genocide in
Darfur, Sudan, the cyclical famines in the Horn of Africa. He
became one of the earliest advocates for food aid reform, and I
am very proud to welcome this distinguished public servant back
to this committee.
Dr. Erin Lentz is an assistant professor of public affairs
at the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs at the
University of Texas at Austin. And, of course, Mr. Dan Glickman
is currently a Distinguished Fellow of Global Food and
Agriculture for the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, and
previously, he served as our Secretary of the U.S. Department
of Agriculture. Welcome, again, to this committee.
So without objection, the witnesses' full prepared
statements will be made part of the record, and members are
going to have 5 calendar days to submit any statements or
questions or any extraneous material for the record. So if you
would, Mr. Natsios, we will begin with you. Please summarize
your remarks, and then we will go to questions.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ANDREW NATSIOS, EXECUTIVE PROFESSOR,
THE BUSH SCHOOL OF GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE, TEXAS A&M
UNIVERSITY (FORMER ADMINISTRATOR, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT)
Mr. Natsios. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, thank
you for the invitation to speak today. I would like to say, Mr.
Chairman, those of us in the aid community are very upset that
you are retiring. We understand why, but we are still upset, so
it will be a great loss for this institution to have you
retire. You have been a leader in this fight for a very long
time, and I actually think this year may do it because of some
shift in the interest groups' opinion on this legislation,
which I will get to in a moment.
This is a critical subject at a critical moment in world
affairs. The world order, as we have known it for the past 70
years, has been unraveling for a decade now, and it is a
function of history. We are not the hegemon anymore, we can't
direct things we used to. I am not sure how I would function if
I were still USAID Administrator, since they were afraid of the
United States, and bad people stopped doing bad things because
of America intervening to stop them.
And that is--we are seeing the consequence of that, because
we are going through the worst refugee and internally displaced
crisis in post World War II history; 65 million people 2 years
ago were displaced. I think it is up over 70 million now,
because there are four famines going on, and I might add, it is
going to get worse. America cannot stop what is going on. We
used to be able to. We can't do that anymore. And what we need
to do is have new tools, stronger tools, to use the resources
we have now to save more lives faster.
I want to, just for a moment, tell you a personal story why
this matters to me. During World War II, the Nazis occupied
Greece, my ancestral home where my grandparents came 100 years
ago, but my great uncle still lived there, and he was a factory
worker in Piraeus. The Nazis stripped the country of food to
feed Rommel's Army, and \1/2\ million Greeks starved to death,
7 percent of the population. Next to the Holocaust, it was the
worst death rate, and Poland, worst death rate in Europe.
Oxfam was created at an Anglican church in Oxford, England
to bring food to the starving Greeks. By the time it got there
my great uncle was dead. They found him in a field eating
grass, and he was buried in a mass grave along with many other
hundreds of thousands of other Greeks. My father told me that
story over and over again. Every time we had a famine and USAID
was responding to it, I remembered my great uncle, the story of
what he went through and what our family went through. People
do not starve to death quickly. They starve to death slowly,
painfully.
The United States Government is the leading humanitarian
power in the world, and has been since World War II. It remains
so in terms of the aid budget, in terms of the humanitarian
part of that budget, the emergency response, which has had
broad support in the Congress from very conservative, very
liberal Members, Democrats and Republicans from the beginning.
Even people who would be regarded as isolationists, like
Patrick Buchanan when he ran for President in 1992 against
President Bush in the primary, said he would abolish aid, but
he would leave the emergency response system in place.
And that bipartisan support allowed the agency to have a
profound effect, and I saw it up close because I ran the
program for 9 years in two administrations. And I took care to
watch exactly what the humanitarian bureaus were doing, the
Office of Foreign Disaster Office, the Office of Food for
Peace, and the Office of Transition Initiatives.
There are three reforms that I endorse strongly and that I
gave a speech in 2005 in Kansas City. I have to say, it was not
one of the best-received speeches I ever gave. In fact, I had
two security people with me who were worried I was going to get
assaulted before I left the building, in which I announced that
President Bush would be proposing a 25 percent set-aside in
Title 2 for local purchase of food aid, and there was stunned
silence when I gave it.
Without going into all of politics of that, the Food Aid
Coalition, which met annually, was composed of the shipping
companies, the NGOs, and the farmers. And they were the support
behind the Food for Peace program, which we appreciated. I
think if some of them had been a little bit more broad in their
thinking, a little bit more flexible, we could have got these
reforms through much earlier. Three reforms. One is that up to
50 percent of Title 2, and I would not support more than 50
percent. We need a base to use to intervene in emergencies when
there is massive crop failure as Congressman Royce just said.
There are instances where we need a large volume of food from
the United States that we can inject into the system before the
food economy collapses. But if we put 50 percent of it into
local purchase, we can save hundreds of thousands of people's
lives. We can move much faster. And we can get into areas that
if we tried to move food aid into, the security situation would
make it impossible to do anything.
The second reform is to repeal the cargo preference law,
which, in my view, is a scandal. It is simply an oligopoly at
this point. There are just two or three companies that ship
most of the food. Sometimes they don't even bid. USAID will put
a bid out to ship food, and no company bids on it. That is a
delay in and of itself. They have to go back and rebid it. And
the law does not allow flexibility.
And the third reform is to prohibit the modernization of
food aid to produce local currency for NGO programs, which is a
terrible practice. However, and I want to add this in, because
this is not widely known, even in the Congress--there are
situations where USAID and WFP will ship food in, auction it
off to stabilize hyperinflation of food prices. Hyperinflation
kills as many people in a famine as the lack of food because
people--my great uncle had a job. He had money. The problem is
the price of food was so high he couldn't buy enough to survive
on. And so, we will go in when prices have gone up 700 percent
as they did in Somalia in 1992, and auction food off, which is
what CARE did with USAID food in 1993 to stabilize prices. We
need to allow that option there. But that is not for local
currency, and it is not to run other programs. It is to
intervene the markets when prices are out of control.
So, Mr. Chairman, I think because the NGOs now are all on
board in this. World Vision, the last NGO holdout, last year
enthusiastically endorsed these changes. Number two, we now
have the American Farm Bureau endorsing these reforms. The last
holdout is the shipping industry, which is basically an
oligopoly. They are using the Federal Government to protect
almost a monopolistic control over this shipping system, and I
think it is scandalous, frankly, that this has been allowed to
go on this long.
So, Mr. Chairman, I hope this year is the year that we can
get these reforms through. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Natsios follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Chairman Royce. Mr. Natsios, thank you very much. Dr. Erin
Lentz.
STATEMENT OF ERIN LENTZ, PH.D., ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF PUBLIC
AFFAIRS, LYNDON B. JOHNSON SCHOOL OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS, THE
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
Ms. Lentz. Chairman Royce, Ranking Member Engel, and
honorable representatives on the committee, thank you for
inviting me to testify today. I have been researching food aid
and food assistance policies for the past 14 years, and please
see my written testimony for my full remarks.
Today, I will highlight two budget-neutral policy changes
that can improve the effectiveness of U.S. food aid and market-
based food assistance. These two policy changes could save
millions of lives, stem forced migration, and ensure that
American tax dollars do more to help hungry people around the
world.
First, relax or eliminate requirements that food aid be
procured in the U.S.; second, relax or eliminate cargo
preference requirements on U.S. food aid shipments. As Mr.
Natsios stated, the U.S. has long been a leading provider of
food aid. U.S. food aid and market-based food assistance, such
as vouchers and locally and regionally purchased foods, save
lives and livelihoods, but the need for continued U.S.
leadership and food aid programs is stronger than ever. Recent
estimates indicate 815 million people worldwide are
undernourished, more than double the U.S. population.
At the same time, U.S. food assistance is an increasingly
scarce resource. In inflation-adjusted terms, funding has been
dropped 76 percent since the 1960s. This means we must find
ways to do more with the resources we have. Two budget neutral
strategies for doing this are as follows: First, relaxing or
eliminating requirements that commodities be purchased in the
U.S. would help food aid programs reach more people and faster.
Food aid purchased in the U.S. and shipped abroad is the
slowest form of food assistance, and most often, the most
expensive. For example, a study I co-authored found that
market-based food assistance is usually substantially cheaper
than purchases in the U.S. Buying grains in or near the country
where the U.S. donates food aid saved 53 percent. That is 53.
And in the case of legumes and pulses, it saved 25 percent.
As the chairman and ranking member noted, compared to food
aid from the U.S., market-based food assistance also shaved 14
weeks off of delivery time. Saving time matters. Hungry
families on the verge of migrating in search of food cannot
afford to stay in place and wait those extra months for
delivery of assistance.
Further, the 14 weeks saved when buying food closer to
beneficiaries works out to be approximately 10 percent of the
so-called first 1,000 days. This 1,000-day window between a
woman's pregnancy and her child's second birthday is the most
critical window for a child's cognitive and physical
development. Delivering food assistance faster during this
crucial period can, therefore, have lifelong benefits. In sum,
halting the wasteful practice of buying food aid in the U.S.
and shipping it abroad is perhaps the single most effective
change that could be made to current U.S. food assistance
policies. It could allow the U.S. to reach an additional 4
million to 10 million people more per year at no additional
cost.
The second proposal I would like to highlight is to relax
or eliminate cargo preference requirements. These rules require
that half of all food aid purchased in the U.S. be shipped on
U.S.-flagged vessels regardless of cost. This, essentially,
adds a 23 to 46 percent surcharge on food aid shipped on U.S.-
flagged vessels, a cost of about $50 million per year.
Since 2015, this surcharge has been paid for entirely by
U.S. taxpayer-funded food aid programs. To make matters worse,
it generates a windfall profit for a few ship owners, often
foreign corporations operating U.S. subsidiaries. For example,
three foreign shipping lines accounted for nearly half of all
food aid carried by U.S.-flagged ships from 2012 through mid
2015. Though often claimed that food aid cargo preference
contributes to military readiness, no credible evidence
supports this claim. Indeed, the majority of food aid shipments
are on U.S.-flagged vessels that the U.S. Government has deemed
not militarily useful. Removing cargo preference rules would
enable U.S. food aid programs to feed an estimated 1.8 million
more people per year.
The evidence is clear: Two policy changes, both of which
are budget-neutral, would greatly enhance food assistance
programs. First, relax or eliminate domestic procurement
restrictions on food aid; second, relax or eliminate the food
aid cargo preference rule. These two policy reforms matter.
American taxpayers deserve to not have their tax dollars and
goodwill squandered supporting special interests and complying
with burdensome restrictions. These reforms would also allow
U.S. food assistance programs to reach more people in need more
quickly and at no additional cost. Ending these two
restrictions could offer relief to an estimated 5.8 to 11.8
million more people per year. Thank you for your time and
attention to this very important issue.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lentz follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Dr. Lentz. Secretary Glickman.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DAN GLICKMAN, DISTINGUISHED FELLOW
OF GLOBAL FOOD AND AGRICULTURE, CHICAGO COUNCIL ON GLOBAL
AFFAIRS (FORMER SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE)
Mr. Glickman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, let me
say that when you referenced my time at USDA, my best time in
public service was my 18 years in the House. And I was never a
member of this committee, but I have told people it is,
notwithstanding all the controversy that is going on now, still
the best job in America, and we are very sorry to lose you as a
leader. You and Congressman Engel and the members of this
committee have done more to encourage U.S. engagement in the
world than almost anybody else. I wear many hats, the Chicago
Council, the World Food Program, U.S.A., U.S. Global Leadership
Coalition, and what this committee has done to make America
stronger by encouraging its engagement in the world, not
disengagement, I think has really been important.
I generally agree with the comments of my colleagues. I
would mention the first reform is to ensure that we do not go
down the road of meat-axing the budgets of the State Department
and USAID. It is interesting to look at the budget document of
the President, and it says, ``The budget acknowledges the
importance of State and USAID to advance the national security
interests of the United States.''
And then it announces a $9 billion cut, or about 26
percent, a cut of more than a quarter. Even General Mattis, our
Secretary of Defense, has said, if you don't fund the State
Department, I have got to buy more bullets. And I think there
is a recognition that we need a strong military, but we also
need a strong development and diplomacy side of the equation.
And so, I hope that this budget does not go forward because I
think it will hurt America and American engagement in the
world.
In terms of the issues we are talking about today, the
national security implications of food assistance are enormous.
Food price spikes led to fights and protests over the price of
bread in Tunisia, this is one of the primary causes of the
revolutions that the negative side of the Arab Spring and
snowballed into complete regional destabilization, and stoked
all sorts of fears in terms of the world economy. And the
national security interests of the United States in making sure
that we stabilize destabilized areas by feeding hungry people
with nutritious food is critical to our impact in the world.
And if we are out of the game, somebody else will get into this
game or nobody will get into the game, and I don't want to see
that happen.
Second of all, as former Secretary of Agriculture, I am
concerned about the impact of American farmers, and there is
clearly a role for commodities as part of our business of
providing assistance in the world. It just needs to be
flexible. The op-ed piece in the Nashville Tennesseean, which
probably everybody has seen written by Senators Corker, Coons,
and Zippy Duvall, president of the American Farm Bureau, could
be my statement today. It basically says what you said in your
opening statement. It encourages flexibility to deal with
different kinds of crises, and it also recognizes the
importance of the developing world for American farmers.
Africa has some of the fastest-growing economies of the
world. The African food and agriculture sectors projected to
reach $1 trillion by 2030. If America continues to invest in
the next generation of agricultural entrepreneurs, we and not
China, will be who they will turn to when looking for new seeds
or fertilizer, technology, business partnerships, and high
value products. But to meet that future, we have got to promote
the entirety of the aid toolkit. So some of that is U.S.
commodities, which Andrew Natsios and my colleague, Dr. Lentz,
have said may be necessary in severe humanitarian crisis. But
some of it is other things, including using EBT cards and paper
vouchers in the host communities.
I, myself, went to the Zaatari refugee camp. I don't know
if you have been there, which is on the Jordanian-Syrian border
about 100,000 people. And I saw the use of e-cards, basically
EBT cards and paper vouchers, about 100,000 people in that
camp. And the conditions were frankly not very good, but they
were getting food. They were using their cards to buy food.
Some of that food came from the region where they lived in, but
the cash was supported by the United States through the World
Food Program, and I saw the branding when I was there, which is
very important, that people know that it is coming from the
United States of America.
In Lebanon, WFP supported 650,000 Syrian refugees mostly
with cash-based assistance in a place where almost 25 percent
of the population is comprised of Syrian refugees. And Lebanon
is hosting 1 million of these refugees right now. Lebanon
directly injected U.S. dollars, about $1 billion into the
Lebanese economy through these programings.
And so, you need a variety of things. In-kind commodities
are critical to feeding local populations. This can include
corn and soy, or protein-rich therapy foods like Plumpy'Nut for
the severely malnourished, but when local markets are
functioning, new techniques like vouchers and debit cards can
be utilized to great effect. But in the cases of natural
disasters, if you talked about it the Philippines, Nepal, and
some places in sub-Saharan Africa right now, shipping food from
the United States is still going to be critically important,
and can't be out of the equation completely.
I agree that the use of monetization is not a good idea,
generally disrupts local markets and impacts farmers in the
region for decades, and Congress has recognized the need to
scale this back.
I would say I was very concerned about the budget proposal
to eliminate the McGovern-Dole school lunch program, a great
bipartisan effort by two great Senators who were involved in
these issues, as well as concerned about the efforts to
diminish the Feed the Future Initiative. In 2016, the McGovern-
Dole International Food for Education program reached 2 million
children. In the face of famine in Ethiopia, farmers reached by
USAID'S resiliency programs were significantly better at
maintaining their food security, only experiencing a 4 percent
drop, compared with those not reached by the program who saw a
30 percent drop. And this is the difference between being able
to continue to feed your family and going hungry.
There are 500 million small holder farmers in the world.
The U.S. is uniquely positioned to provide technical
assistance, help build infrastructure, and help American
farmers and ranchers at the same time. So again, I applaud your
efforts here. Those of you who have traveled to these camps to
see the incredible problems in Yemen, South Sudan, Ethiopia,
and to see what the United States has done, and really, to be
perfectly honest with you, I don't see anybody else filling the
gaps. And it is a great addition to the American toolkit and
American power, and I thank you very much for allowing me to
testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Glickman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. We have seen in
Sudan and South Sudan, food used as a weapon. We have seen it
in Somalia. We have seen it firsthand in Syria as well. And Mr.
Natsios is right. During the war, other than the Jewish
communities in which men and women and children, the majority
perished; the Greek community, because of the resistance; in
the Peloponnese; in northern Greece; in Crete, because of the
resistance, they had the highest share of losses of any
resistance that engaged against the Nazis and the highest share
of famine, a famine that was orchestrated by the Nazis during
the occupation. And our ability in order to project our
influence, not just for humanitarian interests, but for
economic and security reasons as well, is articulated by
Secretary Glickman is very important. I thought I would ask Dr.
Lentz, I am particularly interested in key issues like maternal
and child survival in situations like this, and given your
research, maybe you could explain.
And the other thing I was going to say is the
prepositioning of food is one of the things we often hear.
Well, you could preposition food, but I just want to tell you,
when our committee, after the typhoon were in the Philippines,
we were surprised to learn that even the prepositioning takes
weeks to get the food there, as opposed to what was being done,
which was buying the food locally in the region in the
Philippines and getting it there to the site in real time. And
so, Dr. Lentz.
Ms. Lentz. Thank you for those comments. I think you are
exactly right about prepositioning. The best available evidence
suggests that it costs between $30 to $60 per metric ton to
preposition food because of the additional storage costs
because of the additional fumigation costs, et cetera, so it is
a little bit more expense. But you are right, that trade-off
would be worth it if it could get there very quickly. And
oftentimes, it is still slower than using other sorts of tools
in the food assistance basket, so buying food locally, relying
on vouchers, or electronic transfers. These sorts of things
tend to be faster than prepositioned food, although
prepositioned food is very much better and faster than food
coming from the U.S. in terms of timeliness.
And that comes to your second point about the maternal
child health implications around time savings. I think the best
available evidence has indicated that this first 1,000-day
period is absolutely crucial and can have lifelong effects on
cognitive skills, on health, on earnings and even
intergenerational impacts. So children who are undernourished
when they grow up and have children, their children are more
likely to be unwell, as well.
So the opportunity for us to intervene earlier is
absolutely critical, especially in these cases where there is
an emergency, and we need to respond quickly. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. And let me also talk about that growing
effort for reform that Secretary Glickman referenced. So it was
yesterday that the President, as you said of the National Farm
Bureau, co-authored that op-ed that endorses these key reforms.
And we know that Food for Peace has enjoyed strong support from
American farmers and shippers and the NGOs implementing these
programs. So, Mr. Glickman, can you speak to why so many
farmers are coming out in support of the reform effort? And
maybe Dr. Lentz, should we be concerned by claims that changes
to the Food for Peace program will affect U.S. maritime
readiness? Maybe you can address that issue or any of the
panel.
Mr. Glickman. Well, I think that Zippy Duvall, who I don't
know very well, took a courageous stand because there has been
kind of a mantra in farm country for many years that the
majority of our assistance ought to be in the form of
commodities. And working especially with Senators Coons and
Corker, both of whom share yours and Chairman Engel's views on
a lot of these issues, I think was a gutsy thing for him to do,
to come out with this, particularly because all of agriculture
has not necessarily been unified on this particular point.
I want to make the point, however, that I don't think we
ought to think this means 100 percent cash. It can't.
Chairman Royce. No.
Mr. Glickman. But it does mean that somebody has got to be
able to use good judgment, and not necessarily be bound by
bureaucratic rules, which stovepipe the kind of programs that
go out, so if we need to get cash, we get cash there for local
market purchasing.
Chairman Royce. To quote Aristotle or Andrew Natsios,
``balance in all things.'' Comment maybe on the issue of
maritime preparedness.
Ms. Lentz. So just to echo Mr. Glickman's point, I agree,
flexibility is crucial. We want to provide USAID and USDA with
the broadest set of tools possible so that they can identify
what is appropriate for the right context.
Regarding military usefulness, I think claims that food aid
cargo preference requirements somehow support military
readiness are not backed up by any evidence that I have seen
that I find compelling, frankly. First, there is no evidence
that food aid helps in that food aid is often a very small part
of the actual cargo preference laws. It is only about 13 to 15
percent of cargo carried is food aid. And so, what that means
is the bulk of the cargo preference requirements are being met
through military cargo.
So it sounds like, okay, well, what is the big deal for
food aid? Well, the big deal is it costs a lot for the food aid
program. And so it is a very high cost to need to support or
need to kind of meet these cargo preference requirements.
Furthermore, officials at both the Department of Defense
and Homeland Security have expressed support for food aid
reforms. They have suggested that cargo preferences for food
aid does not actually make a substantial contribution to
military readiness.
Chairman Royce. Thanks, Dr. Lentz. Okay. Mr. Engel, my time
has expired.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me ask a question.
Let me ask all of you if you could please be concise in the
answer. A question on a point I made earlier. The President
wants to end the Food for Peace program. I don't think that is
a good idea. He wants to eliminate it as a standalone program.
He says that emergency food assistance will instead come out of
the international disaster assistance account. Is this a good
idea or a bad idea, Mr. Natsios?
Mr. Natsios. Well, Congressman, when I was the Assistant
Administrator of the bureau in which the Office of Foreign
Disaster Assistance and Food for Peace was, this was under Bush
41, 28 years ago, we considered merging not the accounts, but
the staffs of Food for Peace and OFDA, because there are
tensions. I understand they moved into the same building, and
there has been a huge drop in the tension levels, the friction
that exists between Federal offices since they are co-located.
So I would actually support a merger of the two offices,
which is under serious consideration, but not an abolition of
the Food for Peace law or the appropriation level, or the
expertise that Food for Peace has in food security. People
think that all the Food for Peace staff does is ship food out.
That is just not true. They are experts in nutrition. They are
experts in the balance you need when you feed people. You can't
just feed them all grain. You have to give them fat in the form
of vegetable oil. You also have the give them protein in the
form of beans, and you have to monitor that. You have to have
set up systems for monitoring this to make sure that the food
is getting where it is supposed to get. So that expertise
cannot be lost. And so, I strongly support the continuation of
the Food for Peace account, the Food for Peace program, but
believe it should be more flexible.
Let me just add one piece of empirical evidence we have.
Dan Honig is a young academic at SAIS, the Johns Hopkins School
of Advanced International Studies here in DC. He has just come
out with a book that studied 10,000 aid projects from nine
different aid agencies, including USAID, DFID, the British aid
agency, and he asked the question: Those which are highly
centralized in their headquarters versus those that are highly
decentralized, what is the failure rate of the programs? And he
concludes that particularly in unstable and rapid changing
circumstances, which is certainly the case in disaster
response, that the failure rate increases dramatically if the
decisions are made in the capital or the headquarters, and if
they are highly decentralized and you give maximum flexibility
to the offices in the field, you have a much higher success
rate. So we now have enormous empirical research to support
what seems to be common sense. Sometimes common sense can't be
proved. In this case, we can prove it.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Dr. Lentz?
Ms. Lentz. I would agree that the Food for Peace program
should be maintained. I think Mr. Natsios covered it really
well.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Mr. Glickman?
Mr. Glickman. And I would add McGovern-Dole to that, as
well. That should be maintained. But here is the problem: There
probably are some bureaucratic problems in terms of
implementation. You talk to the NGOs, and they really have to
go through a lot of bureaucratic gobbledygook to figure out
which account they are going into and which they are not. But
if this were offered without a 29 percent reduction in money I
might be willing to sit down and talk to them about some of
these changes, but the elimination of Food for Peace and
McGovern-Dole and others, frankly, is just a way to reduce the
amount of money we spend in those areas. So that is one of the
real reasons why I wouldn't support it.
Mr. Engel. I agree with you, and that is why I am so
worried about it. Mr. Glickman, let me ask you this: Many would
argue that the U.S. comparative advantage in responding to
international food needs is through its ability to produce an
abundant food supply. When America provides homegrown food, it
is supporting the U.S. farmer, as well as U.S. food producers,
processors, and shippers, and yet, in-kind food aid as we have
heard here, is relatively slow to arrive and costly when
compared with cash-based alternatives. So in your view, what is
the appropriate balance here? What is the appropriate balance
between in-kind and cash-based food assistance?
Mr. Glickman. I think it depends on the nature of the
purpose of where the food is going. So if it is dealing with a
typhoon or an earthquake, the majority probably ought to be in
the form of in-kind commodities. Just you got to get the food
there as quickly as possible, and it still takes too long to
get there. But if you are trying to build local economies or if
you have refugee camps, like the Ethiopian camps, or the camps
in Lebanon, and, of course, a lot of people in Jordan actually
live in Amman. There are several hundred thousand people there,
and they get most of their food through the voucher, the EBT.
Then you almost have to go the way of using local purchases or
EBT cards, that kind of thing. So it is just the whole thing
you have got to be flexible with it. I think the American
farmers want to help feed the world, and we provide the
commodities to do that, but I think that more American farmers
are realizing that there are many ways to skin this cat, not
just one way.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel. Next in the queue is
Tom Marino of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Chairman. Good morning, and thank
you for being here. I would like to start with Secretary
Glickman. When U.S. international food aid programs were first
designed 64 years ago, surplus agricultural commodities
threatened to destabilize food prices, and negatively impact
American farmers. Today, food prices are high, and exports of
U.S. agricultural commodities are booming, exceeding the USDA's
own forecast in fiscal year 2016. Food aid represents less than
one-tenth of a percent of U.S. agricultural production. Reforms
that this committee will be asked to consider would eliminate
the requirement, but not the option, for all food aid to be
procured in and shipped from the United States.
Mr. Secretary, how would a proposal to relax U.S. purchase
requirements impact American farmers, and to what degree are
American farmers dependent on U.S. food aid programs? I come
from a very rural agricultural district.
Mr. Glickman. Yes. You know, the biggest part of our
exports in the world are in what you would call the row crop
commodities, wheat, corn, cotton to some extent, rice, soy
beans, and right now, actually, agriculture prices have taken a
bit of a tumble during the last year or so in part because of
world economic conditions and, in part, because of surpluses.
Over the years, most farmers have supported these programs
largely because they provided an avenue, although a small
avenue, because we actually sell way more in these products
than we give away. This is a huge part of an American farmer's
income is the sale of these products.
But I guess I would answer your question this way: A very,
very small portion of what an American farmer produces actually
goes for food assistance. But large enough that, and especially
the countries in Africa that within the next 10 or 15 years,
may be able to buy 20, 25 percent of their products from us. So
this is more of an investment in the future as much as it is an
immediate need. We don't want to lose those markets, and the
best way to get those markets is to build local agricultural
infrastructure and economies and as they grow, they begin to
buy more stuff from us. That is a longer-term strategy, but
that is the best answer I can give you.
Mr. Marino. What arguments would you make to farmers in
agribusiness to convince them that the United States should
substantially reform the way in which it provides food aid? And
believe it or not, I have my farmers ask me what is going to
happen to my farm when changes are made and how can we survive?
Mr. Glickman. Well, again, we don't want to do anything to
jeopardize our global sales, because that is the big elephant
is the ability to sell our agricultural commodities overseas,
and that gets into a lot of other issues, like trade
agreements, which is not part of this discussion. But that is
far more important to farm income right now than the
humanitarian relief that we provide.
But what I would tell farmers is that the big growth
regions in the world are in the developing world. Africa will
produce $1 trillion worth of agriculture commodities and crops
within the next 5 to 10 years. I mean, that is where the growth
is, and the growth is in the developing world. And the more
business we do with them the better we are, and when they
suffer, our ability to help alleviate their suffering builds
trust.
I think Andrew Natsios talked about branding, and when you
deliver, when it is commodities, you deliver that aid with the
USAID, what was it?
Mr. Natsios. Logo.
Mr. Glickman. Logo on it, or even on the EBT cards, or the
other forms that you provide electronically it says, ``product
of the United States of America.''
Mr. Marino. I would like to quickly hit two other areas. I
have been to Africa, the continent of Africa, Liberia, Sierra
Leone, Ghana, I see what it is like. I have been with the
chairman on several trips, and the things that we have seen
were just heartbreaking. But we also heard that the militants,
there are groups of militants that confiscate, steal this food
from where it is supposed to go. To what degree is that
happening, and what are we doing about it? Anyone?
Mr. Natsios. Well, I have been managing off and on these
programs for 28 years, and security particularly in unstable
regions of the world, which is the majority of--75 percent of
this food goes for humanitarian relief and in emergencies, and
it is not in natural disasters. It is almost all in famines and
civil wars.
Mr. Marino. Agreed.
Mr. Natsios. We did a study when I was OFDA director in
USAID 25 years ago, we asked the question, the previous 25
years, how did people die in disasters? Seventy-five percent of
the people who died in disasters died from famines or civil
wars. Seventy-five percent. Not in natural disasters. So our
program is focused on food security for that reason.
Now, how do you deal with the issue of security if you
don't have American troops there, or U.N. troops to protect the
food aid? Well, that is the problem. The reason I support going
to the use of cash cards in unstable situations is you can't
tell who has a cash card and who doesn't. But you can tell who
has a bag of food and who doesn't. The bag is pretty big. It is
a giant bull's-eye for anybody with a gun. And if you have a
food truck going down and it is an unstable area, guess what
they attack? A person--how do you know who has a cash card?
Chairman Royce. Okay. Mr. Brad Sherman of California.
Mr. Sherman. No one can quibble that we need flexibility,
especially when time is of the essence, and if the goal was the
cheapest calorie per cents measure, we wouldn't have a Food for
Peace program. We might keep the staff. We would have a ``Money
for Peace program.'' We would tell the bureaucracy you get so
much money, provide as many calories as you can, as many
protein grams as you can to as many people as you can. This is
close to what the President is proposing. He says, let's
eliminate the Food for Peace program and move the money to
situations where the bureaucracy is free. And what that does is
it destroys many elements over time of the support for U.S.
foreign aid.
We already have authorized the ``Money for Peace program.''
We get dozens of programs that provide U.S. money to poor
people, or people who are suffering for a variety of reasons.
We have basically one Food for Peace program, which would have
the support of American agriculture if the advocates of the
program weren't busy telling farmers that it was unimportant to
American agriculture. And now we are going to make it utterly
unimportant, or less important to American agriculture. It has
the support of the cargo industry, or an element of it, and the
many millions of Americans who dream and honor the U.S.
merchant marine and remember how important that was in the
past, so we lose the support of those who are advocates of
dealing with the trade deficit because now all the money is
part of the trade deficit. We lose the support of those who are
for agriculture by telling them it is unimportant, or by making
it unimportant. We lose the support of those who are in favor
of a strong U.S. Merchant Marine. And we rely exclusively on
whatever political support we have from those who want to feed
those who would otherwise starve, perhaps even die.
And I wonder whether it is right to say that it is clear
that these restrictions cost money. Do they also generate
money? I almost feel like we should be the witnesses and you
should be asking the questions. You are strong advocates of
feeding those who are hungry. But actually, we should have some
appropriators here, and see whether the cost is more than made
up by the political support.
But I was on the trip that the chairman references where it
was important to have the flag on the bag. There is something
very symbolic to the American people to say here we are, pose
for a picture, bag of American food. And I think if we were
sitting there posing with an EBT card where people were buying
Australian grain, I am not sure that that would have built the
support in the United States, but what is even more important
is the image to those who receive the aid.
Mr. Glickman, or Secretary Glickman, you have been talking
about branding. The Australians provided aid, we provided aid.
They had their flags on their bag. I presume we had our flag on
our bag. How do we use some sort of debit card, put a flag on
the card, but what if that card is used to buy grain from a
variety of different sources. It could be recharged different
ways. It may not even be a card, it may be on a phone. How do
you brand American aid--how do you put a flag on a bag if there
is no bag?
Mr. Glickman. Let me just give you a couple things. Nobody
is talking about getting rid of the cash program, period. We
are just saying that in some cases it doesn't work very well,
it can't get the food there fast enough.
Mr. Sherman. Oh, yes. Clearly the only argument here is the
degree of flexibility.
Mr. Glickman. That is right.
Mr. Sherman. Some have put forward the argument, Hey, you
can be 20, 30 percent more effective if you just eliminate all
these restrictions with a possible exception of vegetable oil
shipped on foreign flag vessels.
Mr. Glickman. But what is encouraging is when I saw this
op-ed in the Nashville Tennessean, you had the head of the
largest farm organization in the United States joined with two
very senior Senators who are involved in humanitarian efforts
to say flexibility is good, and we as farmers can support that
flexibility.
The other thing I would just mention is the U.N. food
program estimates that they are not able to fund one-third of
the needs for famine and humanitarian relief every year. The
United States is the largest funder in the world food program.
And much of that is going to continue to be cash, and the
better we brand it, the better we are. And so all I can say is
that----
Mr. Sherman. Secretary Glickman, I asked a question about
branding.
Mr. Glickman. You did.
Mr. Sherman. I know I said a lot of other things you would
like to respond to, but I am already on overtime. Can we have
an answer on branding issues?
Mr. Natsios. Yes. I put the branding system in place when I
was USAID Administrator in 2003 because of the war on terror,
and we had to make it clear this was U.S. purchased food.
Locally purchased, not U.S. food. There you see, ``USAID from
the American people.'' So the locally purchased food still has
the USAID brand on it, not just the U.S. shipped food. And I
might add, all of those cash cards----
Mr. Sherman. We were talking about the EBT cards, what if
we are not----
Mr. Natsios. They also have the USAID logo. From the
American people on each one of the cards.
Mr. Sherman. Then you have to have a separate card--if you
are getting aid both from Australia and the United States you
would have one card from one country and another card from
another country.
Mr. Natsios. Well, the way we do it in the U.S. Government,
we pay for the card, we put our brand on it, it is clear. Every
time they use that card, they see U.S.
Chairman Royce. And just to clarify, the flag on the bag
that we saw when we were in the Philippines when we were
assisting there, that was locally purchased food from the
Philippines that was in that bag.
Mr. Natsios. And let me just add one thing to make clear. I
completely agree with Secretary Glickman's comments on these
budget cuts. You cannot delegate to the States or
municipalities--I am a Republican, which I normally, in
domestic programs, support--you cannot delegate American
foreign policy, and you cannot privatize it. Cutting $9 billion
out of the 150 account is a terrible idea. I do not support it,
and I wish the administration would stop doing that.
Mr. Sherman. Amen.
Chairman Royce. Okay. So we go to Mr. Ted Yoho of Florida.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate all three
of you being here and your patience. Mr. Natsios, you were
talking about America losing its hegemony in the world, and I
think that is something that is going to continue.
Unfortunately, we are going through a tectonic shift in world
powers that we haven't seen the likes since World War II, and I
think that is one of the reasons we are seeing the amount of
refugees that we are seeing.
Saying that, with the budget restraints that we are seeing
as a Nation, all you have to do is look at what has gone on
since September with the six resolutions, continuing
resolutions, we are facing severe budgetary constraints, and we
are going to continue, and they are going to worsen in this
country. Therefore, how do we tighten up the program to make it
more beneficial, and if you look at the different agencies and
departments giving out food aid, or some form of foreign aid,
we have to streamline this. And so my question to you is how
well are we coordinating with other countries when there is an
emergency famine? I agree we have to respond to that. And I
came up here to get rid of foreign aid, but I have become more
knowledgeable after 5\1/2\ years here that I agree with General
Mattis. We have to use a certain amount, but we have to use it
more effectively. So how well do we coordinate with other
nations so that we are not duplicating efforts? Is that going
on now?
Mr. Natsios. If I could, we have been coordinating better,
actually, in the emergency area than any other area of foreign
aid, and we have been doing it for three decades now. The
evidence we have for this is in a new book written by a good
friend of mine, Alex de Waal, a British scholar who teaches at
Tufts. It is called ``Mass Starvation.'' And he looks at a
number of people who have died since 1870 from starvation, and
he goes through that 110-year period. And he concludes that
since 1980, there has been a dramatic drop in the number of
people who die of starvation. And he said the reason for this
in part is the growth of the world economy, globalization,
which everybody is attacking now, and the second reason is the
emergency response system. Even though it has got its
weaknesses, it is actually working. Now, we have a meeting--not
``we,'' I am not in office anymore. The emergency managers from
Europe, Canada, the United States, Australia, and Japan meet on
a regular basis, and they will say, look, the United States can
put more money in Liberia, not so much in Sierra Leone because
of the historic relationship. The British say, no, we will do
Sierra Leone if you do Liberia.
Mr. Yoho. All right, but we are talking about money, but
what about the coordinating of the efforts like, all right, you
guys bring this to the table, we will bring this. Is someone
coordinating this?
Mr. Natsios. Yes, that is exactly what goes on.
Mr. Yoho. Secretary Glickman?
Mr. Glickman. First of all, let me tell you we have a great
new head of the World Food Program, David Beasley, the former
Governor of South Carolina.
Mr. Yoho. Yes, I know him. I met with him.
Mr. Glickman. He is outstanding. And you talk about a real
genuine humanitarian, and this is not to castigate anything on
previous WFP directors, but he cares very much about it,
because most of this food aid is run through the World Food
Program, the U.N. The U.N. is very bureaucratic. You talk about
bureaucracy in the United States.
Mr. Yoho. That is why I say, how can we do it better?
Mr. Glickman. His job, his charge is to try to reduce some
of this effort, and it makes it hard for the NGO community to
be honest with you because they have to deal with different
accounts in different countries, but my judgment is that based
on my discussions with him, he is committed to do exactly what
you are talking about, and that is better management.
Mr. Yoho. We have had several discussions with them. In
fact, we are introducing the BUILD Act, which is Better
Utilization of Investments Leading to Development--it will be
coming out in near future--to streamline foreign aid. But then
we have the emergencies of famine.
With the McGovern-Dole, we hear a lot of criticism of that,
and with the austerity measures, the President, in his budget,
was saying that it is an ineffective program. The school
program, lunch programs. Do we have numbers to show what the
results of those have been since 2002 when that program came
out? Can we justify and say, ``Since we started this, these are
the results''?
I will give you an example. With GAVI, with Bill Gates,
when they go in and vaccinate in countries, what they have seen
is there is less money going for sickness, for the treatment of
sickness because they have prevented it, and crime has gone
down 40 percent. Do we have anything like that that we can say,
with McGovern-Dole, the school program?
Mr. Glickman. I don't have anything specific, but I will do
my best to get you that information.
Mr. Yoho. If you can get us that information, it will be
very helpful.
Mr. Glickman. Yeah, I referenced some of the things, little
bit in my testimony, about the drop of food insecurity with
those who were fed in school meals programs, but I will get you
more.
Mr. Yoho. And you guys brought up a very important thing.
If people's bellies are empty, they are hungry, there is
strife. And you can't have world peace if you don't have food
security.
Dr. Lentz, you wanted to throw something in? I am out of
time.
Ms. Lentz. I would just to add to that, which is that a
recent United Nations World Food Program study found that a 1
percent increase in food insecurity causes a 2 percent increase
in forced migration.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you. I am out of time. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. We will go to Bill Keating of
Massachusetts.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is great to see
Andrew Natsios here, my former colleague from the Massachusetts
House. And his presence reminds me of the wisdom of former and
the late Congressman Joseph Moakley, who used to say that if a
person has served three terms of Congress, it might qualify
them for their first time in the Massachusetts House.
So welcome, Andrew. I would like to thank the rest of our
panel. I would note, Mr. Chairman, once again, we have a panel
and no representative from the Trump administration here on
these important issues, something I hope we can look forward to
in the future, although the panel is a terrific one. And I
think it speaks to the commitment to this program and our
national effort. You have Mr. Glickman, dating back from the
Clinton administration; you have Dr. Lentz who is here
representing the Johnson School of Public Affairs, and you have
Mr. Natsios who is here with the Bush School of Government. And
I think it shows the bipartisan nature and commitment to this
issue, something that I hope we can move forward to, given the
fact that Food for Peace was eliminated and supplanted, at
least, in terms of budgetary issues.
I am also the ranking member on the Foreign Affairs'
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade. And on
the terrorism aspect, I would like to ask Mr. Glickman, you
touched on it, I think, with your remarks, but we could really
rename this, instead of Food for Peace, we could say it is
``food for national security.'' And I think it would be as apt
as calling it that.
With terrorism and the threats that not only affect global
security, but affect us back here at home, can you tell us of
the importance of that program in that regard?
Mr. Glickman. I will give you one example. When I was at
the Zaatari refugee camp on the Jordanian-Syrian border, I met
with a family. We sat on the floor. There was nothing, it was
concrete. The family, the father, he was an automobile
mechanic. And most of the time we spent with him, he was
crying. And he had five children, and one of them was a 17-
year-old boy. And this doesn't go exactly to your question, but
it goes to the issue of refugee status. They had been there for
5 years in this place.
And he said, look at my son. He said, You don't think he is
a candidate for ISIS? He says, there is nothing here for him.
Zero. Yeah, we have enough food to eat because the U.N.--and
then I said, And the U.S.--I wanted to make sure I got that in
there--provides that kind of thing.
There is no question that poverty, hunger, and economic
instability is one of the major factors in terrorism in this
world. I think it is clear.
Mr. Keating. It really creates a system of incubation for
terrorism. Would any of the other----
Mr. Natsios. Let me just to make a comment on this, because
I think there is a lot of comments being made--not just here,
but everywhere--and there is a subtlety to this. When people
feel threatened in their home villages, either from violence,
from epidemics of disease, most importantly from severe food
insecurity and famine, they leave, en masse, their villages.
They don't normally like to do that. They will do it when they
are desperate and they think they are going to die otherwise.
When people leave their village, their social hierarchies
collapse. A large number of them die because they are already
malnourished along the way. They form refugee camps and
internally-displaced camps. Every extremist movement that we
are dealing with started in a refugee--almost all, not every
single one of them--but where did al-Qaeda start? And where did
Taliban start? It started in the Afghan refugee camps in
Pakistan. Why were those camps there? Because of the Russian
invasion in 1979. Wide-spread food insecurity. There were
starvation deaths in 1990s in Afghanistan. And those people,
millions of them, I think there 3 or 4 million Afghan refugees
in Pakistan that were there for 15 or 20 years. And Ahmed
Rashid wrote a book called ``The Taliban,'' and he traces the
development of the Taliban that led to the attack on the United
States in those camps.
If we get food quickly and efficiently to the villages
before people leave, those camps won't form, unless they are
leaving because of violence. That is a different matter.
Mr. Keating. Thank you. I enjoyed cutting you off a little
bit, Andrew, because I never was able to do that in the
Massachusetts House.
But Dr. Lentz, quickly, this is important, too. How it gets
there. If you could touch on the fact--and I think you did this
with your remarks--quickly. What is the role of women and
mothers, in terms of the management and disposition of these
resources. I think that we have found through so many studies,
the more they are involved in their own country in this regard,
more of the resources and the food would go to children as
well. And it gets better dispensed. Can you quickly comment on
that?
Ms. Lentz. I think you are absolutely right. I don't think
this kind of speaks to earlier comments made about the
importance of Food for Peace's staff in terms of their
abilities to identify what are the right sets of resources for
people who are in need. And those needs differ, of course, by
family members. So children and their moms often have different
nutritional requirements than the rest of the household.
So I think that you are exactly right. To kind of care for
mothers, women who are pregnant, and young children, we need a
lot of different tools out there, including ready-to-use
therapeutic foods. We also need to figure out what the best
ways possible to get them there faster. And I think that you
are right, when women have some ability to make choices more
broadly with, say, for example, using vouchers, many folks end
up trying to buy healthier foods, right. So not necessarily
more calories, but oftentimes, more nutrient-dense foods, like
leafy greens and eggs, and things that are really important for
children's nutrition that, frankly, are very hard to accomplish
with food aid purchased in the U.S.
Mr. Keating. Great. Thank you. I am over my time. And I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. To respond, though, if I could, Mr.
Keating, you mentioned the Secretary of State. He will be here
in 2 weeks, on the 27th. And the week after, or at least March
7th, we will have USAID Director Mark Green here. And they just
presented the budget, so that is why they are not here today.
But I think this was a good forum here today, that we took the
opportunity for some very experienced presenters, or witnesses,
here.
We now go to Adam Kinzinger from Illinois.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I will say,
just to say further on that, this administration has actually
reached out more than I have ever experienced in my 8 years in
politics. So, but let me just, at the risk of reiterating
reiterations and piggy-backing and all those annoying terms, I
want to make the quick point that we have talked about branding
and the branding issue. I think it is essential to remember
food as not just a humanitarian tool, which it is and it is
important, but it is also a tool of national security. It is
soft power. And we are in the business of figuring out how to
bring people better lives through great influence of our
country. And I think that is important to remember.
I think we all can agree--I will ask this first to the
Administrator, Mr. Natsios, and then we will go down the line,
if anybody has answers or thoughts. We can all agree that the
Syrian conflict has reached epic proportions, in fact, that
news over the last couple weeks is, I mean, we now have
basically all the parties of the world fighting over land. Over
500,000 people are dead, and 50,000 of those are children,
which people need to continue to let that sink in.
Last year, I wrote about how hunger is used as a weapon in
Syria. We see daily instances of these actions by the barbaric
Assad regime to hold food assistance hostage in order to starve
the people of Eastern Ghouta. By the way, Russia and Iran bear
equal responsibility in that, too.
Furthermore, I fear that if we are not helping these people
feed their families, as you guys talked about, those 7- and 8-
year-old Syrians in refugee camps, or those besieged in Syrian
cities, will become easy recruits for terrorists who manipulate
their hunger and fear. It is very hard to recruit somebody out
of a village. For instance, a village I went to in Africa, in
which the United States built a milk co-op and helped them,
helped the village learn how to feed the cows and produce more
milk. And they will always remember the United States changed
their lives. But if you find yourself hopeless in a refugee
camp, it is really easy for some extremists to come in and tell
you, the West is at fault for your misery, and you should blow
yourself up in a cafe. Syria continues to be a difficult place
to have an impact with food aid.
Starting with you, Mr. Administrator, if you were advising
the President, what would you recommend in terms of how we can
effectively provide food aid to the people that need it while
not benefiting the Assad regime?
Mr. Natsios. Well, that is the question, Congressman, that
is the question. And more even in Syria than almost anywhere
else because there is so many great powers involved, as you
pointed out, at the same time. Russia; the United States; Iran
is involved; Turkey is deeply involved in a destabilizing way,
in my view. So that is the problem.
The use of cash cards has been more extensive in Syria than
almost any other emergency for that reason, because we--the
United States--did not want the Assad regime or any of the
groups to hijack the aid effort for their own political
purposes. And the more chaos there is, the more the risk
increases for that to happen.
And so, they have used cash cards, vouchers, and what I
would call more innovative approaches to relief in Syria
because they are more immune to manipulation in a highly
politicized circumstance than traditional food aid. That is not
the case in other places, but it is particularly the case----
Mr. Kinzinger. So you would have no further
recommendations? You think it is going kind of swimmingly?
Mr. Natsios. Well, I personally supported it a long time
ago, and signed a letter 7 years ago during the Obama
administration saying there should be safe havens established--
--
Mr. Kinzinger. Sure.
Mr. Natsios [continuing]. And we should provide air cover,
and we wouldn't have had all this population movement, which is
a disaster.
I just want to say--and maybe I shouldn't say it--King
Abdullah of Jordan, who is an ally of the United States and one
of my favorite heads of state, Jordan is doing very well,
surrounded, it is, by chaos.
Mr. Kinzinger. Sure.
Mr. Natsios. He said, he told a group of U.S. Senators,
that Turkey was driving refugees to Europe, pushing them across
the border, and he used the term ``weaponized refugees.'' And
the chairman of the Joint Chiefs and the Supreme Allied
Commander of NATO said the same thing. They are weaponizing--
different powers. Russia is doing the same thing.
Mr. Kinzinger. Yeah.
Mr. Natsios. They are trying to destabilize Europe.
Mr. Kinzinger. I have no doubt that we see what we are and,
you know--fine, if you are non-interventionalist, I get it, and
you think America plays no role in the world, that is fine, I
get that. But there is no doubt that our inaction in Syria is
extremely responsible for what we are seeing today.
And, look at this. I mean, it is funny, just to bring up
the politics of it for a moment. A lot of the times people
criticize the current administration's actions or lack of
actions, or whatever. We are in this situation in Syria because
we were paralyzed and didn't do anything. And now you have
every major power of the world trying to gain something in
Syria, and we end up having to defend our allies, and in the
process, kill many, many Russian mercenaries, which, I think,
Vladimir Putin has been notoriously quiet on. So I would be
curious as to what his thoughts were on that and why they were
there.
I am sure, you don't leave Russia as a mercenary without
some kind of tacit approval. But I digress. I had more
questions, but we got on to the Syria issue, which I am
especially passionate about.
So Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Glickman. Mr. Chairman, can I make just a comment?
First of all, Congressman, your leadership is well known in
this area.
I want to reinforce what Andrew said about Jordan. One-
fourth of the people in Jordan are Syrian----
Mr. Kinzinger. That is right.
Mr. Glickman [continuing]. Syrian refugees. They have
inundated the country because there is no other place to go. A
lot of them are in refugee camps. Most of them are in the
cities. And I can't answer your question about Syria, but I can
and say this: If we don't understand and help the Jordanians
deal with this problem, we will lose one of our closest
friends, not only in the region, but in the world.
Mr. Kinzinger. I agree.
Mr. Glickman. They are key to this.
Mr. Kinzinger. The King made a point to us. He said, I
think it was, at that time, he said, ``It is the equivalent of
all of the nation of Canada moving into the United States
without a job.'' We like the Canadians, but we want them to
have jobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Natsios. Mr. Chairman, could I just----
Chairman Royce. It would actually be twice that percentage.
Mr. Kinzinger. Yeah, that is right. Yeah.
Mr. Natsios. Could I just add one thing?
Chairman Royce. Mr. Natsios.
Mr. Natsios. I am Antiochian Orthodox Christian, and our
patriarch is in Damascus. One of our archbishops was kidnapped
by the terrorists, and one of our bishops. And we have not
heard from them in 3 years.
The largest number of people killed in Syria,
disproportionate to any other, are Antioch, are my church
members. And we get terrible stories from our priests in the
villages about the atrocities being committed against Orthodox
Christians, and also, eastern right Catholics as well. But
there is a particular focus on attacking the eastern church
that has been there for 2,000 years, so I have to say, this is
a very personal thing for me.
And I might add, when people attack Arabs in the United
States, they make these comments, a lot of Arabs are
Christians, and they have been for 2,000 years. And so, I get
upset when people make these generalizations. It is
inappropriate. The fact of the matter is, the great bulk of
people who are getting killed are, in fact, Christians in
Syria, but also, many of the minority traditions of Islam are
also being attacked and being victimized. And you know that
from your own experience. It is horrendous, the atrocities that
have been committed.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. We go now to David Cicilline of Rhode
Island.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
for this hearing on this very important issue that is quite
literally a matter of life and death. Without proper access to
food and nutrition, children cannot attend school, men and
women cannot work, and families cannot feed their children. And
we all understand the conflict and national security challenges
that flow from food insecurity. And that is why I am very proud
that the United States has been the largest supplier of food
aid in the world, and committed to ensuring that we continue to
lead the world in efforts to ease hunger and establish self-
sufficiency and food security.
And like many of my colleagues, I am deeply troubled about
the President's budget, which really abandons that role. I am
also particularly proud that in Rhode Island, we are helping to
lead this effort. I was happy to hear Secretary Glickman talk
about Plumpy'Nut. And I really want to recognize the work of
Edesia Nutrition, a wonderful food aid and global nutrition
nonprofit based in my home State. It uses an innovative and
targeted approach to ensuring that populations around the world
have access to healthy, nutritional food by producing and
introducing into local markets ready-to-use therapeutic and
supplementary foods.
Each year, millions of their miracle packets leave Edesia's
Rhode Island factory, and are delivered by large humanitarian
organizations such as UNICEF, the World Food Program and USAID
into the hands of malnourished children all over the world in
some of the hardest-to-reach places, in most inhospitable
places on the planet. And their incredible state-of-the-art
factory is this incredible example of a public-private
partnership that is producing peanut, milk-based, ready-to-use
supplemental and therapeutic foods with ingredients sourced
from over 15 States.
These products are really saving the lives of millions of
starving children around the world, at the same time, providing
good paying jobs to middle class workers in our State, and as
well as refugees who have settled in America. So I just want to
acknowledge their work and say how proud I am of them.
There are two things that I think that their presence in
Rhode Island has kind of focused my attention on. And the first
is, as we talked about food reform, food aid reform, it seems
to me that one of the things we have to be careful about is
this sort of U.S. manufactured-based food aid that Edesia
represents and others, that if we ship too much to just cash,
we lose the whole kind of stakeholder advocacy that has been so
critical to protecting U.S. food aid and our leadership role in
that. And I think it becomes very easy if it is just a number
in a budget, a lot easier to cut, and, maybe someday,
eliminate. I just wonder what your thoughts are on that?
And secondly, with particularly specialized nutritional
products that were created by research that was funded by USDA
and USAID, that really meet the specific nutritional needs in
some of the most fragile populations, children under 5 and
pregnant mothers, nursing mothers, for example.There are some
local and regional producers who can make these types of
products, but they don't have the capacity to reach all the
areas of need, and particularly in the times of acute crisis.
So I wonder how we preserve this important capacity that it
makes the food supplement that arrives really effective and
that may not be capable of being generated in the host country.
Do we do a carveout? Do we do a percentage? But how do we
protect that so we don't lose both the advocacy and the very
specialized capability of places like Edesia that are making a
real difference?
Mr. Natsios. Could I just comment on that? First, the
nutritional supplements are actually not funded by Food for
Peace. The corn-soy blend is, but a lot of the intensive
feeding is funded by the Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance.
It is an entire budget. It is the 150 account as opposed to the
farm bill.
We hear this argument made. And the advocacy groups, the
shipping companies keep making it, that the----
Mr. Cicilline. No, no, I am not talking about the shipping
companies.
Mr. Natsios. No, no, I understand.
Mr. Cicilline. I am talking about the production.
Mr. Natsios. I know. I know. But let's just talk about the
farmers. Okay. They are saying, without us, there would be no
Food for Peace. That is just not true. The office----
Mr. Cicilline. With all due respect, that is not my
question. I have limited time. I am talking about specialized
products that are produced----
Mr. Natsios. Right.
Mr. Cicilline. That are manufactured in the U.S.
Mr. Natsios. Those are not paid for, for the most part, by
Food for Peace. They are paid for by the Office of the Foreign
Disaster Assistance that has a $2 billion budget because of the
generosity of this Congress, I might add. By the way, I ran
that office 30 years ago, and it had a $20 million budget with
45 staff. It has 700 staff and a $2 billion budget. And the
food that they do--they don't do food, that is the Food for
Peace; however, nutritional supplements are done by OFDA. The
corn-soy blend, which you may also be talking about, that is
funded by Food for Peace.
So it is a careful arrangement, but it is not entirely done
by Food for Peace, is what I am saying to you.
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Glickman?
Mr. Glickman. A couple things. I think your point about
political support is interesting. As you know, only 1 percent
of the budget is in foreign assistance, but it is still a chore
to get people to support it. I understand that. And that is why
it is so important to have farmers and rangers in this country
continue to support these programs. And I work on that as much
as I possibly can.
With respect to the issue of the specialty foods, one
interesting phenomenon is, Africa now has the highest rate
increase of noncommunicable diseases in the world. So what are
those? Diabetes, hypertension, cardiac disease. And I mean, we
know about of the pandemics and the communicable disease. And a
lot of studies show it has to do with what they eat, and that
their diets are not fully enriched and don't contain the broad
variety of nutrients that are needed. And so I now see the
World Food Program is beginning to get much more interested in
the subject.
I will go back to David Beasley, who is the chairman. And
you are going to have Mark Green, the head of USAID. You ought
to ask him the same question. It is really important.
Mr. Cicilline. Can I just ask one last question? On the
branding, do we brand also in the native language? The only
thing I remember when I was at Zaatari in Jordan, there was
some language about a gift from the people of the United
States. But my guess is that 98 percent of the people in that
camp did not speak English.
Do we also do it in the native language of the recipient?
Mr. Natsios. Well, I can tell you what the rules say that I
put in place when I was Administrator. And it is in the Federal
Acquisition Regulations, written down. And it says it must be
in the local language. I have noted, however, that that is not
always what is done.
Mr. Cicilline. As have I.
Mr. Natsios. They usually keep the words in English.
However, the red, white and blue and the ``U.S.'' is pretty
clear, even to people who can't read where it comes from. And I
will give you an example how we know that. After the tsunami in
the Indian ocean in December 2004, the end of December, just
after Christmas, 125,000 people were killed in Aceh. We ran a
huge relief effort. And we branded everything with the brand
that I showed you earlier.
We didn't do it for any other reason than we just wanted it
on the aid to show what we did. Bin Laden's poll ratings in the
largest Muslim country in the world, in Indonesia, were 58
percent approval rating. The U.S. had a 28 percent approval
rating, before the tsunami. Four months later, according to
five different polls in five different newspapers, bin Laden's
polls collapsed from 58 percent to 26 percent, and the U.S.
went up from 28 percent to 63 percent approval rating.
The CIA told me bin Laden was extremely upset that his poll
ratings collapsed. All the newspapers in Indonesia said, where
is our friend bin Laden? He is our friend. We didn't like the
United States, but who is helping us in our time of need, the
United States is. They are everywhere.
So if you think this doesn't have an effect, let me tell
you, it does. And President Yudhoyono, who is the President of
Indonesia, said privately, I am an ally of the United States,
but sometimes it is kind of hard to be supportive of you guys,
since you are not very popular here. After the tsunami, it was
easy for him to associate with the United States.
Chairman Royce. Ann Wagner of Missouri.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for hosting this
important hearing on international food aid. As noted,
America's generosity to victims of disasters, atrocities and
poverty across the world, has been an integral part of our
foreign policy, and certainly, our national security and such.
Like all Federal programs, our food aid programs should be
smart, they should be efficient, and they should be
streamlined. Our food programs require commonsense reforms, as
I think noted today, that ensure that food assistance
complements local markets, finds the right balance between U.S.
commodities and market-based programs, like vouchers and
electronic transfers and end the unnecessary losses through
modernization. We all have been looking for ways, as a
committee, to better support Rohingya victims of ethnic
cleansing in Burma. This entire conflict is man-made, and has
resulted in the murders of so many innocent men, women, and
children.
Just one of the tragedies of the past few years has been
the food aid has been recurrently suspended due to safety
concerns and because the government and military have blocked
access to the Rakhine state. Last year, the Office of Food for
Peace provided $13 million for atrocity victims and IDPs. My
understanding is that much of this funding went to locally and
regionally-purchased food, as well as cash transfers for food.
Mr. Natsios, what unique challenges do our food aid
programs face in areas that are experiencing mass atrocity
crimes, and how can we improve the food assistance in those
areas?
Mr. Natsios. Well, there are a number of things. One, it is
very hard to put, because of the very strict rules of the State
Department Diplomatic Security Office that controls the
security for the Embassy and the aid missions, to put officers
in the middle of these emergencies where they could get
kidnapped and killed. And so, we have DART teams, USAID has
what is called a DART team, Disaster Assistant Response Team,
which actually was put in place when I was the OFDA director,
28 years ago. The first DART teams were deployed when I was
director in 1989, actually. And so, they are very effective.
But now, because of the level of atrocities, Diplomatic
Security is very reluctant to allow them to go in. So that is
the first challenge, is we have to have officers on the ground.
And our system is highly decentralized. The DART team has
enormous authority in the field to make quick decisions, almost
overnight. They have a notwithstanding clause in Federal law,
which means they don't have to go through the Federal
procurement laws. All the regulations, all the bureaucracy,
OFDA is exempt, so is Food for Peace from those rules, that is
why they are so effective. They don't have to comply with all
these rules.
Third, there is a huge problem in security where warlords
will prey on relief groups, NGOs, the U.N., and attempt to
divert resources. And so, the third big challenge is to make
sure that these resources get where they are going. And not so
much as get where they are going, to make sure they stay there.
So what happens, sometimes as you leave the village, and
the extremists group will go in and then take the food or
whatever we have given them.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Natsios. I have very limited
time.
Dr. Lentz, how do you think cash transfers have worked in
Burma? Are we using cash transfers because vouchers or
electronic transfer system is untenable? And is the cash
transfer system more common in these conflict areas, you think?
Ms. Lentz. That is a great question. And I can't speak
directly to the case of Burma. I can say that as a former
Fulbrighter to Bangladesh, I think thinking about this
situation of their refugees is something near and dear to my
heart, and I would just suggest that I think with the monsoons
coming, things are going to get a lot worse before they get
better.
Mrs. Wagner. And Mr. Glickman, or Mr. Natsios, 9 percent of
our Burma Food for Peace assistance was through in-kind food
aid in fiscal year 2017. What is the process for determining
what percentage of aid in any particular country is given
through U.S. commodity versus vouchers for instance? Perhaps,
Mr. Natsios, you can----
Mr. Natsios. It is done based on the unique
characteristics, each emergency, which are all different. So
these are the factors. There is actually a manual on how to do
this that CARE developed under contract by Food for Peace. It
is called ``the decision-making tree.'' And you go through a
set of processes, and it will tell you how much to put in each
area.
And the way it is done is how many people are in displaced
camps or refugee camps which are secure enough so that you can
send in the commodities and they can be properly distributed.
Or, if people are on the move and things are very chaotic and
you don't have security, then a cash card is more appropriate
if you have ATM machines around.
What they are doing in South Sudan, which I did not know
until recently, is they are putting ATM machines on the back of
trucks, aid trucks, and they give the cash cards out. And then
they drive the truck through the villages. And the people come
in and put the cash card, and get the cash, go buy the food,
because southern Sudan is not exactly a highly-developed area
with a huge system of ATM machines. But you would be surprised
in the area--and by the way, people also use their cell phones,
can do cash transfers.
A million people in South Sudan within 2 years after peace
broke out--I wish it could break out again--had cell phones
when there were none before. Cell phones are a very, very
useful way of doing cash transfers as well. And people have,
surprisingly, they have accounts that they can use----
Mrs. Wagner. And probably a much more safe avenue, also.
Mr. Natsios. That is correct.
Mrs. Wagner. Well, I appreciate your testimony.
Mr. Glickman. I just would add one other thing.
Mrs. Wagner. Yes, Mr. Glickman.
Mr. Glickman. One, is that I am glad you raised the issue
of Burma----
Mrs. Wagner. Yes.
Mr. Glickman [continuing]. Because it is a gigantic issue
and it doesn't get the attention----
Mrs. Wagner. I feel the same way.
Mr. Glickman [continuing]. Because it is not a political
hotspot of the world. And for people who work for Save the
Children just died in Afghanistan. And some of the more
vulnerable people in the world are the NGO people that are on
the ground doing the kind of things that you are talking about.
And I think this is a question you ought to probably ask Mark
Green when he comes here, because he is probably pretty current
on how you deal with these very dangerous situations.
Chairman Royce. Secretary Glickman, if I could just
intercede here. The circumstance, the reason, the in-kind food
has to be taken into the camps is because basically, these are
concentration camps with razor wire around them. The
individuals inside are not permitted to engage in the market.
So they will literally starve to death if we are not bringing
that food into the camps. And at the same time, those reporters
locally who report on the conditions on the ground that the
Rohingya population face, they can face, as we saw this week,
up to 14 years in prison for simply writing about the
circumstances.
So hence, the circumstances in Burma, Ambassador, as to
why, Ambassador Wagner, we are bringing the food into the camps
or orchestrating the food to go into the camps.
We go know to Dr. Ami Bera of California.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I ask my
question, I just wanted to reiterate a few things that were
stated earlier. Under the chairman's leadership, I think we
have long suspected in Syria that there was specific targeting
by the Russians to weaponize refugees. And I think that is an
accurate terminology to drive refugees into Europe and
destabilize refugees.
And Secretary Glickman, to your comment, I was in Jordan
visiting Syrian refugees and visiting some of the camps this
past summer, and Jordan is under tremendous strain right now.
Like classroom size, unemployment, and yet, they are one of our
closest friends. So the importance of finding resolution to the
Syrian issue is paramount because the other impression I walked
away with is most of the Syrian refugees did not have a side in
this civil war. The war found them and drove them out. And they
would like to return to their homes. Again, a monumental global
challenge.
Now to my questions. Mr. Natsios, shifting from Food to
Peace to Feed the Future, as one of our programs in terms of
capacity-building, obviously, I think a lot of us are concerned
about what is going to happen with climate change. We think
there is going to be increasing water shortages, increasing
mass migrations. Could you just describe a little bit of Feed
the Future? How effective it is? What we ought to be thinking
about in terms of supporting that capacity?
Mr. Natsios. One of the most successful aid programs in
history, in the 20th century, was the Green Revolution in Asia,
which was led by Dr. Norman Borlaug, who won the Noble Peace
Prize in 1970. He is from Texas A&M, my university. And
Bourlaug Institute is down the street, and his granddaughter
works, Julie Borlaug, at the Institute itself.
So we know it works. It tripled, quadrupled in some cases,
food production and productivity in Asian countries. There was
an attempt in 1980s to transfer those lessons to Africa, it did
not work for a variety of reasons. There weren't enough roads,
there wasn't enough fertilizer. They are attempting to do that
again. Not that all of that program is in Africa, but a
disproportionate amount is, because that is most food-insecure
area in the world.
And I am a very big supporter of this program. And I can't
tell you the data, because I am not running USAID now. I think
Mark Green would be more appropriate. But I do not support any
cuts in that account, because I believe the greatest risk we
face for a world war, and I mean a great power war in the next
20 or 30 years, is going to be over food. And we are playing
with fire if we do not recognize that the international food
system, which is mostly private, if that is disrupted, it will
drive countries, big powers with big armies to war. And I am
very worried about it.
And this Feed the Future program is designed to mitigate
that, at least for poor countries.
Mr. Bera. Right. Dr. Lentz, do you want to add anything?
Ms. Lentz. Thank you. Yeah, I would just add to what Mr.
Natsios said. To say that food aid can't solve all problems at
all, right? And so this is where there is a huge role for other
forms of foreign assistance. And I think it is really difficult
for programs like Feed the Future, because they are investing
in long-term solutions, and it takes time, and it is harder to
see results. But I think that just to echo sort of Mr. Natsios'
point, it is worth the investment.
Mr. Bera. Right. Mr. Glickman.
Mr. Glickman. Just two things: One, there has been some
evidence of the reduction of stunting in children as a result
of the Feed the Future program. It is a fairly new program. I
think the last administration did a better job of targeting it,
so it doesn't apply to every country in the world. It targeted
countries, as I mentioned, that in Ethiopia--in my statement--
in Ethiopia, there was a positive metrics on the farmers who
had participated in Feed the Future versus those who have not.
But I agree with Mr. Natsios, very important program.
Mr. Bera. Quick follow-up question. Mr. Natsios, I noticed
in your bio that you wrote a book on the North Korean famine.
And a little bit of side question, but we have not talked about
if there is a conflict in North Korea, the huge humanitarian
crisis that would be there. And I don't know if, in the
remaining time I have, if you wanted to touch on how big a
challenge that would be with the, you know----
Mr. Natsios. I just wrote an article for Foreign Affairs
online, the Journal, on this very issue. And suggested that we
might approach the Chinese to do some planning in the event of
regime collapse in North Korea. Because it is not as stable a
regime as people think.
And I suggested in the article--I wrote it with a colleague
of mine from South Korea. If you give me your email address, I
will send you a copy. But it just came out 2 or 3 weeks ago,
and it suggested that what we need to do is prevent mass
population movements, because the death rate is frequently 50
percent of the people, when they leave their villages, they die
if they are severely food insecure.
So we can't prevent them from leaving, because that is a
violation of international humanitarian law, but you can create
the conditions where people don't want to leave. In other
words, if you provide the food there--and what I suggest in the
article, is that two-thirds of the population, I believe, in
North Korea, lives within 50 miles of either coast--the central
part of the country is relatively thinly populated. What we
should be doing is thinking through a plan to move small
amounts of food to all of the small ports all along the coast,
because the road system is in terrible condition, they don't
have enough gas. Even in the event of collapse, it will get
worse. And so we need a logistics plan that will allow us to
immediately secure the food system of the country so we don't
have mass population movements in the event of collapse of the
regime.
Chairman Royce. And if I could just clarify, because we did
have the opportunity to talk to the defector who ran the
propaganda program, Hwang Jang-yop. Adam Schiff and I had the
opportunity to interview him after he defected some years ago.
We asked him about the NGO estimate of 2 million North Koreans
starving. He said, no, the internal number was 1.9 million. We
then asked him about the circumstances of that starvation. And
he said, well, a lot of those were the no-go areas. Those were
areas where it was questionable whether people were really that
enthusiastic about the regimes in those areas. And he said,
what we were doing was putting the money into the nuclear
weapons program and the support for the military.
And I think that when we talk about food as a weapon, we
forget that regimes use it occasionally against their own
population, especially if they have objectives that are higher
on their list of things to do than feeding their people.
So we go to Brian Mast of Florida.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think there were some
great questions on both sides of the aisle today, great
analysis by you all. I really enjoyed the hearing. I don't want
to rehash everything that has already been out there. I just
have one question, and that is for you, Mr. Natsios.
And it goes back to the idea of the hegemonic stability
element of U.S. food aid. And in your opening remarks, you
basically talked about how you felt the U.S. was not reigning
anymore, or falling as a hegemonic stability. And I want to
know, given carte blanche, if you had carte blanche, what would
you change about the program to make sure that the U.S. reigns,
in terms of food aid, doing its best possible work, to make the
U.S. the continually reigning hegemonic stability?
I disagree with that analysis a little bit, but that is a
different conversation. What would you change about it to make
sure that we reign as that in terms of food aid? That is the
only question that I have.
Mr. Natsios. I was referring, in terms of hegemonic
dominance, to military and economic, not to our aid program. We
are the greatest humanitarian power, and have been since World
War II, but I would not use the word ``hegemonic.'' And if I
used the term to describe it or I confused people, I apologize
because I wouldn't use that. That is a geo-strategic term.
So what I would do are the three reforms that we have all
have been advocating: 50 percent of Title 2 for local purchase;
eliminate modernization to provide cash-for programs, use it
only for market interventions to stabilize prices; and three,
exempt the Food for Peace office from the cargo preference law.
If we did those three things, we would go a long way. And
we can't have these budget cuts. The budget cuts, to me, don't
make any sense. They just don't make any sense.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, sir. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Congressman. Gerry Connolly of
Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much. And thank you all three
for being here. I spent 10 years on the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, and my primary assignment was foreign aid
authorization. I am proud of the fact that we got the last
foreign aid authorization bill passed when I was there in 1986,
and we spent a lot of time on PL 480 working with our
counterparts on the Agriculture Committee, where I met one, Dan
Glickman.
And let me start by asking a question, Mr. Natsios. You
talked about maybe a shift in interest groups that would
support aid and food aid. And you have talked about the
shippers who favor the use of cargo preference. You have
referred to it as a scandal. So I wonder if you could
elaborate?
What is the scandal and how would you characterize this
shift? Because one of the things I always worry about up here
is the coalition of support for foreign aid generally is
fragile. And anything that potentially unravels it makes me a
little weary because we can get glib about oh, no, no, no. But
as we just saw, and I welcome your remarks, the President
zeroed out this entire program, and wants to cut foreign aid by
a third, which, to me, is a massive retreat on the part of the
United States.
But at any rate, I just wanted you, if you could, elaborate
a little bit on those two things. What is this new coalition of
support that presumably could have either augment or replace
the old coalition support, and why is it you think cargo
preference shippers, what is the scandal involved there?
Mr. Natsios. The scandal is that 60 percent of the
companies are not American companies. They are German, Danish,
and Singapore-based companies that bought an American
subsidiary as a front. So if we are protecting American
shipping because we need to control it for national security,
we don't control it. Other countries do.
So we are subsidizing foreign shipping companies using the
Food for Peace account, which is supposed to be for feeding
hungry people. That is a scandal to me. If you make a national
security argument, make the national security argument, but
that is not who is bidding on these contracts. And I might add,
Food for Peace puts out tenders, bids, for the ships and no one
answers at all. Or they got one bid. Is that competition?
I think it is a scandal because it means it is monopoly-
controlled. It means a small number of companies control the
whole shipping lanes, which means we are very vulnerable, and I
think that is scandalous.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. I just want to understand the word,
because, to me, ``scandal'' involves something illegal.
Mr. Natsios. No, no, I don't mean scandal----
Mr. Connolly. Right. You mean, it is a sham.
Mr. Natsios. It is a sham.
Mr. Connolly. Right. Got it.
Mr. Natsios. But also, the other issue is, they are the
last remaining holdout to reform. The NGOs, the farmers, and
the shipping companies formed the cartel that protected the--or
the coalition. I like to use the word ``cartel.'' The NGOs now
have all dumped out on the cartel. They are now in favor of
reform. World Vision was the last one.
Last summer, at a hearing here, I believe, they endorsed
the reforms, very aggressively. The American Farm Bureau, I
believe, is one of the largest representatives of American
farmers. They have just endorsed the reforms. Who does that
leave? Three foreign shipping companies that are hiding behind
an American subsidiary trying to say, We want special
preference, saying there is a national security issue here. And
there isn't. It is a sham.
Mr. Connolly. Okay.
Mr. Natsios. ``Sham'' would be the better term.
Mr. Connolly. Got it. Because I think ``scandal,'' one
needs to be a little careful about that word.
Mr. Natsios. Absolutely.
Mr. Connolly. I think that implies criminal activity, and I
don't think that is what you meant. That is why I wanted--thank
you for clarifying.
Secretary Glickman, the President's budget cuts foreign
assistance by a third and eliminates, zeroes out the Food for
Peace program. Any problem with that?
Mr. Glickman. Yes, massive problem. I would call that a
scandal. All right. And as I said, the fact of the matter is
that your committee has been, and the leadership, recognizing
we have a 3-tiered stool of diplomacy, development, and
defense. And the fact of the matter is that funding the State
Department, USAID and their functions, including the feeding
programs are a part of those efforts. And they enhance
America's national security.
So I find real problem with it. In the past, Congress has
rejected that. And one other thing, too. And that is, America's
engagement in the world--this is a signal to the world that we
do not find it necessary to be as engaged.
Mr. Connolly. But real quickly.
Mr. Glickman. Yeah.
Mr. Connolly. If we zero out the Food for Peace program----
Mr. Glickman. Yeah.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. Does it actually affect people's
lives? I mean, it is one thing about our prestige, but what
about the potential recipients who could be at risk if we zero
that out? Is that a concern?
Mr. Glickman. Hundreds of thousands of people, if not more,
would be impacted by that. Millions maybe.
Mr. Connolly. You agree, Mr. Natsios?
Mr. Natsios. Absolutely.
Mr. Connolly. And Dr. Lentz?
Ms. Lentz. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. I thank you. My time is up.
Mr. Garrett [presiding]. I thank the gentleman from
Virginia. I will tell you all as an aside, that it has been
something that I laid awake at night, staring at the ceiling,
wondering if I would ever have the opportunity to chair the
House Foreign Affairs Committee. I did not know it would be
today.
Mr. Connolly. I have laid awake thinking about that
prospect myself, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Garrett. Well, it is a great subject matter that brings
us together today because it is one where myself and my
colleague from Northern Virginia have a lot of shared passion.
I want to sort of scold us collectively for politicizing
something that shouldn't be political.
As someone who generally tends to support this
administration, I am also deeply disappointed in these proposed
cuts, which I would characterize as draconian and shortsighted.
Having said that, no one is perfect, and this is why we have
these hearings. I am hopeful that the administration will
listen, both to myself and Mr. Connolly, and I apologize in
advance by way of my line of questioning, which will take the
form more of soliloquy, perhaps, than questioning.
It is through learning that we better ourselves. I hesitate
to contemplate the outcome of a day that I spend without
learning something. And so it was as a member of this committee
that I became familiar with the McGovern-Dole school feeding
program. And the more I learned, the more I fell in love with
it. And I will tell you why. And this may shock some people who
think they know me politically, but they don't.
When you are a subsistence farmer in a Third World nation,
and you have to do a cost benefit analysis on what happens when
you send your children and, particularly, your daughters to
school, versus putting them in the field to grow the food that
they must eat to survive, then oftentimes, historically, we see
these children in the field. School feeding provides a break in
that paradigm which allows for the education of young people,
and particularly young women, which we can demonstrably show
leads to a decrease in radicalization, and increase in economic
development, growth, and opportunity, which ultimately both of
those things lead to what, I believe, my colleague, Mr.
Kinzinger, referred to as ``the prevention of someone without
hope strapping a suicide vest to themselves and taking human
lives.''
Now, I worked as a prosecutor for a number of years, and we
pursued people who preyed on children. And the greater
satisfaction that I received when we locked these people up was
knowing that there would be a number of children who were never
victims because they were locked up.
There will be terrorists who are never terrorists if they
have opportunity. It is not the sole responsibility of the
United States to afford that; however, in the absence of
leadership, there is a vacuum and power abhors a vacuum. The
Chinese are more than willing to jump in. And when they do
these things, they usually do them in a manner such that it
exploits the local populace, particularly in terms of economic
opportunity and resources; whereas, historically, we don't.
So, again, I apologize for the form of my questioning, but
I would invite each of you to speak to the positive long-term
and unquantifiable benefits of things like school feeding
programs that I have elaborated on, in the hopes that people
who make policies and vote on budgets will listen to what we
say here today. And perhaps we can nudge this thing back in the
right direction.
Mr. Natsios.
Mr. Natsios. There is another benefit from school feeding
programs, which is not widely discussed, particularly during
civil wars and the aftermath. Children need order in their
lives. Regardless of how much they learn in the school, they
actually need an ordered day, or they can get into a lot of
trouble. And in most of these war zones, there are land mines
everywhere, there are guns everywhere. And so if nothing more
than to order the day of the children and keep them under adult
supervision, the schools need to stay open.
And one way of making sure they go to school, is the
parents knowing that they are going to get fed a lunch, because
that means they won't have to feed them at home.
Mr. Garrett. That is exactly it. And, again, it breaks the
paradigm that has been destructive historically and helps us
move forward as a global community. And human lives are human
lives are human lives. I serve the American people of the fifth
district of Virginia, but I care about people everywhere,
regardless of how they look or worship, or what have you.
Mr. Natsios. Let me give you an example how we use food aid
to get kids back to school in Afghanistan, particularly girls.
This is just after we sent the troops in, so this is early
2002.
We did two things: We paid the 50,000 teachers. We had no
cash to pay them. We paid them in vouchers that WFP then gave
them food for. And I asked the teachers, do you want cash? They
said, Well, there is no currency in this country because there
is no government. There hasn't been a government for 15 years.
And so we would prefer food. We don't know what currency you
would give us because we could guarantee we can feed our kids.
So teachers went back to school because they got a food voucher
from USAID, the from World Food Program.
Secondly, to get more girls in school, we said, if you send
your girls to school, at the end of each month, we will give
you a liter of vegetable oil. Very valuable thing for cooking.
And there was a substantial increase in girl participation
because of the vegetable oil program.
Mr. Garrett. I would ask my colleague, the gentleman from
California, Mr. Lieu, if he would indulge me for another moment
to allow Dr. Lentz and Mr. Glickman the opportunity.
Thank you. I don't want to be hegemonic.
Dr. Lentz.
Ms. Lentz. Thank you. I think, Mr. Garrett, what you are
saying is exactly why I became interested in food aid policy,
because not only is there a military or is there security
benefits to the U.S. and I think there is a moral, frankly, for
me, a moral imperative. I don't want to live in a world where
people die from hunger, especially when there is things that we
can do here. And I really hope that many American taxpayers
agree with me, that this is a huge thing that nobody, nobody
wants to have stories like Mr. Natsios' about his great uncle.
I think it is devastating.
Mr. Garrett. Well, the problem I think--and I appreciate
that. And the problem is that it is unquantifiable, right? But
if we make a better tomorrow, then bad things don't happen. And
it is hard to do an ROI on that, but it is real.
Mr. Glickman--Ambassador, or Secretary Glickman,
Congressman Glickman.
Mr. Glickman. Whatever you want to call me. And I think you
will be a terrific chairman of this committee one day. I want
you to know that.
Mr. Garrett. Well, Ed is retiring, and I have got a whole
year here.
Mr. Glickman. A couple of things. You mentioned the issue
of girls in schools. This is an amazing success story. The fact
that girls stay in school, they are less likely to be sexually
abused and demeaned in a variety of ways, and that has been one
of the success stories. The second thing has to do with high
nutrition. The program does focus on the nutritional
components.
And I was there, in fact, I was in the cabinet room when
the President brought in Senators Dole and, I believe--
McGovern, and I believe Dole. And this idea came from them. It
shows you, again, the bipartisan foundation for most of these
programs. And it grew out of this desire by these two great
patriots of America to have some sort of foundation to use
education, which we have learned from our own experience in
this country, to try to help the developing world.
Mr. Garrett. Again, I thank each of you. And I would now
recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Lieu.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank each of the
witnesses today, first of all, for your time and your
expertise, and also for your work on these important issues.
I would like to talk about Yemen. USAID, in December 13th
of 2017, released a fact sheet on Yemen. I am just going to
read some of the highlights. They say that, ``In Yemen, an
estimated 22.2 million people require humanitarian assistance,
including 17.8 people who require emergency food assistance.
Due to ongoing conflict, Yemen faces the largest food security
emergency in the world.''
And as all of you know, the U.S. has a hand in this. We
chose to take sides and we are refueling jets of the Saudi
Arabia-led coalition that is doing air strikes in Yemen. There
is also indications that these air strikes are striking
civilians nowhere near military targets. I previously served in
active duty in the military. They look like war crimes to me.
I am pleased that certain countries chose not get involved
with air strikes in Yemen, so just the country of Qatar. I
think they made the right decision. But nevertheless, the U.S.
did get involved with refueling these jets. There has also been
articles that some of these jets are targeting farms, directly
attacking production of food. And then Saudi Arabia, to make
things worse, did a blockade on Yemen. Because of the outcry,
both from the international community as well as Members of
Congress and others, they partially lifted the blockade. So now
they have a partial blockade going on.
And so my first question to you is, do you believe Saudi
Arabia needs to lift the blockade entirely in Yemen so that
supplies such as fuel can get through and actually deliver the
food to the people who need it?
Anyone can answer that.
Mr. Natsios. Anybody with a gun in a civil war eats. And so
the notion that they are going to defeat the rebels, the Saudis
are going to defeat the rebel movement is backed by Iran--Iran
has a hand in this, too, a dirty hand in this--is being naive.
I don't think the Saudis understand what they are doing.
I think the blockade is inappropriate. Whether it is a war
crime or not, I am not a lawyer. And that is a harsh term, but
it is unacceptable, in my view.
And the President did tweet it, and it upset the Saudis
enough that they lifted it. And I know the Congress said
things, but the thing that really upset them is one that
someone they thought supported them did that little tweet.
Mr. Lieu. Right.
Mr. Natsios. And it shocked them.
I wrote an op ed with the former Director of the Office of
Foreign Disaster Assistance under President Obama. It was a
bipartisan column on this. We haven't placed it yet. I don't
know, maybe people think because the blockade was partially
lifted, the media, they are not running the column. But the
article said exactly what you said, which is that this is not
acceptable and it needs to be stopped.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Ms. Lentz. I would agree. I think that lifting the partial
blockade would be incredibly helpful to get food to folks.
Mr. Glickman. I concur but I also think this: That is, the
role of the United States as a leader in humanitarian disasters
is a multifaceted thing. It relates to food, it relates to
abuse, it relates to improper treatment of prisoners, and we
have to be a moral leader as well. It just can't cherry-pick:
This country, not this country.
And I worry about the fact that if we don't recognize that
special nature--and perfect example, bipartisan example--it is
nothing like Yemen, which is a disaster--was after the Second
World War when President Truman decided that we had to
rehabilitate Europe, and we had to feed these people, who did
he choose to do this for him? He chose Herbert Hoover, the
former President. Who ironically, President Roosevelt had
isolated because he ran against him and lost. And that
bipartisan effort on bringing Europe out of famine is a
disaster, along with the Marshall Plan, revolutionized the
world forever.
Okay. Why did that happen? Because we had a couple of
leaders who decided we needed to do that. And I think that is
missing right now, to be honest with you.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, I appreciate that. And let me, only
short amount of time left, just conclude with my comments that
I believe the conduct of Saudi Arabia in this Yemen war is not
acceptable.
And the Washington Post reports that every 10 seconds, a
child in Yemen dies. Saudi Arabia's conduct has lowered its
standing in the international community. It has turned Members
of the Congress against our ally. I urge Saudi Arabia to take
another look at Yemen to get a political resolution, because
the longer this goes on, the worse it will be for Saudi Arabia.
I yield back.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Lieu. They should have never
given me the gavel because I am going to go into this a little
bit.
Mr. Natsios really hit on this. It is tragic how often we
can trace back bad outcomes to the Iranian regime, because what
is going on in Yemen is nothing more than a proxy war between
the Saudis and the Iranians. And I would like to point out that
Hezbollah, which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Iran, has the
unique distinction of having murdered people on every single
inhabited continent on the planet. Think about that for a
second.
So without commenting, I think Mr. Lieu makes good points.
I don't disagree with the members of the panel, but ultimately,
you don't cut the branch of the tree off, you cut the tree
down. And we need to act to support humanitarian outcomes and
peaceful regime change in Iran, because you can trace Syria and
Yemen and tragedies in Iraq all back to Tehran.
So with that, I will also echo the sentiments of Mr.
Natsios, who pointed out that a person with a gun in a civil
war zone eats. Contemplate, if you will, being a 14-year-old
boy who has no food and told, if you carry this rifle and shoot
at these people, we will feed you.
Mr. Glickman. And often paid large amounts of money to do
that.
Mr. Garrett. Sure. So what we do matters.
With that. I want to thank each one of you. Again, this is
important. This is important for who we are, this is important
for how we will be judged by posterity.
Your testimony is invaluable as we pursue reforms that will
enable us to better utilize world-feeding programs, whether it
is Food for Peace, whether it is McGovern-Dole, et cetera, and
this is important, I believe, to U.S. national security and
world peace and stability.
With that, the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:11 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]