- BUSINESS MEETING
[Senate Hearing 115-578]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-578
BUSINESS MEETING
=======================================================================
MEETING
before the
COMMITTEE ON
ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MAY 22, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-696 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming, Chairman
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware,
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
Ranking Member
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
JONI ERNST, Iowa
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
Richard M. Russell, Majority Staff Director
Mary Frances Repko, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
MAY 22, 2018
OPENING STATEMENTS
Barrasso, Hon. John, U.S. Senator from the State of Wyoming......
1
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware..
334
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L., U.S. Senator from the State of Maryland
335
Inhofe, Hon. James M., U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma...
353
Duckworth, Hon. Tammy, U.S. Senator from the State of Illinois,
prepared statements............................................
360
ADDITIONAL MATERIALS
Legislation and related documents:
S. 2602. Amendment in the nature of a substitute. The
``Utilizing Significant Emissions with Innovative
Technologies Act,'' or the ``USE IT Act''..................
2
S. 2800. Amendment in the nature of a substitute. The
``America's Water Infrastructure Act of 2018''.............
34
Report on S. 2800, the ``America's Water Infrastructure
Act of 2018''..........................................
286
Presidential Nomination 1542. John L. Ryder, of Tennessee, to
be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Tennessee
Valley Authority for a term expiring May 18, 2021, vice
Michael McWherter, term expired............................
324
S. 2734. To designate the Federal building and United States
courthouse located at 1300 Victoria Street in Laredo,
Texas, as the ``George P. Kazen Federal Building and United
States Courthouse''........................................
325
S. 2377. To designate the Federal building and United States
courthouse located at 200 West 2nd Street in Dayton, Ohio,
as the ``Walter H. Rice Federal Building and United States
Courthouse''...............................................
327
Committee Resolutions:
Lease, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, Arlington, VA.
PVA-04-WA17............................................
329
Lease, Department of State, Washington, DC. PDC-06-WA17..
331
Building acquisition, Robert T. Stafford U.S. Post Office
and Courthouse, Rutland, VT. PVT-BPS-RU16..............
333
S. 2800 amendments agreed to en bloc:
Duckworth #1, Credit Transfer Enhancement--This amendment
makes technical corrections to 33 U.S.C.  2225 to
facilitate the transfer of existing credits from a non-
federal sponsor of a Section 211 project (Construction
of Flood Control Projects by Non-Federal Interests) to
another government entity, pending the approved by the
Secretary..............................................
339
Markey #1, Regional Liaisons for Minority, Tribal, and
Low-Income Communities--This provision required the EPA
to appoint not fewer than 1 employee in each regional
office to service as a liaison to minority, tribal, and
low-income communities, and publically identify each
regional liaison on the agency's website...............
342
Sullivan #1, amendment to conform the definitions of
Indian tribe with the Indian Self-Determination and
Education Assistance Act to allow all recognized tribal
entities to participate as a non-federal sponsor on
projects, as well as cost share waivers that are
currently available to tribes. Substitutes the current
definition with a universally accepted definition that
recognizes all tribes and tribal organizations that
work on behalf of tribes...............................
345
Whitehouse #3, an amendment requiring the Corps to submit
a report to Congress identifying ongoing and recently
completed projects in coastal states, analyzing how
these projects correspond to State-approved coastal
plans, and making recommendations as to how these state
plans can be better incorporated into the Corps' work..
348
Documents in support of the Utilizing Significant Emissions with
Innovative Technologies Act, or the USE IT Act.................
394
BUSINESS MEETING
----------
TUESDAY, MAY 22, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Environment and Public Works,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m. in
room 406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Barrasso
(Chairman of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Barrasso, Carper, Inhofe, Capito,
Boozman, Wicker, Fischer, Rounds, Ernst, Sullivan, Shelby,
Cardin, Whitehouse, Merkley, Gillibrand, Booker, and Markey.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN BARRASSO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING
Senator Barrasso. Good morning. I call this business
meeting to order.
Today we are going to consider bipartisan water
infrastructure and carbon capture innovation legislation, as
well as one nomination, two bills to name Federal buildings,
and three General Services Administration resolutions.
The first of these bills is S. 2602, the Utilizing
Significant Emissions with Innovative Technologies, or the USE
IT Act. This bill is called the USE IT Act because it
encourages the commercial use of manmade carbon dioxide
emissions. The bill supports innovative research and projects
that capture carbon dioxide.
My home State of Wyoming is already a leader in supporting
carbon utilization research. Just last week the Integrated Test
Center outside Gillette opened its doors to support innovative
research on how to use carbon dioxide.
In Congress, we need to support efforts like the Integrated
Test Center so America can maintain its leadership in carbon
capture and utilization and sequestration technologies. The USE
IT Act does that.
The legislation also facilitates permitting for capture
projects and carbon dioxide pipelines. Innovation is how
America will be a leader in reducing emissions.
I introduced the USE IT Act with Committee members
Whitehouse and Capito, as well as Senator Heitkamp. The bill is
now also co-sponsored by Senator Duckworth. Together with
Ranking Member Carper, we have introduced a manager's
substitute amendment to make the bill stronger.
I encourage Committee members to support this important
legislation, so I look forward to working with my colleagues to
pass the legislation and get it to the President's desk.
[The text of S. 2602 follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. This morning we will also consider S.
2800, America's Water Infrastructure Act of 2018. This is
bipartisan legislation I introduced along with Committee
Ranking Member Carper, Transportation Infrastructure
Subcommittee Chairman Inhofe, and Subcommittee Ranking Member
Cardin. The bill is also co-sponsored by Committee members
Capito, Van Hollen, Wicker, Boozman, Whitehouse, and Sullivan.
America's Water Infrastructure Act will grow the Nation's
economy, will give State and local leaders increased input in
water infrastructure projects, will cut bureaucratic red tape,
and will make communities safer from dangerous floods and
droughts. President Trump has called for a comprehensive
infrastructure initiative. America's Water Infrastructure Act
is a significant piece of that initiative.
Last week during our Committee hearing, R.D. James,
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works, said the bill
will fulfill key principles outlined by President Trump. These
principles include rebuilding America's water infrastructure by
cutting red tape, by approving projects in a timely and
effective manner, by giving more local control, by increasing
the focus on rural America, and by leveraging Federal dollars.
More specifically, the bill gives State and local leaders a
significantly increased role in prioritizing projects.
The legislation also reauthorizes the Water Infrastructure
Flexibility Act, or WIFIA. This leverages billions of dollars
in non-Federal investment for water infrastructure projects.
The bill will grow America's economy and create jobs. It
authorizes projects that will increase water storage, deepen
nationally significant ports, address aging irrigation systems,
and maintain the navigability of our inland waterways. It will
also protect communities from dangerous floods.
Today we will vote on a bipartisan manager's substitute
amendment to further improve the bill. I have worked closely
with Ranking Member Carper to draft this amendment. It will
help get water infrastructure projects started faster. The
amendment will push the Corps to take just 2 years to complete
its feasibility studies for potential projects. That is in line
with goal President Trump has set. The bill allows the Corps to
review, and if necessary, initiate new categorical exclusions
so projects aren't unnecessarily delayed due to environmental
red tape.
The amendment also includes language that helps smaller
rural communities leverage WIFIA dollars so that they can
complete needed infrastructure projects. The language is a
modified version of Senator Boozman's SRF WIN bill, and I would
like to thank him for all of his hard work on this important
legislation.
Thank you, Senator Boozman.
The amendment also includes the Buy America language. After
consulting with Senators Capito and Carper I have agreed to add
this provision. As the bill proceeds through the legislative
process, we are going to work to limit this provision's impact
on small, disadvantaged, and rural communities.
I want to thank Ranking Member Carper and Senator Inhofe
and Senator Cardin, all the members of the Committee, and their
staffs for their hard work on this bill. I urge all the members
to support the important infrastructure legislation.
[The text of S. 2800 and the related report follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Additionally, the Committee will be
considering the nomination of John Ryder to be a member of the
Board of Directors of the Tennessee Valley Authority. The
Subcommittee on Clean Air and Nuclear Safety held a nomination
hearing on Mr. Ryder in March.
Finally, the Committee will consider S. 2734, a bill naming
a Federal building and courthouse in Laredo, Texas; S. 2377, a
bill naming a Federal building and courthouse in Dayton, Ohio;
and three General Services Administration leases.
[The text of Mr. Ryder's nomination, S. 2734, S. 2377, and
General Services Administration resolutions follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. I would like to now turn to Ranking
Member Carper for his statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS R. CARPER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
There are a number of items on the agenda for our business
meeting today, including several important bipartisan pieces of
legislation.
With respect to America's Water Infrastructure Act of 2018,
once again, my thanks to you, Mr. Chairman. I also want to
extend my thanks to our colleagues, Senator Inhofe, Senator
Cardin, your staffs, my own staff for working with us on the
important authorizing legislation for the Army Corps of
Engineers.
I am proud of the bipartisan work we have done together on
this legislation. I hope it will serve as a model for work that
we, along with other committees, can do in the future to
address our Nation's infrastructure needs even more broadly.
This bill is of great importance to our economy in
Delaware, but I know that the First State's reliance on the
Corps' work is not unique. Over 99 percent of the U.S. overseas
trade volume moves through coastal channels that the Army Corps
maintains. Think about that, over 99 percent maintained by the
Army Corps of Engineers.
The Corps' inland waterways and locks form a freight
network that provides access to international markets through
our ports. They also serve as a critical infrastructure for the
U.S. military.
Our bill authorizes investments in this system in multiple
ways. Most notably, at the request of Secretary James and of
many Senators both on and off our Committee, the bill better
positions the Corps to be an active partner with ports, with
communities, with States, Tribes, and other stakeholders in
growing and expanding our Nation's economy.
I would also like to take a minute or two here to say a few
words about the substitute amendment for S. 2602, the Utilizing
Significant Emissions with Innovative Technologies Act, or the
USE IT Act. I have added my name as a co-sponsor of the
substitute of which our Chairman is the sponsor, and which
Senator Whitehouse has done a huge amount of work. I applaud
you both. As I said during the legislative hearing for S. 2602,
I appreciate the Chairman's focus on solutions to climate
change when it comes to carbon capture, utilization, and
sequestration, also known as CCUS.
I have long believed that the wide deployment of CCUS
technologies could reduce climate pollution emissions in our
country and abroad, while providing a real win-win for coal
communities, for manufacturing, and for our climate. That is
why, for over a decade, I have supported, and in some cases,
led efforts that spur the development of CCUS without weakening
environmental and public health protection.
At the legislative hearing for this bill, I applauded the
underlying efforts of the legislation, but voiced a couple of
concerns. I was mainly concerned that the legislation could
open the door for weaker environmental protections and
unnecessary streamlining measures. Since the hearing, staff
from the offices of the Chairman, Senator Whitehouse, and other
co-sponsors have worked closely with my own staff to try to
address those concerns, and I especially want to thank the
Chairman's staff for their hard work on this issue.
The substitute that is before us today is a reflection of
that hard work, and I believe it represents a good compromise.
Some of the key changes we are making today include requiring
EPA to consult with the Department of Energy on CCUS research
to avoid duplication and enhance coordination between our two
agencies; requiring a robust report from the Council on
Environmental Quality that will provide critical information
about the CCUS Federal permitting process for anyone thinking
of starting a CCUS project, as well as information about
possible regulatory gaps needed for CCUS; and finally, adding
additional environmental safeguards and public notice and
comment period for any guidance produced by CEQ regarding the
permitting process.
I suspect that the Chairman will probably agree that this
substitute is not a bill either of us would have written on our
own; however, if we are going to truly address big issues like
climate change, we are going to have to find compromises that
can work for both parties. With these changes in the substitute
and with assurance from the Chairman that this legislation will
not be used as a vehicle to attack the Clean Air Act, I will be
voting yes.
I realize that we have some additional important work to do
in order to move these two bills across the finish line, but
today is a very important first step, and if we continue to
work in a bipartisan fashion, I believe we will enact these
bills into law this year, and our country will be better for
it. So, let's get on with it, and as we do, let me express once
again my heartfelt thanks to the members of our staff who have
worked hard and constructively to bring us this far today.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Carper.
Senator Cardin, anything you would like to add?
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BENJAMIN L. CARDIN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MARYLAND
Senator Cardin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be very
brief because I think we now have a quorum.
Senator Barrasso. We do.
Senator Cardin. Would the Chairman prefer to vote, then I
will make my statement?
Senator Barrasso. Please.
Senator Cardin. I will be very quick, then.
First, thank you for continuing the tradition of our
Committee. This is a nonpartisan bill, has the strong support
of both Democrats and Republicans in the best tradition of our
Committee, moves forward on water projects that are important
to all parts of our country. I particularly want to thank you
for the work that we have done in the Chesapeake Bay Watershed.
Both Poplar Island and Mid-Bay, which are critically important
locations for dredge material, are advanced by this bill. The
Anacostia River is advanced in its review.
As we commented earlier, thank you for your leadership on
dealing with the small dockside businesses that cater to
recreation and tourism economies. The economic impact gives
them a better chance to get their projects moving forward.
I am also pleased this is the third WRDA bill in a row that
you include updates to our Nation's drinking water, wastewater,
and stormwater infrastructure. I particularly want to
acknowledge several bills, much of which are incorporated in
here, that were worked on by members of this Committee: S.
1137, the Clean, Safe, Reliable Water Infrastructure bill.
Senators Boozman, Inhofe, Duckworth, and others worked with me
on this bill to improve increased water efficiency.
The Clean, Safe, Reliable Water Infrastructure Act includes
$225 million to protect the sources of our drinking water and
funding to repair and eliminate sewer overflows.
Now, that hit home in Maryland just this past week with
what happened in Frederick, Maryland, that saw historic rain
last week. The rain soaked the region beginning Tuesday night,
caused the wastewater treatment plant to take on more water
than it could handle. Millions of gallons of untreated water
were diverted into Carroll Creek to prevent equipment failure.
So, this bill will help alleviate those types of issues in the
future.
For those of you who watched the Preakness on Saturday, I
think you saw how drenched we have been as a result of the
water. This bill will help.
Second, S. 692, the Water Infrastructure Flexibility Act. I
worked on that with Senators Fischer and Brown dealing with
affordability and integrated planning. Important provisions are
included in this bill. The bill also creates a multi-agency
Federal task force to study the problems of funding and
financing stormwater. The bill also addresses information
concerning onsite wastewater recycling.
Finally, the bill incorporates much of S. 451, the Water
Resources Research Amendments, that I worked with Senator
Boozman to research increased effectiveness and efficiency of
new water treatment facilities.
This is a great bill. I am proud to be associated with it,
and I strongly support it.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Cardin.
Senator Inhofe.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since we do have a
quorum here, I want to go ahead and get with that, but I will
just ask that the statements that I made comparable to the
statement of my friend be made a part of the record, so we can
go ahead and vote.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Senator Inhofe.
We will move ahead now. Since we have enough members who
have arrived, we want to move to the votes on the items on
today's agenda. The Ranking Member and I have agreed to vote on
the USE IT Act by voice. The Ranking Member and I have also
agreed to vote on the two Federal buildings and courthouse
naming bills, the TVA nomination, the three GSA resolutions en
bloc by voice.
Members may choose to have their votes recorded for a
specific item in that bloc after the voice vote. The record
will reflect any member requesting to be recorded on any item
on today's agenda as long as he or she does so by the close of
business today and it doesn't change the outcome.
I appreciate the comments of all of the members. I would
like to call up now the substitute amendment to S. 2602, the
Utilizing Significant Emissions with Innovative Technologies
Act. This was circulated last Friday. The Ranking Member and I
have agreed that this substitute shall be considered the
original text for purpose of amendments. Members have not filed
additional amendments to the substitute.
I move to approve the substitute amendment to S. 26----
Senator Carper. Before we do that, Mr. Chairman, could I
just ask unanimous consent to add Senator Heitkamp as a co-
sponsor of the manager's amendment to S. 2602 in the nature of
a substitute?
Senator Barrasso. Without objection.
I now move to approve the substitute amendment to S. 2602
and report S. 2602, as amended, favorably to the Senate.
Is there a second?
Senator Whitehouse. Second.
Senator Barrasso. All those in favor, please say aye.
[Chorus of ayes.]
Senator Barrasso. Opposed, no.
[No audible response.]
Senator Barrasso. In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes
have it. We have approved S. 2602, as amended, which will be
reported favorably to the Senate.
Next is en bloc passage of six items. I would like to call
up S. 2734, a bill naming a Federal building and the courthouse
of Laredo, Texas; S. 2377, a bill naming a Federal building and
courthouse in Dayton, Ohio; Presidential Nomination 1542, John
Ryder of Tennessee to be a member of the Board of Directors of
the Tennessee Valley Authority; and three General Services
Administration resolutions en bloc.
I move to approve and report S. 2734, S. 2377, and
Presidential Nomination 1542 favorably to the Senate, and
approve three GSA resolutions en bloc.
Is there a second?
Senator Carper. Second.
Senator Barrasso. All those in favor please say aye.
[Chorus of ayes.]
Senator Barrasso. Opposed, no.
[No audible response.]
Senator Barrasso. In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes
have it. We have approved S. 2734, S. 2377, and Presidential
Nomination 1542, which will be reported favorably to the
Senate. We have also approved three GSA resolutions.
Next is America's Water Infrastructure Act. Now I would
like to call up the substitute amendment to S. 2800, America's
Water Infrastructure Act that was circulated last Friday. The
Ranking Member and I have agreed that this substitute shall be
considered the original text for purposes of amendments.
Members have filed amendments to the substitute. The
Ranking Member and I have agreed to vote on four amendments en
bloc by voice vote. Members may choose to have their votes
recorded for a specific item in that bloc after the voice vote.
So, we have en bloc approval of four amendments. I would
like to call up Duckworth No. 1, Sullivan No. 1, Markey No. 1,
and Whitehouse No. 3 en bloc.
Anyone like to be heard on any of the amendments in this
bloc?
Senator Carper. I would like to make a very, very brief
statement, if I could, Mr. Chairman.
This package of amendments represents more areas of
consensus that were able to come together in bipartisan fashion
in support. I recognize that a number of amendments were filed
today and that we will continue to work with Committee members
to address their priorities as this process moves forward.
I would just like to echo your point. We will continue to
work with Senators Booker and Capito on their wastewater grant
proposal, and Senators Markey and Gillibrand on their Section
111 matter. Both of these are key issues that need to be
addressed, and they have our commitment to continue to work
through these amendments as we get to the floor so that these
proposals can be included, and I would encourage everyone to
support the package nonetheless.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Carper.
At this time, I would like to approve Duckworth No. 1,
Sullivan No. 1, Markey No. 1, and Whitehouse No. 3 en bloc.
Is there a second?
Senator Carper. Second.
Senator Barrasso. All those in favor, please say aye.
[Chorus of ayes.]
Senator Barrasso. Opposed, no.
[No audible response.]
Senator Barrasso. In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes
have it, and Duckworth No. 1, Sullivan No. 1, Markey No. 1, and
Whitehouse No. 3 are all agreed to.
[The referenced amendments follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Several members have requested to enter
into colloquies on matters relating to this bill. We will enter
into those colloquies after we have concluded the voting.
Does any Senator seek recognition to offer an amendment
that is not related to those colloquies?
[No audible response.]
Senator Barrasso. I see no further members seeking
recognition to offer an amendment, so I move to approve the
substitute amendment to S. 2800, as amended, and report S.
2800, as amended, favorably to the Senate. We will hold a roll
call vote.
Is there a second?
Senator Carper. I second.
Senator Barrasso. The Clerk will call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Booker.
Senator Booker. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Capito.
Senator Capito. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Cardin.
Senator Cardin. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Carper.
Senator Carper. Aye.
The Clerk. Ms. Duckworth.
Senator Carper. Aye by proxy.
The Clerk. Mrs. Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Fischer.
Senator Fischer. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Inhofe.
Senator Inhofe. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Markey.
Senator Markey. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Merkley.
Senator Merkley. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Moran.
Senator Barrasso. Aye by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Rounds.
Senator Rounds. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sanders.
Senator Carper. Aye by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Shelby.
Senator Shelby. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan.
Senator Sullivan. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Van Hollen.
Senator Carper. Aye by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse.
Senator Whitehouse. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Wicker.
Senator Wicker. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, the yeas are 21.
Senator Barrasso. The yeas are 21, the nays are zero. We
have approved S. 2800, as amended, which will be reported
favorably to the Senate.
I want to thank each and every one of you.
The voting part of the meeting is finished. I am now happy
to recognize members who would like to enter into colloquies,
and I know, Senator Inhofe, you were kind enough to hold back
on your opening comments because we did have a quorum, and we
wanted to make sure that people could vote as they were here,
so I want to thank all of you for agreeing to defer the
colloquies until after the conclusion of the voting.
Senator Carper, perhaps before we jump to the colloquies,
Senator Inhofe, he could make his opening statement.
Senator Carper. That would be fine.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES M. INHOFE,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA
Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and the Ranking
Member, Senator Cardin, all of the staffs that got this bill to
this point.
In 2014 we had a WRDA bill for the first time in 7 years.
Initially, we were supposed to have WRDA bills every other
year, so we made the commitment at that time that we were going
to start having them, so we had it in 2014, 2016, now 2018 we
are keeping our word. I appreciate the Chair and the Ranking
Member's commitment to continue the cycle. With the House
releasing their bill last week and marking up this week, too,
we are on track.
So, if you hear that Congress isn't working on an
infrastructure bill, remind them that our water resources and
our water treatment system are considered infrastructure, very
important infrastructure.
Our ports are responsible for 99 percent of our overseas
trade, making up a fourth of our economy. Fourteen percent of
our domestic freight travels on inland waterways. I might add
that one of those inland waterways, which is the most inland
warm water port in America, happens to be in my State of
Oklahoma.
The America's Water Infrastructure Act provides project
funding authorizations for many critical projects. The programs
are also reforming the Corps' budget, cutting red tape,
providing more transparency, and increasing local input when it
comes to Corps priorities, so I look forward to continuing to
work with my colleagues as we ensure all of our infrastructure,
the backbone of the economy, is prioritized.
Senator Barrasso. Well, thank you so much, Senator Inhofe.
We appreciate your comments and your leadership as the former
Chairman of the Committee and now as the Chairman of the
Subcommittee dealing with this topic.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you so much.
Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman, I want to raise an issue
regarding Section 1041, a provision related to the benefit to
cost ratio, known as BCR. I think the current drafting may have
some unintended consequences. I want to work with you and your
staff, we want to work with you and your staff to modify the
language in this section to make a technical correction that
better reflects our intent. Specifically, the provision, as
currently drafted, may limit the ability to seek court review
of errors in a benefit to cost ratio, and if there are errors
in the benefit to cost ratio, then parties should have a
process for those errors to be remedied.
Senator Barrasso. Well, I want to thank you, Senator
Carper, for raising this issue, which is a concern for all of
us. We agree that there should be one BCR on a single project.
We both share the concerns, though, that any BCR changes during
project construction could cause delays and waste taxpayer
dollars. I am going to be happy to work with you to remedy the
language as we move to the floor.
Senator Rounds, you are recognized.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had originally
intended to offer an amendment today that would address a
significant issue facing my State and others. The Army Corps of
Engineers, under a process begun by the previous
Administration, is attempting to finalize surplus water rules
that could deprive the States of their legal water rights. In
addition, the Corps has created unnecessary red tape and
requirements for the people of my State to be granted easements
for routine infrastructure upgrades.
But in lieu of offering an amendment, Mr. Chairman, I would
simply ask that you, if you would, please, commit that you and
your staff would continue to work with me on statutory language
to address these issues.
Senator Barrasso. Absolutely, Senator Rounds. I look
forward to working with you regarding this important issue as
we consider a manager's amendment to the floor, so thank you,
Senator Rounds.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
Senator Markey.
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
you and the Ranking Member for your leadership and commitment
to passing another strong water resources bill in this
Congress. As the bill moves to the floor, I welcome the
opportunity to work with this Committee to address another
pressing water resource challenge plaguing Massachusetts.
The Town of Sandwich, on Cape Cod, has suffered from
coastal erosion over several years, which may be a result of
the Federal Cape Cod Canal interrupting the natural flow of
sediment, that is, the sand which flows into the channel rather
than onto the beach. The town is currently seeking assistance
from the Corps to nourish, that is, to put sand on the beach
using a special program that was established to mitigate the
damage caused by other Federal projects, for example, channels
and sea walls.
Under this program, the Corps typically pays for the entire
cost of the restoration, and the reason why is simple: if
Federal infrastructure is causing harm to our communities, it
is the Federal Government's obligation to make those
communities whole. Yet the Corps may require communities to pay
half of the cost of maintaining those beaches after they are
restored, that is, placing that additional sand on them once
the sand has eroded.
That is not the spirit of the law. That is why I filed an
amendment requiring the Corps to pay for the full cost of
future nourishments. I thank Senator Gillibrand for co-
sponsoring my amendment, and I would like to work with you, Mr.
Chairman, and the Ranking Member on this pressing issue before
we reach the floor.
Senator Barrasso. Well, thank you, Senator Markey. I do
appreciate your interest in addressing the issues of the
beneficial use of sediment. As you know, Secretary James raised
this very issue in our hearing on America's Water
Infrastructure Act just last week, so I believe we need to find
a national fix for this issue, and I look forward to working
with you to address this important issue as we move to develop
a manager's amendment for the floor, so thank you very much,
Senator.
Senator Markey. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Booker, you are recognized.
Senator Booker. Mr. Chairman, I am really grateful to be
recognized, but I am also grateful for you and Senator Carper
for putting together this really impressive bipartisan bill. To
hear it passed with unanimity is testimony to both of your
leadership. I am grateful, and I am thankful, really, to all
the staffs. My team has been working with folks on both sides
of the aisle. I think this is really, unfortunately, a part of
my Washington experience that is very little talked about
outside of Washington, the kind of work that went into this.
I am really pleased to work with Senator Capito; it has
been a great experience working with her staff throughout this
experience, especially on the Water Workforce Development Act
I, which was included in this legislation, something I am very
proud of, really needed in my State, and I know, others. There
is a growing shortage of water workers in the utility sectors.
This shortage threatens the safety and efficiency and the
management of our drinking water systems and our wastewater
systems. The new program is just an important first step to
address this issue.
I want to also thank, in his absence, Senator Boozman for
his leadership on the SRF WIN Act. I am proud to support this
innovative provision that will help States fund bundles of
water infrastructure projects that are construction ready, but
often lack the funding to move forward.
I filed three amendments, as you all know, that I did not
call up today for a vote, and I was grateful, frankly, for both
of my Chairmen and Ranking Members for agreeing to work with me
and Senator Capito as these move to the floor. In particular, I
am glad to have recently introduced, along with Senator Capito
and Senator Jones, the Residential Decentralization Wastewater
Improvement Act. Senator Carper talked to me before this
hearing directly, as his staff has already affirmed the
willingness and the interest to work with us on this.
I filed this amendment and withdrew it because of the
commitment I got from leadership to work with me on this, and I
just want to really make clear my motivations here. I have now
traveled now only throughout my State, but throughout the
country, and been anguished to see what is happening to low
income and moderate households who have such difficulty
connecting to existing wastewater infrastructure or installing
upgrades to septic systems. This is a national problem causing
things that should not go on in the wealthiest Nation on the
planet Earth.
I have seen firsthand in rural parts of our country how low
income homes, often in minority areas, that there are upwards
of half the populations that are not connected to municipal
water systems. I will never forget touring Alabama, Lowndes
County, the very famous civil rights county where the marchers
from Selma to Montgomery walked through. I was stunned to see
that there are so much challenges there with just septic
problems.
I found out about this because, on my Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, I am the Ranking on the Africa
Subcommittee, met with Dr. Peter Hotez, who is the probably top
American doctor on neglected tropical diseases, and we wanted
to do something about hookworm problems in Africa, and he hands
me his book at the beginning of the meeting, and I am flipping
through the pages, and I was shocked to see that the United
States had these problems. An estimated 12 million Americans
who are suffering from tropical diseases like hookworm, and
most doctors in this country don't think exists on this
continent. And that drew me down to the Black Belt in the
South, where I started seeing the communities that are being
affected by this.
It is shameful. It is just shameful that we are not
addressing these problems. So, I just want to say I am deeply
grateful for this bipartisan effort. I really am thankful to
Senator Capito for her leadership and partnership in driving
these issues.
There is a moral imperative to deal with these issues. The
suffering that is going on in places from my State to others
because of the lack of these simple basic connections to
wastewater systems and municipal water systems is just
something that we can address. We have the power to do this;
this is not one of those issues that it is a matter of can we,
it is do we have the collective will, and I am grateful to see
that will evidenced by my Ranking and my Chairman, as well as
other colleagues on this Committee, and I am grateful to you
for giving me this time to make some remarks.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Senator Booker and I were able to talk for
a couple minutes about this earlier. Our southernmost county is
Sussex County. We don't have many counties, but it is the third
largest county in America, and most of it is pretty rural.
Raised a lot of soybeans and chickens and all there, but we
have several dozen communities that were developed with housing
maybe 30, 40 years, and at the time the developer installed
wastewater treatment, and there was a drinking water system
that was supposed to be maintained through fees collected from
the residents in those communities. Over time people moved,
folks stopped collecting the fees, and we have situations where
the quality of the drinking water is not what it ought to be
and where the ability to safely dispose of wastewater is not
what it should be.
We have an interesting pilot, a couple of interesting
pilots going on in a couple of those communities that use I
think a little bit of Federal money, along with involvement of
a utility and one or two non-profits to see if we can't come up
with a cost effective way to meet the moral imperative that you
are talking about. So, I am interested in exploring this
further and working with you and Senator Capito, and I suspect
the Chairman feels the same way. Hopefully, we can have
something ready to go by the time this bill comes to the floor.
Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Well, I want to thank you, Senator
Booker, and I want to thank you, Senator Capito, for raising
the issue. The language would greatly expand the Clean Water
Act. It is my understanding that this issue possibly could be
better suited in the Farm Bill, and you are trying to include
similar language in that bill, but I want to work with you on
this issue as we move forward with the legislative process.
I just wanted to give Senator Capito, since you raised her
involvement, an opportunity to speak to this or other matters
related to the bill.
Senator Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the
Ranking Member. I am delighted that we have come to this point
where we are unanimous for the WRDA bill. I am glad that we are
updating it in the timeframes that we need to.
I want to thank Senator Booker, as well, for working with
us and including in this bill the Water Workforce Improvement
Act. A lot of our workers who are tending to our water systems
are aging out, and it is not a career that a lot of people are
really aspiring to. Although it is a very highly technical
career, as well, and we need to make sure that we are
addressing the challenges of an aging work force there, so,
thank you, Senator Booker, for that.
Also, I look forward to working with you both on the septic
tank issue. Obviously, in rural areas it is of great concern. I
am going to be honest with you, Senator Booker, I did not
realize the statistics were as high as they are in terms of
diseases that are transmitted because of faulty or infected
systems, so that, in and of itself, is rather startling.
There is also another portion of this bill that you all
included for me, and I appreciate that, and these are
intractable water systems. These are systems that don't belong
to a municipality. Many of them in my State are in the southern
part of the State where they were old coal camps that have now
been abandoned. There is no data, there is no help for these
entities to be able to manage these systems, so any help that
we can get. A lot of them are under boil water advisories,
which, in and of itself, you think are we still living in a
time where we are boiling water? But yes, we are, and some
people are bringing their water in, so working with that is
good.
You also included the Buy America requirements that are for
funding of the Safe Drinking Water State Revolving Fund, so I
appreciate that as well.
I would like to talk about the USE IT Act. Nobody has
talked about that; it is sort of overshadowed. But I see
Senator Whitehouse there, and he has been a great co-
conspirator here with us, working together with the leadership
of this Committee, because we started with the 45Q tax credit
issue for CCUS. We come at it from different angles here.
Obviously, I am from a coal State who wants to see the use of
coal still have as long a life as possible. I don't want to
speak for Senator Whitehouse, but he has come to it for a
carbon capture interest.
So, this initiative was kind of difficult because it will
help incorporate different viewpoints of Federal agencies,
States, industry, academic, NGOs, to figure out the permitting
process for innovative projects; like how are we going to carry
the carbon. We don't really have the permitting process in
place. This will give us a playbook for those projects. A lot
of this that is occurring now in some of the innovation is sort
of stumbling in the dark, so I think a good framework, which
the USE IT Act will bring.
I would also like to take a moment to thank my staff,
because I know our staffs have worked very hard on this. We
have a great co-sponsorship of Barrasso, Heitkamp, and Senator
Whitehouse, as I mentioned, and I want to thank the Ranking
Member and Senator Duckworth for signing on to the manager's
amendment.
But I would like, in particular, to thank Travis Cohen, who
is my staff person who has done a wonderful job, but in
particular Elizabeth Horner, who is Senior Counsel for EPW
Majority on the Council for the Clean Air and Nuclear Safety
Subcommittee, which I chair. So, thank you to both of them, and
I look forward to us working together to refine this and to
hopefully get it through the entire Senate.
Thank you very much.
Senator Carper. I would just add I think you were out of
the room when I asked unanimous consent that Senator Heitkamp's
name also be added as a co-sponsor to the manager's amendment,
so she has joined the team as well.
Senator Capito. Great. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Whitehouse.
Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, Chairman.
First, on the USE IT Act, let me say a very big thank you
to you and to the Ranking Member for your leadership getting
this moving. It has been a pleasure to work with the Chairman,
Senator Capito, Senator Heitkamp, and Senator Duckworth on this
piece of legislation.
I want to thank the Audubon Society, The Nature
Conservancy, the Clean Air Task Force, the Center for Climate
and Energy Solutions, and many other groups for their support
of this measure.
I understand that there remain some concerns with the
permitting section of the bill, but I come from a State that is
now providing clean electrons to the grid from offshore wind,
the first in the country, and the reason that we are doing that
is because we made a more efficient permitting regime for
offshore wind.
I have been involved in other reforms that have involved
regulatory efficiency, and I think it is really important that
we be able to work together on those issues.
To the extent that regulatory efficiency and regulatory
improvement becomes a stand in for environmental degradation,
please know that I and others will stand watch against that.
The CCUS legislation that we enacted is going to be, I
think, empowered by this. It is one thing to take the carbon
dioxide out of the air at the plant; it is another thing to be
able to get it to where it can find a beneficial use, whether
it is to put bubbles into soda or to be used for industrial
purposes or for whatever use, and there is not, as Senator
Capito said, a very effective existing regime for how you send
CO2 pipelines places.
In Rhode Island, we have a lot of algal technologies
developing through groups like bioprocessH20 and Ag Corps, and
obviously the use and development of algae, which feeds off of
carbon dioxide, is one of the many uses that our CCUS bill will
support. Brown University has a center for the capture and
conversion of CO2, which I want to thank for their
work in this area.
And we don't really know yet, but this could be quite a big
thing. The National Academies have estimated that direct air
capture technology has the potential to remove a billion metric
tonnes of CO2 annually, and that could be a very
important component of our efforts to address the climate
crisis, so I thank all of the bipartisan participants in this
effort.
On the WRDA bill, a particular thank you again to Senators
Barrasso, Carper, Inhofe, and Cardin for their work getting
this bill together. There are a lot of my priorities that are
in this bill, and I appreciate it very much.
And I appreciate very much our Ranking Member's pledge to
continue to work to try to balance the Flood and Coastal Storm
Damage Reduction Fund, which at this point, despite referring
to coastal storm damage right in its title, runs $37 to $1 for
inland over coastal projects. I have raised that with Mr.
James, and we are going to continue to work to try to get a
little bit more balance there.
A big and final thank you to Senator Boozman for his SRF
WIN bill. I have raised the issue before of how WIFIA is simply
not useful to Rhode Island because it operates at a scale, and
with interest costs, it simply makes it non-competitive. And I
think Senator Boozman's amendment, which would open up the
WIFIA program to States like mine, is potentially a game
changer for us and very important, so I want to particularly
thank him for working to address this concern in a bipartisan
way.
And again, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Well, thank you so much for all of your
comments. Everyone here has had a chance and opportunity to
speak on all of the pieces before us, so I ask unanimous
consent that--before doing that, though, I will turn to Senator
Carper.
Senator Carper. Before Senator Whitehouse wraps up, I just
want to thank him and applaud him and his staff, as well as the
Chairman and his staff, Senator Capito. You all have done very
good work, and we appreciate you working with us to I think
make a good bill even better.
Sheldon just said that this could be the start of something
big, or words to that effect. I think he is right. We need
something big, and to the extent that we can actually produce
that, hallelujah. That would be great.
Mr. Chairman, I have a statement for the record from
Senator Duckworth. I would just ask unanimous consent that it
be added, please.
Senator Barrasso. Without objection.
[The referenced information follows:]
Statement of Hon. Tammy Duckworth,
U.S. Senator from the State of Illinois
The Utilizing Significant Emissions with Innovative
Technologies Act is a significant step forward in the fight
against climate change. This bipartisan bill recognizes the
important role of carbon capture, utilization, and storage
(CCUS) in reducing emissions. These emerging technologies will
not only help combat climate change, but will enhance our
economy, advance new industries, and create new American jobs.
I would like to thank the authors of the USE IT Act for
working diligently with me to include important language on
permanent geologic storage. Carbon storage is the key to
ensuring these emissions are safely kept in the ground to help
limit the harmful impacts of climate change. Illinois is a
leader in carbon storage research and infrastructure, and I am
proud that my home State is helping us better understand how to
deploy these technologies in an effective and safe manner.
As I noted at the legislative hearing, the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change found that the cost
of reducing carbon emissions will be at least 140 percent
higher without CCUS. This important legislation promotes
investment in low carbon technology infrastructure and research
in emerging, innovative low carbon technologies. Our Nation
must embrace every pathway to lowering emissions and bolstering
our economy. This bill plays a critical role in achieving both
these goals.
Statement of Hon. Tammy Duckworth,
U.S. Senator from the State of Illinois
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you, Ranking Member Carper,
Subcommittee Chairman Inhofe, and Ranking Member Cardin for
your leadership in advancing this important legislation.
America's Water Infrastructure Act is an important and
thoughtful effort to improve the effectiveness and efficiency
of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, strengthen our Nation's
water infrastructure, and advance dozens of projects nationwide
that are critical to public health and safety.
Included in this WRDA reauthorization legislation are key
provisions that will empower communities to partner with the
Corps of Engineers to advance regionally significant projects
by requiring Corps districts to produce 5-year budgets and work
plans with input and participation from local and regional
stakeholders. The bill steers funding to Corps districts to
create these work plans and prospective budgets, adding more
transparency to Corps budgeting activities.
Many communities in Illinois that have been frustrated by
the Corps' antiquated ``Benefit-to-Cost Ratio'' will breathe a
sigh of relief from provisions included in this legislation
that require the Comptroller General to examine benefit-cost
calculations and require the National Academy of Sciences to
study the Corps' project planning process to determine if the
Corps should move away from the existing project-based
authorization process.
I am also proud of the other provisions included in this
legislation that will benefit Illinois by optimizing
opportunities for managing wet weather events in ways that
bolster a community's resiliency. One such provision integrates
the Corps' work with local municipal stormwater management
projects to help ensure broader water resource management goals
are met. The bill also requires the Corps to review their
procedures for addressing urban flood risk to allow more active
Federal participation in urban flooding events and prioritizes
the McCook Reservoir project to better protect 5 million
Chicago-area residents from flooding in their homes and
businesses.
This WRDA legislation makes enormous strides in protecting
one of Illinois' most precious resources, the Great Lakes,
through a reauthorization of the Great Lakes Restoration
Initiative with increased funding authorizations of $30 million
in fiscal year 2019, $60 million in fiscal year 2020, and $90
million in fiscal year 2021. The bill includes the Great Lakes
Coastal Resiliency Study to facilitate meaningful coordination
between various Federal and State agencies to produce
recommended actions to manage and protect the Great Lakes
coastline--an effort supported by all eight Great Lakes States.
The bill also calls on the Corps to complete a final
feasibility report for the Brandon Road Study by February 2019
and makes it easier for existing local funding to be used in
this important effort.
As the Ranking Member of the Fisheries, Water, and Wildlife
Subcommittee with jurisdiction over Federal drinking water and
wastewater infrastructure programs, I am very pleased that the
bill reinforces congressional commitment to the Clean and Safe
Drinking Water State Revolving Funds by calling for robust
funding of capitalization grants. I am also pleased that the
Committee included a reauthorization of the Water
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act (WIFIA) pilot program
to help accelerate water infrastructure investment by providing
long term, low cost supplemental loans for regionally and
nationally significant projects. At the urging of Subcommittee
Chairman Boozman, the bill also includes new innovative
financing options for States and communities to consider a
wider array of investment opportunities. Finally, I am
heartened to see that Buy America protections for drinking
water infrastructure projects were made permanent in the bill,
which are critically important to our domestic steel industry.
This bill is a significant and meaningful step forward for
the thousands of communities that depend on modern ports and
waterways, safe and reliable water infrastructure, or deal with
pervasive flooding. This legislation sets the stage for
modernizing our waterways so that American industries that rely
on efficient, safe, and reliable transportation systems can
remain competitive in the global marketplace, but more must be
done to address our backlog of aging locks and dams by
including additional innovative mechanisms to increase funding
for these critical assets on the Mississippi and Illinois
Rivers, among others.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Carper, I want to thank you
again for your leadership on this important effort and your
commitment to continue working with members of this Committee
throughout the legislative process. I look forward to
continuing our dialogue about how to enhance lead testing and
monitoring of drinking water infrastructure at schools to
protect public health and the safety of our children.
Finally, I would like to thank the Committee staffs, both
majority and minority, for their tireless work and dedication
to this bipartisan effort. I strongly encourage my colleagues
to support S. 2800, the bipartisan America's Water
Infrastructure Act.
Senator Carper. And Mr. Chairman, I also have several
letters of support for the record for America's Water
Infrastructure Act. These include the American Society for
Civil Engineers, National Park Conservation Association, Great
Lakes Commission, American Shore and Beach Preservation
Association, National Association of Counties, Audubon,
American Rivers, Nature Conservancy, U.S. Conference of Mayors,
National League of Cities, and League of Conservation Voters.
I would ask that those letters be submitted for the record.
Senator Barrasso. Without objection.
Senator Carper. Thank you very much.
[The referenced information was not received at time of
print.]
Senator Barrasso. And I have a similar long list of letters
for the record, and I would be happy to submit them, without
objection, and that will be done.
[The referenced information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. I just want to thank all of the members,
and a special thanks to the staff, who have worked extremely
hard to make sure that we could find common ground, and we have
done a wonderful job in doing that, to address the needs of
this Nation, so I ask unanimous consent that the staff have the
authority to make technical and conforming changes to each of
the matters approved today.
With that, our business meeting is concluded.
[Whereupon, at 10:45 a.m. the Committee was adjourned.]
[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]