- KEEPING THE LIGHTS ON: ADDRESSING CYBER THREATS TO THE GRID
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
KEEPING THE LIGHTS ON: ADDRESSING CYBER THREATS TO THE GRID
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
JULY 12, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-52
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
40-665 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair
BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------
Professional Staff
JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Energy
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Chairman
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
FRED UPTON, Michigan
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Ranking Member
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
JERRY McNERNEY, California, Vice
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
PETE OLSON, Texas
PAUL TONKO, New York
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,
BILL FLORES, Texas
Massachusetts
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hon. Jerry McNerney, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................
2
Prepared statement...........................................
3
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
9
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................
9
Prepared statement...........................................
11
Witnesses
Karen S. Evans, Assistant Secretary, Office of Cybersecurity,
Energy Security, and Emergency Response, Department of Energy..
13
Prepared statement...........................................
15
J. Andrew Dodge, Sr., Director, Office of Electric Reliability,
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission...........................
25
Prepared statement...........................................
27
James B. Robb, President and Chief Executive Officer, North
American Electric Reliability Corporation......................
31
Prepared statement...........................................
33
Submitted Material
Article of July 8, 2019, ``Grid Chief: Operators pulling
`rabbits' to keep lights on,'' by Peter Behr, E&E News,
submitted by Mr. McKinley......................................
69
Letter of July 9, 2019, from James D. Ogsbury, Executive
Director, Western Governors' Association, to Mr. Rush and Mr.
Upton, submitted by Mr. Rush...................................
71
Letter of July 12, 2019, from Jim Cunningham, Executive Director,
Protect Our Power, to Mr. Pallone and Mr. Walden, submitted by
Mr. Rush.......................................................
84
Letter of July 12, 2019, from Kathryn Waldron, Fellow,
Cybersecurity and National Security, R Street Institute, to Mr.
Rush and Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Rush......................
86
KEEPING THE LIGHTS ON: ADDRESSING CYBER THREATS TO THE GRID
----------
FRIDAY, JULY 12, 2019
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:32 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Bobby L. Rush (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Rush, Peters, McNerney,
Loebsack, Butterfield, Schrader, Kennedy, Veasey, Kuster,
Kelly, Barragan, McEachin, O'Halleran, Blunt Rochester, Pallone
(ex officio), Upton (subcommittee ranking member), Latta,
Rodgers, Olson, McKinley, Griffith, Johnson, Bucshon, Flores,
Hudson, Walberg, Duncan, and Walden (ex officio).
Staff present: Jeffrey C. Carroll, Staff Director;
Jacqueline Cohen, Chief Environment Counsel; Jean Fruci, Energy
and Environment Policy Advisor; Waverly Gordon, Deputy Chief
Counsel; Tiffany Guarascio, Deputy Staff Director; Omar Guzman-
Toro, Policy Analyst; Rick Kessler, Senior Advisor and Staff
Director, Energy and Environment; John Marshall, Policy
Coordinator; Elysa Montfort, Press Secretary; Meghan Mullon,
Staff Assistant; Lisa Olson, FERC Detailee; Alivia Roberts,
Press Assistant; Tim Robinson, Chief Counsel; Andrew Souvall,
Director of Communications, Outreach, and Member Services;
Tuley Wright, Energy and Environment Policy Advisor; Adam
Buckalew, Minority Director of Coalitions and Deputy Chief
Counsel, Health; Robin Colwell, Minority Chief Counsel,
Communications and Technology; Jordan Davis, Minority Senior
Advisor; Melissa Froelich, Minority Chief Counsel, Consumer
Protection and Commerce; Peter Kielty, Minority General
Counsel; Mary Martin, Minority Chief Counsel, Energy and
Environment & Climate Change; Brandon Mooney, Minority Deputy
Chief Counsel, Energy; and Brannon Rains, Minority Legislative
Clerk.
Mr. Rush. The subcommittee will now come to order. I want
to thank all the Members and the witnesses for appearing before
the subcommittee this morning.
The Chair will now yield 5 minutes to my great friend, Mr.
McNerney from California, for 5 minutes.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JERRY McNERNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Mr. McNerney. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. I thank you for
yielding me the 5 minutes.
And I thank the witnesses for coming this morning. It is an
incredibly important issue that we needed to care a lot about
and make good policy on.
We are meeting today to discuss the state of cybersecurity
in the grid and the continuing threats facing America's energy
infrastructure. We continue to see increasing threats to the
grid, originating both at home and abroad. I am glad to see the
DOE and FERC and others taking steps to address the growing
dangers posed by nefarious actors.
Our energy grid serves as the backbone of our economy,
touching every aspect of our lives, and a reliable grid is also
crucial to crucial to our national security and for a clean
energy future. For lawmakers to encourage and enable innovative
advancements that we can improve the security and reliability
of our Nation's electric grid, we must work on a bipartisan
basis and actively engage with industry leaders as we are doing
today here.
Fortunately, the modernization and innovation of our energy
infrastructure is already underway. What was once a one-way
delivery system has evolved into a dynamic network where
information and energy flows both ways. Technological
advancements are also borne from the need to secure the energy
grids against potential physical and cyber threats.
For example, technology allowing for the rerouting of power
and quick response in the event of attack is being deployed
across the grid. The cooperation among Federal, State, and
local governments is essential to protecting Americans and our
Nation's infrastructure.
Given today's cyber environment, it is more important than
ever that Congress pursue policies that continue to foster
these exciting developments and support our grid
infrastructure.
This is an issue that I am very passionate about, and any
vulnerable component is a threat to our physical and national
security, making it imperative that we invest in grid
modernization and security.
That is why I am proud to cochair the bipartisan Grid
Innovation Caucus with my good friend from across the aisle,
Representative Bob Latta from Ohio. Together, we are focused on
providing a forum for discussing solutions to the many
challenges facing the grid and to educate Members of Congress
and staff about the importance of the electric grid with
relation to the economy, energy security, advanced technologies
being utilized to enhance grid capabilities.
This work has informed our introduction of two bills on the
topic, both of which have already been marked up and advanced
by this subcommittee. Their aim is to bolster America's
electric infrastructure by encouraging coordination between the
Department of Energy and the electric utilities.
My bill, which I introduced along with Mr. Latta, H.R. 359,
the Enhancing Grid Security Through Public-Private Partnership
Act, would create a program to enhance the physical and
cybersecurity of the electric utilities through assessing
security vulnerabilities and increasing cybersecurity training
and collect data.
It would also require the interrupt cost estimate
calculator, which is used to calculate the return on investment
on utility investments to be updated at least every 2 years to
ensure accurate calculations.
Mr. Latta's bill, which he introduced along with me, H.R.
360, the critical Cyber Sense Act, makes important headway in
protecting our critical grid infrastructure. The Cyber Sense
Act would create a program to identify cybersecure products for
the bulk power grid through testing and verification program.
The bulk power system supports American industry and
provides all the benefits of a reliable electric power to the
American people. It is essential that we make this system as
secure as possible, as cyber attacks do pose a serious threat
to the electric grid. Any vulnerable component in our grid is a
threat to our security, and this bill will go a long way to
strengthening that system. I thank Mr. Latta for his
partnership, and looking forward to working with him.
I also want to take a moment to mention my support for H.R.
362, the Energy Emergency Leadership Act, sponsored by Chairman
Rush and Mr. Walberg. This bill would establish a new DOE
Assistant Secretary position with jurisdiction over all energy,
emergency, and security functions related to energy supply,
infrastructure, and cybersecurity.
Finally, I want to mention my support for one more bill on
this topic, H.R. 370, the Pipeline and LNG Facilities
Cybersecurity Preparedness Act, sponsored by Ranking Member
Upton and Mr. Loebsack. This bill would require the Secretary
of Energy to establish a program relating to the physical
security and cybersecurity for pipelines and liquefied natural
gas facilities.
As the bills I have mentioned show, our committee is
uniquely positioned to examine the issues before us today as we
work to put America on a path to better securing our electric
and utilities system.
Now I yield back to the chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McNerney follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Jerry McNerney
We are meeting today to discuss the state of cybersecurity
in the grid and the continuing threats facing America's energy
infrastructure.
We continue to see increasing threats to the grid
originating both at home and abroad. I'm glad to see DOE, FERC,
and others take steps to address the growing dangers posed by
nefarious actors.
Our energy grid serves as the backbone of our economy,
touching every aspect of our lives. A reliable grid system is
also critical for our national security and clean energy
future.
For lawmakers to encourage and enable innovative
advancements that can improve the security and reliability of
our Nation's energy grid, we must work on a bipartisan basis
and actively engage with industry leaders as we are doing
today.
Fortunately, the modernization and innovation of our energy
infrastructure is already underway. What was once a one-way
delivery system has evolved into a dynamic network where
information and energy flow both ways.
Technological advancements are also born from the need to
secure the energy grid against potential physical and cyber
threats.
For example, technology allowing for the rerouting of power
and quick response in the event of attacks is being deployed
across the grid. The cooperation among Federal, State and local
governments is essential to protecting Americans and our
Nation's infrastructure.
Given today's cyber environment, it is more important than
ever that Congress pursue policies that continue to foster
these exciting developments and support our grid
infrastructure.
This is an issue that I am very passionate about. Any
vulnerable component is a threat to our physical and national
security, making it imperative that we invest in grid
modernization and security.
That is why I am proud to cochair the bipartisan Grid
Innovation Caucus along with my good friend from across the
aisle, Representative Latta of Ohio.
Together, we are focused on providing a forum for
discussing solutions to the many challenges facing the grid,
and to educate Members of Congress and staff about the
importance of the electric grid with relation to the economy,
energy security, and advanced technologies being utilized to
enhance grid capabilities.
This work has informed our introduction of two bills on the
topic, both of which have already been marked up and advanced
by this subcommittee.
Their aim is to bolster America's electric infrastructure
by encouraging coordination between the Department of Energy
and electric utilities.
My bill, which I introduced along with Mr. Latta, H.R. 359,
the Enhancing Grid Security through Public-Private Partnerships
Act, would create a program to enhance the physical and cyber
security of electric utilities through assessing security
vulnerabilities, increase cybersecurity training, and data
collection. It would also require the Interruption Cost
Estimate Calculator--which is used to calculate the return on
investment on utility investments--to be updated at least every
2 years to ensure accurate calculations.
Mr. Latta's bill, which he introduced along with me, H.R.
360, the Cyber Sense Act, makes important headway in protecting
our critical grid infrastructure.
The Cyber Sense Act would create a program to identify
cyber secure products for the bulk power grid through a testing
and verification program.
The bulk power system supports American industry and
provides all the benefits of reliable electric power to the
American people.
It is essential that we make this system as secure as
possible, as cyber attacks pose a serious threat to the
electric grid.
Any vulnerable component in our grid is a threat to our
security, and this bill will go a long way to strengthening our
system.
I thank Mr. Latta for his partnership in these efforts and
look forward to continuing to work to ensure a more secure and
resilient grid.
I also want to take a moment to mention my support for H.R.
362, the Energy Emergency Leadership Act, sponsored by Chairman
Rush and Mr. Walberg. This bill would establish a new DOE
Assistant Secretary position with jurisdiction over all energy
emergency and security functions related to energy supply,
infrastructure, and cybersecurity.
Finally, I want to mention my support for one more bill on
this topic, H.R. 370, the Pipeline and LNG Facility
Cybersecurity Preparedness Act sponsored by Ranking Member
Upton and Mr. Loebsack. This bill would require the Secretary
of Energy to establish a program relating to the physical
security and cybersecurity for pipelines and liquefied natural
gas facilities.
As the bills I have mentioned show, our committee is
uniquely positioned to examine the issues before us today as we
work to put America on a path to better securing our electric
utility system.
Thank you and I yield back.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank the gentleman. And on a point of
personal privilege, the Chair was originally scheduled to be at
home in Chicago this morning for a funeral--one of my dear
friends, Ms. Dana Russell, trusted friend and colleague and
supporter--and due to inclement weather last night, my flight
was canceled, so I couldn't be in Chicago.
And Mr. McNerney graciously agreed to sit in the chair for
me last night, because I wasn't going to be here this morning.
But I am here now, and so I want to thank him, Mr. McNerney,
personally for agreeing to sit in the chair for me in my
absence. But as you can see, I am here, and so thank you.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I appreciate the sentiment, and I also
appreciate the confidence that you have shown in me, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Rush. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Upton, the ranking member of
the subcommittee, for 5 minutes for the purposes of an opening
statement.
Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am sorry to
hear about your friend, and I am grateful that you didn't get
on that plane, because I drove home through that storm last
night, and I don't think that plane would have had a lot of----
Mr. Rush. Thank you.
Mr. Upton. Yes. Yes. Smart.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN
Today's hearing continues the subcommittee's ongoing
oversight of cybersecurity threats to the electric grid, a
priority that all of us have had. And while this is the first
hearing specifically on the topic this year, the subcommittee
has been raising questions about persistent and emerging
threats to the electrical grid in closed briefings and in
hearings with Federal officials and others over the course of
this session, building on the work that we have done over the
last couple of Congresses.
It is unquestionable that ensuring the reliable supply of
electricity is vital to our Nation's security, economy, our
health, and welfare. Electricity enables telecommunications,
financial transactions, the transport and delivery of energy
and agriculture; it powers the infrastructure that delivers our
drinking water. It enables business and industry to make and
provide the goods and services of our modern society. It powers
our hospitals, our households, and everything else.
But let's face it. The U.S. has the world's most complex
electric grid, and while we have a well-developed system of
grid operators to ensure that the lights stay on, we are
confronting new challenges every day and adapting to a changing
generation mix, new technologies, and consumer preferences.
We are also responding to new threats and working to
strengthen the cybersecurity of the Nation's grid. The
integration into the system of new digital technologies that
are essential for keeping up with our Nation's energy needs
constantly add vulnerabilities.
Other vulnerabilities are being added with increasing
dependence on pipeline infrastructure by electric generating
units. Combine that with a rapid expansion of cyber
capabilities by more of America's adversaries in safeguarding
transmission infrastructure remains particularly urgent.
Many of the Federal oversight and regulatory structures in
place today that ensure that the system can mitigate and
respond to cyber can be traced to this committee's legislative
work.
In 2005, we authorized FERC to commission the North
American Electric Reliability Corporation, NERC, with the
authority to establish and enforce reliability standards and to
coordinate activities among industry and the Feds to confront
cyber threats.
In 2015, this committee wrote provisions, including the
FAST Act, to strengthen DOE's energy sector specific
authorities and to facilitate sharing of the threat information
between private-sector asset owners and the Federal Government.
As a Federal agency with a leading expertise on our
Nation's electricity grid and the cybersecurity threats against
it, it is imperative that we arm DOE with the tools and
authorities to protect our electricity system from the
transmission lines to the very generating stations and their
pipelines.
Most recently, we developed legislation to elevate DOE's
functions overseeing cybersecurity and to improve information
sharing, emergency planning, and other technical activities in
this jurisdiction. That legislative work is continuing, but
fortunately the Department has used its own authorities to
implement enhanced leadership over cybersecurity and to improve
interagency coordination.
Against that backdrop, today's hearing provides a great
opportunity to update the subcommittee on what these agencies
are doing to advance cybersecurity practices, protections, and
response planning.
I am looking forward to hearing from Assistant Secretary
Karen Evans, who heads the DOE Office of Cybersecurity, Energy
Security, and Emergency Response, or CESER. When she testified
in September last year, she had been on the job for just a
couple of weeks, though she brought long Federal experience to
the table as soon as she sat down.
So I look forward to discussing DOE's current work, how
well it is exercising its coordinating role over the
cybersecurity threat, and to learn what challenges she sees
going forward and how she plans to address those challenges.
It will also be helpful to hear today from the regulators
of the electric grid: Andy Dodge, who heads FERC's Office of
Electric Reliability, and of course, from Jim Robb, who heads
NERC. Both of these entities serve as the front lines of
regulatory oversight of electric grid infrastructure
protection. I am particularly interested in learning what
measures you are working on to address threats to ensure best
practices and to coordinate response to cyber incidents.
The risk of massive blackouts can be hard to think about,
but the cybersecurity realities of today require that we face
these risks head on, that we be sure that our agencies and
appropriate groups have the tools in the toolbox and the
information that they need to address the risk and what they
are prepared for the consequences of successful attacks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Fred Upton
Today's hearing continues the subcommittee's ongoing
oversight of cybersecurity threats to the electric grid. While
this is the first hearing specifically on that topic this year,
the subcommittee has been raising questions about persistent
and emerging threats to the electrical grid in closed briefings
and in hearings with Federal officials and others over the
course of this session--building on the work we've done over
the past few Congresses.
It is unquestionable that ensuring the reliable supply of
electricity is vital to our Nation's security, economy, our
health and welfare. Electricity enables telecommunications,
financial transactions, the transport and delivery of energy,
and agriculture. It powers the infrastructure that delivers our
drinking water. It enables business and industry to make and
provide the goods and services of our modern society. It powers
our hospitals, our households.
The United States has the world's most complex electric
grid, and while we have a well-developed system of grid
operators to ensure our lights stay on, we're confronting new
challenges and adapting to a changing generation mix, new
technologies, and consumer preferences. We're also responding
to new threats and working to strengthen the cybersecurity of
the Nation's grid.
The integration into the system of new digital technologies
that are essential for keeping up with our Nation's energy
needs constantly add vulnerabilities. Other vulnerabilities are
being added with the increasing dependence on pipeline
infrastructure by electric generating units. Combine this with
the rapid expansion of cyber capabilities by more of America's
adversaries, and safeguarding transmission infrastructure
remains particularly urgent.
Many of the Federal oversight and regulatory structures in
place today that ensure the system can mitigate and respond to
cyber threats can be traced to this committee's legislative
work.
In 2005, we authorized FERC to commission the North
American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) with the
authority to establish and enforce reliability standards and to
coordinate activities among industry and the Feds to confront
cyber threats.
In 2015, this committee wrote provisions included in the
FAST Act to strengthen DOE's energy sector specific authorities
and to facilitate sharing of threat information between private
sector asset owners and the Federal Government. As the Federal
agency with the leading expertise on our Nation's electricity
grid and the cybersecurity threats against it, it is imperative
that we arm DOE with the tools and authorities to protect our
electricity system, from the transmission lines to the
generating stations to the pipelines.
Most recently, we developed legislation to elevate DOE's
functions overseeing cybersecurity and to improve information
sharing, emergency planning and other technical activities in
its jurisdiction. That legislative work is continuing, but
fortunately, the Department has used its own authorities to
implement enhanced leadership over cybersecurity and to improve
interagency coordination.
Against this backdrop, today's hearing provides a great
opportunity to update the subcommittee on what DOE, FERC and
NERC are doing to advance cybersecurity practices, protections,
and response planning.
I am looking forward to hearing from Assistant Secretary
Karen Evans, who heads the DOE Office of Cybersecurity, Energy
Security, and Emergency Response, or CESER.
When Ms. Evans testified in September last year, she had
been on the job for just a few weeks--though she brought long
Federal experience to the table as soon as she sat down. So I
look forward to discussing DOE's current work, how well it is
exercising its coordinating role over the cybersecurity threat,
and to learn what challenges she sees going forward, and how
she plans to address those challenges.
It will also be helpful to hear today from the regulators
of the electric grid: Andy Dodge, who heads FERC's Office of
Electric Reliability, and, of course, from Jim Robb, who heads
NERC. Both these entities serve at the front lines of
regulatory oversight of electric grid infrastructure
protection. I'm particularly interested in learning what
measures they are working on to address threats, to ensure best
practices, and to coordinate response to cyber incidents.
The risks of massive blackouts can be hard to think about.
But the cybersecurity realities of today require we face these
risks head on, that we be sure our agencies and the appropriate
groups have the tools and information they need to address the
risks, and that they are prepared for the consequences of
successful attacks.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for keeping the subcommittee
informed on this important topic.
Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this hearing. I
yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes for the purposes of an
opening statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Rush.
Today we are here to get an update from Federal agencies
about how they are addressing cyber threats to our electricity
grid. We know our adversaries are developing new techniques to
compromise and attack our grid, so it is vitally important that
the Federal Government and the electric industry remain
vigilant in ensuring the grid is secure.
Our committee has been conducting robust oversight on this
important topic in a bipartisan fashion for years. Today's
hearing is a public forum to discuss how the Federal Government
is addressing cybersecurity challenges, but the committee also
continues to receive closed-door briefings on the issue to
understand more classified matters.
Our witnesses and their respective agencies all take
cybersecurity to the grid very seriously, and I believe
Secretary Perry made the right decision in creating the
position of Assistant Secretary for Cybersecurity, Energy
Security, and Emergency Response to focus specifically on these
pressing issues.
Last month, the subcommittee favorably reported out
legislation introduced by Chairman Rush and Mr. Walberg that
would enshrine in statute this important new division at DOE,
and I look forward to bringing this bill and three other
bipartisan cybersecurity bills up for a markup at the full
committee soon.
We must be both active and vigilant when it comes to
cybersecurity, because time is of the essence. In March, we had
the first reported malicious cyber event that disrupted grid
operations of a western utility. Thankfully, there seemed to be
very little effect on the transmission grid and no customers
lost power, but we must stay ahead of anyone who is a cyber
threat.
And I appreciate the work of FERC and N-E-R-C, or NERC, to
continue enhancing critical infrastructure protection
standards, like the final rule last October to bolster supply
chain risk management. This rule implements new reliability
standards that respond to supply chain risks, like malicious
software, by requiring responsible entities to develop and
implement security controls for industrial control systems,
hardware, software, and services.
And these are the types of important forward-looking
actions we need to proactively protect our grid against
attacks. And while this hearing today is not specifically about
pipeline cybersecurity, I would be remiss not to mention how
important that is to our grid system. We have a reliable
pipeline system, but we never want to find ourselves in a
different situation, so I remain concerned about the lack of
resources and expertise at the Transportation Security
Administration's pipeline security program.
I look forward to hearing from DOE about possible ways they
could help address these safety gaps. As I have said before, if
TSA continues to devote scant resources or attention to these
matters, we must start looking at other options to keep our
pipes secure. So, again, I thank our witnesses for being here
today as we discuss this critical security issue.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, unless someone else wants the
time, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.
Thank you, Chairman Rush, for holding this hearing today on
the very important topic of cybersecurity of our Nation's
electric grid. We know our enemies are rapidly developing new
techniques to compromise and attack our grid. It is important
government and industry stay on top of the issue.
I know our witnesses and their agencies--the Department of
Energy, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, and the North
American Electric Reliability Corporation--all take
cybersecurity of the grid very seriously and are doing good
work. I look forward to today's discussion.
I am pleased Secretary Perry established the Cybersecurity,
Energy Security, and Emergency Response, or CESER, office to
focus specifically on these pressing issues. Chairman Rush and
Mr. Walberg have introduced bill H.R. 362, the Energy Emergency
Leadership Act, to enshrine in statute this new focused level
of leadership at the Department of Energy. I hope we are able
to report this legislation out of the full committee soon.
This bill, along with three other bipartisan bills
addressing cybersecurity of our Nation's energy systems, were
favorably forwarded to the full committee recently. These bills
are a top priority to move, and I am very proud of our strong
bipartisan working relationship and the committee's efforts on
cybersecurity.
We all understand time is of the essence. March 2019 marks
a sobering milestone of the first reported malicious cyber
event that disrupted grid operations of a Western utility.
Thankfully, there seemed to be very little effect to the
transmission grid and no resulting blackouts. We must stay
ahead of our enemies and keep it that way.
I appreciate FERC and NERC's work together to continue
enhancing Critical Infrastructure Protection Standards like the
final rule last October to bolster supply chain risk
management. This rule implements new reliability standards that
respond to supply chain risks like malicious software by
requiring responsible entities to develop and implement
security controls for industrial control system hardware,
software and services. These are the types of important
forward-looking actions we need to proactively protect our grid
against attacks.
And, while this hearing today is not about cybersecurity
relating to our pipelines, I'd be remiss not to mention how
important that is to our grid system. We have a reliable
pipeline system, but we never want to find ourselves in a
different situation. DOE, FERC, and NERC's responsiveness to
the committee's briefing request and job of oversight is a
welcomed change from the stonewalling from TSA who refuse to
testify. As I've said before, and my friend from Michigan,
Ranking Member Upton has echoed, if TSA does not want to be
taken seriously, we may have to look at other options.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here today. I look
forward to hearing about CESER's range of work including work
on a national strategy and cybersecurity risk assessment of the
grid. I also looking forward to hearing about FERC and NERC's
continued work to build out a critical infrastructure
cybersecurity framework. In general, how are you working to
incentivize and implement leading cybersecurity standards? What
types of collaborative processes are your agencies working on
with industry? And, what can Congress do to support each of
your agencies' work?
Thank you, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Walden, for the purposes of an opening
statement.
Mr. Walden. Well, good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rush. Good morning.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON
Mr. Walden. I am delighted to have the witnesses here and
to have this hearing.
By any measure, the reliable supply of electricity is an
essential part of everything that we do. We know that. And as
we have learned in previous briefings and hearings, in today's
highly interconnected and digital world the threat of cyber
attacks, the reliability of electricity is ever present and it
is growing.
And one of our responsibilities on the Energy and Commerce
Committee is to review and, where necessary, revise laws and
policies that concern the reliable delivery of energy. This is
part of the committee's black letter jurisdiction, and it is
something that we all take very seriously, no matter which
party is in the majority.
This morning's oversight hearing continues this important
work, and it focuses on the status of efforts to address
cybersecurity threats to the electricity grid. We will hear
testimony from our witnesses today--you are key players in
keeping the lights on--Department of Energy, Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission, and the North American Electric
Reliability Corporation, or NERC.
Each of your organizations has a role in supporting
effective information sharing, technical assistance, standard
settings, oversight of standards implementation, sound
engineering practices, all of that as it relates to the bulk
power system. And I look forward to hearing updates from the
witnesses, especially on coordination and on sharing among the
Federal entities and industries. We know that has always been
an issue, and it continues to be.
Our past oversights examine some of the work DOE is doing
to carry out its broad energy emergency and cybersecurity
responsibilities over the energy sector. This includes
providing, supporting, and facilitating the technical
assistance to the energy sector to help identify
vulnerabilities and to mitigate risk.
I have seen some of this work firsthand at our National
Labs, especially in the northwest, the Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory in Washington State, and I went out to
Idaho Falls to the Idaho National Laboratory. Terrific people
working in those labs, doing amazing work on behalf of the
country. They provide the analytical tools, they provide the
test beds and other capabilities that are proving very helpful
for all kinds of industries and systems we rely upon.
We learned last year how deployment of new surveillance and
information-sharing tools, particularly in what is called the
Cybersecurity Risk Information Sharing Program, or CRISP, have
proven especially helpful in identifying systemic and
systematic cyber attacks across the energy sector.
So I would be interested to hear today from NERC and DOE
how this approach is being expanded more broadly, especially as
it relates to supply chain risk and operational technology
systems, the switches and Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition, or SCADA system, embedded in the grid. We know
that as more connected devices and smart grid technologies are
added to the grid, the vulnerabilities will continue to grow.
Information sharing is central to strong cyber defenses.
This is especially important as our energy systems become more
interconnected. Republican Leader Fred Upton has noted
repeatedly how, because the Nation's pipeline systems--and you
have heard this from others today--are such an integral part of
the electricity fuel supply system, harm to pipelines means
potential harm to the supply of electricity.
So we have to think about pipelines as part of our larger
energy system rather than just a piece of hardware or a simple
mode of transportation. While pipelines fall under separate
regulatory regimes, Department of Energy must maintain
visibility over pipelines to ensure the delivery of electricity
to consumers. They are all interconnected.
That is why this committee has been pushing to codify DOE's
emergency response role and strengthen the Department's
capabilities to monitor for cyber threats and to provide
technical assistance to the industries.
It is also important to enhance coordination of response
should attacks succeed at a large scale. Members on this panel
have had the benefit of briefings over the past few years to
understand emergency response exercises in the electric sector.
An update on these exercises will also be useful today, so we
look forward to that.
As this testimony this morning will underscore, the risk to
our critical electrical infrastructure from nation states and
other bad actors is increasing. This means the technical
assistance, the information sharing, and deployment of
innovative technologies and best practices to get ahead of the
threats is ever more urgent.
We must be sure our critical infrastructure protection
standards are up to date, and sufficiently flexible to meet the
risk, and we must be sure we are providing our Federal agencies
the tools needed to serve the industry and the Nation more
effectively. We have real responsibility here, and hearings
like this will help us do our job better.
So, Mr. Chairman, thank you for having this oversight
hearing. And, again, to our witnesses, thank you for your
testimony, guidance, and counsel. You will improve our work.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Greg Walden
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
By any measure, the reliable supply of electricity is an
essential part of almost everything we do. And, as we've
learned in previous briefings and hearings, in today's highly
interconnected, digital world, the threat of cyber attacks to
the reliability of electricity is ever present and growing.
One of our responsibilities on the Energy and Commerce
Committee is to review, and where necessary, revise laws and
policies that concern the reliable delivery of energy. This is
part of the committee's black letter jurisdiction, and it is
something we take very seriously on both sides of the aisle, no
matter which party is in the majority.
This morning's oversight hearing continues this important
work. It focuses on the status of efforts to address
cyberthreats to the electric grid. We will hear testimony from
three of the key players for making sure the lights stay on:
Department of Energy, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission,
and the North American Electric Reliability Corporation, or
NERC.
Each of these organizations has a role in supporting
effective information sharing, technical assistance, standard
setting, oversight of standards implementation, and sound
engineering practices relating to the bulk power system. And I
look forward to hearing updates from the witnesses, especially
on coordination and sharing among the Federal entities and
industry.
Our past oversight has examined some of the work DOE is
doing to carry out its broad energy emergency and cybersecurity
responsibilities over the energy sector. This includes
providing, supporting, and facilitating the technical
assistance to the energy sector to help identify
vulnerabilities and mitigate risks. I've seen some of this work
at the National Labs, particularly at the Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory, in Washington, and at the Idaho National
Laboratory, which provide analytical tools, test beds, and
other capabilities that are proving very helpful for industry.
We learned last year how deployment of new surveillance and
information sharing tools, particularly in what is called the
Cybersecurity Risk Information Sharing Program, or CRISP, have
proven especially helpful in identifying systematic cyber
attacks across the energy sector.
I would be interested to hear today from NERC and DOE how
this approach is being expanded more broadly, especially as it
relates to supply chain risks and operational technology
systems--the switches and Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition (SCADA) system--embedded in the grid. We know that
as more connected devices and smart grid technologies are added
to the grid, the vulnerabilities will continue to grow.
Information sharing is central to strong cyber defenses.
This is especially important as our energy systems become more
interconnected. Republican Leader Upton has noted repeatedly
how, because the Nation's pipeline systems are such an integral
part of the electricity fuel supply system, harm to pipelines
means potential harm to the supply of electricity.
We must think about pipelines as part of a larger energy
system--rather than a piece of hardware or a simple mode of
transportation. While pipelines fall under separate regulatory
regimes, DOE must maintain visibility over pipelines to ensure
the delivery of electricity to consumers. That is why this
committee has been pushing to codify DOE's emergency response
role and strengthen the Department's capabilities to monitor
for cyberthreats and to provide technical assistance to
industry.
It is also important to enhance coordination of response
should attacks succeed at a large scale. Members on this panel
have had the benefit of briefings over the past few years to
understand emergency response exercises in the electric sector.
An update on these exercises will be useful today.
As testimony this morning will underscore, the risks to our
critical electric infrastructure from nation states and other
bad actors is increasing. This means the technical assistance,
the information sharing, and deployment of innovative
technologies and best practices to get ahead of the threats is
ever more urgent. We must be sure that our critical
infrastructure protection standards are up to date and
sufficiently flexible to meet the risks. We must be sure that
we are providing our Federal agencies the tools needed to serve
the industry and the Nation more effectively. We have a
responsibility here and hearings like this will help us do our
job.
Thank you. Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Walden. And with that, I will yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair would now like to welcome all of our expert
witnesses for today's hearing. From my left, the Honorable
Karen S. Evans. She is the Assistant Secretary of the Office of
Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response, CESER,
at the U.S. Department of Energy.
Next to her is seated Mr. J. Andrew Dodge, Sr. He is the
Director of the Office of Electric Reliability for the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission, FERC.
And sitting next to Mr. Dodge is Mr. Jim Robb, the
president and chief executive officer of the North American
Electric Reliability Corporation.
And I want to, again, thank all of the witnesses for being
here with us today, and we look forward to your testimony.
But before we begin, I have to give you a little tutorial.
I would like to explain the lighting system.
In front of you is a series of lights. The light will
initially be green at the start of your opening statement. The
light will turn yellow when you have 1 minute remaining. Please
begin to wrap up your testimony at the yellow light. The light
will turn a bright, bright, bright red when your testimony
expires.
And with that said, Assistant Secretary Evans, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENTS OF KAREN S. EVANS, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE OF
CYBERSECURITY, ENERGY SECURITY, AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE,
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY; J. ANDREW DODGE, Sr., DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF
ELECTRIC RELIABILITY, FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION; AND
JAMES B. ROBB, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NORTH
AMERICAN ELECTRIC RELIABILITY CORPORATION
STATEMENT OF KAREN S. EVANS
Ms. Evans. Thank you, sir. Good morning, Chairman Rush,
Ranking Member Upton, and members of the committee. Thank you
for the opportunity to discuss the continuing threats facing
our national energy infrastructure.
Focusing on cybersecurity, energy security, and resilience
of the Nation's energy systems is one of the Energy Secretary's
top priorities. By the administration proposing and Congress
affirming the Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and
Emergency Response, CESER, the Secretary has clearly
demonstrated his commitment to achieving the administration's
goal of energy security and, more broadly, national security.
Our Nation's energy infrastructure has become a primary
target for hostile cyber actors, both state-sponsored and the
nonstate-sponsored. The frequency, scale, and sophistication of
cyber threats continue to increase. Cyber incidents have the
potential to disrupt energy services, damage highly specialized
equipment, and even threaten human health and safety.
The release of the President's National Cyber Strategy, the
NCS, in September 2018 reflects the administration's commitment
to protecting America from cyber threats. The Department of
Energy plays an active role in supporting the security of our
Nation's critical energy infrastructure in implementing the
NCS.
The efforts reflect a concerted response to the emergence
of energy cybersecurity and resilience as one of the Nation's
most important security challenges. Fostering partnerships with
public and private sector stakeholders is of the utmost
importance to me as the Assistant Secretary for CESER.
The NCS prioritizes risk reduction activities across seven
key areas, which include national security and energy and
power. DOE cybersecurity activities for the energy sector align
to the secure critical infrastructure section of pillar one,
which is protecting the American people, the homeland, and the
American way of life under the category to prioritize actions
according to identified national risks.
In the energy sector, the core of the critical
infrastructure partners is represented by the Electricity
Subsector Coordinating Council, or the ESCC, the Oil and
Natural Gas Sub Sector Coordinating Council, the ONGSCC, and
the Energy Government Coordinating Council, the EGCC.
The ESCC and the ONGSCC represent the interest of their
respective industries. The EGCC, which is led by DOE and DHS,
is where the interagency partners, States, and international
partners come together to discuss the important security and
resilience issues for the energy sector. This forum ensures
that we are working together in a whole-of-government response.
It is critical for us to be proactive and cultivate a
secure energy network of producers, distributors, regulators,
vendors, and public partners acting together to strengthen our
ability to identify, detect, protect, respond, and recover. The
Department is focusing cyber support efforts to strength the
energy sector cybersecurity preparedness, coordinate cyber
incident response and recovery, and accelerate game-changing
research development and deployment of resilient energy
delivery systems.
DOE also maintains a close relationship with FERC and NERC
to ensure that they have the relevant information to execute
their missions. DOE also holds regular discussions with the
three energy sector information-sharing and analysis centers,
which include the Downstream Natural Gas ISAC, the Oil and
Natural Gas ISAC, and the Electricity ISAC, to share emerging
and potential threats, and to disseminate information.
Establishing CESER is the result of the administration's
commitment to prioritize the energy security and national
security. CESER is working on many fronts collaborating with
industry, State and local governments, to protect our Nation's
critical energy infrastructure from all hazards, including this
growing cyber threat.
Our long-term approach will strengthen our Nation's
national security and positively impact our economy. I
appreciate the opportunity to appear before this committee to
discuss cybersecurity in the energy sector, and I applaud your
leadership. I look forward to working with you and your
respective staffs to continue to address cyber and physical
security challenges.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Evans follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Madam Secretary.
And now I want to recognize Mr. Robb for--Mr. Dodge, I am
sorry--for 5 minutes for the purposes of an opening statement.
STATEMENT OF J. ANDREW DODGE, Sr.
Mr. Dodge. Thank you very much. Good morning, Chairman
Rush, Ranking Member Upton, and members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. My name is Andy
Dodge, and I am the Director of Electric Reliability at FERC,
or the Federal Regulatory Energy Commission. During my
testimony I will often refer to that as the Commission.
I am here today as a Commission staff witness, and my
remarks do not necessarily represent the views of the
Commission or any individual Commissioner. Today, I will
provide a brief overview of the Commission's authorities and
activities to help protect and improve the cybersecurity of the
Nation's bulk power system.
Our work includes mandatory reliability standards, audits
of those standards, identification and sharing of best
practices. We work very closely with the North American
Electric Reliability Council, or NERC, its regional entities,
other Federal and State agencies, and responsible entities to
carry out this very important work.
As a result of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and section
215 of the Federal Power Act, NERC is responsible for
developing and proposing new or modified reliability standards
to the Commission. The Commission oversees NERC's development
and enforcement of critical infrastructure protection
standards, or CIP standards.
The original set of eight mandatory CIP standards were the
so-called version one standards. They were actually developed
in 2006 and became totally enforceable in 2010. The CIP
standards are continuously reviewed and updated to address new
cybersecurity threats and challenges, as well as technological
changes. We are currently in version five of the overall
standards. There are currently 11 active cybersecurity
standards and one active physical security standard. In all,
there are over 200 distinct requirements.
The CIP standards are a portfolio of requirements that
constitute a defense in-depth approach to cybersecurity based
on an assessment of risk. Importantly, the CIP reliability
standards are objective-based, and responsible entities are
free to choose compliance approaches best tailored to their
individual systems.
The foundational standard is CIP-002. This standard
requires each utility to perform a risk assessment of its
assets and then to categorize those assets in the low, medium,
and high impact to the electric grid. The other CIP standards
then build upon the CIP-002 standard, and they require utility
companies to develop and implement cybersecurity plans, train
personnel adequately, establish physical and electronic access
parameters, and then also test and apply patches in a timely
manner, identify and report cybersecurity incidents, and also
develop and implement recovery plans, amongst other things.
Recently, the Commission further enhanced the CIP
reliability standards to address supply chain risk and also
incident reporting. Although NERC and its regional entities are
primary enforcement authorities for the CIP standards, since
2016 the Commission has been auditing sample utilities each
year with respect to their compliance to the version five of
the CIP standards.
As a result of these audits, the Commission has issued two
reports that described the lessons learned from the audits as
well as best practices. By publishing these lessons-learned
reports, we hope to help other utility companies improve their
compliance with the CIP reliability standards as well as their
overall cybersecurity.
In addition to the mandatory reliability standards, the
Commission has adopted voluntary initiatives overseen by our
Office of Energy Infrastructure Security, or OEIS. OEIS engages
in partners with industry, States, and other Federal agencies
to develop and promote best practices for critical
infrastructure security.
These initiatives include voluntary architecture
assessments of interested entities, classified briefings for
State and industry officials, and joint security programs,
other Federal Government agencies, and industry.
In conclusion, protecting the electric system from cyber
and physical threats is critically important to securing our
Nation's critical infrastructure. The Commission is taking both
a standards or mandatory approach as well as a collaborative
voluntary approach to ensuring a reliable and secure operation
of the grid.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify today and
participate in this hearing, and I very much look forward to
answering your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dodge follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Rush. I want to thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Robb for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF JAMES B. ROBB
Mr. Robb. Thank you, Chairman Rush, Ranking Member Upton,
and members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity
to be with you today. This is my first appearance in front of
the committee as NERC CEO since taking the job last year.
You have all noted in your opening comments how
foundational electricity is to modern society. And all of us
here on the panel, NERC, FERC, the Department of Energy, we all
take our job of strengthening the reliability and security of
the fabric of the industry very seriously.
We know the citizens of the United States and our neighbors
in Canada and Mexico depend on a reliable supply of electricity
for all of their daily life needs. To date, there has been no
successful cyber attack that has resulted in a loss of load in
the United States. While we are very proud of that statistic, I
can assure you that we will never rest in our laurels, as the
threats are real and the potential consequences as noted are
significant.
As a result, the electricity sector has taken the
cybersecurity threat extremely seriously and has put in place a
robust system to protect our critical infrastructure. We find
that boards and executive leadership play strong support,
focus, and set cybersecurity as one of their top corporate
priorities.
Unlike our day-in and day-out job to reduce risks to
reliability, cyber risks originate from determined adversaries
who use multiple persistent techniques to attack our grid.
The electricity sector employs a multipronged approach to
support security of the bulk power system. The approach
includes mandatory and enforceable reliability standards and
security standards, information sharing and partnerships with
our sector-specific agency, the Department of Energy, as well
as other Government entities, such as DHS and DOD, to confront
rapidly developing threats, and drilling education and
engagement with industry. Together, we believe they form a
solid foundation of best practices and strategies to
effectively confront this ever-evolving threat.
With respect to standards, our critical infrastructure
protection standards provide a common foundation for security.
Our standards are developed using subject matter expertise from
industry then reviewed and approved by NERC's independent board
of trustees, and ultimately by the FERC.
The CIP standards, as Andy noted, require companies to
establish plans, protocols, and controls to protect their
critical systems against cyber attack, ensure personnel are
adequately trained on cyber hygiene, report security instances
in a timely manner, and effectively recover from events.
Our standards evolve with increased understanding of
threats. Recent updates to the CIP standards address supply
chain risks and improve cyber incident reporting. And we expect
later this year to address cloud computing and EMP.
Compliance with standards is routinely audited, and
noncompliance is subject to financial penalties, at times quite
significant, and require in many cases CEO execution and board-
level reporting.
But standards are just one important element of a
comprehensive strategy. Because the security threat evolves
rapidly, in addition to the defense provided by the standards,
industry and government must maintain constant situational
awareness, real-time communication, and prompt emergency
response capabilities. And that is where robust information
sharing comes in, and that is a service that we provide through
the electricity sector, information sharing and analysis
center, or the E-ISAC.
Operated by NERC and working in close collaboration with
the Department of Energy and the Electricity Subsector
Coordinating Council, the E-ISAC is the central hub for sharing
of security information within the electricity sector. The E-
ISAC communicates with over 1,000 electricity industry
organizations via secure portal with critical security
information that is provided by both industry and government.
Through the E-ISAC, we manage a terrific information
sharing program called CRISP, the Cybersecurity Risk
Information Sharing Program. CRISP uses innovative technology
developed by the Department of Energy and the National Labs to
monitor cyber activity on company systems, and we have
developed over the last several years the capability to rapidly
declassify insights from CRISP within 24 hours to communicate
insights out to industry.
CRISP companies currently cover about 75 percent of U.S.
customers, and we are working to further expand the program.
Information by CRISP is shared beyond CRISP members so that all
1,000 E-ISAC members can benefit.
We also conduct a biannual continentwide security drill we
call GridEx. GridEx is the largest geographically distributed
security exercise for the electricity sector. Conducted every
other year in partnership with the ESCC and our Government
partners, it simulates a widespread coordinated cyber and
physical attack designed to overwhelm even the most prepared
organizations and exercise their ability to respond and to
recover.
And, finally, we invest significantly in education and
outreach. We conduct periodic webinars, critical broadcast
calls, and recently established an all-points bulletin to
rapidly communicate key insights and threats to industry. For
the most serious threats we can also use a NERC alert, which
provides concise, actionable security information and
mitigation strategies to industry and in many cases require
industry to report back to us on successful threat mitigation.
In addition, we sponsor the premiere annual grid security
conference in partnership with our regional entities, called
GridSecCon, and it has proven to be a terrific training and
outreach engagement forum for NERC, the E-ISAC, our Government
partners, key industry security officials, and key vendors to
engage and learn from each other.
Again, I thank the committee for inviting me here today. I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Robb follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Rush. The Chair thanks the witness. And with that, we
are now concluding the opening statements from the witnesses,
and we will now proceed to Members' questioning. Each Member
will have 5 minutes to ask questions of our witnesses, and I
will start by recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
Assistant Secretary Evans, it is certainly great to see you
this morning before our committee once again. And, as you know,
I have sponsored, along with Mr. Walberg, H.R. 362, which will
essentially codify your position within DOE as a new Assistant
Secretary position with jurisdiction over all energy emergency
and security functions relating to energy supply infrastructure
and cybersecurity.
So we look forward to marking that bill up and passing it
out of the House, and we hope the President will sign it
subsequent to it passing in the Senate. So we want to be
invited to your celebration when you are sworn in as the
codified Assistant Secretary, all right.
But I have a question for you now. Currently there appears
to be some overlap or even some tension among some of the
Federal agencies as it regards to who is responsible for
cybersecurity when it comes to protecting the energy sector.
What makes DOE uniquely positioned to take on a leading role
when it comes to technical expertise, knowledge, experience,
and resources in protecting the energy-specific sectors? Why is
DOE uniquely positioned to address all those issues?
Ms. Evans. Well, first, thank you, sir. And when it is
signed, we will invite you down for the celebration, everyone
on the committee, because we applaud your leadership and your
forward leaning into this important issue.
Where DOE is uniquely positioned for this is the
partnership that DOE has as the sector-specific agency out
through the entire sector as well as State and local
government. But what is even more unique about the Department
of Energy is the National Lab structure and leveraging the
capabilities that the National Lab has.
So, when you hear maybe that there is some tension, I don't
know that there is actually tension. It is the specific
expertise of the energy sector, and that is why the
administration has us as the sector-specific agency under the
PDDs, and as well as with the National Cyber Strategy as it
goes forward.
There is clarity that we continue to work through as to the
incident response and how that should work, but I think there
is no disagreement in the executive branch that this is an
important sector, and that the public/private partnership is
critical and that leveraging the National Labs' capabilities
and our understanding in the energy sector does make us that
lead, and why we are the sector-specific agency for the energy
sector.
Mr. Rush. Thank you very much. I want to move on. Today, we
have not experienced any large-scale cyber attacks on our
energy grid. That said, we know that Russia and China and even
Iran are wrapping up their capabilities to potentially attack
our energy grid and cause disruptions to our economy.
And I know that DOE takes these potential threats very,
very seriously. But are there any areas where Congress should
provide more assistance either in the form of additional
authority, resources, or anything else that you might think of?
And I would also like to hear from Director Dodge and Mr.
Robb on this issue, on whether there is anything more that this
Congress can do to help you all protect the grid from foreign
attacks? Beginning with you, Secretary Evans.
Ms. Evans. I appreciate the opportunity to answer that
question. As I outlined in my testimony, it is clear from the
worldwide threat assessment what the DNI has said about our
adversaries' capabilities and what they can do in the energy
sector. When we are looking at it from a national security
perspective and what the Department is doing, we are really--I
think, the key area really is the partnership and then the
information sharing.
And so, as we are implementing the national strategy, we
are really looking to clarify roles and responsibilities to
specifically answer the question that you have posed: Do we
need more legislative authority? Do we need--as a government,
what is that administrative package that needs to come up here
so that we can have that information sharing in a way that will
facilitate and ease some of the issues that industry may feel
that they have going forward?
One area that we are also working out that we are looking
at is, under the FAST Act, you have given the Secretary the
authority, once the President designates a grid emergency, what
exactly is involved in that, and how we would then move private
industry resources to deal with the national emergency. At that
point, industry has also expressed and is working with us how
some additional liability protections may be needed.
Mr. Rush. My time is expiring, so I won't be able to get
answers on that question. Will you please respond in writing to
that question?
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Upton, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Upton. Well, thank you again for your testimony. I have
a couple of questions, and I am going to try to get through
them all. I know that we have had exercises on grid security
that have been, I think, very helpful. Can you tell us what are
some of the things you have learned from that, number one, and
also, whether we have had exercises actually on pipelines in
terms of cyber attacks on pipelines in terms of an exercise?
Ms. Evans. As it specifically relates to pipelines, we have
done a joint exercise with FERC in a classified setting to
really exercise out that interdependency and to see what
weaknesses we need to shore up. I would--there are lessons
learned. There are things that we are applying and taking
forward in the whole-of-government approach. And I would yield
over to FERC if they would like to speak more about that
exercise that has happened.
Mr. Dodge. Thank you. The only thing I would like to add
about the exercise, it was actually a DOE-led classified
security briefing and then it was actually a joint tabletop
drill between DOE and FERC and involved electric industry
officials, natural gas industry officials. It also included all
the RTOs and ISOs, and it was a rather extensive event. There
were lessons learned, as Ms. Evans indicated. It was a
classified briefing, and the items from those we are actively
following up on.
Mr. Upton. And do you plan on doing any of that this year
yet, calendar 2020, 2019 or 2020? Is there another one that
is--a date that is set or not?
Mr. Robb. So let me hop in here. We will be conducting our
fifth GridEx exercise this November, and it will be a
multisector exercise, highly focused on the electric system,
but will also involve communications and fuel suppliers such as
natural gas.
You asked about kind of the--and that exercise, again, is a
continentwide, overwhelming attack, and it is really designed
to break everybody's system, really to kind of push them to the
limit so they understand where their vulnerabilities are in
terms of response and recovery.
One of the things we are doing this year in our executive
tabletop is to take a very strong focus on a narrow region of
the country and really start to focus in on the operational
coordination that would be required between gas pipelines, the
communications sector, the utilities sector, and probably even
the finance sector in what would be involved in actually
restoring the system after such a catastrophic event.
Mr. Upton. And a followup question: Was TSA involved at all
with the exercises?
Mr. Robb. They have been invited to participate this year,
and I believe they will be.
Mr. Upton. Have they participated in the past or not?
Ms. Evans. TSA participates in all the activities that we
do from a government perspective. And so, we did last October--
--
Mr. Upton. They actually had a person there, or they
actually----
Ms. Evans. Yes, sir. Yes, sir. They have a representative
there. Two weeks ago, also, we just had the Oil and Natural Gas
Subsector Coordinating Council meeting out in Oklahoma City.
TSA actively participates. We work directly with the industry
to actually go through the initiative and the update that we
have jointly announced with the oil and natural gas that
happened last October.
So TSA, Transportation, DOE, Department of Homeland
Security, we are all there leveraging our resources to look at
the pipeline security and how to make it more robust.
Mr. Upton. I am looking at a statement--and I am sorry I
didn't print this out. I just saw it just a few minutes ago. It
was reported, I think, in Politico this morning that TSA
Administrator David Pekoske is talking about they want to be
more involved but they realize that they are, in essence,
short-staffed, and the likelihood of operating under a
continuing resolution, which means that they won't be able to
expand anything beyond what they had in fiscal year 2019.
And as we learned a few weeks ago, they only have, I think,
four people out of the 50,000 that work on pipelines. So I just
question the substantive role that they might have knowing that
we have entrusted you all to work together with the enactment
of the FAST Act, and really appreciate the work that you do,
and I look forward to supporting the legislation to make you
someday a portrait-hanging deal as an Assistant Secretary.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Peters for 5 minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks to the witnesses for being here.
Ms. Evans--well, first of all, I appreciate we are in a
nonclassified situation, so you will obviously tell me if you
can't answer my questions. But do you know how many cyber
attacks the electric grid sustains on a regular day, average
day?
Ms. Evans. So DOE continuously monitors across multiple
things, so it depends on how we talk about a cyber attack. And
so, we are in constant communications with the ISACs, and we
constantly monitor what is happening in the state of the sector
as a whole. So beyond that, I am happy to come back in a more
appropriate setting to give you more details, if you would
like.
Mr. Peters. Well, you didn't tell me a number. Do you know
the number yourself?
Ms. Evans. That is why I said it depends on how you----
Mr. Peters. How you define the attack?
Ms. Evans. Yes, and how you want to quantify that.
Mr. Peters. Are you able to determine how much of that
activity is coming from state actors?
Ms. Evans. So, again, I would be happy to talk about that
more, but, yes, the way that we are designing the system----
Mr. Peters. I am not asking you to tell me if it is coming
from--are you able--do you know whether it is coming from state
actors, or is that something you don't want to answer here?
Ms. Evans. I would like to answer that in a more
appropriate setting.
Mr. Peters. Let me move on then to something else, maybe to
Mr. Robb, to follow up with a question that the chairman asked
of Ms. Evans about what needs to be done now from Congress.
It is my observation that we rely heavily on the utilities,
private companies to deal with this. And when they came to
speak to us last Congress, they suggested that the thing that
they needed most to modernize the grid, not just related to
security, but to modernize it was research support from
Congress that they wanted to be sort of left to their own to be
able to innovate, which I think is generally appropriate.
How comfortable do you feel that individual utilities are
able to handle these attacks, and is there anything that you
think--to follow on with Mr. Rush's question--that Congress
should be doing to back that up in terms of security?
Mr. Robb. I am not sure I caught the entire question with
the door closing, but----
Mr. Peters. OK.
Mr. Robb. The point I would make in response to Chairman
Rush's question is that the biggest issue for us is that for
NERC, we are sort of--threat actors or so forth is of less
interest to us than what is of interest, are the attack vectors
and so forth.
The most important thing from our perspective would be for
government to be able to, more rapidly, declassify information
to get it into actionable insights that we can get out to
industry. Industry doesn't need to know the origin. We don't
need to know the sources.
Mr. Peters. Right.
Mr. Robb. We just need to know the whats. And I think
unfortunately right now, the whats and the whos are intricately
tied up, and so that kind of clogs the machinery up.
That would be the most important thing that I would see
government being able to do that would facilitate better
information sharing and better awareness at an industry, would
be rapid declassification and/or broader availability of
security clearances for folks to participate in those
conversations.
Mr. Peters. So real-time ability to share information on
attack kind of thing?
Mr. Robb. Absolutely. Absolutely.
Mr. Peters. Right. What should be the responsibility, the
legal liability for utilities fending off these attacks?
Suppose something gets through because of the weakness of a
particular utility. What incentives do we have to make sure
that they are carrying their weight?
Mr. Robb. Well, I am probably not the best expert to talk
about legal liability. What I would say, though, in response to
the question, is that every CEO I know of--and this goes from
the largest IOUs to the smallest public powers--takes this
threat enormously seriously. So right now I think they all do
everything that makes sense for them in their situation to
protect against these attacks.
Mr. Peters. It is just my observation that unless--I
appreciate that. I think that is probably something that every
CEO wants to avoid. But unless there is a bottom-line impact,
sometimes it doesn't filter through the culture of the entire
company.
And I think--I like the way that we rely on private
innovators to deal with these problems. I think often they are
better situated than the government, but on the other hand we
have to provide those incentives through the private industry
to make sure that they do emphasize this as a business matter.
And I guess my time is expired. We will have to continue that
conversation later. But thank you again for being here.
Mr. Rush. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Walden, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you can see, Mr.
Chairman, it is dangerous protecting the grid. I am just
saying. We all have to do our part.
Mr. Robb, in addition to reports of Russian and Chinese
cyber activities, you referenced news reports have indicated in
recent weeks that Iran may threaten retaliation. And that could
include cyber attacks on critical infrastructure. From your
perspective, can you briefly walk through how the owners of the
bulk power system prepare for when they see something like this
in the news? Are they ready for it?
Mr. Robb. First of all, I believe that the utilities are on
kind of constant alert, because they know that they are a great
attack target for foreign adversaries, and so I think the
security establishment within the utilities sector is topnotch
and I think always on alert.
In the case of, you know, the situation surrounding Iran,
as soon as we were made aware of the situation, we had an all-
points bulletin that we put together in concert with DOE with
an appropriate level of declassification of insight that we had
out within 3 hours.
Mr. Walden. Right. Now, in recent months the U.S. and its
allies have been addressing security concerns about Chinese
telecommunications technologies, such as Huawei. This raises
questions about the use of similar equipment in the bulk power
system.
How are you all--Mr. Robb and Ms. Evans, if you could both
could address this--how are you all addressing supply chain
risks from this technology in the bulk power supply system? Ms.
Evans?
Ms. Evans. As you know, the administration has released
several guidance and Executive orders associated with supply
chain risk management. The Department of Energy, the CESER
program in particular, already had a program underway which was
dealing with it, which is our CTRICS program, which is Cyber
Testing for Resilience of Industrial Control Systems, but it is
really looking at the technology associated with what is in the
energy grid. That really is looking at that, what is the supply
chain risk? How are you doing that?
We also have purchased a tool which we intend to deploy out
to the sector as a whole so that they can then start looking at
their own suppliers. And then on top of that, the last piece
is, is that the Department has announced an advanced
manufacturing initiative, which is looking at things in the
long range, for all the innovative technologies, all the
different things that are happening so that we can make sure
that we are looking at that upfront as we are then
manufacturing these technologies.
Mr. Walden. So will that give purchasers of the technology
in the systems--can you give them an assurance that what they
are buying is certified safe----
Ms. Evans. It is----
Mr. Walden [continuing]. As well as saying that equipment
over there may not be?
Ms. Evans. The idea of our programs to be able to go
forward, which actually merit the same type of approach that
you have taken in the legislation, is a voluntary
participation. So leveraging the capabilities of the labs and
looking at the test beds----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Ms. Evans [continuing]. It is publishing and then us
working in jointly with, like, the National Institute of
Standards to do the widest distribution of that information so
that you could then become an informed consumer. So what you
will then see is industry partners who are actively
participating. For example, NIST has a very active cyber center
of excellence that the energy sector and the industry partners
are actively participating in.
Mr. Walden. Yes. So what I want to know is, as a simple
consumer here--I realize that is not who is buying this
equipment in the power grid--but will there be like a stamp-of-
approval URL, you know, approval that this equipment meets the
standards, you can rest assured it has no backdoors, no chips
that are programmed?
Ms. Evans. That is what we hope to be able to identify
jointly through the Advanced Manufacturing Institute.
Mr. Walden. All right. All right.
Ms. Evans. So do we have an outcome in mind? Not
necessarily, but it will evolve through the Advanced
Manufacturing Institute.
Mr. Walden. Because I know we have some of this equipment
in different telecommunication systems today.
Ms. Evans. Absolutely.
Mr. Walden. And it gets very expensive to take it out. And
you don't want, you know, buy the next piece of equipment to
replace it and then somebody says, ``Oh, by the way, that is
not good either,'' and so we want to avoid that. Mr. Robb, I
have only got 30 seconds, but please, take it.
Mr. Robb. Sure. So on this last point, we think a supplier
certification program is a very smart thing to do. The work
that DOE is doing in this area is terrific. There are also some
voluntary industry groups coming together to try to create a
similar program.
To your initial question around Huawei, ZTE, and the list
of suspect companies, we are actually going to be issuing--
well, first of all, we issued an all-points bulletin back in
March in response to the Defense Authorization Act prohibitions
around those suppliers, alerted industry to that fact. We gave
them some time to get their head around where some of those
technologies might be deployed in their systems.
Next week, we will be issuing what we call a level-two NERC
alert, which will require industry to inventory all the
instances that they still have of those devices, communicate
back to us their mitigation strategies around them, and we will
have that information by the end of the summer.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. McNerney for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. McNerney from California.
Mr. Rush. Mr. McNerney from the great State of--great
nation of California.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, I thank the
witnesses.
Mr. Robb, you testified that, as of yet, there have been no
successful cyber attacks on our utility system. And that is a
great achievement of your office, so I appreciate that.
Ms. Evans, are you aware of any foreign governments that
are embedding cyber weapons into our utility grid today to be
used in possible future attacks? If you are free to answer that
question.
Ms. Evans. I would reference back to the unclassified
version of the worldwide threat assessment. I think that the
DNI has been very specific about what our adversaries'
capabilities are. I specifically quoted in my testimony, and I
also have it memorized, it is at the bottom of page 5 and the
top of page 6. And so he was very clear about what the
capabilities and what our adversaries can do.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Robb, concerning information sharing, is the security
clearance of utility officials an obstacle to effective data
sharing of cybersecurity information?
Mr. Robb. I would say yes. Just the sheer number of
individuals who are waiting for a clearance that don't yet have
them is problematic.
Mr. McNerney. How can we remedy that problem?
Mr. Robb. I don't have the answer to that question, but it
is a problem that needs to be resolved.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Let's collaborate on that a little bit
then.
Assistant Secretary Evans, you note in your testimony that
one area of truly foundational problem is the cybersecurity
workforce development. What is CESER and the DOE doing to train
workers against these kinds of threats?
Ms. Evans. So I appreciate the opportunity to highlight the
work that we are doing there. We have the cyber strike
training. And the Executive order that the administration has
released recognizes the fact that we have to deal with
cybersecurity workforce issues in general, but very specific
about the energy sector.
So we are looking and leading the effort in conjunction
with Department of Homeland Security to see what those gaps are
and how to train and make that more robust. And then the other
area that we are really trying to innovate and lean forward on
is the use of competitions to be able to use that applied
learning. The labs are strategically placed in this area with
all the different types of test beds that they have so that we
can use those competitions for a learning experience and then
feed that result back into the training that we need to do for
the sector as a whole.
Mr. McNerney. I have met some of those folks at the
National Labs. It is impressive what they are doing. And the
young people are impressive that are doing the work as well.
Ms. Evans. Yes, sir.
Mr. McNerney. Again, Assistant Secretary Evans, can you
describe some of the unique threats facing small utilities
today with regard to cyber attacks?
Ms. Evans. I would say that one of the biggest things that
we need to do, which you hit on a little bit, is making sure
that dissemination of information and the sharing of that
information hits at all levels, and that we are working with
State and local governments and the associations to make sure
that they have the tools that they need and that they have the
awareness and the education that all of them need to have so
that you can properly prepare and make sure that you are
assessing the risk that is happening in your area.
We are working with those State and local governments with
the energy coordinators in the Governors' offices and in the
States to also then drive down this information. And then also
working across with other parts of the Government that interact
with State and local governments as well to make sure that
these tools, as well as with the ISACs, have the widest
proliferation.
Mr. McNerney. Good answer.
Mr. Dodge, can you describe some of the work that the OEIS
is doing to assist small utilities in addressing their
vulnerabilities?
Mr. Dodge. Sure. Through FERC, through the OEIS office,
they actually work with DOE to actually constantly stay aware
of all the threats that are taking place. They also coordinate
with the ISAC to find out the threats are taking place as well.
Through DOE, they actually then conduct classified
briefings with the smaller utilities, and they are actively
going out and identifying and sharing best practices with the
smaller utilities. In addition to that, they are actually
volunteering--on a voluntary basis conducting architecture
assessments with any of the entities that are interested in
that service.
Mr. McNerney. So it sounds like the availability of
security classifications is an issue then?
Mr. Dodge. I am sorry?
Mr. McNerney. The availability of security classifications
for these small utilities could be a problem?
Mr. Dodge. We work to try to overcome that as much as we
possibly can. And part of what we would do as we work with DOE
is actually get one day read-ins for some of the personnel from
the utility companies to alert them of threats.
Mr. McNerney. All right. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman from the great State of California
yields back.
And the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from the only
State in the Union that eclipses California as a great State,
Mr. Latta from Ohio, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks for
conducting today's hearing. Very informative. And I want to
thank our witnesses for being with us today. It is a very, very
important topic that we all worry about constantly on this
committee.
I just want to follow up a little bit from my friend and
colleague and co-chair of the Grid Innovation Caucus. Mr.
McNerney talked about a little bit earlier that we had
introduced legislation earlier this year on H.R. 359, which,
one, being the Enhancing Grid Security, and H.R. 360, the Cyber
Sense Act. And on the Cyber Sense, just, again, to go through
that, because I know that my friend from Oregon was talking a
little bit about it. We had been looking at what has been
happening, a lot of different things that are happening from
around the world with--we have to be very careful about what is
being put into our systems and what kind of devices.
But the 360 is the Cyber Sense Act. And, again, that
program would identify and promote cybersecure products for use
in the bulk power system and also would establish that testing.
I know he brought about, you know, that seal of approval. But
we want to make sure that there is that testing of these
products that would be going on and a reporting of the
cybersecurity vulnerability. And also, the Secretary at DOE
would be required to keep a related database for those products
to assist electric utilities in that evaluation of these
products.
And, you know, both these bills have now been reported
favorably out of our subcommittee. Hopefully, we will see those
be signed into law soon.
But if I could ask Assistant Secretary Evans, do you think
that our legislation we have been working on, not only the Grid
Security, but also the Cyber Sense, is going to be helpful in
making sure that you can do your job?
Ms. Evans. I appreciate the leadership that you--that the
committee is showing in this area. I do believe that the intent
of what you have going forward about having vulnerability
disclosures and the idea of constantly--or having the ability
to verify and validate products as they go out and ensuring
that the supply chain risk is minimized is important regardless
of whether the legislation gets passed or not. And so our
office is working and leveraging that capability and using the
National Labs, and we are moving forward.
When the legislation--I am assuming you will be successful.
When the legislation is passed, it will enhance that and allow
for us to move in a more robust manner.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
You know, in the aftermath of the 2015 Ukraine cyber
attack, the investigation found that the perpetrators didn't
rely on any exploits or software vulnerabilities to disrupt the
grid. Rather, they gained access to the system over time,
learning how to maneuver it and use it against itself. In
short, patching vulnerabilities wouldn't have prevented the
attack, but patching continues to represent the majority of our
cybersecurity efforts.
And to the panel, what steps can be taken to improve the
monitoring of the system networks to prevent potential
attackers from learning how to use a system against itself?
And, Assistant Secretary, if you'd like to start, we would just
ask everyone to answer that question.
Ms. Evans. So I would like to change the dynamic, and that
is what we are attempting to do through our research and
development in the CEDS program that we have, because a lot of
what we are looking at is after the fact, so patching and
maintaining systems.
A lot of the things that we are looking at in investing
through our portfolio is being able to detect and protect,
which is changing the dynamic in a way of using technology so
that you cannot necessarily do it after the fact but prevent it
up front. So looking at more active dynamic types of things,
such as software-defined networks, looking at quantum key
distribution. How can you use those types of technologies that
are evolving right now to ensure the validity of the data or
look at the interactions of the transactions that are happening
between the operational technology as well as the information
technology systems.
We are investing pretty heavily in that, leveraging what is
happening in the labs, and we currently have a lab call right
now that is out that is looking for some ways of how we can
accelerate that deployment.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Dodge and Mr. Robb, we have got about 35 seconds.
Mr. Dodge. Sure. So FERC just recently changed the
cybersecurity reporting standard requirements. And previously,
entities were only required if they had an event related to a
cybersecurity that impacted reliability of bulk power system.
Now they will have to report events where--or possible
intrusions or attempts to actually compromise the cyber assets
that impact the cyber assets as well as a bulk power system.
And that information sharing associated with that will be a
huge benefit.
I defer to Jim.
Mr. Latta. Mr. Robb.
Mr. Robb. I will be very quick. I think I would underscore
Secretary Evans' discussion. I think from our perspective, one
of the most valuable capabilities to advance would be the
ability to monitor what is going on with operational technology
systems in the same way we can enterprise systems right now.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
McEachin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McEachin. Mr. Chairman, sadly, my questions have been
asked, so I will yield back.
Mr. Rush. The Chair thanks the gentleman for yielding back.
Now the Chair recognizes Ms. Blunt Rochester for 5 minutes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
so much to the panel for discussing the security of our
Nation's critical energy infrastructure. As was stated by
everyone, this is of utmost importance, and we thank you for
your work.
I just want to pick up on some of the questioning that was
asked before from a workforce perspective. I served in our
State of Delaware as head of State personnel for a while and
secretary of labor. And one of the big challenges is always
recruitment, retention, compensation, training. Sometimes the
first budget that gets cut is training.
I am curious if you could just talk to us about some of the
both challenges that you see in terms of recruitment and
retention of individuals in this cybersecurity space--and
particularly from a nonprofit and a public-sector perspective
when you are competing with the private sector--and then the
other question that I had was around innovation. Are there
innovative things that are being done to recruit folks to work
in your organizations?
I will start with that, and if we could start with Ms.
Evans.
Ms. Evans. So I appreciate the question, and especially
coming from Delaware, because the State of Delaware, based on
my previous experience, is very innovative in the approach that
they are taking. In my work as the U.S. cyber challenge
director, we really looked at this. And the blending of
nonprofit public sector, the education system, and how you do
that and how to identify that and then make it and that
commitment of bringing them in is clearly demonstrated in the
way that the State of Delaware has tackled this issue.
There are incentives. There are things that we need to do,
but what really gets people excited--and you have to look
outside the more traditional places. Some of the people that
are best in this field do not come out of STEM. And that is
clearly demonstrated when you put together teams in the
competitions to see all the skill sets that are needed.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Dodge.
Mr. Dodge. Thank you for the question. So from a FERC
perspective, we are actively monitoring our staffing levels and
our needs. And we have actually undertook several programs in
the last couple of years. I am not going to get the precise
names of the programs. But, basically, there is an internship
program where we actually reach out to colleges and bring
people in as they are freshmen, sophomores in college, and they
come in and they spend a summer or a part of the year working
for us.
We are actively working to improve our on-campus
relationships with different universities. And then we actively
go out and do on-campus recruiting as a followup. And then in
addition to that, the Federal Government actually has a tuition
reimbursement program that, after the students graduate, they
come work for FERC for a period of time. There is actually some
tuition reimbursement where they actually can forgive some of
their previous student debt.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you.
And, Mr. Robb.
Mr. Robb. Yes. I don't have any great insights into kind of
the workforce development challenge that we have in the sector
other than to underscore that it is real, as we all know.
I would say from a NERC perspective, what we have found is
we have been able to attract and retain some very top-flight
cyber skilled individuals. But we do that not because we pay
them top dollar; we do that because they are committed to our
mission. And a number of people in the sector are very
committed to the security and the value associated with
electricity and so on and so forth. So we appeal to that part
of individuals. And we have had some pretty good success with
that, but it is a challenge.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Yes. Thank you.
And, Ms. Evans, thank you for bringing up also the
nontraditional. I think one of the challenges we have as well
is an aging workforce. And so, even when you look at workforce
planning and who will be retiring, making sure that we are
staffed up.
My other question was more related, not so much to the
cyber, but to our--to kind of natural disasters and things like
that and whether or not, with the severe weather incidents that
we are seeing, how are you preparing, whether you call it
climate change, whether you call it severe weather, whatever
you want to call it? These things are real as well. Could you
talk about preparation for those?
Ms. Evans. We also have the emergency response capability
in our group. We are looking at our staffing of how to do that.
The staffing and the way that our plans are set up mirror the
way the FEMA regions are set up. But we also then use a lot of
the modeling that is available within the National Labs so that
we can do predictive types of things.
But what is key to the success in this emergency response
is our partnership with private industry. And so we
continuously have to have that dialogue with them because it is
their resources that we need and that we work with in order to
be able to share that information and be able to respond.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you so much.
And I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The Chair thanks the gentlelady for yielding back
and now recognizes Mr. Olson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair. And welcome to our three
witnesses.
As my colleagues all know, I love to brag about Texas. And
along that line, Mr. Chairman, you are correct, one former part
of Mexico became a country before it became a State, but it
wasn't California. It was the Republic of Texas, in existence
from 1836 to 1845. God bless Texas.
Mr. Rush. We haven't recovered yet.
Mr. Olson. And this is not a brag, but our grid is the
biggest target in America for cyber attacks. We have a free
market power system that covers 95 percent of our State run by
a group called ERCOT. They manage 46,000 miles of electric
power lines, 650 separate generation units. Last summer, their
daily load was 72 megawatts hourly. That is a huge, huge amount
of power. And as you know, if that goes down, that could be
very, very bad.
Along the Houston Ship Channel, 52 miles long, lies
America's largest petrochemical complex, valued at over $15
billion and growing quickly. And with the shale revolution, we
have more and more oil coming into our region for refining.
Those are being exported now. Nearly 7 million people live
within 30 miles of the port of Houston, Houston Ship Channel.
The bad actors know if they can take down our grid, have us
lose control of some of these industrial processes, people will
be harmed, and some people may even die.
My question is for all three of you. We right now are
working hard with the private sector, government there in
Houston to address these cyber issues. But we all know we have
resources that are limited. We can't go crazy. We can't jack up
the prices. These things have to work.
So my question for all of you is how do we balance the
proper way to achieve how we can best prevent cyber attacks
while making sure we don't jack up prices and make us
noncompetitive in a global market? How could we balance this
out? What is the key?
Ms. Evans, you are up first.
Ms. Evans. All right. The way that we are approaching this
and that we are working with our partners at DHS is really
doing risk modeling. And so it is really identifying what are
those most critical assets that an industry has. And then in my
particular case, what I am trying to do is develop a set of
tools so that the Government as well as our industry partners
can actually look at what is the best way, what is the highest
risk, how do I protect that, what is the cost associated with
reducing the risk in that particular asset.
And so as we move forward with that, a lot of this is,
then, how you give them that information so that they can then
use that in the marketplace going forward.
Mr. Olson. That is the same model Governor Perry had there
in Texas. That made our grid pretty secure when he was our
Governor. Thank you.
Mr. Dodge, your thoughts, sir.
Mr. Dodge. Thank you. Thank you for the question. So from
FERC's perspective, we have the Office of Energy Infrastructure
Security that actively is doing things on a voluntary basis,
conducting classified briefings, performing architecture
assessments, identifying best practices, sharing those best
practices. In addition to that, FERC undertook a security
investments tech conference back in the spring, a couple months
ago, where we actually brought in members of the electric
industry as well as the natural gas industry as well as Federal
and State public utility commissions and also officials.
The goal of that tech conference was to actually identify
best practices, share those best practices amongst protecting
infrastructure that is not only FERC's jurisdiction but other
infrastructure, look at cost recovery mechanisms to determine
whether they are adequate, and whether FERC or the State should
take additional action. And also, I was remiss to mention that
actually that was a joint DOE, FERC-led tech conference. So we
are actively working with FERC on that.
We received comments back from the public on that tech
conference, and we are process reviewing these comments in
determining next steps.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. And the man from Neal Armstrong's
university, Mr. Robb.
Mr. Robb. Go Purdue.
Mr. Olson. Fifty years ago, that man walked on the Moon.
Mr. Robb. I would echo what has been said here. I think one
of the key things that we are doing as NERC is taking a risk-
based focus to all the work that we do, both in terms of which
standards are applicable to which entities and then which
standards do we audit and so on and so forth.
So I think there is a clear recognition that ``one size
fits all'' doesn't work in this area. So in terms of striking
that balance between economics and risk reduction, you really
just got to make sure you are focusing on the most important
risks and not leaving yourself exposed on the other side.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I remind everybody the
stars at night are big and bright.
Mr. Rush. The Chair wants to bring the gentleman from Texas
down to size. Your time is up.
And now we recognize the gentlelady from New Hampshire, Ms.
Kuster, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. And
thank you to all the folks that we have here today.
This is a very important issue, and I know people in New
Hampshire are concerned about their critical importance to our
families and to communities all across the country. And it
doesn't typically get the attention it deserves, so I
appreciate this hearing.
Ensuring that our electric grid can operate without
disruptions is imperative to ensuring that hospitals can treat
patients, first responders can do their jobs, and schools can
educate our children. But all of this can be jeopardized if a
foreign entity or bad actor is successful with a cyber attack
on our electric grid.
We know our utilities are on the front line of ensuring
that our grid is protected, but not all utilities are
adequately maintaining safeguards that could combat a cyber
attack. And while I am pleased to see FERC taking recent steps
to strengthen cybersecurity standards for our Nation's electric
system, I still have questions about how we can act in a more
transparent way.
So, Mr. Dodge, my first question is directed to you. Could
you please explain what happens at FERC when it becomes aware
of a utility's noncompliance with cybersecurity regulations?
Mr. Dodge. Sure. Thank you very much for the question. I
appreciate the question. So there is a process, and actually
the process that takes place is in terms of compliance. FERC
oversees the development and enforcement of the mandatory
reliability standards, including the CIP standards. NERC, and
actually its regional entities, actually conduct periodic
audits of the red strategies to make sure----
Ms. Kuster. I am asking when FERC becomes aware that a
utility is noncompliant with security regulations.
Mr. Dodge. So that the process would actually take place is
either through an audit conducted by NERC or its regional
entity or through a self-report from the registered entity to
NERC. NERC actually coordinates that. They investigate the
noncompliance. The registered entity actually files a
mitigation plan, and they mitigate the concern. And then NERC
submits the actual violation, along with a recommendation for
penalty, to FERC for review. FERC staff reviews that and makes
a decision whether to assess the penalty or not.
Ms. Kuster. And that FERC assessment, does FERC disclose to
the public the specific utility that is in violation?
Mr. Dodge. So through the FAST Act that was passed a couple
years ago, this actually gives us authority underneath FOIA to
identify CEII, which is critical energy infrastructure
information.
So critical energy infrastructure information could be
engineering, design, prints, vulnerability information about
specific electric system assets. FERC, as a policy, looks at
that information and any of that information that could
potentially be useful to someone who wants to impose harm on
the electric system. We do not divulge that information.
So over the past 6 to 12 months, we received a number of
requests, FOIA requests, for CEII-related information,
including the entities who have violated some of the CIP
standards. We reviewed them in excruciating detail, and we have
determined which ones to release, which ones not to release. We
are still working through that. And we have released the names
of some entities where we did not believe it would actually be
a threat to security of that entity.
Ms. Kuster. So how would you suggest that we keep our
constituents informed of the level of risk to them from a cyber
attack?
If you are not willing to be transparent with the public--
and I have heard your explanation why, this is a balance for
us. If our constituents are at risk, we need to be able to
inform them of the level of risk.
Mr. Dodge. So whenever a--the utility companies,
registering entities, are actively monitoring the compliance to
the CIP standards. As soon as they find a problem or through a
self-report or through an investigation, routine audits
conducted by NERC or one of its registered entities, they
actually work to mitigate that concern and address that
concern. We do go through--you know, through the FOIA process
and CEII process and review the individual FOIA requests, and
we do make the information available as appropriate.
Ms. Kuster. So if there is a bad actor, you would tell my
constituents or anyone else in this country, in this Congress,
tell the public we have had repeated concerns about compliance
with this bad actor?
Mr. Dodge. So we actually review the information that is
publicly available or the information that is filed with FERC.
And we look at the information. We look at what level of
detail, technical details in the information, whether releasing
that information would identify any vulnerabilities or make
available any information that was particularly useful to
someone who wants to impose malintent or ill harm on the
electric system. We do not release the names of the entities in
that situation.
Ms. Kuster. So I am just trying to raise the balance of
protecting our constituents. But my time is up. I appreciate
your response.
Mr. Dodge. Thank you.
Mr. Rush. I thank the gentlelady.
The Chair recognizes my friend, the gentleman from West
Virginia, who has the best mustache in the whole Congress, Mr.
McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, my friend.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous consent that
this article with comments from Mr. Robb about the grid be
submitted for the record.
Mr. Rush. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. McKinley. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I would also like to expand on the theme of
this keeping the lights on to include grid reliability. Last
Congress, as you well know, our committee held a number of
hearings on this--on the grid and reliability and resiliency.
But it is not just the Energy and Commerce Committee that is
concerned about the grid and its reliability. We had a report
that was produced by the National Energy Technology Laboratory
that said that, without the use of coal, the Eastern United
States would have suffered widespread blackouts during the 2018
bomb cyclone. Think about that.
ISO New England said that--in their report said that the
most significant challenge that they face is fuel security and
that coal and nuclear power plants are needed to maintain
reliability. And lastly, Secretary Perry said in 2017 that the
resiliency of the electric grid is threatened by the premature
retirements of these fuel-secure, traditional base load
sources.
So, Mr. Robb, if I could turn to you. Last week, you made
these remarks, these profound comments, I believe, regarding
the grids in both Texas and New England specifically.
Regarding Texas, you said--pardon my French here on this--
you said there is no way in hell they can keep the lights on,
and yet they do. Regarding New England, you said the grid
operators constantly are finding ways to pull another rabbit
out of the hat to keep the lights on, when any of us would look
at that situation as engineers and say it has got to break.
So, Mr. Robb, should Congress be more concerned with this
situation?
Mr. Robb. So I am not sure I used exactly all the colorful
language that was reported in the----
Mr. McKinley. It is in the press. Whatever is in the press,
you know we believe it.
Mr. Robb. I have to watch my vocabulary sometimes.
I think the point around this--and I threw a third market
in there, California--I think all three of these markets are
demonstrating the challenges associated with the transformation
that is going on within the electric grid. The agencies in
California revolve around the deployment of solar and the role
of natural gas to balance those resources. Texas has kind of a
contemporary problem of just reserve margin, which is one of
the planning statistics that we look at to assess whether or
not there is enough resource to meet load. That is below levels
that traditionally people would say are reliable. New England
has a fuel security problem, as noted there.
I don't know that these are congressional issues as much as
they are market issues and State policies around resource
development and deployment. And the point that I don't think
got reported quite as clearly as I would have hoped is that
what we are seeing in these areas are market operators
innovating and finding ways to make the system work in ways
that aren't consistent with traditional rules of thumb. And I
think the key here is for us to modernize our thinking.
Mr. McKinley. Let me try to get a couple more questions in.
If I could go to my fellow colleague from--fellow Mountaineer
from West Virginia, Ms. Evans, and also Mr. Dodge.
In your experiences, are fuel-secure coal and nuclear plant
base load power plants critical to maintaining grid
reliability? Both of you, please.
Mr. Dodge. So there has been a lot of work done in this
area. And, you know, what you really have to look on overall--
--
Mr. McKinley. It is a yes or no, isn't it?
Mr. Dodge. So what you really----
Mr. McKinley. Let me ask the question again.
Are fuel-secure coal and nuclear base load power plants
critical to maintaining grid reliability?
Mr. Dodge. I would like to get back to you in writing with
the answer to that question.
Mr. McKinley. Be what?
Mr. Dodge. I would like to get back to you with an answer
to that question.
Mr. McKinley. OK.
Ms. Evans.
Ms. Evans. I believe that the Secretary has, and the
administration has, expressed its commitment to multiple
sources as it relates to the reliability and our commitment as
it goes forward. And our budget request also reflects our
commitment to new sources such as nuclear.
So if you need a more detailed answer, I am happy to take
that question for the record and get back to you as well.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. O'Halleran from the great
State of Arizona.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, especially for
letting us know that Arizona is a great State, since I came
from Illinois originally. It is also a great State. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Upton, for
holding today's important hearing on ways we as a government
can ensure our electrical grid assets remain protected and our
agencies and stakeholders are fully empowered to defend against
cyber threats.
My State of Arizona is one of the most diverse States in
the country when it comes to electric generation and sources.
While more electric grids integrate renewable energy into their
grids, it is essential that reliability of the grid is never
interrupted.
As cyber attacks continue to increase across multiple
sectors, it has become clear that threats from information
sharing, collaboration, and partnerships between government
agencies and industry are necessary to achieve a full defensive
cyber posture.
Assistant Secretary Evans, in your testimony, you
highlighted the Cyber Analytics Tools and Techniques program as
one of the several DOE initiatives to promote cybersecurity
defense at the energy sector who owns the critical
infrastructure assets. What is DOE doing to support threatened
information sharing, analysis, and timely--and I repeat,
timely--return of actionable intelligence back to energy sector
entities? And is the energy information flow reciprocal?
Ms. Evans. I appreciate the opportunity to talk about that
specific initiative. We refer to it as CATT. And the key to
that is the timeliness of getting the information back. So I
would like to share one particular piece that is happening on
that project.
One of the things that is important is getting the
contributions of the information from private sector. I think
what you have heard today is that there is a lot of information
sharing that happens. What we have to do, then, is be able to
anonymize it to put it into a big pool, which our National labs
have worked with us on that, but then keep enough information
with it so that, as they identify something across a big trend,
that we can then take it back out of that pool and give
actionable information either through the ISAC or directly to
that entity.
That is what that platform is doing through the multiple
pilots that we have into research and development. We talked
about CRISP. That is one of the contributions to that. And the
whole key to that is to keep our portion of it declassified so
that it will end up being machine to machine in the long run by
using the advances of technology.
Mr. O'Halleran. I had some other questions that I prepared.
But, in general, as I have been listening today, I have heard
the word ``whole of government'' mentioned. I have heard best
management and practices mentioned. The shortage of, obviously,
potentially the workforce that is going to be needed. And then
I took a look at your budget in the Department of Energy and
found that--I don't know how you are going to get that all
accomplished with that budget. I don't know--I am not going to
leave you here today secure to be able to tell my constituents
that we are in a position to fully defend the electrical grid
at this moment in time. I would like to make sure that I can
eventually be able to see a timeline on these projects that you
have mentioned today, a cost estimate on how much it is going
to cost us within that timeline and with a more aggressive
timeline, because this is something that is continually
changing, as you know, but also continuing to be a threat to
our country.
I am concerned about some of the more volunteering
reporting structure that I heard about today, especially as we
get down and down into having less personnel available and that
are a level of competency to be able to address those needs on
an ongoing basis. And we have newer and newer energy sources
coming online with much smaller budgets and getting into the
grid than some of the other major competitors that are out
there.
So, in general, I think this has been a good and
enlightening process today. But as far as enlightening me, it
has been one that has left me with more questions than answers,
especially in the integration of how that whole process is
working in that timely fashion.
So I want to thank you all for being here today, and I
yield.
Mr. Rush. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now the Chair recognizes Mr. Griffith from Virginia, the
great State of Virginia, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I greatly
appreciate it.
Assistant Secretary Evans, you and I spoke last year
discussing pipelines and some of the concerns that my
constituents have. And I was going to ask you some questions on
updating me on what you all were doing related to pipeline
cybersecurity and coordination. You answered those questions
earlier when Ranking Member Upton was asking questions, and so
I appreciated those answers. I am going to skip those questions
that I would have asked, because I don't believe in asking the
same question over again just so it gets on my video clip.
But if anybody back home is watching this, I encourage them
to flip back a little bit and look at your answers, both yours
and Mr. Dodge's answers, to Ranking Member Upton in regard to
the coordination that you all are doing. And it sounds like--
although it was classified, it sounds like you all are headed
in the right direction.
Do you have anything to add? Are you doing the same kind of
coordination on physical threats to the pipelines as well?
Ms. Evans. The short answer is yes, sir, and that that then
is also then demonstrated through the exercises. And that
information is also shared through the ESEC meetings that we
have when the government partners are there and talking about
the physical threats that happen to the pipelines with the
voluntary reports. And FBI is there, and that has been
highlighted from our industry partners to the FBI.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Mr. Dodge, did you want to add
anything in regard to the physical threats? Because we have
already talked about the cyber.
Mr. Dodge. The only thing I would add is that, in terms of
the pipeline activity, OEIS is also involved with that
activity. They work with DOE to conduct a security briefing
threats. In addition to the ESEC, they are actually actively
involved with the ONG SEC as well.
Mr. Griffith. And because there are continuing concerns, I
think that the questions that Mr. O'Halleran just asked are
also important. And some of the questions, we will continue to
look at at this committee. And if you need our help passing
legislation or something, we want to make sure that we have as
much safety as we can. And I appreciate that.
Assistant Secretary Evans, when it comes to pipelines, TSA
is taking the lead in developing some voluntary guidelines for
industry to follow. According to reports from the GAO and the
CRS, they have only a handful of people working on
cybersecurity for pipelines.
Do the TSA staffing and resource constraints concern you?
And this is a lob in hopes that maybe I think maybe DOE ought
to take the lead.
Ms. Evans. So, as you know, through the oil and natural
gas, SEC as well as the Government Coordinating Council, we
work jointly with Department of Homeland Security and TSA. And
so our resources we use to leverage the TSA resources because
we recognize as a government that we need to address this
vulnerability.
Mr. Griffith. And I appreciate that. But am I correct--and
I may not be--but am I correct that DOE is actually putting
more capacity and has more folks working on this than TSA?
Ms. Evans. I would not presume to answer a TSA staffing
issue, sir, at this time, because I know that that is an
internal discussion to DHS, and it is more appropriate for that
question to go to DHS at this time.
Mr. Griffith. Maybe you can encourage them to talk to us
about this as well. I appreciate it.
Would you describe the Energy Government Coordinating
Council and DOE's role in that council?
Ms. Evans. We are the cochair of the Government
Coordinating Council with Department of Homeland Security. We
help craft the agenda. Going forward, we work with DHS hand in
hand and our government partners. A good example of that work,
we just recently did a top-secret SCI briefing for the
Interstate Natural Gas Association of America, so--keeping with
the pipeline theme--so that we could really share with them and
coordinate through the intelligence community what risks that
they are facing. And that was to the executive board of that
association.
Mr. Griffith. And I don't even remember now who it was.
They didn't reveal any secrets, but they felt like that was a
useful--somebody reported to me they felt like that was a
useful--it was a good use of their time, and it was a useful
meeting.
In this space, should DOE have the lead role to ensure the
safe and reliable flow of energy across the U.S.?
Ms. Evans. I believe, sir, right now that we do have that
role as it relates to the sector-specific responsibilities that
we have that are outlined both in the FAST Act and the
Presidential directives.
Mr. Griffith. Well, and as I have revealed my prejudices in
this regard, I do think the DOE is probably where--I think DOE
should probably be in the leadership role in coordinating
preparedness and cybersecurity efforts on all aspects of our
pipelines. And you have already indicated you can't talk about
the staffing, but would you disagree with me on that?
Ms. Evans. I believe that we have unique expertise. And as
the sector-specific agency, we use that expertise across the
energy sector and with our partners in private industry.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate it very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Washington,
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate the
witnesses being here today to share your perspective on this
important topic.
Assistant Secretary Evans, I understand that one of the
most exciting projects is looking at how software-defined
networking, SDN, technology developed by Schweitzer Engineering
Laboratories in Pullman, Washington, in partnership with the
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, next door in the Tri-
Cities, can be used to help secure the energy infrastructure at
critical national security facilities.
Can you share more about this project with the committee
and tell us how it is going?
Ms. Evans. So that is a promising project that we are
funding. This particular project, it is called CEDS. Everything
has an acronym. So it is the strategic engagement between the
Department of Defense and Department of Energy. But it also
includes the Veterans Administration as well as the Coast
Guard.
And what it is really looking at is a different way to
manage the network and network trafficking. And so that is the
idea behind software-defined networks. And so it is divorcing
it from, really, very static types of architecture to make it
more dynamic so that you can then address, on an ongoing basis,
the threats, and doing analytics, and then adjusting your
configurations as it goes forward.
So we--right now, there is a successful implementation that
is happening in Virginia at Fort Belvoir. And PNNL is
continuing to work to roll this out with our partners in
multiple places, and I believe the next place is going to be
Nevada.
So, as that information comes in, we are using that to then
invest in other efforts across the National Labs so that we can
then add that into the overall solution that was brought up
earlier.
Mrs. Rodgers. It is crucial that information about
vulnerabilities such as cyber attacks is shared between
government entities and electric grid asset owners. I believe
the creation of CESER was an important step, and I applaud the
Department's commitment to engaging the public-private critical
infrastructure community. But there is more work to be done,
especially regarding engagement with critical infrastructure
equipment manufacturers.
Again to Assistant Secretary Evans, what steps has your
office taken to include not just asset owners but also vendors
such as the designers and manufacturers of critical
infrastructure equipment like SEL in my district?
Ms. Evans. Well, the initial piece--several of this is done
through our research and development programs that we have that
we fund where we are requesting that manufacturers and folks
that produce hardware that are in the grid participate. So
there were 11 projects that were recently funded that are
actually looking at firmware down to the level of how these
things are done, and then being able to say, ``OK, that is a
more secure product, we have demonstrated that, and now we are
going to go ahead and implement that and show that information
out.'' So those are some of the short-term things that we are
doing.
The longer-term things are like our CyTRICS program, which
is looking at bigger types of manufacturing activities and
being able to share that information out. And the longer-term
play that we have is the advanced manufacturing institute that
is really going to look at how can we improve this in the long
run on an ongoing basis to address that manufacturing up front
and be able to share that information and then be able to take
advantage of the innovation that we have.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
There is a growing concern about the presence of certain
foreign manufactured components in various aspects of our 21st
century infrastructure, whether in communications,
telecommunications, or our electric grid.
For the panel, what potential risk does the growing
dependence on foreign manufactured components in our energy
supply chain create? And how do we mitigate such potential risk
while recognizing that it would be impossible to completely
phase out all foreign-made equipment?
Mr. Dodge. So, from a FERC perspective, approximately 2
years ago we actually directed NERC to develop a standard to
address supply chain risk. NERC filed the standard with us, and
we approved it. It actually helps address some aspects of
supply chain risk. We also directed NERC to go back and do
additional work in this area and to look at the supply chain
risk associated with electronic access control systems as well
physical access control systems, as well as look at the
potential supply chain risk for low-impact cybersecurity
assets.
They have conducted a report on that, and they are in the
process of following up on that. And I defer to Jim to add
additional information on that.
Mr. Robb. So Andy is right where this is an ongoing
exploration of a very complicated topic. Our next step on this
is that we will be issuing, later in August, what we call a
1600 data request, which will go out to all the utilities that
are in the NERC registry, and collect a lot more information on
what suppliers, what equipment is actually out there. So we
will have a better sense of the extended condition, which will
then inform what the appropriate next steps might be in order
to mitigate whatever threats might be out there.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. I look forward to seeing more of that.
Thank you.
And I will yield back my time.
Mr. Rush. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the brilliant cosponsor of H.R.
2062, Mr. Walberg of Michigan, for 5 minutes. Great State of
Michigan. Upper Michigan, not lower Michigan.
Mr. Walberg. Lower Michigan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And
having been born and raised part of my life in your district as
well, I appreciate serving with you and also drawing attention
to the fact that we were successful in getting the $3 million
amendment for CESER past the House, and that is the first step.
Secretary Evans and the rest of the panel, thank you for
being here. As I am sure you know, Chairman Rush and I, as he
has just mentioned, have H.R. 362, the Energy Emergency
Leadership Act, which would codify the functions assigned to
your office as permanent Assistant Secretary.
Can you briefly address for us today how you think such an
authorization could improve CESER's ability to carry out its
important mission in the long term?
Ms. Evans. I think it--first, I appreciate the leadership
that you are showing with that and the commitment to the office
and the commitment to the administration.
What it will do is ensure the ongoing establishment of the
office. It will ensure continuity as it goes forward. That has
already been done with the line item in the budget. That helps.
And so this would be the conclusion to solidify what this
Assistant Secretary position is intended to do to realize what
you had envisioned with the FAST Act of 2015 as well.
Mr. Walberg. I appreciate that.
Secretary Evans, due to the fast-evolving nature of
cybersecurity risks, security cannot be achieved through
standards alone. Reliability and security depend on constant
awareness and information sharing between utilities and the
Government and coordination among the Government's efforts.
As you know, the FAST Act that you mentioned codified DOE
as the sector-specific agency for cybersecurity for the energy
sector. This provision requires DOE to coordinate with the
Department of Homeland Security and other relevant Federal
agencies.
Can you provide an evaluation of how your office and DOE
have coordinated with other agencies?
Ms. Evans. We take our responsibility very seriously as the
sector-specific agency, and we lead those efforts in
conjunction with the Department of Homeland Security. The
Department of Homeland Security overall has responsibilities
for all the sectors. We are just one of those sectors. We view
we are critical to that effort, and we work in multiple ways
jointly with the whole of government. I know everybody is
talking about the whole-of-government approach, but that truly
is the way that we need to do this.
We are just one piece of the puzzle, and it has to be
looked at across the board both within the intelligence
community as well as the Department of Defense, Department of
Transportation. All of this is interconnected. And we do lead
that as the energy-specific agency, and it does work well.
And so there are examples upon examples of where we can
show that it is working well. And it is being mobilized right
now as we are watching the hurricanes approach. And so I do
believe that us as the lead, as the sector-specific agency, we
are committed to doing that, and our partnership with our
fellow agencies, it does work well.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
The FAST Act also amended the Federal Power Act by
introducing a new tool of grid scale emergency declarations
that could be provided by the President. If the executive
branch were to ask or order a utility to take or not take
certain actions with regard to the intrusion or vulnerability,
there are concerns that utilities may face legal exposure by
acting contrary to their first course of action.
Has CESER or the Department considered the possibility and
in such circumstances that are not grid scale emergencies? Are
you aware of these concerns over this type of incentive
structure creating ambiguity or strain?
Ms. Evans. So that is one thing that we are working in
partnership with our industry partners as well as State and
local governments. Should the President declare a grid
emergency, looking at the way that Department of Homeland
Security is--through the National Risk Management Center is
identifying risk, we--and then also the work that is going on
through our Office of Electricity with the North American
resiliency model, you can then start seeing what kind of risk
there would be, based on the way the infrastructure is set out.
We are working in conjunction with them to be able to
highlight these issues through a policy process in the
administration to make the determination should additional
legislation or liability protections are needed, if and when
that happens.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Dodge, if I could, has FERC looked at this
issue as well?
Mr. Dodge. [Off mic.]
Mr. Walden. OK. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Johnson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to our
panel for being with us today.
Ms. Evans, because DOE is the sector-specific agency for
cybersecurity for the energy sector, the work your office does
is so very important. And that importance will continue to
increase as our dependency on technology grows.
Last time you testified, we discussed DOE's role in the
tri-sector working group, which, as I understand it, was
organized to help us better identify and ideally safeguard some
of the interdependencies of the critical functions of each
sector of that group; that is, our electric utilities, our
financial sector, and telecom industries.
So last time we talked, this work was just beginning and
discussions were underway on how to best direct that work. Can
you please provide an update on how these conversations have
been going and if this work is helping to better safeguard
these critical industries?
Ms. Evans. So I am happy to provide the update. The work is
continuing. Obviously, there is an industry side of this. The
industry group has identified and has fed into the process that
DHS, when they release the national critical functions, that
work of the tri-sector group, both the government as well as
the industry side, fed into what are those national risk
indicators.
Based on that, now, the groups are going down, both on the
government side as well as the industry side, looking at those
interdependencies. And then, in essence, it is a risk register.
And then looking at those interdependencies between those three
sectors and then what can we do to mitigate the risk as we go
forward.
So the work is continuing. It is getting to a more granular
level. But that is to be expected so that we can then inform
how are we going to, then, deal with it as we go forward.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right. Well, I am an IT guy by--in my
profession before I came to serve here in Congress. How can
Congress be helpful with this work moving forward?
Ms. Evans. What I believe is going to happen, and this is
what we are going to have to look at going forward is, as you
start seeing these interdependencies, especially as it relates
to technology, we have covered some of the issues going forward
is there probably will be help. There will be things that we
will need to discuss with you that could say that maybe the
legal framework in order to be able to share the information
needs to be more robust. That is a path that we are exploring.
We are looking at it from the government side. I know the
industry side is looking at that as well.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Shifting gears just a little bit. To the
entire panel, looking at strengthening our workforce, I spent
26 1/2 years in the Air Force doing large-scale IT projects.
Many of them very secure programs. Lots of experience and
skills among our military veterans that are getting out. So
what are you doing--and I will give each panelist an
opportunity to comment on this. What are you doing to
incorporate cleared individuals such as military veterans in
your cyber assignments or cyber workforce hiring initiatives?
Ms. Evans, you want to go first?
Ms. Evans. Oh, OK. Sure. As you said, sir, they have a
series of skills that are readily transferable. We are doing
targeted recruiting as we are going forward. We do partner with
DOD. There are a series of programs that are out there that--
some of them have already been mentioned today--that allow for
that transference to go back and forth.
And so there are programs that the nonprofit sectors are
also looking at so that military personnel know how their
skills translate into civilian sector as well. I think a lot of
times what I have seen in my experience is they don't
necessarily know that it translates into this particular job--
--
Mr. Johnson. Yes. It has been that way since 1999, when I
retired. The amount of information going to our veterans and
letting them know where their services might be useful has not
gotten a lot better in almost 30 years. I hear you.
Mr. Dodge.
Mr. Dodge. Sure. Thank you for the question. So we received
a similar question a little bit earlier today, and we responded
to that. I am not an expert in the Federal Government, the
human resource policies, but I can tell you that we have
recently hired several recent veterans into our organization.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Robb, quickly.
Mr. Robb. Yes. I kind of have a similar answer as Andy. And
I would say this transcends cyber. We found military veterans
to be a great fit for our mission in a number of areas, and I
would guess a material--I won't give you a number, but a
material part of our workforce are ex-military.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Veasey, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Chairman Rush. Really appreciate you
holding this hearing and the witnesses that have taken the time
to come before the subcommittee to discuss ways we can improve
the cybersecurity of our Nation's grid.
It is clear that electrification of our world has brought
many benefits, but we also face the risk of foreign actors that
would like to disrupt that. They understand that it is a
benefit and know how disruptive that it would be if they could
cause any sort of havoc in that. Advancements in cybersecurity
best practices will be helpful in reducing those risks, and we
should continue to partner with industry in ensuring our
defenses are strong.
And my question today--and anybody on the panel can answer
it--I think that it was referenced in testimony from Ms. Evans
in particular that the assessment released earlier this year by
the Office of the Director of National Intelligence details the
capabilities of Russia and China to cause massive disruptions
to our energy systems.
And I was wondering if you could expand a little more on
what a disruption to an electrical distribution network or a
natural pipeline, gas pipeline would mean for those citizens
and companies impacted. Can anybody touch on that?
Mr. Dodge. Could you just repeat the very last portion of
your question?
Mr. Veasey. Yes. Just expanding a little more on what a
disruption to an electrical distribution network or a natural
gas pipeline would mean for citizens and those companies that
would be impacted by that disruption.
Mr. Dodge. OK. Sure. Thanks for the question. So we have
not had a disruption up to this point. I want to point that out
and make that very clear. We have actually improved the
cybersecurity reporting standards that actually reports
attempts as well as actual events.
So, from an actual customer perspective, it likely could be
an interruption, whether it is on an electric distribution
system or a natural gas system, and it could be a disruption
for some period of time. The period of time could vary quite a
bit, and I don't really have additional insight to the answer
to your question other than that.
Mr. Veasey. Anyone else have any thoughts?
Mr. Robb. So I would just make the observation that one of
the key tenets of the NERC and FERC reliability regime is that,
if an incident occurs, it quickly gets contained, right, so it
doesn't cascade beyond kind of a local boundary to allow kind
of, you know--the various parties that would be required to do
restoration are working on a smaller problem rather than a
large one.
So the one thing I would say is that the highest likelihood
in that area is that an electrical disruption would be
contained to a fairly specific area and not cascade.
The other point I would make--and, again, this will
probably be a better comment coming from the gas industry--is a
disruption on the natural gas system is really very, very
complicated from a safety perspective because of the--just the
nature of the fuel.
Mr. Veasey. Right. Right. Exactly.
Secretary Evans, you talked in your testimony about DOE's
role on the National Security Council, and you mentioned the
regular unclassified threat briefings that DOE provides to
interagency and industry partners that go with the classified
threat briefings to cleared members of the sector.
Can you talk a little bit about the importance of working
with industry to head off threats and specifically DOE's
interactions with the three energy-focused information sharing
and analysis centers?
Ms. Evans. Yes, I am happy to discuss that. We do try to
get the information declassified to the greatest extent
possible so that it can be distributed through the information
sharing and analysis centers that you mentioned. We hold
regular meetings with those folks who manage that, the
technical teams who manage the ISACs. And they come--those are
handled at classified levels so that they can understand the
context around the threat.
But we also then work across with the energy sector and the
associations and through the sector coordinating councils to do
both classified and unclassified briefings, so that they can--
the more you can say in a classified environment is great, but
you really want to be able to give them information that is
actionable so that they can go back and talk to their entire
company and what kind of actions they can take and what kind of
risks they are posing.
And so we work at multiple levels to make sure that we can
get the best information in the hands of those who can then
turn it into actionable information for their constituents.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
And that concludes the witness questions. And I certainly
want to thank all the witnesses for your participation in
today's hearing.
I remind Members that, pursuant to the committee rules,
they have 10 business days to submit additional questions for
the record to be answered by the witnesses who have appeared.
And I will ask each witness to respond promptly to any such
questions that you may receive.
The Chair now requests unanimous consent to enter into the
record the following documents: a letter from the Western
Governors' Association, a letter from Protect Our Power, and a
letter from the R Street Institute.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Rush. And the subcommittee now stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:40 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS ARE AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]