- TAX ADMINISTRATION
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
TAX ADMINISTRATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
of the
COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JANUARY 30, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-OS11
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
33-793
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
KEVIN BRADY, Texas, Chairman
SAM JOHNSON, Texas
RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DEVIN NUNES, California
SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington
JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois
LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida
MIKE THOMPSON, California
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska
JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
RON KIND, Wisconsin
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
TOM REED, New York
DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
LINDA SANCHEZ, California
JIM RENACCI, Ohio
BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
TERRI SEWELL, Alabama
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota
SUZAN DELBENE, Washington
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JUDY CHU, California
JASON SMITH, Missouri
TOM RICE, South Carolina
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan
DARIN LAHOOD, Illinois
David Stewart, Staff Director
Brandon Casey, Minority Chief Counsel
______
SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas, Chairman
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana
JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
SUZAN DELBENE, Washington
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan
EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
DARIN LAHOOD, Illinois
TOM REED, New York
C O N T E N T S
__________
Page
Advisory of January 30, 2018, announcing the hearing.............
2
WITNESSES
Representative Jason Smith, 8th District of Missouri.............
17
Representative Peter Roskam, 6th District of Illinois............
17
Representative James Renacci, 16th District of Ohio..............
24
Representative Tom Rice, 7th District of South Carolina..........
25
Representative Steve Chabot, 1st District of Ohio................
27
Representative Bill Posey, 8th District of Florida...............
28
Representative Louie Gohmert, 1st District of Texas..............
31
SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD
Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigation (IRS CI).........
33
Representative Patrick McHenry, 10th District of North Carolina..
34
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA).......
35
American Payroll Association (APA)...............................
43
Nonprofit Data Project of the Aspen Institute....................
46
National Association of Tax Professionals (NATP).................
50
Small Business & Entrepreneurship Council (SBE Council)..........
59
LEGISLATION TO IMPROVE
TAX ADMINISTRATION
----------
TUESDAY, JANUARY 30, 2018
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Oversight,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:01 p.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Lynn Jenkins
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]
ADVISORY
FROM THE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
CONTACT: (202) 225-1721
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Tuesday, January 30, 2018
OS-11
Chairman Jenkins Announces Member Day
Hearing on Legislation to Improve
Tax Administration
House Ways and Means Oversight Subcommittee Chairman Lynn Jenkins
(R-KS), announced today that the Subcommittee will hold a hearing on
Member proposals for improvements to the IRS administration of the U.S.
tax system. The hearing will take place on Tuesday, January 30, 2018,
in room 1100 of the Longworth House Office Building, beginning at 2:00
p.m.
Oral testimony at this hearing will be limited to Members of
Congress who have either introduced or co-sponsored legislation related
to improving the IRS. Members wishing to testify at this hearing should
contact the Subcommittee at (202) 225-9263 or [email protected]
by no later than noon on Friday, January 26. However, any individual or
organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may submit a written
statement for consideration by the Committee and for inclusion in the
printed record of the hearing.
DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:
Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to make a submission, and click on the link
entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once
you have followed the online instructions, submit all requested
information. ATTACH your submission as a Word document, in compliance
with the formatting requirements listed below, by the close of business
on Tuesday, February 13, 2018. For questions, or if you encounter
technical problems, please call (202) 225-3625.
FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:
The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any materials submitted for the printed record,
and any written comments in response to a request for written comments
must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any submission not in
compliance with these guidelines will not be printed, but will be
maintained in the Committee files for review and use by the Committee.
All submissions and supplementary materials must be submitted in a
single document via email, provided in Word format and must not exceed
a total of 10 pages. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the
Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the official
hearing record.
All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/or
organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. The name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness must be included in
the body of the email. Please exclude any personal identifiable
information in the attached submission.
Failure to follow the formatting requirements may result in the
exclusion of a submission. All submissions for the record are final.
The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.
Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available at
http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/
Chairman JENKINS. The Subcommittee will come to order.
Welcome to the Ways and Means Oversight Subcommittee Member Day
hearing on legislation to improve tax administration. Today is
a unique opportunity for us to hear from colleagues about their
legislative ideas and priorities related to reforming the IRS.
Tax administration is an issue that I have been familiar
with for my entire professional life. As a CPA I have had many
years of experience helping individuals and small businesses
navigate the complexities associated with filing their taxes.
I know the relationship between the IRS and taxpayers can
be strained, particularly as taxpayers strive to understand
their tax liability and the IRS struggles to communicate and
provide help. I am looking forward to exploring ways to restore
the relationship between taxpayers and the IRS and help the
agency better understand and administer the tax code.
Over the last year, through more than 10 formal hearings
and Committee events, this Subcommittee has heard from high-
level IRS executives, the National Taxpayer Advocate, and
agency watchdogs such as GAO and TIGTA on how the IRS is
functioning, and where they are succeeding and where some
assistance may be necessary. We have also heard from
practitioners, public interest groups, small businesses, and
individuals about the challenges they face with the IRS.
One of the challenges I would like to highlight today is
the dispute resolution process at the IRS. This is an
administrative process where the agency seeks to resolve
controversies without litigation. If a taxpayer disagrees with
an IRS decision or assessment, Congress determined that a
review by an independent IRS employee should be available.
Unfortunately, over time, the process set up by the IRS has
become less independent, and taxpayers are frustrated. Some
express frustration at not being able to plead their case face
to face. Others have been completely denied access to
independent review. Taxpayers are losing faith that they will
receive an independent and fair review of their case.
I am looking forward to working with Ranking Member Lewis
to address these concerns and others, as we craft a bill to
reform the IRS.
In addition to hearing from my Subcommittee colleagues here
behind this dais, I am eager to hear from other non-
Subcommittee Members who have spent time and energy on bills to
improve the way our tax code is administered. Today's hearing
will be structured as follows.
Members will have 5 minutes to discuss their tax
administration legislative priorities. I would remind those
Members that they are also able to submit written testimony in
support of their legislation.
I want to thank our witnesses and Members of the
Subcommittee for taking time to be here today.
And with that I would like to yield to the distinguished
Ranking Member, Mr. Lewis, for the purpose of an opening
statement.
Mr. LEWIS. Madam Chair, thank you for holding this hearing
on proposals to improve the administration of our Federal tax
system.
Let me begin by congratulating you on your appointment, and
welcome you as our new chair. I enjoyed working with our friend
and colleague from Florida, and I look forward to working with
you.
Today we will hear suggestions from our colleagues on how
to improve IRS operations and taxpayer services. In a Nation as
great and diverse as ours, taxpayers have unique perspectives
and needs.
Madam Chair, as you know, we have a voluntary tax system
that depends on taxpayers understanding their responsibility
and receiving timely answers to their questions. Unfortunately,
identity theft and tax fraud continue to challenge tax
administration. It is particularly important that all
taxpayers, especially those who are low-income, disabled, and
senior citizens receive fair, quality, in-person services.
Over the past 8 years, Congress cut the agency budget by
almost $1 billion. I said it before and I will say it again:
You cannot squeeze blood from a turnip. We all know that the
agency is in desperate need of more funding and staff. For
these reasons, we must strengthen the Internal Revenue Service.
Madam Chair, I would like to share a brief overview of my
bill to improve taxpayer service: H.R. 2171, the Taxpayer
Protection Act of 2017. The Democratic Members of this
Subcommittee joined me in introducing this legislation. My bill
would repeal the private debt collection program that costs
three times more than it collects, and abuses thousands of low-
income taxpayers, by enrolling them in installment agreements
that they cannot afford. The program is a shame and a disgrace,
and it must end.
My bill will also strengthen low-income taxpayer clinics,
fix the offer-in-compromise program, and improve overall
funding for taxpayer services.
Finally, I will--it would ensure that taxpayers know
whether the professional preparing their return is licensed and
in good standing with the IRS. This bill proposes good, sound
policy, and I hope our colleagues on both sides of the aisle
will support it.
Madam Chair, thank you again, and I ask unanimous consent
that my full statement is included in the record. And thank you
for holding this hearing. I look forward to the testimony of
our colleagues, and I yield back.
Chairman JENKINS. Without objection.
[The prepared statement of Hon. John Lewis follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Lewis. Thank you, Mr.
Lewis, without objection.
Other Members' opening statements will be made part of the
record.
Now we are going to hear from the Members of the
Subcommittee on their priorities to improve tax administration.
And with that I will recognize Mr. Schweikert for 5 minutes.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Thank you, Madam Chairman. We have actually
two pieces of legislation out there, and here is the basic
concept. One is often referred to as a third-party
verification, but let's use sort of a simple model example.
You qualify for an earned income tax credit. And today we
expect the IRS to do an algorithm. We have actually done
legislation to delay the payment going out. What would happen
if I came to you and said there is a more elegant way to do
that, and the person who is actually under--played by the rules
and has earned that value could get it almost immediately?
The ability to have the tax return and a couple of the key
fields balanced against--we will call them private commercial
databases saying, hey, this database over here says this person
had $200,000 worth of consumption, but they are telling us they
made $30,000 last year. You know that should probably go into
the pile to be looked at again.
But if it matches instantly, it is an elegant way to use
just a simple, high-high-speed computer match to say, yes, we
have good data here, a good request. It--we don't see fraud.
Send the person the resources they have earned. It is much more
elegant.
And I don't mean to hurt anyone's feelings who is a
programmer at the IRS, but it is much more elegant than trying
to design an algorithm that, as soon as you understand what the
algorithm is looking for, you design the--you put in paperwork
to work on--to the outskirts of the algorithm to work around
it.
The data is already out there. It doesn't mean you transfer
information to a private vendor. You just look for the match.
And so it is a red light/green light. It is simple, it is fast.
It would be, I believe, dramatically less expensive. And over
time we need to accept using technology to make the IRS much
faster and much more elegant on these.
The second one I want to share with you is how many of you
have ever gotten a loan? You have gone out and gotten an SBA
loan or a home mortgage or this and that. You remember filling
out the piece of paper saying, ``IRS, please tell my lender
what my last couple years of tax returns were''--particularly
if you are an independent contractor.
Do you know that, if I look on here, the technology today
is functionally fill out this 56--or, excuse me, 4506T form,
and then fax it. Fax it in. Come on. Let's actually sort of
reach into this century and just ask for the 4506T, the income
verification for our brothers and sisters who are out there
getting a loan, that they can use this thing called the
Internet and technology, fill out the form, turn it in. You
know there are plenty of ways to make it much safer than a fax.
This legislation, I believe, is Representative McHenry's,
so it is already out there. Both of these we already have in
bill form. And it is just the embracing of modern technology
and this thing called the Internet to make it more efficient
and more simple for Americans.
And with that I yield back, Madam Chairman.
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Schweikert. I will now
recognize Mrs. Walorski for 5 minutes.
Mrs. WALORSKI. Thank you, Chairman Jenkins, for holding
this hearing.
It is hard to believe that it was just literally over a
month ago that President Trump signed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
into law, yet we have already seen workers getting raises,
bonuses, and better benefits, and companies announcing new
investments in equipment and facilities right here in the
United States.
While this was the most transformative overhaul of the tax
code in 32 years, it is easy to overlook the fact that it has
been 20 years since Congress took a major look at the structure
of the IRS. A lot has changed since then.
In 1999, only 23 percent of individual returns were e-
filed. In 2016, that figure was 89 percent. With the growth in
e-filing, fraudsters are, unfortunately, becoming more and more
sophisticated in their techniques. And yet the IRS's IT
infrastructure is woefully lacking. They still rely on systems
from the Kennedy Administration. There is a clear, critical,
and urgent need for the IRS to fundamentally overhaul its IT
systems, but repeated mistakes, big and small, have undermined
our trust that they will get it right.
Consider this quote from a September 17th TIGTA report:
``The IRS suspended the Enterprise Case Management, or ECM,
project due to insufficient funding and staffing. In addition,
the IRS determined that the software product selected for ECM
could not support an enterprise-wide deployment.''
To put it more plainly, the IRS bought the wrong product,
and then didn't have enough money to buy the right one. I would
be pretty upset if my husband took $20 to get gas for the car,
but came back and said, ``Honey, I need another $20 because I
got a new ice scraper instead. Also, we need to call a tow
truck because I ran out of gas.''
Unfortunately, this isn't the only failed acquisition. The
IRS wasted $12 million on an email system that, as it turned
out, they could not use. According to TIGTA, again, they bought
it ``without first determining project infrastructure needs,
integration requirements, business requirements, and whether
the subscriptions were technologically feasible.'' But
considering the wasted staff time in rebidding the contract,
you are actually talking about a mistake that cost well over
$12 million. The staff time and taxpayer dollars could have
been devoted to other critical IT projects.
The IRS is run by human beings, and human beings make
mistakes. But when a mistake happens, we need to ensure that
there is accountability, and that procedures are followed to
prevent it from happening again.
The IRS would also benefit from a better strategic vision
and long-term planning. Back in 2009 the agency embarked on the
return review program, or RRP, a new fraud detection program to
replace legacy systems. It came in years behind schedule, and
hundreds of millions of dollars over budget. The RRP is a long
saga. But I want to highlight one episode in particular.
The IRS put the project into a ``strategic pause'' in 2014.
They cited many reasons, but here is a sampling: ``To determine
the priority and direction from IRS senior leadership; to
articulate and align RRP's role in the broader business vision;
to develop a road map for future State capabilities and
architecture for RRP; to ensure clear and concise understanding
of scope, cost, and schedule with contractors.'' And finally,
``budgetary constraints.''
Looking at this list, I wonder how any project could ever
be on time or on budget. I see things like this and I can't
help but ask, ``Are these budgetary constraints real? Are they
because people spend so much time spinning their wheels without
any direction they just really run out of money?''
Now, the RRP is more or less up and running, and that is a
good thing. It will help catch fraud. But the process was a
failure. Picture a basketball player on a breakaway. He trips
on his own shoelaces, but heaves the ball up while falling and
makes the basket. You wouldn't say, ``Good job,'' you would
say, ``Tie your shoelaces.''
Had the underlying planning issues that led to such a cost
overrun and long delay with the RRP been fixed--are new
projects like CADE too needlessly doomed to the same fate?
Chairman Jenkins, this is the trust gap. It didn't open up
overnight, and it won't be closed overnight, either. But we
absolutely have to fix it. I believe, if we can instill more
accountability, better contracting practices, and better
strategic planning, the IRS really can get on the right path.
Some of this can be legislative, but some involves a cultural
shift. It is up to our next IRS Commissioner, who I hope will
make this a priority.
Our Committee is seeking to closely engage the IRS on
multiple fronts to better understand these issues, too. Still,
I look forward to this Committee's continued work in the
overhaul on reforming the IRS. I look forward to hearing our
colleagues' ideas today, and I yield back.
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you.
Mr. Bishop, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. BISHOP. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak today, and I would like to let you know
that I appreciate the fact that we are holding hearings about
the IRS, a great opportunity to discuss much-needed steps to
improve the Service. And I look forward to working with the
Committee to do so.
Over the last year or so we have had a number of meetings
with various officials at the IRS, and I am continually amazed
and shocked to hear about its archaic technology and
infrastructure, and how much we need to do to ensure that the
IRS is pulled into the 21st century.
That said, it is imperative that this Subcommittee explores
ways to improve the IRS's technology and capabilities.
Furthermore, when it comes to taxpayers, many of whom still
receive paper checks that do not have access to the--we--pardon
me a second, pardon me. Let me rewind a little bit here.
When we talk about the IRS and its capabilities, I want to
begin with my ongoing suggestion that we need to do whatever we
can to address refunds. And I want to backtrack because, while
we get a long way in this discussion about IRS reforms, one of
the things that we talk about--that we have not talked about, I
believe, enough is about the process of distributing refunds.
And during the 2006 filing season the IRS issued 104 million
refunds, 19 million of which went out by paper check.
When refunds are issued by paper checks, it is important to
note that it costs the government about a dollar per check. But
if processed electronically, it costs mere cents. The potential
savings are, therefore, abundantly clear.
Furthermore, when it comes to the taxpayer, many receive
these paper checks, don't have access to a bank or a credit
union, and must resort to payday lenders or other check-cashing
organizations, oftentimes who will charge a substantial fee and
nullify the benefits of the refund. By enhancing the electronic
payments, there will be fewer costs to the government. And,
most importantly, taxpayers are able to keep more of their
rightfully owed refund.
Madam Chairwoman, electronic payments are simply quicker
and more secure. And for those reasons I have been working on
legislation to increase the number of tax refunds that are
processed electronically. And I hope it can be included in the
final package this Subcommittee produces.
I would like to submit by unanimous consent, if I could,
Madam Chairwoman, a statement that I have from the Electronic
Transaction Association, which is an association representing
over 500 companies that offer electronic transaction processing
products and services. They encourage Congress to work with the
IRS to implement electronic payments for Federal income tax
refunds.
And that said, Madam Chairwoman, I would ask by unanimous
consent that we submit this into the record.
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Bishop. Without objection.
[The submission for the Record of Hon. Mike Bishop
follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. BISHOP. On the top of the security, every day we hear
that countless hackers and criminals are developing new schemes
to steal taxpayer refunds, and are constantly trying to access
the IRS's data. In an effort to combat bad actors and
collaborate and share best practices to fight off emerging
threats, the IRS formed the IRS Security Summit, which is a
partnership of the IRS, State revenue agencies, and the private
industry. By all accounts, this Summit has been beneficial for
the parties involved, and I think we should explore more ways
this Congress can further assist this effort.
In closing, I wholeheartedly agree with everyone in the
room that the IRS is in dire need of reform. We have had plenty
of bipartisan agreement on these issues over the last year, and
I think this is a real opportunity to improve the IRS for the
American taxpayers and start bridging the gap, the trust gap.
Thank you very much, and I yield back.
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you.
Mr. Reed, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I appreciate the
opportunity to have the discussion today with our colleagues in
regard to ways to improve the IRS.
And I was listening to my good friend from Indiana, Mrs.
Walorski, talking about the status of the computer programming,
if you would, in the IRS. And I remember fondly the
conversation I had with a prior IRS Commissioner about the
discussion in regard to Fortran being the computer code that is
utilized in some areas of the IRS in regard to its computer
programming situation.
And, for those that may not know what Fortran is--because I
look around this room and I see many folks in this hearing room
today that were probably born 20 years after the creation of
Fortran--it is a 1950s, 1960s computer programming system that
is so antiquated, my understanding in the conversations with
the former IRS Commissioner, that it is very difficult to even
fix that computer code because no one knows what it is. They
have all retired or gone to the great beyond.
So this is an area that, hopefully, with technology, as my
good friend from Arizona had mentioned, can be improved upon in
regard to providing better services to our constituents and to
the American public.
But I wanted to focus in particular, Madam Chair, on
improvements in the IRS that I truly do believe need to occur
in regard to serving populations in rural communities such as
yours in Kansas, Ms. Jenkins. And one of the areas that I see,
just some simple reforms that maybe the IRS can take heed to,
is utilizing technology when it comes to callback features, for
example.
When folks call a service organization today, often they
will be--hear a recorded message saying if you would like a
call back, we can provide a call back to you at the phone
number that you enter into the program. That is a simple relief
reform that would go so far to help the needs of taxpayers
across the country, especially in rural communities.
In our district we have very limited live centers where
folks can go into areas like Jamestown, New York, or Elmira,
New York, and meet with an actual person to discuss their
sensitive IRS matters. Using these types of phone services that
accommodate the interests of our constituents--you know, many
are working families, many are working mothers, working fathers
that have difficulty trying to travel. Our district, from point
to point across the district, is about a 5-hour drive, to be
perfectly honest with you. It is very difficult to get to these
centers and to have a conversation in regard to the issues
before the IRS.
So doing things such as that callback feature, I think, is
a simple reform that they could implement.
I also like the concept that is being discussed in regard
to a year-round call center. I know the IRS, from information
we have received, has kind of an off-season, on-season type of
resource allocation. If we could maybe provide those resources
on a year-round basis, many of the issues, especially as we go
through tax reform, that many of the taxpayers deal with can be
headed off--and have access to information sooner, rather than
waiting potentially for an on-season staffing level that allows
them to talk to real people.
And then, finally, Madam Chair, you know, I think it would
be appropriate on these issues in regard to the IRS that maybe
we have a dedicated line to people like yourselves, who are
CPAs, enrolled agents, and then, therefore, maybe their more
technical, advanced questions get the resources immediately
responded to by staffing sophistication on the other end of the
phone that can address those inquiries, as opposed to folks
that may just have some basic questions and information
requests that they could potentially get through a direct line.
Maybe this would allocate the phone system so that you are not
on hold for a significant amount of time, you are actually
getting to the resource from the IRS in a timely fashion at the
level that maybe your question or inquiry deserves the matching
of that resource on the other end of the phone line.
So, for those simple reforms, I would advocate for the
continuation of this hearing, and appreciate the Chairman
putting this together and hearing from our colleagues and
others ideas to improve services for what we all believe needs
to be done in the IRS--better service to the people across
America.
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Reed.
Mr. LaHood, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LAHOOD. Thank you, Chairwoman Jenkins, for holding this
Subcommittee hearing today, and to my colleagues for their
advocacy and testimony on this important topic.
Ensuring an efficient, accountable, and transparent IRS is
key to restoring the relationship between taxpayers and the
agency, as well as an effective implementation of the tax code.
Items of importance include ensuring a service-first agency,
instilling confidence that taxpayer information is protected,
and upgrading IRS technology for the 21st century, among other
things.
It has been over 20 years since major reforms were made to
the IRS. I appreciate the work this Subcommittee has done over
the last year, including the Better Way blueprint. As the
newest Member of this Subcommittee, I look forward to beginning
engaging in this important work.
First, I would like to mention a bill that I am a cosponsor
of, H.R. 3541, the Free File Permanence Act of 2017. This
legislation was introduced by my colleague from Illinois, the
Chairman of the Health Subcommittee, Peter Roskam. If enacted,
this legislation would make permanent the IRS's Free File
program. I have held a number of information seminars
throughout my district on this subject, and people understand
how important it is.
This program is a public-private partnership between the
IRS and tax software companies and State departments of revenue
that enables low-income and underserved individuals to choose
between the best tax preparation products to prepare and
electronically file their Federal return for free. This
actually saves the Federal Government money in the process.
Ensuring taxpayers have access to the tools and resources
they need to simplify the tax process, this is important and a
major part of H.R. 1, which was just signed into law.
Second, I would like to raise a different issue that I am
working on to address through my own legislation. Currently, by
law, the IRS Taxpayer Advocate Service can issue a--issue a
taxpayer assistance order for specific case issues. While
authorized by the Commissioner, the IRS Taxpayer Advocate
Service does not have the same codified authority to issue
taxpayer assistance directives for systemic issues.
Ensuring that the IRS Commissioner is responsive in a
timely and substantive way to both types of requests is
important to assure that areas for improvement within the
agency are recognized and addressed.
In the event that the IRS Commissioner does not respond, it
is worth considering what else can be done to ensure that the
taxpayers' issue is fully reviewed and acknowledged. I look
forward to continuing to find the best way to fix this
situation, and hope to have bipartisan support on this
legislation.
With that, Chairwoman Jenkins, I yield back my time. Thank
you.
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Curbelo
for 5 minutes.
Mr. CURBELO. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and congratulations
on your new role. I am thrilled that we will be working
together under your leadership to reform, modernize, and revamp
the IRS. And I know that Members on both sides of the aisle
will have plenty to contribute to this process.
I want to take the opportunity today to discuss critical
legislation I introduced with Representative Danny Davis of
Illinois, and--which is very fitting, given what we are
discussing today.
Our bill, the Volunteer Income Tax Assistance Permanence
Act of 2017, would permanently authorize the Internal Revenue
Service to administer the Volunteer Income Tax Assistance
matching grant program. With the VITA program, the Federal
Government partners with the local community to provide free
tax preparation services for individuals with an annual income
of less than $54,000, and those with limited proficiency in
English. The program is specifically targeted to ensure
taxpayers have access to services where they can confidently
file returns without fear of being scammed by fraudulent
preparers.
Tax return preparer fraud consistently ranks among the
IRS's dirty dozen tax scams, and we know this problem all too
well in South Florida. Filing a tax return is enough of a
headache, without the added fear of being scammed. The VITA
program helps insulate the most vulnerable populations from
this threat.
The legislation also ensures that VITA grant recipients
maintain strong records of accuracy that will save taxpayers
money. The program already boasts a 94 percent accuracy rating,
even including returns with a complicated earned income tax
credit. When taxpayers use VITA services to file their returns,
they can rest assured knowing that their returns will be filed
accurately and without the threat of fraud.
The success of the VITA program is evident in its growth.
The number of tax returns prepared by the VITA program was 3.8
million in the 2016 tax filing season, up 100 percent from the
number of returns prepared in the 2014 season. This program is
critical to the residents of South Florida that I am honored to
represent, where tax fraud and abuse of low-income filers is
rampant, especially among immigrant communities.
According to Branches, a participant in the VITA program in
Miami-Dade County, approximately 60 percent of residents
qualify for assistance. In 2016, Branches helped residents file
9,845 tax returns at no cost, and secure $11.5 million in
refunds. I look forward to visiting a VITA center operated by
the United Way in South Florida in the very near future.
Funding for this essential service has received bipartisan
support under both Republican and Democratic Administrations.
The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have continued
to include strong funding for taxpayer services like VITA,
regardless of which party is in the majority. The VITA
Permanency Act would provide the longevity this program needs
because it benefits so many.
H.R. 2901 already has the support of 38 bipartisan Members,
including 13 Members of this Committee. I urge my colleagues to
join us in supporting the VITA program, which has a proven
track record of success in assisting the most vulnerable in our
communities.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Curbelo. I would like to
recognize the Ranking Member for a few statements.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I just want to
recognize Mr. LaHood. Did he walk out?
Chairman JENKINS. He did.
Mr. LEWIS. He did. But tell him I just wanted to observe
that he has become a Member of the Committee, and to welcome
him. I enjoyed working with his father over the years, when he
was a Member of the Congress.
Chairman JENKINS. Very nice, thank you.
We are now joined by non-Subcommittee Members who have some
legislative ideas. We are going to just move right down the
line.
We have the Honorable Representatives Smith, Roskam,
Renacci, and Rice.
And, with that, we will yield to the Honorable
Representative Smith from Missouri for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF THE HON. JASON SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF MISSOURI
Mr. SMITH OF MISSOURI. Thank you, Chairman Jenkins. It is a
great honor to be before your Committee.
The passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in December
created a pro-growth tax code for the American taxpayer. And
folks across the Nation are starting to see the benefits of the
lower rates in their paychecks. Just last week I visited three
different employers in Southern Missouri who were either
handing out bonuses, increasing hourly wages, or strengthening
benefits as a result of the new tax code.
An important next step following such momentous tax reform
is to ensure that the agency tasked with administering the tax
code, the IRS, works effectively and efficiently for the
American taxpayer. The IRS has been rightfully scrutinized over
the years for its mismanagement and abuses of the American
taxpayer, targeting long wait times and unauthorized spending,
just to name a few. We need an IRS which protects and serves
the American taxpayer, not one which proactively seeks to harm
them.
Simply put, the IRS, in its current form, needs to be
ripped out by its roots and turned on the--turned on its head
into an entity which serves the American public, not one which
only looks to hinder our families, farmers, and small
businesses.
In July of last year, I introduced bipartisan legislation
with my colleague on the Committee, Representative Terri
Sewell, called the Preserving Taxpayer Rights Act. This good-
government legislation would put a stop to an IRS which is
inefficient, time consuming, and expensive for taxpayers. My
bill takes the burden off the backs of taxpayers by allowing
them to take certain cases to the IRS Office of Appeals,
removes threatening tools of the IRS taking taxpayers to court,
and protects their private and sensitive information by
preventing outside groups from participating in audits,
codifying into law something the President has instructed
Treasury to do.
The American taxpayer deserves an IRS that is less
burdensome and more transparent. They need an IRS that would
work for them, not against them. Madam Chairman, it is my hope
that, as you and your colleagues on the Oversight Subcommittee
consider legislation to overhaul the IRS, you include the
Preserving Taxpayers Rights Act as a mechanism to make the IRS
work better for the American taxpayer.
Thank you again for holding this hearing, and I look
forward to working with you on this and other issues.
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Smith.
Chairman Roskam, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF THE HON. PETER ROSKAM, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and Ranking Member
Lewis. It is an honor for me to be here today, and I deeply
appreciate the work of the Subcommittee on which I have served.
And I am here to talk about two pieces of legislation for your
consideration.
The first is H.R. 3641, the Free File Permanence Act, which
is a commonsense bill that makes the free file program
permanent. It is a program that is a public-private partnership
between the IRS and a group of companies which have agreed to
offer commercial, online tax preparation and electronic filing
services to consumers. This partnership allows free tax filing
for any taxpayer making less than $66,000, removing a financial
burden for taxpayers and ensuring that they are receiving
quality guidance on how to file their taxes.
As an added bonus, the program actually saves the Federal
Government an estimated $13 million a year because electronic
filings are less expensive for the IRS to process than paper
versions.
H.R. 3641 has 122 cosponsors, including Chairman Jenkins
and Representatives DelBene, Walorski, Curbelo, Bishop, and
LaHood on this Subcommittee.
Now, the second bill that I want to bring to your attention
is
one that Ranking Member Lewis is very familiar with, because he
and I were partners in uncovering this scandal at the IRS. It
is
H.R. 1843, the Clyde-Hirsch-Sowers RESPECT Act. And it was
during our time when we were leading the Committee together
where we uncovered civil asset forfeiture abuse last Congress,
and Congressman Crowley is the lead Democrat sponsor on this
legislation.
Here is what happens, in a nutshell. If a person deposits
$10,000 or more into a financial institution, that institution
is required to submit a currency transaction report to the
Treasury Department. Avoiding this reporting requirement by
purposefully staying below the $10,000 limit is a Federal crime
known as structuring. Structuring was made illegal in 1986 to
prevent large-scale criminal enterprises, terrorists, and money
launderers from hiding their money from authorities by
consistently depositing just shy of the $10,000 limit.
Okay, so far so good. It makes perfect sense. But when
structuring is believed to have occurred, the IRS can use its
civil asset forfeiture authority to seize funds in the bank
accounts and force the owner of the funds to prove that they
were obtained legally. Unfortunately, this very Subcommittee
uncovered multiple instances where the IRS abused this
authority, and was stealing legally-earned funds solely because
the owners ran afoul of structuring laws.
In some instances, the rightful owners of the money were
told by bank tellers that depositing over $10,000 causes a
headache of paperwork for the bank, so they deposited under
$10,000 to be considerate, of all things.
In another instance, a taxpayer deposited under the limit
because their insurance policies didn't cover $10,000 in off-
premise losses.
Finally, some taxpayers deposited under the limit simply
because they didn't want their private information sent off to
the IRS every time they made a deposit. The RESPECT Act limits
the IRS's civil asset forfeiture authority. It requires that,
in order for--to seize funds the IRS believes have been
structured to avoid reporting requirements, the IRS must first
show probable cause that those funds are derived from an
illegal source or connected to some other criminal activity.
Perfect common sense.
It also provides important procedural protections,
including a post-seizure hearing for people whose assets the
IRS has seized within 30 days after the seizure, or longer if
the asset owner requests an extension.
We have just seen too many of these stories about the IRS
seizing assets of honest, law-abiding taxpayers. And codifying
these protections is something that I think should be included
in any tax administration bill.
The RESPECT Act passed the Ways and Means Committee
unanimously, which means that everybody supported it except the
newly-arrived Mr. LaHood from Illinois, and we got him when he
voted for it on the House floor. It overwhelmingly passed the
House. I urge its--both of these bills consideration.
And I thank you, Madam Chairman, for the opportunity and--
or the Ranking Member, Mr. Lewis, for your work, in particular,
on the RESPECT Act.
I yield back. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Peter Roskam follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you.
Mr. Renacci, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF THE HON. JAMES RENACCI, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman and Ranking Member
Lewis. I want to thank you for holding this hearing. I believe
that reforming the IRS's ability to administrate our tax code
is a critical next step to the--following the passage of the
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
I am pleased to discuss two pieces of legislation today
that I believe will help the IRS better serve the American
people, the Improper Tax Payment Reduction Act of 2017, and the
Stolen Identity Refund Fraud Prevention Act of 2017. I will
start with the Improper Tax Payment Reduction Act of 2017.
This legislation addresses improper payments under the
Earned Income Tax Credit, which is also known as EITC. The EITC
incentivizes work, while providing a refundable tax credit to
qualifying taxpayers. Unfortunately, the program is currently
riddled with fraud and error. The 2016 report from the Treasury
Inspector General estimated that nearly 1 in 4 payments are
improper, exceeding $16 billion annually in improper payments.
This is unacceptable.
It is our responsibility to ensure that our constituents'
hard-earned dollars are being properly spent. My legislation
seeks to address this issue in four ways.
First, it clarifies existing law to prevent overstatement
of self-employment income.
Next, it encourages information verification when there are
reporting discrepancies.
Then it allows excess credit payments in instances where it
is impossible to resolve reporting discrepancies after
verification requests.
Finally, it captures information vital to fraud prevention,
long before paying out on the EITC.
This is commonsense legislation. It passed out of the House
on November 16, 2017, in the first vote by the House on the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act, but it was not ultimately included in the
final legislation that came out of conference due to inability
to meet the reconciliation rules.
I look forward to seeing the Improper Tax Payment Reduction
Act of 2017 included within the tax administration legislation
we are discussing today.
The other piece of legislation I want to discuss is the
Stolen Identity Refund Prevention Act of 2017. This bill
combats tax-related identity theft, while also helping victims.
Mr. Lewis was a cosponsor on this legislation.
Not too long ago I was a victim of identity theft. I
leveraged this experience to come up with the safeguards to
prevent others from going through what I went through.
Five highlights of the legislation include establishing a
centralized point of contact at the IRS for victims of identity
theft, making it simpler for victims to resolve tax-related
identity theft cases.
Requiring--number two, requiring the IRS to notify
taxpayers when the IRS discovers unauthorized use of taxpayers'
identification information.
Three, requiring the IRS to submit a feasibility study
regarding establishment of a program for identity-theft-related
tax fraud victims to opt out of electronic filing.
Four, establishing an information-sharing and analysis
center to collect, analyze, and share actionable data and
information to detect and prevent identity theft.
Five, creating a local law enforcement liaison's role
within the IRS to coordinate on identity theft cases with local
police and law enforcement.
Last spring this bill reported favorably out of the Ways
and Means Committee by voice, and passed the House on
suspension by voice. However, it is yet to move forward in the
Senate. As such, I look forward to seeing the Stolen Identity
Refund Prevention Act of 2017 included within the tax
administration legislation we are discussing today.
In conclusion, the IRS needs our help in order to be--more
efficiently administer the tax code and better serve our
constituents. I look forward to again advancing these two
commonsense bills and working on additional reforms in
collaboration with the IRS.
I appreciate the Chairwoman, her staff, and my colleagues
for working on these important issues with me last year and
going forward. I also thank you for allowing me to participate
in this hearing today.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you.
Mr. Rice, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM RICE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA
Mr. RICE. Thank you, Chairman Jenkins, Ranking Member
Lewis. Thank you for holding this hearing and giving me the
opportunity to discuss my legislative proposals to improve the
Internal Revenue Service.
We need to make the IRS more customer-service-oriented, an
agency that protects taxpayer rights, and fairly and
efficiently administers our new tax code.
The first legislative proposal I have will help achieve the
goal of IRS reform--H.R. 3153, the Electronic Signature
Standards Act. This bill, which I introduced in the House on
behalf of myself and Representative Ron Kind, would provide a
simple, no-cost, private-sector option for small businesses and
individual taxpayers to comply with the requirements of our tax
system.
The bill would require the IRS to issue guidance
establishing uniform standards and procedures for the
acceptance of electronic signatures on disclosure authorization
and power-of-attorney forms.
Currently, the IRS allows for the use of electronic
signatures on an ad hoc basis, accepting electronic signatures
on certain forms, while prohibiting their use on other forms.
This lack of uniform treatment adds an extra layer of confusion
for practitioners that are trying to help taxpayers navigate
our tax system, while limiting filing options for taxpayers
that increasingly rely on modern-day advancements such as
electronic signatures.
The IRS has acknowledged that an e-signature option would
reduce unnecessary expenses and time spent obtaining
physically-signed forms. Yet the IRS has still not issued
uniform guidance for the use of these signatures. Put simply,
H.R. 3153 would make the IRS move forward with an additional
secure filing option that they already support.
I would also like to discuss a proposal for legislation
that I plan on introducing in the coming weeks that would
provide taxpayers with more certainty and peace of mind when
they need it most. This legislation would provide for an
automatic 30-day reset of any IRS filing deadline that occurs
in the wake of a major, major disaster declaration for events
such as hurricanes or wildfires.
Under current law, the Secretary of Treasury and the IRS
have discretion to extend filing deadlines for certain forms of
taxpayers dealing with the effects of major natural disasters.
While the IRS often provides filing deadline relief to the
affected taxpayers, it does--it usually takes days or even
weeks for the IRS to reach that decision, leaving taxpayers in
limbo. When Hurricane Matthew devastated my district in October
2016, I had many constituents contact me, concerned with how
they were going to file their tax forms--more concerned with
how they were going to file their tax forms than with dealing
with their flooded homes and businesses.
The past few months served as a reminder that, in times of
extreme need that occur in the aftermath of natural disasters,
the last thing that Americans should be worried about is
whether the IRS might fine them for missing a filing deadline.
Ultimately, this proposal would ensure the IRS works for
the American taxpayer when they need it most, the exact type of
reform we need as we consider how to bring the agency into the
21st century.
I look forward to working with you and this Committee to
achieve commonsense taxpayer-friendly reform of the IRS.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you.
I want to thank all our colleagues that joined us today. We
are going to take a recess and go vote, and we will reconvene
immediately following the last vote.
[Recess.]
Chairman JENKINS. The Subcommittee will come to order. I
welcome everyone back to the Ways and Means Oversight
Subcommittee Member Day hearing on legislation to improve tax
administration. Today's hearing will continue as before, and
Members will be given 5 minutes to discuss their tax
administration legislative priorities.
I also remind Members that they will have the ability to
submit written testimony in support of their legislation.
And I want to thank our witnesses. And this second panel
will include Representatives Chabot, Gohmert, and Posey.
And, with that, I would like to yield Representative Chabot
5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF THE HON. STEVE CHABOT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO
Mr. CHABOT. Thank you very much. Good afternoon, Chairman
Jenkins, Ranking Member Lewis, and Members of the Subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to share a few thoughts on ways
to improve tax administration at the IRS.
Let me begin by congratulating your Subcommittee for its
work on the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. We hear on a daily basis the
positive results this law is already generating for hard-
working Americans. From the impact on corporations to how the
new withholding tables will affect employees, this law is
delivering.
As Chairman of the Committee on Small Business, I want to
thank you for keeping small businesses front and center during
the debate. Small businesses now have more parity when it comes
to the tax code. With monumental tax cuts now in place,
Congress must address how the tax code is administered. More
specifically, I would like to discuss the treatment of the
Nation's true job creators, small businesses.
Two out of every three new private-sector jobs are
generated by small businesses. With over 29 million small
businesses in the United States, the economy is intricately
linked to the health of our smallest firms. Unfortunately,
small businesses often face challenges when managing their
taxes.
While often operating on the margins, small business owners
do not have the resources available to hire an army of tax
professionals to calculate their taxes. Rather, they sacrifice
time away from growing and creating jobs to address IRS
matters. For the economy to continue to record impressive
marks, Main Street America must be operating at full strength.
Moreover, the code has not kept pace with technological
advancements that are changing how businesses operate and reach
customers. As a result of multiple hearings exploring this
topic, I introduced H.R. 3717, the Small Business Owners Tax
Simplification Act of 2017, with the aim of modernizing the
process for the Nation's small businesses, entrepreneurs, and
start-ups. H.R. 3717 takes simple, commonsense steps to reform
tax administration.
For example, H.R. 3717 realigns estimated tax payment
deadlines, which cause confusion because they currently do not
fall when calendar quarters actually conclude. To bring further
clarity, H.R. 3717 aligns the tax filing thresholds of the Form
1099 Miscellaneous and the Form 1099-K.
Next, the legislation requires the Secretary of the
Treasury to set standards for accepting digital signatures. And
when a direct deposit refund is in order, pre-notification
testing is also required. To address the pace at which small
businesses are pursuing the sharing economy, where they utilize
technology and web-based applications to reach customers, we
examined the important decisions small businesses make when it
comes to independent contractors and worker classifications.
Specifically, the legislation allows companies to enter
into voluntary withholding agreements and offer voluntary
training without impacting classifications. These changes can
make a difference. At a hearing that explored this legislation,
a witness commented that H.R. 3717 ``is a necessary first step,
and would bring about much-
needed simplification.'' Another witness explained, ``H.R. 3717
proposes commonsense changes to better meet the needs of the
growing number of sharing economy operators and self-employed
small business owners.''
I respectfully ask the Committee to take into account these
provisions as you address tax administration, and we look
forward to continuing to work with you on them. We owe it to
the small businesses and entrepreneurs and start-ups that
define our communities and neighborhoods to simplify tax
administration.
We thank you very much.
I think I finished early. And I yield back, and I will be
happy to answer any questions.
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you.
Mr. Posey, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF THE HON. BILL POSEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA
Mr. POSEY. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member.
Chairman JENKINS. Do you want to hit your microphone on?
Mr. POSEY. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member, for
holding this hearing today to discuss proposals to reform the
U.S. Internal Revenue Service administration of our tax system.
As tax day approaches, Americans are being reminded why
filing taxes is a dreaded experience, especially in the case of
seniors whose retirement finances are simple, yet require a
very complicated filing process.
My bill, H.R. 2721, the Seniors Tax Simplification Act of
2017, would allow for easier tax form completion for senior
taxpayers. The IRS currently prohibits individuals over 65
years old from filing the one-page 1040-EZ form, even if they
have a simple return and choose not to itemize deductions. It
really doesn't make sense.
Specifically, the EZ form does not include lines for Social
Security or other retirement benefits, as well as interest in
capital gains on investments.
The Seniors Tax Simplification Act of 2017 will direct the
Internal Revenue Service to create a new, basic, easy-to-read
form called 1040-SR for senior taxpayers earning Social
Security retirement benefits, interest, and capital gains,
while extending the common-sense convenience of the 1040-EZ
form. The Seniors Tax Simplification Act of 2017 has recently
been endorsed by the American Association of Retired Persons
and the 60-Plus Association.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to include in the
record a January 24th letter of support from AARP and a January
9th letter of support from the 60-Plus Association for the
Seniors Tax Simplification Act of 2017. Thank you.
[The submissions for the Record of Hon. Bill Posey follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. POSEY. Again, I thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. The Seniors Tax Simplification Act is a simple,
commonsense solution, which would provide a measure of relief
for our senior citizens who deserve a tax filing option that is
fair and simpler than allowed under current law.
I know you all want to do something for our seniors, too. I
look forward to working with the Committee to modernize our tax
administration policies, and I thank you again, and I yield
back.
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you. I want to thank all our
colleagues who came before us today, those on the Committee and
those off the Committee. And with that, I see our final
witness.
Mr. Gohmert, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF THE HON. LOUIE GOHMERT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS
Mr. GOHMERT. I will try to be as brief as possible. I have
just one thing I wanted to bring to your attention today.
I know, in prior elections, and especially in 2016, the
idea was brought forward by a number of candidates that we
should do away with the Internal Revenue Service.
And some years back I was having a conversation with a guy
I dearly love, a brilliant man, Arthur Laffer. Dr. Laffer, of
course, was the economic advisor for Ronald Reagan. And we were
discussing the IRS and all the power they had, the potential
for abuse, and how wonderful it would be if there were not an
agency, an entity in our U.S. Federal Government, that had
their power.
It seems that the IRS is the one agency that can legally
just push the Constitution aside and come after folks. You are
guilty until proven innocent. You have to pay taxes before you
can contest them, even if the IRS is wrong. We have seen
people--and there have been testimonies I have seen before I
ever came to Congress--from people who were targeted by
vengeful IRS agents.
And I said, ``Look, I would love to get rid of the IRS,
Art, but, as a former felony judge, I know there are going to
be people that will cheat. You are going to have to have
somebody that will check and make sure--keep everybody
honest.''
And I don't know, if you get rid of the IRS, how do we do
that, make sure that people have an incentive to stay honest?
And I know in the last election he talked about a flat tax
would enable you to get rid of the IRS. But let's say we keep
the current tax system. Dr. Laffer said the problem with the
IRS is they have too much power. They can decide who they are
going to audit, they can decide how thoroughly they are going
to audit them, if they are going to demand more and more and
more, if they are going to just keep pushing the envelope and
what you are required to produce. And they can decide, once
they have audited you, how--what they are going to do with the
next step.
Do they think there was criminal conduct? If so, do they
pursue it as a criminal case? Do they feel they should even
take your homestead that virtually nobody else can. They get to
decide what happens from there. Do they pursue it as a criminal
violation and give it to a prosecutor? From a pecuniary
standpoint, what do they do?
And he said, ``There is the problem. No one entity should
ever have all of that power.''
And so here--and I appreciate you both being here. I know
you all are busy as can be. And Madam Chair, I appreciate your
attentiveness, as well as that of the Ranking Member, Mr.
Lewis.
But he said, ``What you do is get rid of the IRS, and you
create a small agency of CPAs. All they do is audit. And they
never, ever get to choose who they audit. Each audit is chosen
at random.'' And so, just because you are audited one year
doesn't mean you won't randomly come up another year.
So they don't get to abuse, they don't get to single people
out because of politics or one thing or another. They are
handed the name and address of who is to be audited, they do
their audit as good CPAs. When they finish the audit, they turn
in the results, and that is the end of what they can do.
Then you have someone else make a decision. Is this
criminal? Is this civil? What should be the ramifications? But
it takes all of that just arbitrary power, the potential, the
temptation to abuse somebody--and I just think that is what we
ought to pursue. And I know it is a big step to get rid of a
department, but that is really so serious, I would appreciate
the Committee's considering that.
And I yield back.
Chairman JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Gohmert.
And again, I want to thank all of our Committee and non-
Committee Members that came before us today. There were a lot
of good legislative solutions proposed, and I look forward to
working together to include some of those in a bill to make
reforms to the IRS.
Please be advised that Members have 2 weeks to submit
written questions to be answered later in writing. Those
questions and your answers will be made part of the formal
hearing record.
And with that, the Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:36 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the Record follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]