- SHINING LIGHT ON THE FEDERAL REGULATORY PROCESS
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
SHINING LIGHT ON THE FEDERAL REGULATORY PROCESS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MARCH 14, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-73
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://oversight.house.gov
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-942 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
Trey Gowdy, South Carolina, Chairman
John J. Duncan, Jr., Tennessee
Elijah E. Cummings, Maryland,
Darrell E. Issa, California
Ranking Minority Member
Jim Jordan, Ohio
Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Mark Sanford, South Carolina
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Justin Amash, Michigan
Columbia
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Scott DesJarlais, Tennessee
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Blake Farenthold, Texas
Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Mark Meadows, North Carolina
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Ron DeSantis, Florida
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Dennis A. Ross, Florida
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Rod Blum, Iowa
Jimmy Gomez, Maryland
Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Peter Welch, Vermont
Steve Russell, Oklahoma
Matt Cartwright, Pennsylvania
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Will Hurd, Texas
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Gary J. Palmer, Alabama
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland
James Comer, Kentucky
Paul Mitchell, Michigan
Greg Gianforte, Montana
Sheria Clarke, Staff Director
Robert Borden, Deputy Staff Director
William McKenna, General Counsel
James Lesinski, Counsel
Kiley Bidelman, Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on March 14, 2018...................................
1
WITNESSES
Ms. Kris Nguyen, Acting Director for Strategic Issues, Government
Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................
5
Written Statement............................................
7
Mr. Paul Noe, Vice President, Public Policy, American Forest and
Paper Association
Oral Statement...............................................
28
Written Statement............................................
30
Ms. Karen Harned, Executive Director, National Federation of
lndependent Business: Small Business Legal Center
Oral Statement...............................................
54
Written Statement............................................
56
Professor Nicholas Parrillo, Professor of Law, Yale Law School
Oral Statement...............................................
66
Written Statement............................................
68
Mr. Amit Narang, Regulatory Policy Advocate, Public Citizen
Oral Statement...............................................
89
Written Statement............................................
92
APPENDIX
U.S. General Services Administration, Office of lnspector
General, report titled, ``Evaluation of GSA Nondisclosure
Policy,'' submitted by Ms. Maloney.............................
128
Submission of Federal Rules Under the Congressional Review Act
form, submitted by Mr. Palmer..................................
150
SHINING LIGHT ON THE FEDERAL REGULATORY PROCESS
----------
Wednesday, March 14, 2018
House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Trey Gowdy [chairman
of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Gowdy, Duncan, Jordan, Amash,
Farenthold, Meadows, DeSantis, Ross, Walker, Blum, Grothman,
Hurd, Palmer, Comer, Maloney, Norton, Connolly, Kelly,
Krishnamoorthi, Welch, and Plaskett.
Chairman Gowdy. Good morning. The Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform will come to order.
Without objection, the presiding member is authorized to
declare a recess at any time.
I want to welcome our guests. I will introduce you
individually in just a moment, but for now I will recognize my
friend from North Carolina for his opening statement.
Mr. Meadows.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
leadership in calling this hearing.
Obviously, Federal agencies have a very active role
assigned to them by Congress, and what they do touches the
daily lives of the public. There is no doubt that Federal
agencies play an important role in our government, but they
should still play by the rules laid down by Congress when it
comes to issuing the rules themselves.
The rulemaking process has changed over time and can get
very technical, but what has not changed is only Congress can
legislate and agencies cannot issue regulations unilaterally.
Rules are supposed to be issued in accordance with several
statutes and executive orders, but, as is the case with this
hearing today, and it will show today, that this doesn't always
happen. In fact, in 2016 alone, 18 regulations were issued for
each law passed by Congress, not to mention the hundreds of
pages of guidance that came along with those regulations.
According to the Federal Register, agencies issued 3,280
rules last year. Now, this amounts to just a little bit less
than nine rules per day, including weekends and Federal
holidays. Now, that's an improvement over the previous
administration, where we saw 10-1/2 rules passed each day in
2016.
Now, several laws and executive orders establish a
regulatory process designed to require agencies to consult with
the affected parties, evaluate their benefits and certainly the
compliance burdens and other costs, and consider alternatives
to regulate.
Now, we know Federal agencies are not consistently
following the rules Congress and the President have
established. In fact, recently, GAO released the findings of an
audit concluding that agencies have become increasingly
noncompliant with the Congressional Review Act. And when
issuing rules at the end of a Presidential administration--this
is particularly evident--especially when they have significant
impact, those rules which actually cost the economy at least
$100 million.
Agencies also issue guidance, which is a statement of
policy or an interpretation of the law or regulations.
Generally, guidance is supposed to inform the public of how to
comply with those laws. Unfortunately, we don't know how many
guidance documents agencies have issued, nor do we know how
much it will cost the economy. One of our witnesses today has
written that, while no one knows how many guidance documents
are out there, everyone agrees that the total is oceanic in
scale.
Late last year, our committee launched an oversight project
on regulatory guidance documents. In response to our December
request, agencies provided information on more than 12,800
documents. Now, the final number is still rising as agencies
continue to produce the information.
Agencies have also had difficulty in complying with a few
existing requirements for issuing guidance documents. In fact,
in 2015, the GAO undertook an audit of the Departments of
Agriculture, Education, Health and Human Services, and Labor
and found shortcomings in complying with applicable
requirements.
The committee's oversight project also found widespread
noncompliance with the CRA in the executive directives.
Agencies reported to the committee that they had submitted just
189 guidance documents to Congress and the GAO, as it is
required by the CRA. That's a submission rate of less than
0.015 percent.
In the last 5 months, GAO has issued four opinions to
Members of Congress finding certain guidance documents are
considered rules under the Congressional Review Act and,
therefore, must be submitted.
Now, in conclusion, we know that more congressional
requests for opinions on whether certain guidance documents are
pending before the CRA. Clearly, GAO will never be able to
review the more than 12,800 guidance documents in our limited
sample, let alone the entire universe of the agency guidance.
And there is some sort of disconnect between what the law says
and what agencies do.
So we look forward to hearing your testimony today and you
shining the light on this regulatory process as we try to make
sure that we do what is according to the law and the rules and
upholding the will of Congress.
I yield back.
Chairman Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from North Carolina
and would now recognize the gentlelady from New York to give
her opening statement.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling today's
important hearing.
And thank you to all of our witnesses here today.
I would like to start by making one important point: We all
agree that rules and guidance documents should be fair, open,
and informed by those entities and individuals who are
regulated by them. However, we cannot simply eliminate them.
That would result in chaos.
I want to point out that it is often members of the
business community who want regulations and guidance, because
they want certainty, they want clarity. That is critical for
them to determine how to invest their time and their resources.
Guidance documents, even though they are nonbinding, are often
very useful to regulated entities in explaining how they can
stay on the right side of the law.
The chairman has invited Professor Nicholas Parrillo to
testify today, and I am pleased that he is here. He issued a
report highlighting this point. And he based it on interviews
with business representatives who stressed the importance of
guidance documents.
For example, Marc Freedman, the executive director of labor
law policy at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and I quote,
acknowledged that business sometimes demanded guidance and that
it was quite reasonable for the agency to provide it to clarify
vague legislative rules, end quote.
Let me give you an example. Industry groups recently asked
the IRS to issue guidance about the new tax law. The American
Institute of Certified Public Accountants wrote to the IRS that
specific areas, and I quote, ``need immediate guidance in order
for taxpayers and practitioners to comply with their 2017 tax
obligations and to make informed decisions regarding cash flow,
entity structure, retirement, wealth transfer, and a vast
number of other tax planning issues,'' end quote.
Professor Parrillo summarized his findings by writing this,
and I quote: ``It was clear from these interviews that guidance
increases an agency program's integrity and efficiency and
shields regulated parties against unequal treatment,
unnecessary work, and unnecessary risk,'' end quote.
Guidance works best if there is ongoing interaction between
regulators and the regulated entities. This interaction can
take the form of conversations with stakeholders, advisory
committee meetings, townhalls, or even requests for public
comment.
But we need to avoid placing an overwhelming burden on
Federal agencies. Guidance documents are effective precisely
because regulators can issue them more quickly than Federal
rulemaking. Imposing burdensome requirements on guidance
documents will mean that agencies will stop using them,
depriving the business community and others of this very useful
tool.
Formal rules are different, because they carry the force of
law. They are governed by statutory procedures that require
formal public participation and the opportunity to appeal to
the courts if these processes are not followed. This has been
the law since we enacted the Administrative Procedure Act in
1946.
My concern is that there are multiple recent examples of
the Trump administration attempting to circumvent the
Administrative Procedure Act or issue agency guidance that is
not even public, which leads to less transparency and
certainty, not more.
For example, just last week, the Inspector General for the
General Services Administration issued what I thought was an
excellent report, finding that the agency's guidance on how the
staff communicate with Congress, and I quote, ``lacks
transparency,'' end quote, and completely omitted whistleblower
protection language that is required by the Whistleblower
Protection Act.
Specifically, the IG found that GSA, and I quote, ``created
opportunities for confusion, misinterpretation, and
inconsistent application among its officials and employees,''
end quote.
According to the IG, GSA followed oral instructions from
the White House to stop responding to oversight and
investigative requests from Members of Congress other than
committee chairs. GSA officials communicated this new policy to
staff in, quote, ``small, in-person meetings,'' end quote, and
through, quote, ``telephone calls and hallway conversations.''
And I'd like unanimous consent to put this excellent report
in the record outlining these conflicts.
Chairman Gowdy. Without objection.
Mrs. Maloney. In another example, the Department of Labor
is withholding from the public an economic analysis of its
proposed rule to allow employers to take the tips from
restaurant workers and other employees, according to press
reports. The Department did not publish its analysis, which
showed that, quote, ``employees would lose out on billions of
dollars in gratuities,'' end quote.
Hiding from the public an analysis conducted by the agency,
especially when it contradicts the agency's own proposal, is
the opposite of the transparency we expect in the rulemaking
process.
For today's hearing, I am very pleased that we will be able
to shine a light on the Federal regulatory process, and I look
forward to the testimony.
This is ``Sunshine Week.'' And, after all, as the saying
goes, sunlight is the best disinfectant. I hope we can apply
that disinfectant across the board and not limit it only to
those issues with which some may disagree.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Gowdy. I thank the gentlelady from New York.
We are pleased to have a distinguished panel of witnesses-
slash-experts.
I'm going to introduce you en banc and then recognize you
individually for your opening statement.
First, to my left, Ms. Kris Nguyen, Acting Director for
Strategic Issues at the Government Accountability Office; she
is accompanied by Mr. Robert Cramer, Managing Associate General
Counsel at GAO, who will also be sworn in in just a moment; Mr.
Paul Noe, vice president of public policy at the American
Forest and Paper Association; Ms. Karen Harned, executive
director, National Federation of Independent Business: Small
Business Legal Center; Professor Nicholas Parrillo, professor
of law at Yale Law School; and Mr. Amit Narang, regulatory
policy advocate at Public Citizen.
Pursuant to committee rules, I'm going to have to
administer an oath to you. So if you would please rise, and
we'll do that.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm the testimony you're about
to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth, so help you God?
May the record reflect the witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
You may be seated.
In order to allow the members to ask their questions and to
be good stewards of your time, I just want you to know your
opening statements are all part of the record. If I could get
you to limit your remarks to 5 minutes.
And there are a set of lights, in theory, that are designed
to help with that. So if you--I know a lot of our members have
not figured out the lighting system yet, so I'll share it with
you. Green, you're good. Yellow, speed up, try to get under the
light as quick as you can. Red, if you could begin to maybe
wrap up that final thought.
So, with that, Ms. Nguyen.
WITNESS STATEMENTS
STATEMENT OF KRIS NGUYEN
Ms. Nguyen. Chairman Gowdy and members of the committee,
thank you for inviting me today to discuss Federal regulatory
and guidance practices.
Agencies use Federal guidance and regulations to achieve
national goals, such as improving the economy and protecting
the health and safety of the public. The importance of
improving the transparency of agencies' guidance and regulatory
practices is a common theme throughout GAO's body of work.
At your request, this testimony focuses on two reports. Our
2015 report on regulatory guidance addresses selected agencies'
adherence to relevant OMB requirements and internal controls.
And our recently released report discusses agencies' compliance
with procedural requirements for rulemaking, including the
Congressional Review Act.
Regarding our 2015 report, we found that USDA, Education,
HHS, and Labor did not consistently adhere to OMB requirements
when developing significant guidance. Specifically, agencies
did not consistently follow OMB requirements for the
development and dissemination of significant guidance. While
some agencies had written procedures for the approval of
significant guidance, others had none or their procedures
needed updating. We also found that three of the four agencies
consistently applied OMB requirements for public access and
feedback; however, one agency, HHS, did not.
Agencies also lack adherence to internal controls for
nonsignificant guidance. For example, most sub-agencies we
reviewed did not have written procedures for producing
guidance, and about half did not regularly evaluate whether
issued guidance was effective and up to date.
Nonsignificant guidance is not subject to OMB requirements.
As such, application of internal controls is important to help
agencies achieve effective guidance practices. In this report,
GAO made 11 recommendations to the 4 agencies we reviewed.
Three of these recommendations remain unimplemented by HHS. HHS
cannot ensure transparency and effectiveness of its guidance
practices until it takes steps to improve its adherence to OMB
requirements and internal controls.
For the report GAO issued on Tuesday, we reported, among
other things, one, the number of regulations issued during
Presidential transition periods and their characteristics and,
two, agencies' reported compliance with requirements for issued
regulations.
During the transition from the end of the Clinton, Bush,
and Obama administrations to the next, the administrations
published, on average, about two and a half times more
economically significant regulations during transition versus
nontransition periods.
Agencies more frequently provided advance notice to the
public during transition periods, which provided the public
opportunities to influence the development of these
regulations. However, we found that agencies less often
complied with the CRA in providing Congress time to review and
possibly disapprove regulations. This inconsistent compliance
with CRA also occurred during nontransition periods. Agencies'
most common deficiency was the failure to provide Congress the
required time to review regulations.
In this report, GAO recommended OMB identify regulations at
risk for not complying with the CRA and work with agencies to
ensure compliance.
It is important that agencies consistently provide Congress
with the required time to review regulations throughout a
President's term and, in particular, during a Presidential
transition, when Congress typically has a larger number of
regulations to review.
Improvements made in transparency of the guidance and
regulatory process benefit not only the public but also improve
congressional oversight.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Nguyen follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Gowdy. Thank you.
Mr. Noe.
STATEMENT OF PAUL NOE
Mr. Noe. Thank you, Chairman Gowdy and members of the
committee, for the honor to testify before you today on behalf
of the American Forest and Paper Association and the American
Wood Council.
Regulatory transparency is an important and timely issue
that really goes to the heart of our governmental system--due
process, transparency, and fundamental fairness and
accountability. AF&PA and AWC applaud the committee for
addressing this issue.
For over 32 years, I have worked on regulatory policy,
including in the Senate and the White House Office of
Management and Budget, private practice, and trade
associations. Having lived in the belly of the beast, I
strongly believe there are many ways in which our rulemaking
process could be more transparent and accountable. Today, I'd
like to offer just a handful of problems and potential
solutions.
First, more light should be shined on the vast but often
mysterious part of the administrative law universe which is
agency guidance, also called regulatory dark matter. To be
sure, appropriate guidance can play a very beneficial role in
regulatory programs, and I don't want to miss that fundamental
point. But the truth is nobody knows how many guidance
documents there are or how to find them all.
Eleven years ago, when I was at the White House Office of
Management and Budget, I worked on an OMB bulletin for agency
good guidance practices that requires: first, agency procedures
for the approval and use of significant guidance documents;
second, standard elements--for example, agencies were directed
to avoid inappropriate mandatory language--and, third, public
access and feedback procedures. Each agency was required to
maintain on its website a current list of its significant
guidance documents that were in effect, and there also was a
requirement to provide for public comment and public requests
for modification or repeal of guidance, as well as a
presumption of pre-adoption notice and comment for economically
significant guidance.
The bulletin is rooted in longstanding recommendations of
nonpartisan expert organizations, but, unfortunately, both
congressional oversight and GAO reports have shown, as you've
just heard, that agencies have not been complying with this
bulletin.
Thus, I think Congress should elevate good guidance
practices into statute. And I think an excellent first step
would be enactment of the Guidance Out of Darkness Act,
sponsored by Congressman Walker. I can't imagine why anyone
would oppose a bill requiring Federal agencies to post all of
their guidance on a centralized, publicly accessible location
on their website.
Sometimes agencies have even gone further, and they've
circumvented the notice-and-comment requirements of the
Administrative Procedure Act to essentially regulate through
guidance. Congress passes broadly written statutes. Agencies
follow with broadly written regulations. And then, over the
years, agencies fill in the gaps with highly detailed guidance.
As the D.C. Circuit put it, quote, ``The phenomenon is
familiar. Law is made without notice and comment, without
public participation, without publication in the Federal
Register or the Code of Federal Regulations.''
I commend the Department of Justice for addressing the
improper use of agency guidance, and I think more should be
done on a government-wide basis.
Second, for over 37 years, regulatory agencies often have
circumvented the Presidential orders requiring that regulations
maximize net benefits to society by interpreting their statutes
to preclude full cost-benefit balancing. This is a huge but
unrecognized problem that undermines agency accountability and
transparency and leads to unnecessarily wasteful and
ineffective regulations that are not designed to enhance
societal well-being.
President Trump should take a historic step to ensure
smarter regulation by directing the agencies, including the
independent regulatory commissions, to interpret their statutes
to fully allow benefit-cost balancing unless prohibited by law.
Third, agencies should be more transparent about key
information supporting regulatory decisions.
And, finally, for the last 12 years, agencies have done a
very poor job of complying with the Congressional Review Act.
It clearly mandates that before a rule can take effect the
agency must submit the rule to Congress for review. And covered
rules include both legally binding regulations and agency
guidance documents.
Various reports have shown that many rules have not been
submitted to Congress since the law was enacted in 1996, and
that's especially true for guidance. That raises questions
whether these rules are legally in effect. And it also raises
questions about Congress' ability to overturn those rules today
under the expedited procedures of the Congressional Review Act
even if the rules were issued years ago.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today.
I would be happy to address any questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Noe follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Gowdy. Thank you.
Ms. Harned.
STATEMENT OF KAREN HARNED
Ms. Harned. Thank you, Chairman Gowdy, Ms. Maloney, and the
rest of the committee, for having this hearing today. On behalf
of the NFIB, National Federation of Independent Business, I
appreciate the opportunity to testify regarding making the
Federal regulatory process more transparent.
Overzealous regulation is a continuous concern for small
business. The uncertainty caused by future regulation
effectively acts as a boot on the neck of small business,
negatively impacting the small-business owner's ability to plan
for future growth. In a small business poll on regulations,
NFIB found that almost half of small businesses surveyed viewed
regulation as a very serious or somewhat serious problem.
So it is not surprising to learn that America's small-
business owners view President Trump's commitment to rolling
back unnecessarily burdensome and duplicative regulation as one
of his administration's greatest accomplishments in his first
year in office.
Due in large part to the Trump administration's
deregulatory agenda, small-business optimism is at its highest
level in decades, according to NFIB's survey on small-business
economic trends, which we do monthly.
But much more work can and should be done to make the
Federal regulatory process more transparent and more
accountable to the American people, particularly when it comes
to regulation through guidance documents and other sub-
regulatory pronouncements that impose new mandates on small
business.
The NFIB Small Business Legal Center outlined this
phenomenon in our September 2015 report, ``The Fourth Branch &
Underground Regulations,'' where we also cataloged these
abuses.
Make no mistake: As Paul just said, easy-to-understand
guidance documents can be an effective tool to help small-
business owners understand their legal regulatory obligations.
In fact, the Legal Center frequently directs small-business
owners to such helpful guidance documents like DOL's Wage and
Hour tip sheets and EPA's One-Stop Shop page for small-business
compliance assistance.
But there is a bright line between merely restating the law
as it stands and establishing regulatory policy through
guidance. A true guidance or advisory should do no more than
restate the requirements of established law, ideally doing this
as plainly and simply as possible. It should not impose new
affirmative burdens on the regulated community.
NFIB appreciates this committee's efforts to find solutions
that will shine light on the regulatory process. In particular,
NFIB believes that H.R. 4809, the Guidance Out of Darkness Act,
would be a positive step forward in providing transparency of
agency guidance documents and other sub-regulatory activities.
We also think Congress should consider requiring agencies
to organize guidance materials in some manner that is easily
navigable and user-friendly.
Additionally, NFIB respectfully offers one overarching
principle for Congress to consider as it explores other
legislative solutions: The regulated public should have a right
to voice concerns over any newly announced policy, rule, or
administrative interpretation of law that could impose
affirmative regulatory burdens on them. Regardless of whether
the rule in question might be characterized as legislative or
interpretive, we maintain that it should only be adopted and
enforced if it has gone through some form of notice and
comment.
Finally, NFIB commends Attorney General Sessions for
setting an example for other agencies to follow with his
November 16, 2017, memorandum that instructs Department of
Justice officials to no longer issue guidance documents that
purport to create rights or obligations that bind persons or
entities outside of the executive branch.
And we applaud then-Associate Attorney General Rachel Brand
for following up on that directive with an instruction earlier
this year to heads of civil litigating components and U.S.
attorneys that they are not to use the Department's enforcement
authority to effectively convert agency guidance documents into
binding rules in affirmative civil enforcement litigation.
NFIB encourages other agencies in the Federal Government to
follow course and Congress to consider legislative solutions
that would codify this practice.
NFIB applauds this committee for highlighting the need to
bring transparency to its regulation in all forms, including
agency guidance documents. Such transparency is critical for
America's small-business owners, who struggle to keep up with
the myriad of regulations on the books while they run and grow
their business.
Thank you for having me testify today, and I look forward
to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Harned follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Gowdy. Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
Professor.
STATEMENT OF NICHOLAS PARRILLO
Mr. Parrillo. Mr. Chairman, Ms. Maloney, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify this
morning.
The principal basis for my testimony is a study of Federal
agency guidance documents that I conducted as a consultant for
the Administrative Conference of the United States, for which I
interviewed 135 individuals across a range of agencies,
industries, and NGOs.
The Conference recently completed the process of adopting a
new recommendation on guidance. I participated extensively in
that process, and I broadly support the recommendation, though
I am not testifying as a representative of the Conference.
The term ``guidance'' covers all general statements that an
agency makes, short of issuing full-blown regulations, that
advise the public on how the agency plans to exercise its
discretion or interpret law.
Guidance is an important means for increasing the
transparency of regulation. When an agency chooses individual
targets for enforcement or decides individual applications for
licenses or benefits, the agency has the option to proceed case
by case. The case-by-case approach can subject regulated
parties to uncertainty and unequal treatment. Guidance
redresses this problem by telling regulated parties in a
general, comprehensive, understandable way how the agency plans
to handle individual proceedings.
Regulated parties often want this guidance and complain
about not getting enough of it. On the other hand, guidance can
undermine transparency if guidance substitutes for notice-and-
comment rulemaking.
Given these competing considerations, we confront what you
might call a transparency tradeoff. You can try to increase
transparency if you mandate that any policy an agency makes
about a certain matter has to be made through an open process
like notice and comment, but an open process eats up scarce
agency resources. So, if the agency is strapped, it may react
to this mandate by giving up articulating any general policy on
the matter, which would be the worst outcome for transparency.
In grappling with this tradeoff, it helps to consider why
guidance is exempt from notice and comment to begin with.
Guidance, unlike a full-blown regulation, is supposed to be
nonbinding. The idea is that it's okay to issue a policy
without the safeguards of notice and comment so long as the
policy is not cut and dried, so long as the agency in
individual proceedings is flexible and open-minded when
regulated parties argue for individual departures from the
policy.
But agencies are sometimes inflexible. One might assume
that flexibility is an agency's path of least resistance, such
that inflexibility must be the product of some conscious and
nefarious purpose to treat guidance like a regulation. But that
kind of blanket assumption is mistaken. Agencies face external
pressures andunintended internal dynamics that can make them
inflexible by default.
The new Conference recommendation suggests organizational
reform measures to counter this inflexibility. Admittedly, many
of these measures require managerial initiative and the
commitment of resources, which may be in short supply.
For example, an agency may inflexibly refuse to approve a
company's request for a departure from guidance because the
agency fears that the company's competitors will complain about
an unlevel playing field or that NGOs and the media will
complain about favoritism. The Conference explains how the
agency can head off these complaints by being transparent and
publishing reasons for the departure that become applicable to
all similar cases going forward. But formulating defensible
reasons is costly.
To their credit, some agencies have sought to provide a
degree of transparency and public participation on a wholesale
basis when a guidance document is first adopted--measures that
may approach notice and comment without going all the way.
As my research and the Conference recommendation indicate,
the benefits and costs of such participation for the agency and
the public depend on certain factors that vary a lot by program
and document.
Also, agencies undertaking these measures need to
anticipate certain pitfalls. For example, if an agency promises
to take public comment pre-adoption on more guidance documents
than it has the resources to process the comments for, it may
end up leaving a lot of documents in draft form indefinitely,
which can cause stakeholder confusion.
I'll be happy to discuss these matters and any others in
response to your questions. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Parrillo follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Gowdy. Thank you, Professor.
Mr. Narang.
STATEMENT OF AMIT NARANG
Mr. Narang. Chairman Gowdy, Ranking Member Maloney, and
members of this committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. I am Amit Narang, regulatory policy advocate of
Public Citizen's Congress Watch.
Public Citizen is a national public interest organization
with more than 400,000 members and supporters. For more than 40
years, we have successfully advocated for stronger health,
safety, consumer protection, and other rules, as well as for a
robust regulatory system that curtails corporate wrongdoing and
advances the public interest.
Public health and safety regulation has been among the
greatest public policy success stories in our country's
history. Regulations have made our air far less polluted and
our water much cleaner. They have made our food and drugs
safer. They have made our workplaces less dangerous. They have
made our financial system more stable. They have protected
consumers from unsafe products and from predatory lending
practices. They have made our cars safer. They have outlawed
discrimination on the basis of race and gender and much more.
These regulations are now considered to be bedrock
protections widely popular with the public. In short, our
regulatory safeguards are to be celebrated and emulated. Yet
there is much more progress to be made in addressing threats to
the health, safety, environmental, and financial security of
hardworking American families.
Unfortunately, President Trump and his administration are
taking the country in exactly the opposition direction,
embarking on a radical and unprecedented deregulatory agenda
that is certainly pleasing corporate special interests by
repealing regulatory protections at their behest, but at the
expense of making everyday Americans less safe in countless
ways.
One of the key drivers of this administration's attack on
public protections is Executive Order 13771, the so-called two-
for-one executive order, that requires agencies to get rid of
existing regulations that protect the public in order to allow
for new ones that protect the public. This executive order
fundamentally conflicts with numerous statues that Congress has
passed to direct agencies to protect the public in a wide
variety of areas, including food safety, consumer protection,
environmental protection, auto safety, civil rights
protections, and many more.
None of these laws require, much less permit, agencies to
only protect the public up to the point that it imposes no new
costs on corporate stakeholders. I urge this committee to
monitor agencydecisions under the executive order to ensure
maximum transparency when agencies delay, block, or are
otherwise unable to finalize regulatory protections due to the
executive order.
Making matters worse, President Trump's claimed motivation
for his deregulatory agenda, that it will create economic
growth, has been proven flat-out false. In January of this
year, Goldman Sachs issued a report that found, quote, ``no
evidence that employment or capital spending accelerated more
after the election in areas where regulatory burdens are
higher,'' end quote.
Likewise, in its most recent annual report to Congress on
the costs and benefits of Federal regulations, OMB found that
regulations over the last 10 years have provided the public
with up to $800 billion in net benefits.
Since the focus of this hearing is on transparency, I want
to direct the committee's attention to a number of deeply
troubling instances where agencies are rolling back regulatory
protections while actively seeking to avoid transparency.
The first example is the most urgent, as it relates to
language in the budget proposal currently being considered for
fiscal year 2018 that would exempt the EPA from complying with
the Administrative Procedure Act when repealing the Clean Water
Rule.
Any attempt to carve out the repeal of the Clean Water Rule
from compliance with the EPA, as well as numerous other laws
designed to provide transparency and accountability to the
public, including the Freedom of Information Act, should be
deeply troubling to all members of this committee and Congress,
no matter their position on the Clean Water Rule.
More broadly, it sends the message to the public that
Congress is willing to give agencies a free pass on
transparency and public participation when it comes to
deregulation but not when putting regulatory protections in
place.
I urge members of this committee to demand the removal of
this rider on a bipartisan basis.
Second, reports indicate that the Department of Labor
deliberately withheld economic analysis it conducted for a
rulemaking that potentially would transfer billions of dollars
from the pockets of restaurant servers and workers to the
pockets of employers, as Ranking Member Maloney noted.
What is even more unusual is that the rule was reviewed and
cleared by the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, or
OIRA. It is highly uncommon for OIRA to allow agencies to issue
rules it has reviewed without any accompanying cost-benefit
analysis.
I encourage the committee to scrutinize closely OIRA's rule
and the refusal to release the analysis, which certainly has
called into question the integrity of the OIRA review process.
Finally, critical new guidance unanimously approved by the
EEOC that would clarify workplace protections against sexual
harassment, including based on sexual orientation, has been
under review at OIRA since November, with no indication when
the guidance will be finalized. With renewed attention on the
prevalence of sexual harassment in the workplace, this guidance
is needed now more than ever.
Beyond specific rules, agencies under the Trump
administration continue to be evasive in disclosing the
identities of the Regulatory Reform Task Force officers at
agencies authorized to carry out President Trump's deregulatory
agenda. Given numerous reports of conflicts of interest, this
lack of transparency only adds to suspicions of regulatory
capture by corporate special interests and further undermines
the public's faith in government agencies acting in the
public's interest.
Transparency should not be a partisan issue, and there are
opportunities to increase transparency in the regulatory
process that deserve bipartisan support, both with respect to
specific deregulatory actions taken under the Trump
administration and broader reforms, such as making guidance
documents more accessible to the public and ensuring that OIRA
follows basic transparency provisions and requirements as
stipulated in its governing executive orders.
Public Citizen stands ready to work with members of this
committee that seek to improve the effectiveness and
transparency of regulations that protect working families and
consumers.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Narang follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Gowdy. Thank you.
The gentleman from Tennessee, Judge Duncan, is recognized.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
About a year and a half ago, I read about a new book by a
prominent Boston lawyer who was educated at Princeton and
Harvard, and he wrote this. He said, quote: ``The average
professional in this country wakes up in the morning, goes to
work, comes home, eats dinner, and then goes to sleep, unaware
that he or she has likely committed several Federal crimes that
day. Why? The answer lies in the very nature of modern Federal
criminal laws, which have exploded in number but also have
become impossibly broad and vague,'' unquote.
And while that quote pertains to Federal criminal laws, it
really applies all over the scope of Federal regulation. They
have exploded in number, to such an extent that the staff has
provided us with an article from the Competitive Enterprise
Institute entitled ``Ten Thousand Commandments,'' and they
estimate in this article that the annual cost, the yearly cost
of Federal regulatory activity is costing our economy as much
as $2 trillion a year.
And what I've noticed over the years is that the more
heavily regulated any industry becomes, it ends up in the hands
of a few big giants. And I know the Congress, several years
ago, passed the Dodd-Frank law. Before we passed that law, the
five largest banks had 22 percent of total deposits in this
country; now they've got 45 percent. And there have been
hundreds of small banks and credit unions that either have gone
out of business or have been forced to merge or have been
bought out.
And so we passed a law aiming at the big giants, but we
hurt the little guys. And it seems that applies in almost every
industry.
Ms. Harned, have you noticed that same trend?
Ms. Harned. Absolutely. I've seen it my whole career,
including before I was at NFIB. We represented at my food and
drug law firm a small-business owner, actually a couple, that
were targeted by the DEA. And it was through that process--at
the time, they were trying to get at, you know, the meth lab
issue, which is an important one. But you saw, through the
regulations, through all of that, a more consolidated part of
that industry.
Later, you saw it in grocery stores when it came to WIC
programs. And I've seen it in--you can really see it in so many
industries. And Dodd-Frank is a perfect example. It was the
community banks that were getting closed, not the big ones.
And so there's a reason for this. The small-business owner
is the one doing the regulatory compliance. They do not have
legions of attorneys to scour the regulations of the Federal
Register, much less the guidance documents we're here talking
about today.
Mr. Duncan. When the FDA was small and far less
bureaucratic than today, many years ago, we had very many small
companies in the drug business. Now the drug business is in the
hands of a few big giants.
Mr. Noe, I saw you shaking your head up and down. Have you
seen this in your industry?
Mr. Noe. Sir, I think it's an across-the-board issue. And
you've even heard, you know, some of the leaders of the largest
banks talking about how Dodd-Frank created a moat to help them
keep competitors out. So there can be a very unfortunate effect
where, you know, larger entities can try to use regulations as
a barrier to entry to create a competitive advantage vis-a-vis
smaller entities. I think that's true across the board.
Mr. Duncan. I notice also in some of the material we've
been provided that fewer than 200--that the committee requested
information on more than 12,000 guidance documents. Fewer than
200 guidance documents were submitted to the Government
Accountability Office, as required by the Congressional Review
Act.
Ms. Nguyen, do you think it's accurate to say that the
Congressional Review Act is being ignored by most of the
agencies?
Ms. Nguyen. Based on our recent work, we found that
noncompliance with CRA does exist for the periods that we
reviewed, so during the transition periods as well as
nontransition periods. So what it means is that the most common
deficiency that we found includes the provision for agencies to
provide Congress with adequate time to review regulations.
Mr. Duncan. Well, I can tell you, I was a lawyer and a
judge before I came to Congress, and yet there's so many laws
and rules and regulations on the books in this country today, I
don't think they've even designed a computer that can keep up
with all of them, much less a human being.
And as this article that I--this book I quoted from, I
think it's accurate to say that almost everybody in this room
has violated several Federal laws, rules, and regulations. They
didn't mean to, they didn't know they were. But with this
explosion of laws, rules, and regulations, it's happening all
across this country today, and it's a very sad thing.
I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. [presiding.] I thank the gentleman from
Tennessee.
The chair recognizes the gentlewoman from New York, Mrs.
Maloney, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In 2016, the Obama administration's Department of Health
and Human Services sent a guidance letter informing States that
it's against the law to terminate Medicaid providers,
particularly family-planning providers like Planned Parenthood,
for ideological reasons.
This guidance came at a time when some States were
aggressively trying to ban and defund Planned Parenthood simply
because they provide family-planning services as well. They
based their efforts on unsubstantiated allegations made by
David Daleiden, who circulated misleading and heavily doctored
videos in 2015.
I would point out that our very committee conducted an
exhaustive investigation of these claims, and we concluded, on
a bipartisan basis, that his allegations were completely false.
Even our former chairman, Representative Chaffetz, went on
national television to tell the world that we here on this
committee found no evidence that they broke the law. He sat
right here in this chair, and he said he found--he, quote,
``found no wrongdoing,'' end quote.
Yet some States and outside advocacy groups continue to
cite these discredited claims as a rationale for continuing to
target Planned Parenthood to this day.
In January, the Trump administration rescinded the Obama-
era guidance in a follow-on guidance letter to State Medicaid
directors.
Last month, Ranking Member Cummings sent a letter to the
Department of Health and Human Services raising the concerns
after a whistleblower provided documents showing that an
extreme anti-choice group known as Alliance Defending Freedom
was behind this recision. The whistleblower provided a draft
guidance letter written by the group, and it appears that HHS
rescinded the Obama guidance at the urging of this group.
So I'd like to ask Mr. Narang, in your view, is it a best
practice to consult secretly with one outside group while not
consulting at all with other groups that would be affected by
agency guidance?
Mr. Narang. I do think that sounds like an improper use of
guidance in this instance. And it is troubling to me that it
potentially was adopted at the behest of one particular
individual or group.
Mrs. Maloney. And should HHS have conducted additional
informal outreach to other stakeholders, such as Planned
Parenthood, as well?
Mr. Narang. I do think that it would have been more
appropriate to also include Planned Parenthood in guidance that
would directly potentially affect them.
Mrs. Maloney. And, Mr. Narang, what other steps should HHS
have taken?
Mr. Narang. Well, as I was saying, I do agree that it would
be an improvement to make guidance more accessible, which can
be termed more transparent, but I think the key is making it
more accessible to the public. So this type of guidance, it
would have been helpful, clearly, to make it accessible to the
public, potentially in draft form.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay.
And, Professor Parrillo, you wrote a report on these issues
that was the basis for the Administrative Conference's best
practices guide. Would you agree that it is generally not a
best practice to consult secretly with one outside group while
not consulting at all with other groups that would be affected?
Mr. Parrillo. Ms. Maloney, there are a variety of means for
agencies to take stakeholder input on guidance.
One of them is targeted outreach, in which there's not a
public announcement that the guidance is being considered, but,
rather, the agency selects certain stakeholders to talk to.
This has the----
Mrs. Maloney. Since my time is limited, could I just
specifically ask, what would have been the best practice in
this situation?
Mr. Parrillo. In the case of targeted outreach, I think
agencies would typically get diverse points of view, multiple
sides.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay.
The Obama guidance document clarified the law. It stated
what the Social Security Act and accompanying regulations
require.
So, Mr. Narang, despite what the Trump administration may
be trying to do, it cannot contravene Federal law, correct?
Mr. Narang. Well, that's true. And it will likely end up in
court if that's the case.
Mrs. Maloney. So, at this point in time, under the law,
States still may not refuse to provide Planned Parenthood with
funding just because they have ideological disagreements with
them. Is that right, Mr. Narang?
Mr. Narang. Guidance documents are nonbinding.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay.
My time is almost up, but I'd just like to close by saying
it's good to hear that, at least at this point in time, States
cannot refuse to pay Planned Parenthood for Medicaid services
lawfully provided.
Thank you.
Mr. Meadows. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
So, Mr. Narang, I want to make sure that that last
comment--so you're saying guidance documents are nonbinding.
That's your official testimony here today?
Mr. Narang. That's not just my official testimony; it is
the very nature of guidance documents.
Mr. Meadows. All right.
The gentleman from Ohio is recognized for 5 minutes, Mr.
Jordan.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the chairman.
I first want to start by just saying the assertions made by
the gentlelady from New York--I couldn't disagree more.
First of all, remember, those videos that were produced,
the day after the first video came out, Cecile Richards issued
an apology. Last time I checked, you don't apologize unless
you've done something wrong.
And the group who said that they were heavily edited and
changed, guess who that group was? Fusion GPS. We know how much
you can trust them. Fusion--the same organization that was paid
by the Clinton campaign, the DNC, to put together this dossier,
``salacious and unverified.'' Not my words; former FBI Director
James Comey's words under oath in front of a congressional
committee. That's who said those tapes were heavily edited. You
can't trust that. I mean, that was just ridiculous.
Mr. Noe, let me get back to the subject at hand. So let me
summarize--I think I'm summarizing, and then I want your
response.
So, when I look at what GAO reported and the work that the
oversight staff has done in this area, it seems to me you could
say some agencies are actually just skirting the whole
rulemaking process altogether, trying to get around it. Some
are actually exempt. The IRS has this memorandum of
understanding that they don't even really have to follow the
rulemaking, the CRA process. And then a whole bunch of them use
the guidance rules versus actually going through the formal
process. In fact, I think it was, like, 90 percent of the rules
issued are actually guidance. Like, 12,000 was what the staff
determined, the committee staff determined.
So you have all that going on, but yet we still have this
CRA Act where Congress can get rid of some of these and we can
get rid of them. And we've done 16 in 1 year.
So is that kind of an accurate sort of overall assessment?
Some are skirting it. Some don't even have to follow them,
they're exempt, namely the Internal Revenue Service. And then
those that do go through any kind of rulemaking process, it's
largely guidance and not the actual formal rule itself. Is that
accurate, Mr. Noe?
Mr. Noe. Congressman Jordan, yes, it is.
I was the lead Senate counsel in the Congressional Review
Act, and I can tell you it was Congress' intent that all the
covered rules would be submitted. And they haven't been. And
that's something everybody should be concerned about.
I mean, I think the good news here is that it's very easy
for the agencies to comply. We all have email. It's easy to
send your rule to Congress. And they haven't done it.
And, unfortunately, this pattern of Congress imposing
procedures for the purposes of transparency and accountability
on the agencies--and as soon as they get hold of that mandate,
they often make Swiss cheese out of it.
Mr. Jordan. Why is the IRS exempt?
I mean, one of the findings the committee staff and GAO
found was only 1 of more than 200 tax regulations issued was
determined by the IRS to be significant, which I find
interesting. My guess is taxpayers might think more than 1 out
of 200 is actually significant, but somehow the agency felt
like only 1 was significant.
So why are they exempt? Why do they get the special deal?
It seems to me that's the one agency you'd want to make sure
they're doing things exactly by the book and as transparent as
possible, particularly in light of their history, recent
history.
Mr. Noe. I guess it seems that they're exempt because they
say so.
I used to work at the Office of Management and Budget
reviewing rules. There is a memorandum of understanding about
what rules should come over from the IRS. They have driven a
Mack truck through that.
And I would just refer you to the Wall Street Journal piece
written by former Clinton OIRA Administrator Sally Katzen and
former Bush OIRA Administrator Susan Dudley that points out
that that should come to an end.
Mr. Jordan. And it seems to me, in light of their recent
history, an organization with the power and influence that the
IRS has and exercises over Americans' lives, their history of
specifically targeting conservative groups--they did it in a
systematic way, they did it for a sustained period of time,
they did it--it seems to me all the more reason to have them
follow the rulemaking process and be subject to OIRA as we move
forward.
Mr. Noe. Yeah, I'm hopeful----
Mr. Jordan. Do you think we need legislation to do that, to
overturn this memorandum? Or what?
Mr. Noe. You know, I think maybe calling them up here and
asking them----
Mr. Jordan. Oh, we're more than willing to do that. Yeah.
Mr. Noe. --to answer to that.
One reason I say maybe if Congress were to step in here is,
honestly, I think, you know, they've had years to comply with
these executive directives and they have made Swiss cheese out
of them. So I think they either need to come to an
understanding with you all----
Mr. Jordan. I think the chairman and I would be happy to
call them back.
Mr. Noe. --they're going to comply or else they're going to
face legislation.
Mr. Jordan. We'll probably bring you back, too, and talk
about it when we have the IRS in here as well.
But thank you, Mr. Noe.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman's recommendation for a
followup hearing with some of the individuals. I can assure you
that not only will we have a hearing but we will go ahead and
follow up. And any recommendations for other potential
witnesses who abuse the system would be welcome for this
committee.
The chair recognizes the gentlewoman from the District of
Columbia, Ms. Norton, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Early in the Trump administration, there emerged a rule
that--so-called two-to-one rule--we'll repeal two regulations
for every new regulation. And I'm concerned with whether or not
this rule violates the Administrative Procedure Act.
Now, one can understand that a new administration might
well want to overturn some regulations that they regard as
burdensome or otherwise. That is perfectly rational. But the
APA, the Administrative Procedure Act, requires a rational
basis for all parts of rulemaking.
Now, sacrificing two for one does not seem to me to be a
rational basis. Pass one rule that helps protect the air we
breathe; get rid of another rule that protects the water we
drink. I'm not even sure how one would proceed.
Ms. Nguyen, do you think there could be an APA concern
here, a procedural concern, with the two-for-one rule?
Ms. Nguyen. GAO does not take a legal position----
Ms. Norton. I didn't ask you for your legal position. Do
you think there could be an APA--and surely you know about
that--concern with a blanket two-for-one rule?
Mr. Cramer. I'm Robert Cramer from the General----
Ms. Norton. Please sit down at the table so you may be
heard.
Mr. Cramer. Okay.
I think the question you're posing is a legal question,
whether there is a violation of some provision of the APA as a
result of this executive order. We haven't considered that, so
we can't, then, express an opinion at this----
Ms. Norton. Do you think it is appropriate for you to
consider that? I can understand you may not have done so. I am
asking you, is it appropriate for you to do so, given the
regulations that have been overturned and the two-for-one rule.
Mr. Cramer. When we receive requests from Members of
Congress for opinions----
Ms. Norton. I am asking for an opinion now. And I ask you
to write the chairman of the committee your opinion on whether
the two-for-one rule is in keeping with the Administrative
Procedure Act.
Mr. Parrillo, do you have a view, at this point, on that?
Mr. Parrillo. I have not studied the issue enough to give
an opinion.
The argument that a challenger would make would be that a
particular recision of a rule is arbitrary or capricious,
because the reason for it was in order to make room for this
other rule that is not sufficiently related.
On the other hand, there is, for example, some D.C. Circuit
precedent to suggest that as long as the recision of a rule can
be justified on the official record, then political pressure
regarding the choice that an agency makes between different
possible regulatory choices, each of which could be justified
in themselves, that that is not untoward.
Now, this is a controversial issue, in terms of whether
this D.C. Circuit precedent is a good idea, but that is to give
you an idea of the arguments on both sides.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Narang, there is a court suit, and I
understand standing has been an issue, but, perhaps, you could
tell us the basis for an attack on the two-for-one rule.
Mr. Narang. Well, I think this is a very good question.
And, as much as I would like to answer it, unfortunately, I am
not able to, due to our pending litigation challenging the
executive order as unconstitutional. It has not been resolved
on the basis of standing just yet. The court has----
Ms. Norton. What do you argue in court?
Mr. Narang. We are arguing that the executive order
fundamentally violates certain clauses in the Constitution,
namely, the take care clause that the President takes care that
laws are faithfully executed.
If I could take a minute to talk about the real world
impacts of this executive order and illustrate it. It is going
to make it very difficult, if not impossible, I believe, for
agencies to issue the most important beneficial regulations to
the public.
Let's take the lead and drinking water standard rule. I
think we can all agree it is much-needed and it will be
enormously beneficial. It will likely be quite costly, as well,
and it is necessary for the EPA to offset those costs. We are
talking about offsets that are not that available to agencies.
Over the course of the last year, the administration said
that they have only about $560 million in regulatory offsets.
If the lead and drinking water rule costs more than $560
million, but provides massive benefits that outweigh the costs,
they still will not be able to issue the rule, and that is the
deregulatory offsets for all agencies, just for one rule. It
really is going to be very difficult to protect the public with
this executive order in place.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much.
Chairman Gowdy. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from North Carolina.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Nguyen, let me come to you, because the gentleman at
the end of the table, Mr. Narang, said that guidance is
nonbinding.
In your expertise, would you suggest that the agency's view
all guidance as nonbinding?
Ms. Nguyen. Regarding our past work looking at guidance,
guidance is typically nonbinding. But for the IRS, we found
that they consider their guidance to be authoritative because
their examiners are bound by the statutes and what they are
able to do. We don't have a particular recommendation in that--
--
Mr. Meadows. So is there a statute that would say that the
IRS guidance should be binding and all other agencies should
not? Is there a statute that says that? Not an interpretation,
but a statute.
Mr. Cramer. If I may answer.
Mr. Meadows. Sure.
Mr. Cramer. No, there is no statute.
Mr. Meadows. There is no statute, so there is no law that
would suggest that the IRS guidance should be treated
differently than other agencies, is that correct? Is that your
sworn testimony?
Ms. Nguyen. It is important to know why the IRS, many of
their----
Mr. Meadows. I don't want you to opine.
Is there a law that would suggest that the IRS guidance
should be treated differently than guidance from other
agencies, yes or no?
Ms. Nguyen. There is no statute.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. So if there is guidance, that they
continue to put out, that has the effect of law, would you
suggest, and I will let your counsel answer this, would you
suggest that they are actually infringing on the legislative
process of Congress if, indeed, they are putting forth
guidelines and rules that have the effect of law, but yet are
not warranted by statute?
Mr. Cramer. If the IRS----
Mr. Meadows. I need you to speak into the mic
Mr. Cramer. If the IRS is issuing guidance that is binding
on the regulated community, the public, that would be a
violation of the APA----
Mr. Meadows. Okay. And I agree with you. And so let me tell
you the problem that I have here. Because they have issued a
number of different guidances, and we have a letter before the
GAO right now, as it relates to what I call the silent returns
and the fact of the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.
And so as we are asking you--and I understand you only have two
reviewers that review this for the entire GAO, is that correct?
Mr. Cramer. Actually, we don't have a dedicated staff to
these.
Mr. Meadows. So it is even worse than two reviewers, okay.
So as we go with this, here is my concern. If the IRS is
able to do rules and regulations at the pace of 9 to 10 rules a
day, and our action, under the Congressional Review Act, would
require a laborious month, two month, three month process to
overturn that, do you see how Congress would be at a
disadvantage of them encroaching in on our legislative
jurisdiction?
Mr. Cramer. Certainly. The Congressional Review Act was
intended to give Congress the ability to oversee agency
rulemaking and to place a check on old rulemaking.
Mr. Meadows. So would you also, would the GAO also, and, as
I say, we have a request there, indicate that if, indeed, the
IRS has not followed a statute that would give them the ability
to write guidance, then they do not have really a legal basis
for that guidance, other than a memo of understanding, how
could it be binding on the American taxpayer if, indeed, there
is not a statute that would support their guidance and
rulemaking?
Mr. Cramer. If a person affected by the guidance challenged
that in court, a court could rule on whether it is binding.
Mr. Meadows. So are you suggesting, since I am affected by
that, are you suggesting that we should file a lawsuit against
the IRS, instead of just actually overturning or giving
Congress the ability to overturn that?
I guess here is my concern, and I will cut to the chase on
this long, laborious line of questioning. We have a request
into GAO. GAO is wanting us to check with the IRS and the
Department of the Treasury to have them opine on whether they
believe that their guidance actually is mandated. And you are
telling me today, with this testimony, that they believe that
they are in compliance.
Why would we ask the very agency, of whom they believe is
doing it correctly, to opine on whether they are doing it
correctly or not? Why would it not be a GAO decision to say
that this has the operation of rules and laws and is subject to
the Congressional Review Act?
And I will yield back to the chairman, and if he gives you
time to answer that, that is certainly within his purview.
Chairman Gowdy. I did find the gentleman's line of
questioning to be long, but not laborious, so I would allow
time for an answer in the fullest way you want to give it.
Mr. Cramer. I will be happy to answer the question.
We have been asked to give an opinion on whether a specific
IRS action is a rule for purposes of the Congressional Review
Act.
As part of our standard procedure, whenever we are asked
questions of that nature, we do reach out to the agency because
we need to hear their views on the law and come to an
understanding of why it is that they did what they did, at
least in their view. It is kind of like a judge, when he has to
decide a case, has to get, from both sides, their view on the
law.
That is the process we are following. We are just trying to
get the full picture, legally, so that we can, hopefully, make
the right decision.
Chairman Gowdy. I want to thank the gentleman from North
Carolina, who has become as much of an expert as any Member of
Congress can be, in this important, but difficult and
challenging subject matter area. So I thank Mr. Meadows.
The gentleman from Iowa is recognized.
Mr. Blum. Thank you, Chairman Gowdy, and thank you to our
panelists for being here today.
I am not a lawyer. I am a career small business person. And
a wise person once said the following, and it has stuck with me
ever since: The complex favors the large.
And someone mentioned earlier in their testimony that
regulations end up building moats around large businesses. In
fact, over the last 8 years, regulations have driven industry
consolidation. Call me old-fashioned, but I think industry
market forces should drive consolidation, if there is any, not
regulations.
I looked the number up. Under President Obama's
administration, we added 20,642 new regulations on the books. I
mean, we are called ``regulation Nation,'' and yet we want our
businesses to compete globally and provide good-paying jobs
with good-paying benefits. Of course we all want that. But we
have a 600-pound sack of regulations on every business' back.
Regulations have driven consolidation in the banking
industry with Dodd-Frank; healthcare industry with the ACA Act;
agriculture, I am from Iowa. I don't know about you, but I
don't think it is good for our country, and it is not good for
our citizens to have five companies controlling our financial
sector, five companies controlling our food supply, and five
companies providing our healthcare.
We have a lot of lawyers in Congress, probably too many
actually, with all due respect. We need more people who have
met a payroll. Most folks have never met a payroll. I have met
a payroll for over 20 years.
So I would like to ask Ms. Harned--that is the correct way
to pronounce that, I hope--you are with NFIB, what type of
impact does this have on small businesses, all the regulations?
Ms. Harned. Right. So we have done numerous surveys on
this, because regulations have been a perennial problem for
small-business owners. And, honestly, it is always the top
three problems, second only--or third only to taxes and health
insurance, regardless of if it is good or bad, as far as how
many are coming out of the regulatory state.
Complying with regulations is a problem for small-business
owners because 72 percent of those employers that have ten or
fewer employees are the regulatory compliance officer. They are
reading the rule and they are trying to figure out how to
comply with it.
What are they not doing? They are not managing their
business. They are not growing it, they are not managing staff,
and they are not trying to get new customers. And that, we
think, is not helpful for the economy. And, honestly, that is
very much, I think, why you will see, especially in these
heavily regulated areas, more consolidation.
Mr. Blum. Two trillion dollars, somebody mentioned earlier,
it costs the economy every year.
In small businesses, could they pay their employees more or
could they offer better healthcare to their employees if they
weren't paying all these costs? We don't want no regulations,
okay. We just want a happy medium, happy balance. If they had
less regulations, could they help their employees out more?
Ms. Harned. Absolutely. All of the research that has been
done on this has shown that the disproportionate burden is real
cost, I think. One study recently, $10,000 per employee for
small employers to comply with regulation. When you consider
the fact that our members at NFIB, on average, net $50,000 to
$75,000 a year, they are not counting their gold coins. This is
real dollars that they can't afford to spend.
Mr. Blum. Counting their bit coins or their gold coins?
Mr. Noe, the same question to you.
Mr. Noe. I think this is a basic problem. I think what
makes our country great is that it is a free market democracy,
and that starts with the free market and all the benefits it
can deliver in terms of wealth creation, economic security,
jobs, and all the other benefits.
Certainly if there are market failures, there should be
addressed things like emissions, environmental health, and
safety standards that I feel so strongly about. Those are all
important issues that should be addressed by a regulatory
system, but we ought to do it in a rational way.
I think there should be a congressional requirement that
all regulations should do more good than harm.
Mr. Blum. Mr. Narang, 20,000, not that we are counting,
20,642 new regulations in the Obama administration. How much is
enough? How much is enough? How much do you think businesses
can handle before we don't have any businesses?
Mr. Narang. At Public Citizen, I have met many individuals
that have lost loved ones due to a lack of effective strong
regulations that have had children have asthma due to being
sited close to polluting sources. It is very important to hear
from all voices in this debate, and so it is critical to hear
from small-business owners and small business representatives.
But I think it is just as critical to hear from the folks, the
average Americans, that benefit from regulations on a daily
basis. We all benefit from regulations on a daily basis.
Mr. Blum. Can we keep adding 20,000 regulations every two
terms, two administrations, can we keep doing that?
Mr. Narang. I have many stories to share where there was a
lack of adequate and effective regulation.
Mr. Blum. Is that the exception or the rule?
Mr. Narang. I don't think it is the exception.
Mr. Blum. You don't think so?
Mr. Narang. Well, let me say this. As much as it is my
honor and pleasure to testify here today, I really would
encourage this committee to hear from folks we talk to at
Public Citizen, and other organizations that work with us, that
benefit from regulations and that have been dramatically harmed
by a lack of adequate and strong regulations.
Mr. Blum. I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman, that I do not
have.
Chairman Gowdy. The gentleman from Iowa yields back.
The gentleman from Alabama is recognized.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to begin with the lady from the GAO, Ms. Nguyen.
In your written testimony, you talked about regularly
evaluating whether issued guidance is effective and up to date.
Does the GAO have any estimate of the percentages that were not
considered effective and up to date of the regulations?
Ms. Nguyen. We haven't done work to determine the extent to
which how much is done.
I want to share an example of an agency who does have
procedures in place to review whether or not guidance is
current. DOL, for example, has this process in place. And
through this process, DOL was able to reduce 85 percent of its
guidance for a subagency.
Mr. Palmer. I appreciate that. I am a big fan of the GAO,
by the way. I think you guys do great work, but I try to
utilize your work so the questions that I am asking is in a
context of how do we improve a situation. And so when you have
requirements--these are requirements imposed on the agencies
and they don't comply. I mean it is great to point out that one
does, but they all should--are there any penalties, any
remedies applied for those who fail to comply?
Ms. Nguyen. As noted in our report, we have made
recommendations to agencies to improve their adherence to OMB
requirements for significant rules guidance, and also to adhere
to internal controls for nonsignificant guidance.
Mr. Palmer. I appreciate that, and I hate to cut you off,
but I have only got a few minutes left.
That is part of the problem we see time and time again. It
is the same thing with improper payments. There are laws
actually passed by the Obama administration, signed by the
President, that requires agencies to report the improper
payments, but they don't. The GAO writes a report and has
recommendations, but there is no enforcement. That is a huge
issue. I mean, what good does it do to have these requirements
if nobody complies?
Ms. Nguyen. GAO does not have enforcement authority,
although we do have a good record of agencies implementing our
recommendations. Generally, we have close to an 80 percent
implementation of recommendations, and we believe this is the
case because of the quality of our work.
Mr. Palmer. Okay. I want to make sure you understand. I am
not assigning this responsibility to the GAO. I am simply
pointing out, this is a public hearing, for the public to
understand, that we don't require the agencies to comply with
the guidelines that we give them. Eighty percent might be a B-
minus. I think we owe it to the taxpayers to be an A-plus. We
owe it to the people trying to create jobs to be an A-plus.
And on another point here, under the Congressional Review
Act, the agencies are required to submit new regulations for
congressional review. Do you have any idea how many regulations
that were not submitted to Congress for review?
Mr. Cramer. If I may, I will handle that question. We do
track everything that we receive. So if asked whether we have
received a particular rule or set of rules, we can check our
database to see.
We do not know, at this point, for example, in 2017,
whether there were rules that were not submitted to GAO. We
don't keep track of that information on a daily basis, simply
because what we do track is what we do get.
Mr. Palmer. Well, it is a problem, because in your
recommendations and in what you found, you point out that, for
the most part, they don't comply, and that there is an economic
impact of these regulations that really Congress never has the
opportunity to respond to.
And I just think, Mr. Chairman, that is an issue that we
have got to address. Like I said, I don't attribute that to the
GAO. That is our responsibility.
Professor Parrillo, I am a member of the article I project,
which is made up of a bicameral group of members seeking to
strengthen Congress by reclaiming its constitutional
legislative powers that are now being improperly exercised by
the executive branch, which this previous line of question kind
of leads into this.
Congress, as a body, has ceded most of its lawmaking
authority to the executive branch by writing vague laws. They
give Federal agencies wide latitude to interpret the law in a
way that fits their agenda. It has been said that the most
dangerous words in any piece of legislation are ``the Secretary
shall determine.''
How many of these problems being considered today could be
prevented if Congress wasn't in the business of writing them?
Chairman Gowdy. Professor Parrillo, the gentleman's time is
expired, but you may answer his question.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Parrillo. I do think Congress has a demonstrated
capacity to make choices and put details in legislation.
Several of the environmental statutes. The 1990 overhaul of the
Clean Air Act, for example, really do cabin agency discretion
in significant ways.
I would note that there is some academic scholarship
indicating that the more staff a legislature has, the more it
is capable of writing relatively detailed statutes and cabining
agency discretion. This is a set of conclusions arising from a
comparative study of the different State legislatures. That
legislatures that have more staff tend to delegate to the
bureaucracy less. That is possibly one thing to consider.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a statement,
for the record.
There were 12,000 guidance documents identified in response
to the committee's request, and only 189 were submitted to
Congress and the GAO in accordance with the Congressional
Review Act. I yield back.
Chairman Gowdy. The gentleman from Alabama yields back.
I will go last.
Ms. Nguyen, I am one of those too many lawyers my
colleagues make reference to from time to time. I am not a
subject matter expert here, or anywhere else. But I suspect
lots of people that are following this issue, and maybe they
are watching the hearing, aren't subject matter experts either.
So I get that all of you are experts and the vernacular just
rolls off your tongue. But for lots of people, they don't know
what a midnight regulation is, they don't know what the CRA is,
they don't know what a guidance document is.
So, with respect to midnight regulations, how, if at all,
does it impact the CRA?
Ms. Nguyen. The midnight rulemaking is defined by the
mandate that, in terms of our review, it is defined by a
specific period between September 23 and January 20. So we were
asked, mandated, to look at the midnight rulemaking. It is
referred to that because of that period.
And in terms of the CRA, as I noted, we found that
compliance with CRA for the transition period, in comparison to
the nontransition period, is they are about the same.
The trend that is important to note is that compliance with
the CRA has increased over time.
Chairman Gowdy. Could you tell us which agencies had the
highest rate of noncompliance?
Ms. Nguyen. The two agencies that have the highest rate of
noncompliance are HHS and DOT, and EPA has the lowest
noncompliance rate.
Chairman Gowdy. What justification or explanation were
offered by the two with the highest rate of noncompliance?
Ms. Nguyen. Because of the breadth and scope of our work,
we were asked to look at noncompliance--the compliance with
midnight rulemaking over the course of 20 years for various
procedural requirements. So, therefore, we did not have the
opportunity to inquire with those agencies.
Mr. Cramer. If I may add, we are taking steps to notify
those agencies of their noncompliance, to call to their
attention their obligations under the Congressional Review Act.
Chairman Gowdy. So you think it is a matter of oversight
rather than intentionality?
Mr. Cramer. I wouldn't want to speculate that on that. I
don't know. We haven't looked at that question.
Chairman Gowdy. Is there a correlation between
noncompliance and economically significant regulations?
Ms. Nguyen. Our study shows that economically significant
regulations have a noncompliance rate of about 25 percent, and
15 percent for significant rules.
Chairman Gowdy. All right. For those who have never heard
the term before, what is a guidance document?
Ms. Nguyen. Guidance are used by agencies to provide timely
information to agencies. And agencies also use them to convey
how they plan to interpret regulations. Guidance generally are
not legally binding.
Chairman Gowdy. Whenever you use works like generally, it
makes we wonder that there is an exception to that.
Ms. Nguyen. The exception is what we discussed earlier with
the notion that the IRS views their guidance to be
authoritative.
Chairman Gowdy. If I heard Professor Parrillo correctly,
there is no legal force--lay the IRS aside--there is no legal
force attached to guidance documents. Are there any legal
presumptions attached to it? Excepting that it doesn't have
force of law, are there certain presumptions attached to
guidance documents?
Ms. Nguyen. I cannot speak about the presumption issue.
That is really from the perspective of the regulated parties.
Chairman Gowdy. Can I ask your lawyer, is there a legal
presumption attached in any way with guidance documents?
Here is what is vexing me. When I hear the professor say--
and I am sure he is right--that it is not intended to have the
force of law or for everyone to conform their conduct that they
still want to go on a case-by-case basis--whenever I hear the
phrase case by case, that is just Latin for no guidance. There
is no uniformity. If you are going to go case by case, which is
what I think is what I understood him to say, then what is the
purpose and/or legal effect of guidance documents?
Mr. Cramer. I believe that guidance documents, by
definition, are not legally binding on the regulated community.
There have been complaints over the years, however, from the
regulated community, that at times agencies are imposing
binding requirements on the regulated community through
guidance, rather than going through a rulemaking procedure. And
I think that is the underlying complaint behind the use of
guidance.
Not where it is used for the purposes for which it is
intended, but rather to impose binding requirements that should
really be going through a rule making process.
Mr. Meadows. Will the gentleman yield for a follow-up
question to your point?
Chairman Gowdy. Certainly.
Mr. Meadows. The Chairman is spot on, and he is in a line
of questioning that, quite frankly, is at the very heart of
this hearing. Is guidance typically--and where he is going with
this is, does it have any other meaningful effect, either
through previous jurisprudence or lawsuits where guidance has
been used in a way that connotates a rule or a regulation
instead of just guidance?
Mr. Cramer. I think it would be fair to say that there have
been complaints that guidance has been used to impose
requirements that should not have been imposed unless they went
through a rule making process.
Mr. Meadows. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Gowdy. Well, let me ask one other question.
Is there a colorable claim or cause of action if the
assertion is that this discretion referenced by Professor
Parrillo, was applied disparately to this group versus that
group? Is that a cause of action? Is that a colorable claim
from a litigation standpoint that this exercise of discretion
was used disparately?
Mr. Cramer. I think actually Professor Parrillo might be
best qualified to answer that question.
Chairman Gowdy. I am sure he has written a law review
article on it. He may direct us to it.
Mr. Parrillo. On the question of whether, as I understand
your question, whether inconsistency between individual cases
would be subject to a judicial challenge, if the context were
enforcement, then, no. Because under Heckler v. Cheney, at
least one off enforcement decisions or decisions not to
enforce--or to enforce in the first place--are not subject to
judicial review.
If we move beyond the context of enforcement and we talk
about agency adjudication, such as permanent or something like
that, then if an agency does not follow the reasoning that it
used for a prior individual decision and gives no explanation
of why it didn't follow that reasoning, then that would be
subject to a judicial challenge. So it varies by the type of
individual proceeding we are talking about.
Chairman Gowdy. Thank you.
The gentleman from Wisconsin.
Mr. Grothman. I have all sorts of questions, but at the
beginning I would like to yield to my good friend, Congressman
Palmer.
Mr. Palmer. I thank the gentleman. Just very quickly on
that point about 12,000 guidance documents and only 189 were
submitted.
There is no place on the GAO form for meaningfully
reporting guidance. Don't you think that it would help matters
to have that on the form?
And, Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter this into the
record.
Mr. Cramer. GAO has issued a number of opinions on whether
guidance documents are rules for purposes of the Congressional
Review Act. It is up to the agencies to decide when they are
issuing guidance whether they have an obligation to comply with
respect to the Congressional Review Act, with respect to that
particular guidance document, does it meet the definition of a
rule under the APA.
We call them all rules. And when we are asked to consider
whether a particular guidance document is a rule for purposes
of the Congressional Review Act, at the end of the day, it is a
rule.
Mr. Palmer. I don't want to take up the gentleman's time. I
just think you ought to add that on your form. It might help
get a better response.
I thank the gentleman, and I yield back.
Mr. Grothman. Just a general question. I am going back 25
years to my day as a lawyer. And at the time--at least I used
to do with the IRS--guidances were kind of treated as law. And
that is why they made the guidances, right? If you brazenly
disobeyed the guidances, you were kind of risking the wrath of
the IRS, don't you think that is accurate?
Mr. Cramer. I think that is one of the complaints that
regulated community.
Mr. Grothman. Why else would they issue the guidances?
Mr. Cramer. Guidance does serve a lot of useful functions
to communicate regulated public, who, in many cases, would like
to know what the agency is thinking about a particular issue.
Mr. Grothman. Right, right. That is exactly the point.
If you issue a guidance, it is for a purpose, right? The
purpose is to tell the public--be it a business or an attorney
or whatever--how the agency will interpret an ambiguity. And if
you brazenly go against the guidance--you can do it and hope
you are not caught. That is fine. I wasn't afraid to do that.
But the reason the guidance is out there is you can expect, if
you don't follow the guidance, that if you get caught, you are
going to be challenged in some fashion, isn't that true? I am
sure that is true of other agencies as well, right?
Mr. Cramer. That certainly may be the case.
Mr. Grothman. Of course it is the case. Why do you say it
may be the case? Of course it is the case. Why else issue the
guidance, right? Does anybody else have a comment on that?
Isn't that, of course, what the guidance does? It means the
agency is going to interpret an ambiguity in a law in such a
such a way, and if you brazenly disobey the guidance, then you
are going to wind up challenged in some fashion, maybe a win in
court? It is true it isn't legally binding. But it does say you
could wind up in court, doesn't it?
Mr. Parrillo. If I may answer that question?
Mr. Grothman. Sure.
Mr. Parrillo. So, yes, if the agency is empowered to
proceed case by case, in other words, only on the basis of
precedence from prior individual proceedings, then, in any
future proceeding, it can exercise discretion and interpret law
as it sees best constrained just by this prior precedence. And
so the guidance is a way of saying this is what we are planning
to do in the absence of some argument from the regulated party
that we should do things differently. And if it is guidance,
they have to answer that argument.
Mr. Grothman. Right. But why else issue the thing, right.
And I guess the question is, right now, as I understand it,
in general, maybe always, there is no public participation on
guidance, and that is the benefit of a rule as opposed to
guidance. In a rule, if the agency is doing something dumb,
maybe, or offensive, it will come out because you have to have
some public input. In guidance, there is no public input. Do
you think there should be a little space for public input on
guidance?
Ms. Harned. May I take that?
Mr. Grothman. Sure.
Ms. Harned. Yes. I really appreciate the question, because
NFIB absolutely thinks that there needs to be some space for
comment. Does it have to go through the whole notice and
comment, like a rulemaking? No.
But the idea that small-business owners and other members
of the regulated community even know what these are is an
issue, much less getting to say, hey, this is how this is going
to impact me. As a practical matter, yes, we think that would
be a good practice.
Mr. Noe. Congressman, could I jump into, just from my
experience having been at the White House Office of Management
and Budget drafting the Good Guidance Bulletin they have, we
were very responsive to the agencies that you don't want to
ossify the guidance process, because there are a lot of
potential benefits to guidance, if they are done right. And we
agreed.
So we just said, for the most significant guidance that
might have a potential to lead to an economic impact, but, we
were very clear, it is something that reasonably could be
anticipated to lead to an impact, not cause it directly,
because, of course, guidances are supposed to not be legally
binding, but the agencies made beyond Swiss cheese out of that.
In fact, it is so bad, the report that the GAO did in 2015
showed that the agency said--this is four major departments of
the government with 25 agencies--we have zero, so we have zero
guidance that should be subject to pre-adoption notice and
comment.
That is where we are, and that is why I am saying the White
House Office of Management and Budget should amp up that
guidance. You all ought to think about legislating a
requirement that there be good guidance practices. You have
already done it for one agency.
In 2000, Congress, by statute, required the FDA to do a
regulation to set good guidance practices. This is an agency
that deals with life and death issues, and they have operated--
my understanding is that people are generally happy with the
way that works, and I don't see any reason other agencies
shouldn't be able to operate at that level.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
Mr. Narang. Could I respond very quickly?
Mr. Grothman. We would love to have you respond.
Mr. Narang. Thank you, Congressman.
Let me just say that if Congress does impose procedural
requirements on guidance documents, like notice and comment, or
on a subset of guidance documents, that approximate what we
have with APA notice and comment rulemaking, then I think it is
an open question, maybe right now an academic question, but an
open question as to whether we should then be giving the
agencies the option to make those guidance documents binding.
What is the point of an agency going through a robust
guidance document process that looks like rulemaking if they
are going to have a nonbinding document?
I think the more realistic outcome would be that they not
issue guidance.
Mr. Grothman. Well, I am just going to respond, you know,
there are times where guidance is good because you have got to
come up with something on a dime to interpret a law that
Congress passed, or explain the way an agency is going to treat
things, and that is fair. If you are not going to go all the
way through the administrative rule process, you don't want it
to become the force of law, if it is something less than that,
see.
But I do think there are times, thinking back 25 years, in
which you had guidances that sometimes made, when I was a
lawyer, that guidances made absolutely no sense, or you wonder
who in the world thought up this.
And I would think if there was a little bit of input from
the private sector community and maybe woken up some bureaucrat
over at, because I primarily dealt with the IRS, but there are
other agencies too, would have woke them up and said, yeah,
man, I didn't think of that.
Okay, so you can't go through the whole process because you
want to turn something around quick, but enough that your
bureaucracies can understand how this guidance looks from the
other side of the mirror.
Mr. Parrillo. May I respond on that point?
Chairman Gowdy. Well, let me just say, I have been
uncharacteristically liberal. We have been over 3 minutes over
his time. I will let you respond. Can you give us the Reader's
Digest version in your response?
Mr. Parrillo. There are some agencies that voluntarily
undertake notice and comments for precisely the reasons that
you just suggested. EPA does this on a substantial number of
guidance documents, the National Organic Program at the USDA,
other agencies much less so.
As Mr. Noe mentioned, the FDA is required by statute to
take notice and comments on a large category of its guidance
documents. A lot of people are quite happy with that. The
difficulty they run into is that they will sometimes leave a
document in draft for quite a long time because they don't have
the resources to process all of the comments.
Chairman Gowdy. The gentleman from Wisconsin yields back.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for not just your
expertise on a really important subject matter, but also your
comity with each other and with the members of the committee.
With that, the hearing record will remain open for two
weeks for any member to submit written opening statements or
questions for the record.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
committee will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:44 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX
----------
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]