- ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING FOR THE
116TH CONGRESS
=======================================================================
MEETING
OF THE
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE
CLIMATE CRISIS
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MEETING HELD
MARCH 28, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-1
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-315 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CLIMATE CRISIS
KATHY CASTOR, Florida, Chair
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana, Ranking
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Member
JULIA BROWNLEY, California
MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
JARED HUFFMAN, California
GARY PALMER, Alabama
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
BUDDY CARTER, Georgia
MIKE LEVIN, California
CAROL MILLER, West Virginia
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado
----------
Ana Unruh Cohen, Majority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Member Opening Statements
Chair Kathy Castor...............................................
1
Ranking Member Garret Graves.....................................
4
Committee Business
Proposed Rules for the 116th Congress............................
5
Proposed Amendments
Amendment offered by Rep. Graves.................................
10
Amendment offered by Rep. Carter.................................
14
Amendment offered by Rep. Palmer.................................
17
Amendment offered by Rep. Armstrong..............................
22
Amendment offered by Rep. Miller.................................
25
ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING
----------
THURSDAY, MARCH 28, 2019
House of Representatives,
Select Committee on the Climate Crisis,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:10 a.m., in Room
2247, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Kathy Castor
[chairwoman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Castor, Lujan, Bonamici, Brownley,
Huffman, McEachin, Levin, Neguse, Graves, Griffith, Palmer,
Carter, Miller, and Armstrong.
Ms. Castor. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Well, welcome to the organizational meeting of the House
Select Committee on the Climate Crisis of the 116th Congress.
Thank you for your service on this committee. I expect the time
we spend together will be constructive as we aim to develop
policy recommendations to address the climate crisis.
Today, we will adopt the committee rules, but before we do
that, I would like to introduce our members and give my
colleague, Ranking Member Graves, the opportunity to introduce
the members from the minority.
This committee is authorized by House Resolution 6, and we
have an important charge: to deliver recommendations to
Congress and to the American people by March of 2020, just over
1 year from now, to address the climate crisis and,
specifically, to achieve substantial and permanent reductions
in pollution and other activities that contribute to the
climate crisis.
Now, I have a homework assignment for everyone, and that is
to read the Fourth National Climate Assessment that was
released by the Trump administration back in November. And I
would like to just read the opening paragraph from the Fourth
National Climate Assessment.
``Earth's climate is now changing faster than at any point
in the history of modern civilization, primarily as a result of
human activities. The impacts of global climate change are
already being felt in the United States and are projected to
intensify in the future. But the severity of future impacts
will depend largely on actions taken to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions and to adapt to the changes that will occur.
Americans increasingly recognize the risk climate change poses
to their everyday lives and livelihoods and are beginning to
respond.''
So for this committee, I expect that we will find areas of
common ground. And this committee has the opportunity to
recommend action to standing committees in the coming months,
not to wait until March of 2020. Ultimately, to fulfill our
charge, we must address what is necessary for America to truly
address the climate crisis.
And, with that, I would like to introduce members of the
majority on the committee. First, Ben Ray Lujan from Nevada
serves as----
Mr. Lujan. New Mexico.
Ms. Castor. Excuse me. I knew that, but my script did not
know that. I apologize.
Of course, the Assistant Speaker is from the great State of
New Mexico. He comes to this committee with deep experience in
Congress on renewable energy policy, as he served as chairman
of New Mexico's Public Regulation Commission, where he helped
strengthen the State's renewable energy standard. He also
serves on the great Energy and Commerce Committee.
Congresswoman Suzanne Bonamici from Oregon serves on the
House Science Committee. And her district is in Oregon, already
grappling with rising seas, ocean acidification, and wildfires.
Congresswoman Bonamici co-chairs the STEAM Caucus, the Oceans
Caucus, and will be a valued member of this committee.
Congresswoman Julia Brownley from California is a longtime
environmental leader in California and serves on the House
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure. Congresswoman
Brownley's district suffered from horrendous wildfires in the
past months.
And I hope you will bring their perspective to us as we
grapple with the climate crisis.
Jared Huffman is also from California. He and I have shared
a great interest in coastal issues and protecting our shores
from oil spills. As chair of the Water, Oceans, and Wildlife
Subcommittee in the House Natural Resources Committee, he
brings a wealth of expertise to our committee.
Welcome.
Congressman Don McEachin from Virginia is one of Congress's
most prolific leaders on environmental justice. He also co-
chairs the CBC's Energy, Environment, and Agriculture Task
Force and serves on the Energy and Commerce Committee with me,
as well as the Natural Resources Committee.
Congressman Mike Levin from California serves on the House
Natural Resources Committee and is a clean-energy executive. He
is new to Congress this term but brings great enthusiasm for
tackling the issues ahead.
Welcome.
Congressman Sean Casten from Illinois is a scientist, an
engineer by training, and a clean-energy executive from
Illinois. So we will benefit greatly from his expertise on this
committee.
Congressman Joe Neguse from Colorado led his State's
consumer protection agency, which includes the Public Utilities
Commission. And he is the founder of New Era Colorado, a
nonprofit devoted to advancing clean energy in the State.
Welcome, all.
So, with that, I would love to give Ranking Member Graves
the opportunity to provide some opening remarks and introduce
the other members from the committee.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Castor follows:]
Opening Statement of Chair Kathy Castor
As Prepared for Delivery
Organizational Meeting of the Select Committee on the Climate
Crisis
March 28, 2019
Thank you everyone for joining us. I'm so happy to welcome you to
the very first meeting of the House Select Committee on the Climate
Crisis. To start, I want to thank you for your service on this
committee and I hope the time we spend together will be constructive
for all of us and constructive for addressing the climate crisis.
Today, we'll be considering the committee rules, but before we do
that I wanted to introduce our members and give my colleague
Congressman Graves an opportunity to introduce members from the
minority.
Many of you already know me, many of you will get a chance to know
me as we work together. I've been in Congress since 2006 and before
that, like many of you, I served in local government, including as a
county commissioner. In Florida, we see the effects of rising seas on
our community every day. So when we talk about the climate crisis, we
are talking about my home.
This committee is authorized by House Resolution 6 and we have an
important charge: to deliver recommendations to Congress and the
American people by March of 2020--just one year from now--to address
the climate crisis. And specifically ``to achieve substantial and
permanent reductions in pollution and other activities that contribute
to the climate crisis.''
I know we will have significant differences on this committee. I
hope we can approach those differences constructively.
I also think we will find areas of common ground and I hope this
committee will address what we can do in Congress together today.
But ultimately to full fill our charge we must address what is
necessary for our country to do to truly address the climate crisis.
With that, I would like to introduce members of the majority on the
committee:
Ben Ray Lujan serves as assistant speaker. He comes to this
committee with deep experience in Congress on renewable energy policy
and he served as Chairman of New Mexico's Public Regulation Commission,
where he helped strengthen the state's renewable electricity standard.
Suzanne Bonamici serves on the House Science Committee and her
district in Oregon is already grappling with rising seas, ocean
acidification and wildfires.
Julia Brownley is long-time environmental leader in California and
serves on the House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
Jared Huffman is from California where he and I have shared a great
interest in coastal issues and protecting our shores from oil spills.
As Chair of the Water, Ocean and Wildlife subcommittee in the House
Natural Resources Committee, he brings a wealth of expertise to our
committee.
Donald McEachin is one of Congress's most prolific leaders on
environmental justice. He also co-chairs the CBC's energy, environment
and agriculture task force and serves on the Energy and Commerce
committee with me as well as the Natural Resources Committees.
Mike Levin serves on the House Natural Resources committee and is
another clean energy executive on our committee who is new to Congress
this term.
Sean Casten is a scientist and engineer by training and a clean
energy executive in Illinois, so we'll benefit greatly from his
expertise on this committee.
Joe Neguse from Colorado, has lead his state's consumer protect
agency, which also includes the Public Utilities Commission. And he is
the founder of New Era Colorado, a non-profit devoted to advancing
clean energy in his state.
So welcome and with that, I'd love to give Ranking Member Graves
the opportunity to provide some opening remarks and introduce the other
members of this committee.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I am very happy to
be here. And I appreciate the opportunity to join you in
addressing what I think needs to be an important priority for
this Congress.
Coming from the State of Louisiana, where, a few jobs back,
I had the opportunity to work on one of the largest resiliency
projects in the Nation, working to help to protect our
communities from flooding and the threat of hurricanes in the
aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, working to restore some of the
2,000 square miles of our coastal wetlands that have been lost
in one of the most productive ecosystems on the North American
continent, Madam Chair, there is no question that when you
bring up this topic, when you bring up the topic of climate
change, it results oftentimes in folks taking very divisive
views. Folks often run to their corner.
I want to reiterate something that you said. I agree with
you. I do believe that there are many things, many objectives
that we share. I think that we may find ourselves in the same
place, perhaps for different reasons, but in the same place.
And I think that this is an opportunity for us to reset, to
redefine the narrative, to work together to address issues that
are of mutual concern. Obviously, the protection of our
communities, the protection of our environment is something
that we all share. And we have a diverse group of members that
are here that I think are going to have the opportunity on both
sides to provide input for us to move forward and achieve some
of the goals that I know are important to all of us.
I think something that we need to focus on is not less
science but more, actually bringing more science to the table,
introducing new fields of science into this topic to make sure
that decisions and recommendations we make are grounded, to
make sure that they are realistic, to make sure that they are
actually going to advance some of the objectives that I believe
we all share.
So, once again, I want to say I am looking forward to
working with you and all the members of the committee. We have
a fantastic group of members that we are going to be working
with to partner with some of your folks, starting with Morgan
Griffith from Virginia. He serves on the Energy and Commerce
Committee. Strong science background, and has already been a
great asset in some of our discussions.
Gary Palmer from Alabama that has been the beneficiary of--
let's see, the president of University of Alabama we trained at
LSU. The coach of the football team we trained at LSU. But Gary
played football for Alabama, but, more importantly, spent
decades running a policy institute in Alabama. And, once again,
just great background in helping to guide this Congress in
thinking through the implications of policy.
Buddy Carter from Georgia represents the entire coast of
Georgia, and the only pharmacist in the Congress. Buddy serves
on the Energy and Commerce Committee. And, once again, just a
great, great asset for Georgia and for the Congress.
Carol Miller from West Virginia, a bison farmer, a small-
business owner. And lives in the area where I used to river
guide, over in West Virginia, which we talked about a little
bit yesterday. But, once again, bringing the perspective of
small businesses, bringing the perspective of West Virginia,
which I think is really important to make sure that we
understand the full impact of decisions and recommendations
that we make here.
And then last, Mr. Kelly Armstrong, who represents a very
small district in North Dakota--represents the State of North
Dakota. And Kelly has a background in agriculture and energy
issues, a family business. And looking forward to input from
North Dakota, which has participated in an energy revolution
for this country and----
Ms. Castor. And I was glad to hear that the severe flooding
in the Midwest has not affected your district. But our thoughts
are with all of the folks across the Midwest who are going
through that trauma right now.
Mr. Graves. So that is the team.
Ms. Castor. Terrific.
Mr. Graves. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much, Ranking Member Graves.
Now we will move to our first order of business, the
consideration and adoption of the select committee's rules for
the 116th Congress.
I ask unanimous consent that the proposed rules be
considered read and open for amendment at any point.
[The information follows:]
In the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis
116th Congress, 1st Session
March 28, 2019
__________
A RESOLUTION
Offered by Ms. Castor
To adopt rules of the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis
pursuant to clause 2 of rule XI of the Rules of the House of
Representatives.
Resolved, That the Rules of the Select Committee on the Climate
Crisis for the 116th Congress shall be:
RULE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
(a) The provisions of section 104(f) of H. Res. 6 (116th Congress)
governing the proceedings of the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis
(hereinafter referred to as the ``Committee'') are hereby incorporated
by reference and nothing herein shall be construed as superseding any
provision of that section. The Rules of the House of Representatives
shall apply to the Committee to the extent that they are not
inconsistent with that title.
(b) The rules of the Committee shall be made publicly available in
electronic form and published in the Congressional Record not later
than 30 days after the Committee adopts its rules.
RULE 2. MEETINGS.
(a) In General.--
(1) The regular meeting date of the Committee shall be the
first Tuesday of every month when the House is in session in
accordance with clause 2(b) of rule XI of the Rules of the
House of Representatives. If the House is not in session on the
first Tuesday of a month, the regular meeting date shall be the
third Tuesday of that month. A regular meeting of the Committee
may be dispensed with if, in the judgment of the Chair of the
Committee, there is no need for the meeting.
(2) Additional meetings may be called by the Chair of the
Committee as the Chair considers necessary, in accordance with
clause 2(g)(3) of rule XI of the Rules of the House of
Representatives.
(b) Meetings of the Committee shall be called to order and presided
over by the Chair or, in the Chair's absence, by a member designated by
the Chair to carry out such duties.
(c) Notification.--
(1) Pursuant to clause 2(g)(3) of rule XI of the Rules of the
House, the Chair shall make a public announcement of the date,
place, and subject matter of a Committee meeting (other than a
hearing), which may not commence earlier than the third
calendar day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays
except when the House is in session on such a day) on which
members have notice thereof.
(2) The agenda for each Committee meeting, setting out all
items of business to be considered, shall be established by the
Chair and provided to each member of the Committee at least 36
hours (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays
except when the House is in session on such days) in advance of
the commencement of such meeting.
(d) The requirements of paragraph (c) may be waived by a majority
vote of those present, a quorum being present, or by the Chair with the
concurrence of the Ranking Member. If the requirements of paragraph (c)
are waived, the Chair shall notify the members of the Committee at the
earliest possible time.
RULE 3. HEARINGS.
(a) Announcement of Hearings.--
(1) Pursuant to clause 2(g)(3) of rule XI of the Rules of the
House, the Chair shall announce the date, time, place, and
subject matter of any hearing of the Committee, which may not
commence earlier than one week after such notice.
(2) A hearing may commence sooner than specified in (a)(1) if
the Chair, with the concurrence of the Ranking Member,
determines there is good cause or the Committee so determines
by majority vote, a quorum being present. The Chair shall
announce the hearing at the earliest possible time.
(b) Written Witness Statement; Oral Testimony.--
(1) Filing of Statement.--To the greatest extent practicable,
each witness who is to appear before the Committee shall file
with the clerk of the Committee a written statement of his or
her proposed testimony at least two business days in advance of
his or her appearance. The clerk of the Committee shall
distribute this testimony to the Members of the Committee as
soon as is practicable and at least one business day before the
hearing. The requirements of this subparagraph may be waived or
modified by the Chair after consultation with the Ranking
Member.
(2) Each witness shall limit his or her oral presentation of
testimony to no more than five minutes.
(3) Truth in Testimony.--Each witness appearing in a
nongovernmental capacity shall include with the written
statement of his or her proposed testimony a curriculum vitae
and a disclosure of any Federal grants or contracts or foreign
government contracts and payments related to the subject matter
of the hearing received during the current calendar year or
either of the two preceding calendar years by the witness or by
an entity represented by the witness. The disclosure shall
include (A) the amount and source of each Federal grant (or
subgrant thereof) or contract (or subcontract thereof) related
to the subject matter of the hearing; and (B) the amount and
country of origin of any payment or contract related to the
subject matter of the hearing originating with a foreign
government.
(4) Availability of Information.--Statements filed under this
paragraph shall be made publicly available in electronic form
not later than one day after the witness appears.
(c) Notification of Subject Matter.--As soon as practicable but no
later than 36 hours before the commencement of a hearing, the Chair
shall make to the public and all Members of the Committee a concise
summary of the subject matter under consideration at the hearing, any
relevant reports from departments or agencies on such matters, and a
list of witnesses, including minority witnesses.
(d) Minority Witnesses.--When any hearing is conducted by the
Committee on any measure or matter, the minority party members on the
Committee shall be entitled, upon request to the Chair by a majority of
those members, to call at least one witness, as selected by the
minority members, to testify with respect to that measure or matter
along with witnesses selected by the Chair.
(e) Opening Statements.--
(1) Chair and Ranking Member.--At any hearing of the
Committee, the Chair and Ranking Member, shall each control
five minutes for opening statements. The Chair and Ranking
Member may recognize other members within their respective five
minutes.
(2) Other Members.--The Chair may allow other members of the
Committee to deliver oral opening statements, as appropriate,
with the concurrence of the Ranking Member. Such statements
shall not exceed five minutes in length and are to be equally
distributed between majority and minority members to the extent
practicable given the party makeup of the members present.
Members not recognized by the Chair for oral opening statements
may submit written opening statements for the record.
(f) Questioning of Witnesses.--The Chair shall initiate the right
to question witnesses before the Committee, followed by the Ranking
Member and all other members thereafter.
(1) Order of Member Recognition.--The right to question the
witnesses before the Committee shall alternate between majority
and minority members. A member of the Committee may question a
witness only when recognized by the Chair for that purpose. The
Chair shall recognize in order of appearance members who were
not present when the meeting was called to order after all
members who were present when the meeting was called to order
have been recognized in the order of seniority on the
Committee.
(2) Procedures for Questioning of Witnesses by Members.--Each
member shall be limited to 5 minutes in the questioning of
witnesses and shall limit his or her remarks to the subject
matter of the hearing. After consultation with the Ranking
Member, the Chair may recognize members who have already had an
opportunity to question the witness for a second period of 5
minutes once each member of the Committee present has been
recognized once for that purpose.
(3) Extended Questioning of Witnesses by Members.--Following
the questioning of witnesses described in (f)(2) above, the
Chair, with the concurrence of the Ranking Member or the
Committee by motion, may permit a specified number of members
to question one or more witnesses for a specified period of
time not to exceed 60 minutes in the aggregate, equally divided
between and controlled by the Chair and the Ranking Member.
(4) Questions for the Record.--Each member may submit to the
Chair additional questions for the record to be answered by the
witnesses who have appeared. Each member shall provide a copy
of the questions in an electronic format to the Committee no
later than 10 business days following a hearing. The Chair
shall transmit all questions received from members of the
Committee to the appropriate witnesses and include the
transmittal letter and the responses from the witnesses in the
hearing record. After consultation with the Ranking Member, the
Chair is authorized to close the hearing record no earlier than
15 business days from the date the questions were transmitted
to the appropriate witnesses.
(g) Hearings of the Committee shall be called to order and presided
over by the Chair or, in the Chair's absence, by a member designated by
the Chair to carry out such duties.
(h) Oaths.--The Chair of the Committee, or a member designated by
the Chair, may administer oaths to any witness before the Committee.
The Chair or his or her designee may administer the following oath to
all witnesses prior to receiving testimony: ``Do you solemnly swear or
affirm, under penalty of law, that the testimony you are about to give
is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you
God?''
(i) Claims of Privilege.--Claims of common-law privilege made by
witnesses in hearings, or by interviewees in investigations or
inquiries, are applicable only at the discretion of the Chair, subject
to appeal to the Committee.
RULE 4. OPEN PROCEEDINGS.
(a) Meetings for the transaction of business and hearings of the
Committee shall be open to the public, including radio, television, and
still photography coverage, unless closed in accordance with clause
2(g) of rule XI of the Rules of the House of Representatives.
(b) The audio and video coverage of Committee proceeding permitted
under clause 4 of rule XI of the Rules of the House of Representatives
shall apply to the Committee.
RULE 5. REPORTS.
(a) Approval of Official Committee Reports.--Any report completed
pursuant to section 104(f)(5) of H. Res. 6 (116th Congress) that
purports to express the views, findings, conclusions, or
recommendations of the Committee must be approved by a majority vote of
the Committee at a meeting at which a quorum is present, in accordance
with Committee Rule 7(a)(3). The total number of votes cast for and
against, and the names of those voting for and against, shall be
included in the Committee report on the matter.
(b) Notice of Committee Reports.--Any report described in (a) shall
not be considered in the Committee unless the proposed report has been
available to the members of the Committee for at least three business
days before consideration of such report in the Committee.
(c) Additional Views.--If, at the time of approval of a report, a
member of the Committee gives notice of intent to file supplemental,
minority, additional, or dissenting views for inclusion in the report,
all members of the Committee shall be entitled to no less than two
business days after such notice to file such views following clause
2(l) of rule XI and clause 3(a)(1) of rule XIII of the Rules of the
House.
(d) Availability of Publications.--Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of
rule XI of the Rules of the House, the Committee shall make its
publications available in electronic form to the maximum extent
feasible. Pursuant to sections 104(f)(5) and 104(f)(6) of H. Res. 6
(116th Congress), the Committee shall make its publications available
to the general public in widely accessible formats not later than 30
calendar days following the respective dates for completion.
RULE 6. COMMITTEE RECORDS.
(a) Availability.--Documents reflecting the proceedings of the
Committee shall be made publicly available in electronic form on the
Committee's website and in the Committee office for inspection by the
public, as provided in clause 2(e) of rule XI of the Rules of the House
of Representatives, within 48 hours of such record vote after each
meeting has adjourned, including a record showing those present at each
meeting; and a record of the vote on any question on which a record
vote is demanded, including a description of the motion, order, or
other proposition, the name of each member voting for and each member
voting against such motion, order, or proposition, and the names of
those members of the Committee present but not voting.
(b) Archived Records.--The records of the Committee deposited at
the National Archives shall be made available for public use in
accordance with Rule VII of the Rules of the House. The Chair shall
notify the Ranking Member of any decision, pursuant to clause 3(b)(3)
or clause 4(b) of such rule, to withhold a record otherwise available.
Upon written request of any member of the Committee, the Chair shall
present the matter to the Committee for a determination, which shall be
subject to the same requirements for conduct of Committee business
under Committee Rule 2.
RULE 7. QUORUMS AND RECORDED VOTES; POSTPONEMENT OF VOTES.
(a) Establishment of a Quorum.--
(1) For the purpose of taking testimony and receiving
evidence, no fewer than two members of the Committee shall
constitute a quorum.
(2) A majority of the members of the Committee shall
constitute a quorum for those actions for which the Rules of
the House of Representatives require a majority quorum.
(3) A majority of the members of the Committee shall
constitute a quorum for issuing an official Committee report
pursuant to Rule 5 of the Committee rules and section 104(f)(5)
of H. Res. 6 (116th Congress).
(4) For the purposes of taking any other action, one-third of
the members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum.
(b) Recorded Votes.--A recorded vote may be demanded by one-fifth
of the members present.
(c) Postponement of Votes.--Pursuant to clause 2(h)(4) of the Rules
of the House, the Chair, after consultation with the Ranking Member,
may postpone further proceedings when a recorded vote is ordered on the
question of approving any measure or matter or adopting an amendment
and may resume proceedings on a postponed vote at any time after
reasonable notice to Members by the Clerk or other designee of the
Chair. When proceedings resume on a postponed question, notwithstanding
any intervening order for the previous question, an underlying
proposition shall remain subject to further debate or amendment to the
same extent as when the question was postponed.
RULE 8. COMMITTEE STAFF.
(a) Professional and other staff of the Committee are subject to
the provisions of clause 9 of rule X of the Rules of the House of
Representatives.
(b) Majority Staff.--The Chair shall appoint and determine the
remuneration of, and may remove, the employees of the Committee not
assigned to the minority. The staff of the Committee not assigned to
the minority shall be under the general supervision and direction of
the Chair, who shall establish and assign the duties and
responsibilities of such staff members and delegate such authority as
he or she determines appropriate.
(c) Minority Staff.--The Ranking Member shall appoint and determine
the remuneration of, and may remove, the staff assigned to the minority
within the budget approved for such purposes. The staff assigned to the
minority shall be under the general supervision and direction of the
Ranking Member, who may delegate any authority he or she determines
appropriate.
(d) The Chair and Ranking Member have the right to secure one or
more detailees to assist with the work of the Committee.
RULE 9. BUDGET.
(a) The Chair, in consultation with the Ranking Member, shall
prepare a budget providing amounts for staff, committee travel, field
hearings, investigation, and other expenses of the Committee. Funds
authorized for the Committee as provided in clause 6 of rule X are for
expenses incurred in the activities of the Committee.
(b) Consistent with clause 9 of rule X, the Chair shall designate
an amount equal to 1/3 of the amount provided to the Committee in the
primary expense resolution adopted by the House of Representatives to
be under the direction of the Ranking Member for the compensation of
the minority staff, travel expenses of minority members and staff, and
minority office expenses. All expenses of minority members and staff
shall be paid for out of the amount so set aside.
RULE 10. TRAVEL.
(a) The Chair may authorize travel for any member and any staff
member of the Committee in connection with activities or subject
matters under the general jurisdiction of the Committee. Travel to be
reimbursed from funds set aside for the Committee for any member of
staff member shall be paid only upon the prior authorization of the
Chair. Before such authorization is granted, there shall be submitted
to the Chair in writing the following:
(1) The purpose of the travel.
(2) The dates during which the travel is to occur.
(3) The names of the states or countries to be visited and
the length of time to be spent in each.
(4) An agenda of anticipated activities.
(5) The names of members and staff of the Committee for whom
the authorization is sought.
(b) Members and staff of the Committee shall make a written report
to the Chair on any travel they have conducted under this subsection,
including a description of their itinerary, expenses, and activities,
and of pertinent information gained as a result of such travel.
(c) Members and staff of the Committee performing authorized travel
on official business shall be governed by applicable laws, resolutions,
and regulations of the House and of the Committee on House
Administration.
RULE 11. WEBSITE.
The Chair shall maintain an official Committee website for the
purpose of carrying out the official responsibilities of the Committee,
including communicating information about the Committee's activities.
The Ranking Member may maintain a minority website. To the maximum
extent feasible, the Committee shall make its publications available in
electronic form on the official Committee website maintained by the
Chair.
Ms. Castor. You should have received copies of the proposed
rules on the desk before you, and they were circulated on
Tuesday night.
Five amendments were filed yesterday afternoon and evening
and circulated electronically. We spent many hours over the
last couple weeks to find agreement on the rules with the
minority and incorporated many of their changes.
The first amendment we will consider is the Graves
amendment. The clerk will report the amendment.
The Clerk. ``An Amendment to the Rules for the Select
Committee on the Climate Crisis, Offered by Mr. Graves of
Louisiana.''
[The amendment of Mr. Graves follows:]
Amendment to the Rules for the Select Committee on Climate
Crisis (116th Congress)
Offered by Mr. Graves of Louisiana
Committee Rule 5 is amended by adding the following to the end--
(e) Contents.--Any Committee report shall include--
(1) the net effect on regional economies, including creation
or retention of jobs and net revenue changes, and the related
costs to the federal government as a result of the
implementation of recommendations made by the Committee;
(2) a quantification of the amount of greenhouse gas
emissions reduced as a result of the implementation of
recommendations made by the Committee;
(3) a quantification of the effect on sea level rise as a
result of the implementation of recommendations made by the
Committee;
(4) a quantification of the acres of wildlife habitat
preserved or enhanced as a result of the implementation of
recommendations made by the Committee;
(5) a quantification of the change in global temperatures
resulting from the implementation of recommendations made by
the Committee compared to the change in global temperatures
without the implementation of recommendations made by the
Committee;
(6) a quantification of the potential cost savings from pre-
disaster mitigation as a result of the implementation of
recommendations made by the Committee.
Ms. Castor. The ranking member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, in my opening statement, I talked about how I
think it is important that we sort of reset the narrative,
redefine this issue, and we introduce more science into the
discussion of climate change, ensuring that we are not looking
myopically, that we are looking much broader, that we are
taking into consideration what are the implications of the
recommendations that we ultimately make. It is important that
we look at what happens in Virginia, what happens in West
Virginia, what happens in Louisiana and in Florida and in our
States that have experienced some of the impact of sea rise.
And so what this amendment would do is it would ensure
that, as we move forward toward our recommendations that we are
going to be issuing to the Congress, that we actually go
through and quantify and understand things like the net effect
on regional economies, including the impact on jobs and revenue
changes, making sure that we understand the actual amount of
greenhouse gasses that these recommendations would impact or
reduce, and understanding what that does in terms of how does
that affect temperature, how does that affect sea rise.
We need to use metrics, we need to use criteria to guide
decisions. We can't just go out there and say that I think it
would be fantastic if we had everyone convert to wind-powered
airplanes. Let's understand the implications, both good and
bad, to where we can understand the tradeoffs and make informed
decisions.
I will say it again: We want more science incorporated into
this process.
Quantifying the acres of wildlife habitat that are
preserved or enhanced as a result of the recommendations that
we make to the Congress. I talked about ensuring that we
understand the temperature changes.
And something, once again, that is really important,
especially, Madam Chair, thinking about just in recent years,
Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, Maria, Michael, Florence, the
wildfires in California, the awful flooding, as you noted, that
is occurring in many of our Midwest and northern reaches of the
United States as a result of snow melt, rainfall, and other
watershed challenges, literally from the top of this country
down to my State in Louisiana, where our rivers are at flood
stage, making sure that we understand what type of pre-disaster
or what type of mitigation and adaptation investments will
return cost savings and how we can make the best principled
investments to make our communities, our families, our homes,
and our businesses as safe as possible.
So I urge adoption of the amendment. I think it is
important that we have quantifiable information and understand,
if decisions that are being made or recommendations being made
by this committee could cause adverse impacts, let's make sure
that they are balancing benefits as a result of those
recommendations.
I yield.
Ms. Castor. The gentleman yields back.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes in opposition to the
amendment.
I want to thank the ranking member for his thoughtful
recommendations, but as we do our work, every member will have
an opportunity and will have ideas about how we should evaluate
the information that is presented to us, and we will receive a
lot of expert testimony and recommendations. So, as we develop
committee reports, members will have an opportunity to provide
input on what any given report will cover, so it is premature
at this point to include in our rules any specific analyses.
Under rule 5(c), every member can have the opportunity to
file additional views to committee reports. If the ranking
member feels the analyses outlined in his amendment are not
covered in the committee report, he will have the opportunity
to provide any supplementary analysis as additional views.
So I urge a ``no'' vote and yield back.
Is there anyone else that would like to speak to this
amendment on the Republican side?
Then on the Democratic side?
Mr. Huffman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So I just want to say with respect to this amendment and
also, I believe, all of the other Republican amendments that
are suggesting all of these quantifications and studies that
they would like to see for anything that comes out of this
committee, I would like to see some of that stuff too. But I
think it is important, as we try to understand the costs and
tradeoffs of some of these climate solutions that I hope we
will be recommending, that we also really take a careful look
at the cost of the status quo. Because, otherwise, what is the
point of pretending that action is always expensive and
inaction is always free?
So I don't think this committee has the budget or the scope
or the timeframe to do the kind of exhaustive economic
analysis, especially to the level of certainty that seems to be
requested in many of these amendments.
But what I would offer to Mr. Graves and to my other
colleagues across the aisle is I will be happy to work with you
on a separate bill that would bring forward the kind of study
that looks at both sides of the ledger, the cost of inaction
and also the relative cost of some of the climate solutions
that we are likely to recommend, so that we can point to the
most cost-effective measures.
That is a good way to go. It is getting harder to do that,
though, because the government scientists that we would
normally look to for this information are being reassigned and
pushed out of their jobs, and their budgets are being slashed.
In some cases, entire agency mission statements are being
scrubbed of references to climate change; entire websites are
being taken down and scoured of any references to climate
science or climate data. The Trump budget continues this march
against the kind of science and analysis that we would look to
them to provide.
So, in light of all that, we really do need, I think, a
bipartisan bill in this Congress to begin to bring forward the
cost of inaction on climate change as well as a menu of
economic choices that some of these amendments point to so we
can make good decisions. And I will be happy to work separately
with you on that.
Mr. Graves. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Huffman. Yes.
Mr. Graves. Thank you. And I want to thank you for your
comments about working with us, and I would love to see if we
can figure out a way to do that. Because, look, we can sit here
and write a report that has utopian views. They have to be
grounded.
One of the challenges with this issue, as I stated in my
opening statement, is that, when you look historically, what
has happened is that folks just go to their corners. Folks go
to their corners. And so what happens? Nothing. Nothing
happens, largely. And so I would love to work with you on that.
But I think that it is really important that decisions,
recommendations we make have some type of sideboard, some type
of criteria or parameters to where we know what the net effects
are going to be.
And, also, I use the word ``net'' intentionally, because
that word is in here. ``Net,'' as you know, it actually
considers different impacts based--it looks at a baseline
condition and then determines what happens. And so, if you want
to add the word ``net'' in here, you want to add the word
``baseline'' in here, I would welcome your changes to this
amendment that would do that.
Now, one comment that you made, you said that this
committee doesn't have the budget, the scope, or the timeframe.
You and I, we serve on three committees together, which is
incredible, but--and I always enjoy having discussions with
you, because I think that you are thoughtful and you represent
your constituents. Our constituents are very different, as we
have discussed many times.
But to go home to folks in West Virginia, to go home to
folks in Virginia or Kentucky or Ohio and say that, I am sorry,
we didn't have the time or the budget to figure out if you were
going to lose your job or not or lose your house or not, I am
concerned that that is insensitive and that we could actually
make irresponsible decisions----
Mr. Huffman. But if I might just reclaim whatever time I
have left on that, I don't think you are going to have to have
that conversation, Mr. Graves. This committee is going to
produce, at the end of our work, a report. There is no scenario
under which that report causes any of your constituents to lose
their jobs and force you to have that hard conversation.
I would love for us in this Congress to move a lot faster
and to, you know, maybe by the spring actually produce
legislation where we could accelerate some of those
conversations. But it is just not realistic to think that the
product of this committee's work is going to force you to have
those hard conversations.
I think you and I should work separately on bringing
forward a study that will look at the economic baseline, that
will look at the tremendous cost of the status quo. Because
when you focus only on the cost of action, you are dignifying
this notion that the status quo is free. We are going to pay
for climate change whether we take action or not.
And, in fact, I actually really like one of the points that
you have put in your rule changes. You talk about bringing----
Mr. Graves. You better watch it. You are going to lose
your----
Mr. Huffman [continuing]. Bringing forward an analysis of
the potential cost savings of pre-disaster mitigation. That is
exactly the kind of thing we need to understand. Because I
think it will show that many things we need to do to address
climate change will save money and will have economic benefits,
net benefits.
And I will be happy to work with you separately on these
things.
Mr. Graves. Thank you. You better watch that----
Mr. Huffman. I yield back.
Mr. Graves [continuing]. You better watch that fiscal
conservative talk.
Ms. Castor. The gentleman yields back.
Anyone else to be heard on the Graves amendment?
Seeing none, hearing no further debate, the question is on
adoption of the Graves amendment.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
Mr. Graves. A recorded vote, please, Madam Chair.
Ms. Castor. In the opinion of the chair, the noes have it.
The ranking member has requested a roll call vote. The
clerk may call the vote.
The Clerk. Mr. Lujan?
Mr. Lujan. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Lujan votes no.
Ms. Bonamici?
Ms. Bonamici. No.
The Clerk. Ms. Bonamici votes no.
Ms. Brownley?
Ms. Brownley. No.
The Clerk. Ms. Brownley votes no.
Mr. Huffman?
Mr. Huffman. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Huffman votes no.
Mr. McEachin?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Levin?
Mr. Levin. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Levin votes no.
Mr. Casten?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Neguse?
Mr. Neguse. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Neguse votes no.
Mr. Graves?
Mr. Graves. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Graves votes aye.
Mr. Griffith?
Mr. Griffith. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Griffith votes aye.
Mr. Palmer?
Mr. Palmer. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Palmer votes aye.
Mr. Carter?
Mr. Carter. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Carter votes aye.
Mrs. Miller?
Mrs. Miller. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Miller votes aye.
Mr. Armstrong?
Mr. Armstrong. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Armstrong votes aye.
Madam Chair?
Ms. Castor. No.
The Clerk. Madam Chair votes no.
Ms. Castor. The clerk will report the vote.
The Clerk. Six yeas, seven nays.
Ms. Castor. The amendment is not adopted.
The next amendment, the second amendment we will hear is
the Carter amendment. We will now consider the Carter
amendment. The clerk will report the amendment.
The Clerk. ``An Amendment to the Rules for the Select
Committee on the Climate Crisis, Offered by Mr. Carter of
Georgia.''
Ms. Castor. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment will be dispensed with.
[The amendment of Mr. Carter follows:]
Amendment to the Rules for the Select Committee on Climate
Crisis (116th Congress)
Offered by Mr. Carter of Georgia
Committee Rule 3 is amended by adding at the end the following--
(j) Field Hearings.--In the event of field hearings, the Chair
shall consult with the Ranking Member to determine both the topics and
locations of field hearings. For every two field hearings organized and
noticed by the Chair, the Ranking Member may organize and notice a
subsequent field hearing.
Ms. Castor. And the gentleman is recognized for 5 minutes
in support of his amendment.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And let me begin by saying that climate change is real.
Protecting our environment is real. We understand that. It is
something that is incumbent upon us as Members of Congress and
particularly and specifically incumbent upon us as members of
this committee to address and to address in a bipartisan
fashion.
My hope--and I hope that this is shared by all of us--is
that the product that is generated out of this committee will
be a bipartisan product, it will be a product that will benefit
all Americans and benefit all of us. Because it is extremely
important; we acknowledge that. We certainly feel like it will
be something that we will take pride in and that all of us will
have partnership in.
It is important, and what my amendment does is essentially
say that for every two field hearings that the majority has
that the minority would have one.
Now, in order to come about to a bipartisan consensus, it
is important that we all share in our experiences, in our
interests. And, certainly, the field hearings will be a big
part of that. A big part of what we study here will be where we
go and the hearings that we participate in.
To Ranking Member Graves' point about going to our separate
corners, it would do us no good if we only looked at an agenda
that favored one side. So my hope and my intention with this
amendment is just to make sure that everyone has participation
in this.
I tell my staff often and one of my favorite sayings is
that none of us is as smart as all of us. This just assures us
that we are going to have the opportunity to share in the
decisionmaking about the field hearings.
So I would submit this amendment, Madam Chair, and I yield.
Ms. Castor. The gentleman yields back.
I recognize myself in opposition to the amendment for 5
minutes.
One of the charges of this committee will be to hold field
hearings. We will likely hold more field hearings than the
typical committee in Congress, and I need your suggestions.
Ranking Member Graves and I have already, roughly, talked about
some areas of the country that we should visit to hear their
stories and see what other communities are doing on the
transition to clean energy.
So I would like your suggestions, all of the members of the
committee. I hope we will find a number of places of mutual
interest. And I will be consulting with the ranking member
about possible locations and topics, but all of you. But it is
unnecessary to incorporate an arbitrary constraint on field
hearings, as proposed in this amendment.
I would also note that rule 10 governs travel by the
committee. It allows the chair to authorize travel related to
our jurisdiction and, therefore, could provide additional
opportunities to engage with stakeholders outside of
Washington, D.C.
So this amendment is unnecessary at this time, and I urge a
``no'' vote.
Is there anyone else that would like to be heard on the
Carter amendment?
Seeing none, the vote occurs on the Carter amendment.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
The noes have it.
Mr. Carter. Madam Chair, I would ask for a recorded vote.
Ms. Castor. A recorded vote has been requested. The clerk
will call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Lujan?
Mr. Lujan. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Lujan votes no.
Ms. Bonamici?
Ms. Bonamici. No.
The Clerk. Ms. Bonamici votes no.
Ms. Brownley?
Ms. Brownley. No.
The Clerk. Ms. Brownley votes no.
Mr. Huffman?
Mr. Huffman. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Huffman votes no.
Mr. McEachin?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Levin?
Mr. Levin. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Levin votes no.
Mr. Casten?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Neguse?
Mr. Neguse. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Neguse votes no.
Mr. Graves?
Mr. Graves. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Graves votes aye.
Mr. Griffith?
Mr. Griffith. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Griffith votes aye.
Mr. Palmer?
Mr. Palmer. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Palmer votes aye.
Mr. Carter?
Mr. Carter. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Carter votes aye.
Mrs. Miller?
Mrs. Miller. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Miller votes aye.
Mr. Armstrong?
Mr. Armstrong. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Armstrong votes aye.
Madam Chair?
Ms. Castor. No.
The Clerk. Madam Chair votes no.
Ms. Castor. The clerk will report the vote.
The Clerk. Six yeas, seven nays.
Ms. Castor. The amendment is not adopted.
The question now occurs on the third amendment, the Palmer
amendment.
And the gentleman is recognized for 5 minutes to offer his
amendment.
Mr. Palmer. I have an amendment at the desk. I ask
unanimous consent that the amendment be considered read.
Ms. Castor. Without objection.
The Clerk. ``An Amendment to the Rules for the Select
Committee on the Climate Crisis, Offered by Mr. Palmer of
Alabama.''
[The amendment of Mr. Palmer follows:]
Amendment to the Rules for the Select Committee on the Climate
Crisis (116th Congress)
Offered by Mr. Palmer of Alabama
Committee Rule 5 is amended by adding the following to the end--
(e) Contents.--Any Committee report shall include--
(1) the net effect on regional economies, including creation
or retention of jobs and net revenue changes, and the related
costs to the federal government as a result of the
implementation of recommendations made by the Committee.
Mr. Palmer. Am I recognized, Madam Chair?
Ms. Castor. The gentleman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Madam Chair.
My amendment is simple and straightforward. It would
require that the committee include in its reports the cost of
its recommendations on local economies.
This is a commonsense idea. The American people, our
constituents, deserve to know the cost of the policies that get
reported out of the committee.
I would like to yield to the ranking member for a moment to
amend the amendment.
Mr. Graves. I just want to make sure I put it in the right
spot.
I want to ask my friend from California, all my friends
from California, but especially my Huffman friend from
California: So what about on this one, Mr. Huffman? If we
included in here--if we amended this to put in a baseline, you
know, to have a comparative in here, to amend the amendment, do
a second-degree, and go ahead and look at the cost of no action
or the failure to take action, would that lure you over to the
bright side?
Mr. Huffman. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Graves. Absolutely.
Mr. Huffman. So, approaching it this way, the net effect,
which would involve a baseline analysis of the cost of
inaction, is a great place for you and I to start on a separate
bill that brings forward the kind of economic study that we are
talking about here.
But it is going to be a big study, let's be really clear.
And it will include--I don't even know whether this committee's
report will include all of the specific menu of solutions that
we would need to look at. It may need to be broader even than
what this committee is able to undertake in the next 11 months.
So let's get to work on that, Mr. Graves. I mean, let's not
burden this committee with speculative economic hoops to jump
through. Let's you and I undertake this separately and do it
right.
Mr. Graves. Well, if the gentleman would yield back?
Mr. Huffman. Yeah.
Mr. Graves. Yeah. Thanks.
So here is the challenge. Could we go out and go carry out
a big report? Yes. But how are we going to know what the
recommendations are? How could we possibly evaluate the
recommendations? We would have to guess what the committee is
going to do.
My concern--and the chair made mention of this before--my
concern is what is going to happen is we are going to sit here
and we are going to make these recommendations and, as you
know, hand them out to the various committees, to Energy and
Commerce and Transportation, Natural Resources and Science and
others, give them recommendations----
Mr. Huffman. Uh-huh.
Mr. Graves [continuing]. And then it was said before that
those committees can then go through and do an analysis. Well,
why are we here? For what purpose?
Mr. Huffman. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Graves. Absolutely.
Mr. Huffman. But by the same token----
Mr. Graves. Because I see the clock is frozen. We can talk
as long as we want.
Mr. Huffman [continuing]. This is great. I love it. It is
right twice a day.
By the same token, by the time you know what this
committee's final recommendations are in the report, you are
not going to have time to do the exhaustive net economic impact
that you were talking about here. And what you are really doing
is creating a recipe for this report never being completed.
So, again, I want to invite you to work with me to do it
right. Let's broaden this subject. Let's call in the National
Academy of Sciences. Let's have peer-reviewed science. Let's
look at the severe cost of inaction, and let's compare it to
the costs and benefits of some of the solutions that are likely
to be required to address this climate challenge. And let's put
a bill together.
Mr. Graves. And so, reclaiming time, I just want to
actually reiterate or restate your words. You just said that we
are not going to know what we are doing. And that is my very
concern. That is my concern, is that we are not going to know
what the implications of our recommendations are.
And so we are asking for more science to be injected into
the process to where we can make informed decisions,
understanding the tradeoffs of decisions.
And I believe the gentleman from Alabama's amendment is
appropriate. I want to ask unanimous consent if we can add ``or
the failure to take action'' at the end the amendment before
the period.
Ms. Castor. Without objection.
Mr. Graves. And I yield back.
Mr. Palmer. Reclaiming my time. And I thank you, Madam
Chair, for entertaining this discussion. I think it is very
helpful, and I appreciate that very much.
He mentioned my background. By the way, to correct the
record, I practiced football at Alabama.
But, also, prior to running the think tank, I worked for
two international engineering companies, including Combustion
Engineering in their Environmental Systems Division. And I
understand a couple of fundamental principles: One, to get to
the right solution, you must first properly define the problem.
And, second, to get to a feasible solution, you have to
understand the cause.
So this amendment is offered in good faith. It is not to
take away from the work, to impede the work. And I really would
appreciate the consideration of the committee to adopt this
amendment. I do think we have time to do it. And, again, having
worked in the engineering field, I understand costs and
estimating. I actually worked on the cost side.
So, with that, Madam Chairman, I would encourage the
members of the committee to vote ``yea'' on this, and I yield
back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
The gentleman yields back. I recognize myself for 5 minutes
in opposition to the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Palmer, for this thoughtful amendment, but
as noted during the debate on Mr. Graves' amendment, under rule
5(c), every member can have the opportunity to file additional
views to the committee reports and the final report in March of
2020.
I anticipate there will be plenty of opportunities for us
to incorporate the analysis of experts. We are going to rely on
them--that it will be in our purview. If you feel the analysis
outlined in your amendment is not covered in the committee
report, you will have an opportunity to provide any
supplemental analysis and additional views.
And I think as the standing committees take up our
recommendations, whether it is as we report routinely in the
coming months or after the final report, there will be a lot of
analysis, financial analysis, and discussion and debate over
what course this country finally takes to confront the climate
crisis.
So, at this time, I urge a ``no'' vote.
Is there anyone else who would like to be heard?
Mr. Lujan. Would the chair yield?
Ms. Castor. I will yield. I will yield to Mr. Lujan.
Mr. Lujan. Madam Chair, I very much appreciate the
conversation and the goals that are being outlined, with making
sure that we are able to get information into this committee. I
think that is why we have assembled and we have all agreed to
this important responsibility.
I just hope that when we leave here today that it is not
being suggested that this information is not going to be
allowed to be brought into this committee, that this committee
rejected bringing evidence in, as we go out and we embark on
our beautiful districts over the next few days and we are
speaking about the important work of coming together in here,
and that, truly, that we take full advantage of the witnesses
that are coming in, the full opportunities that have been laid
out in the rules as presented by Chairwoman Castor in 5(c),
that we can submit additional information and evidence and
datasets into the record as allowed.
So I appreciate the conversation, and I very much look
forward to working with my colleagues, and I yield back to the
chair.
Ms. Castor. I yield to Congresswoman Bonamici.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I also appreciate the conversation, and it is a good
one, that we are having. But I am very concerned about amending
the rules of how the committee operates with things that we
have to consider and could that be read as what we can't
consider if it is not in the rules.
So, again, all of these things are important conversations
to have. I am certain that, as we move forward, we will be
talking about all of these issues and how they affect our local
economies and how the specific policies that we are talking
about are going to affect the people we represent. But they
don't belong in the rules about how the committee operates.
We will have a better product if all of these things are
considered, but these are the rules about how the committee
operates. I don't want to limit us to telling us what we have
to consider and not consider in the operational rules of the
committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Castor. I thank the gentlewoman.
She yields back. I yield back. Would anyone else like to be
heard in favor of the Palmer amendment?
Mr. Griffith, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
I mean, this is straightforward. The amendment does not
limit other discussions, but it sets out one of the concerns
that I think a number of us have on the minority side, and that
is that there are a lot of folks who will, you know, bring in
proposals that sound great on paper, but if you don't take in
the human cost--my district has suffered tremendously with a
huge number of loss of jobs.
It may be something that we want to make sure we are
looking at when we are looking at the science, but make sure we
are having a positive impact or at least know what the negative
impact is on the economies. Are we just forcing jobs to other
countries, or are we actually doing something that is going to
help the environment and the climate worldwide?
Because if we don't look at this and we just say, well, we
are just going to look after what the United States is doing,
and we shift the jobs from places like my district and other
districts like mine, where we have natural resources and we
have jobs that are heavily tied and the economy is heavily tied
to the natural resources of the region, and we don't look at
how it is going to have an impact on the economy, I think it is
a failure.
And this amendment does not limit the committee. It is an
amendment that helps, you know, be transparent. We are just
going to say, here it is. Just like we need to take a look at
the science, and if there is something that we can do, even if
it has a cost associated with it, that will actually make a
difference in the long run on the climate and make a positive
difference, then we ought to have that information too.
But I just think it is a fairly straightforward amendment
that just assures that we are not going to go headlong into
some policy that doesn't benefit us on the climate effectively
and negatively impacts large regions of the country.
I yield back.
Ms. Castor. I thank the gentleman.
Would anyone else like to be heard on the amendment?
Hearing no further debate, the question is on adoption of
the Palmer amendment.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the chair, the noes have it, and the
amendment is not adopted.
Mr. Palmer. Madam Chair, I request a recorded vote.
Ms. Castor. A recorded vote has been requested. The clerk
will call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Lujan?
Mr. Lujan. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Lujan votes no.
Ms. Bonamici?
Ms. Bonamici. No.
The Clerk. Ms. Bonamici votes no.
Ms. Brownley?
Ms. Brownley. No.
The Clerk. Ms. Brownley votes no.
Mr. Huffman?
Mr. Huffman. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Huffman votes no.
Mr. McEachin?
Mr. McEachin. No.
The Clerk. Mr. McEachin votes no.
Mr. Levin?
Mr. Levin. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Levin votes no.
Mr. Casten?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Neguse?
Mr. Neguse. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Neguse votes no.
Mr. Graves?
Mr. Graves. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Graves votes aye.
Mr. Griffith?
Mr. Griffith. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Griffith votes aye.
Mr. Palmer?
Mr. Palmer. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Palmer votes aye.
Mr. Carter?
Mr. Carter. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Carter votes aye.
Mrs. Miller?
Mrs. Miller. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Miller votes aye.
Mr. Armstrong?
Mr. Armstrong. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Armstrong votes aye.
Madam Chair?
Ms. Castor. No.
The Clerk. Madam Chair votes no.
Ms. Castor. The clerk will report the vote.
The Clerk. Six yeas, eight nays.
Ms. Castor. The amendment is not adopted.
The next question is on the Armstrong amendment. We will
now consider the Armstrong amendment. The clerk will report the
amendment.
The Clerk. ``An Amendment to the Rules for the Select
Committee on the Climate Crisis, Offered by''----
Ms. Castor. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment will be dispensed with.
[The amendment of Mr. Armstrong follows:]
Amendment to the Rules for the Select Committee on Climate
Crisis (116th Congress)
Offered by Mr. Armstrong of North Dakota
Committee Rule 5 is amended by adding the following to the end--
``(e) Contents.--Any Committee reports shall include--
(1) a quantification of the amount of greenhouse gas
emissions reduced as a result of the implementation of
recommendations made by the Committee.''
Ms. Castor. And the gentleman is recognized for 5 minutes
in support of his amendment.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And in our pitch for field hearings, I will start. It is
not easy to get to North Dakota, but when you get there, it is
a fantastic place.
Prior to getting elected into Congress, I represented a
rural district in the State legislature. And in my district, we
grow all the cereal grains; we have a huge livestock industry.
We have an ethanol plant. We had the first small refinery
permitted in the United States since 1976. That is now being
converted to a biodiesel plant. We are on the southern half of
the Bakken Shale oil play. So we have oil and natural gas. We
move all of our commodities by pipe, truck, and rail. And we
also, in the southern part of my district, have the largest
wind farm in the State of North Dakota.
So if you ever want to see an example of doing an all-of-
the-above energy strategy, I would love to have you all to
dinner at my house.
But one thing they all have in common is--and, yes, even
wind farms--they have an effect on greenhouse gas emissions.
And when we are doing these things, we also have to remember
every one of those economies that are in my district don't
exist just locally; they exist in a global economy. And we play
in a global economy in every one of these fields.
And, I mean, we can go back to 1992, and the U.N. Framework
Convention on Climate Change stated their objective was to
stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a
level that would prevent dangerous interference with climate.
The Paris climate accord does the same thing. In an effort
to reach its stated goal of limiting global temperature
increase by 2 degrees Celsius, not Fahrenheit--my wife is from
Oslo, Norway, so I always remember there are two types of
countries in the world: There are the ones that use the metric
system, and there are the ones that landed on the moon, so--
provides that the parties aim to achieve balance in greenhouse
gas emissions and removals by the second half of the century.
So greenhouse gas emissions are clearly identified as an
important variable in the climate conversation, and common
sense just suggests that this committee should conduct itself
by quantifying the amount of greenhouse gas emissions reduced
as a result of our recommendations.
And I just--because the arguments on these are going to be
the same both ways. And I just want to say--and I do, too,
appreciate this conversation a lot, but I think the problem,
when we go to the situation of every member can file their own
report, I think that forces us back into our own bunkers.
Because if this committee doesn't have the resources, I don't
know how all your offices run, but we are really busy.
And I think there is a big difference between filing
reports on the record that we get from think tanks, whether
they are a liberal think tank, a conservative think tank,
gathering this information from outside resources, and this
committee taking ownership of what we are putting there.
And we have to consider the fact of what is the economic
cost, what is the worldwide global impact versus how it affects
producing States like mine. I mean, we are a commodity-based
economy. We have 750,000 people in the whole State. We produce
food and energy for the region, the country, and the world. And
those are important factors to consider when we are doing this.
So that is my amendment. Let's follow the advice of every
math teacher I have ever had and show our work.
And, with that, I yield back.
Ms. Castor. The gentleman yields back.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes in opposition to the
amendment.
I want to thank Mr. Armstrong for his thoughtful comments.
I anticipate that the committee will be synthesizing many of
the expert opinions and analyses that are submitted to us, but
it is premature to put anything in writing that hamstrings us
in our ability to do so.
As I noted during the debate of Mr. Graves' first
amendment, under rule 5(c), every member can have the
opportunity to file additional views to committee reports as
well. If Mr. Armstrong feels that those analyses outlined in
his amendment are not covered in the committee report, he will
have the opportunity to urge us on to do better, to provide
supplementary analysis as additional views.
So, at this time, I will urge a ``no'' vote on the
amendment and yield back.
Would any other member like to be recognized on the
Armstrong amendment?
Mr. Graves. Madam Chair?
Ms. Castor. The ranking member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Graves. I just had a quick question. I got hung up when
he talked about representing rural North Dakota. Could you
distinguish rural versus urban North Dakota?
I am kidding. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. The gentleman yields back. Any further
discussion on the Armstrong amendment?
Seeing none, the question occurs on the adoption of the
Armstrong amendment.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the chair, the noes have it.
Mr. Armstrong. I request a recorded roll call vote.
Ms. Castor. The gentleman requests a roll call vote. The
clerk will call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Lujan?
Mr. Lujan. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Lujan votes no.
Ms. Bonamici?
Ms. Bonamici. No.
The Clerk. Ms. Bonamici votes no.
Ms. Brownley?
Ms. Brownley. No.
The Clerk. Ms. Brownley votes no.
Mr. Huffman?
Mr. Huffman. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Huffman votes no.
Mr. McEachin?
Mr. McEachin. No.
The Clerk. Mr. McEachin votes no.
Mr. Levin?
Mr. Levin. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Levin votes no.
Mr. Casten?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Neguse?
Mr. Neguse. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Neguse votes no.
Mr. Graves?
Mr. Graves. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Graves votes aye.
Mr. Griffith?
Mr. Griffith. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Griffith votes aye.
Mr. Palmer?
Mr. Palmer. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Palmer votes aye.
Mr. Carter?
Mr. Carter. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Carter votes aye.
Mrs. Miller?
Mrs. Miller. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Miller votes aye.
Mr. Armstrong?
Mr. Armstrong. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Armstrong votes aye.
Madam Chair?
Ms. Castor. Votes no.
The Clerk. Madam Chair votes no.
Ms. Castor. The clerk will report the vote.
The Clerk. Six yeas, eight nays.
Ms. Castor. The amendment is not adopted.
We will now consider the Miller amendment. The clerk will
report the amendment.
The Clerk. ``An Amendment to the Rules for the Select
Committee on the Climate Crisis, Offered by Carol Miller of
West Virginia.''
Ms. Castor. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment will be dispensed with.
[The amendment of Mrs. Miller follows:]
Amendment to the Rules for the Select Committee on the Climate
Crisis
Offered by Carol Miller of West Virginia
Committee Rule 5 is amended by adding the following to the end--
``(e) Contents.-- Any Committee reports shall include--
(1) a quantification of the effect on sea level rise as a
result of the implementation of recommendations made by the
Committee; and
(2) a quantification of the change in global temperatures
resulting from the implementation of recommendations made by
the Committee compared to the change in global temperatures
without the implementation of recommendations made by the
Committee.''
Ms. Castor. And my colleague from West Virginia is
recognized for 5 minutes in support of her amendment.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I rise today to speak in favor of my amendment. My
amendment is very straightforward and simply provides
accountability by establishing data instead of fear or
conjecture.
It requires that any recommendations made by this committee
include a quantification of how the recommendation will affect
sea-level rise. In addition, my amendment also requires the
committee to quantify the change in global temperatures as a
result of the recommendation.
If this committee is serious about addressing the issue of
climate change and the environment, this amendment should be
easily accepted. I believe it is important that we and the
American people know how actions taken by this committee will
actually make a difference in our global climate.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Ms. Castor. The gentlewoman yields back.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes in opposition to the
amendment.
As with the other amendments, and noted during the debate
on Mr. Graves' amendment and the subsequent amendments, under
rule 5(c), every member will have an opportunity to file
additional views to committee reports and to offer their
analysis, and we will all be working together to move these
forward.
If Ms. Miller feels the analysis outlined in her amendment
is not covered in the committee report and committee
discussions, she will have the opportunity to provide
supplementary analysis as additional views.
So I urge a ``no'' vote on this amendment and would like to
see if any other member would like to speak on the amendment. I
could yield them time.
So I will yield back and recognize the ranking member.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, very quickly, I just want to make note, even
referencing your opening comments, the charge of this committee
is to carry out measures that help to prevent the adverse
implications of polluting the environment, of climate change.
If we don't take science, if we don't make science-based,
informed decisions, I am concerned that we are just going to go
out there and just throw everything at the wall without having
some type of measure.
And I understand we can file supplementary views. This
needs to be foundational. Nothing should be in the report
without some type of analysis or quantification. I mean, what
happens if we go out there and we go destroy economies? What
happens if we do things that actually have an adverse impact on
the very objectives that we are working to achieve?
I want to thank the gentlelady from West Virginia for
offering this amendment. This is about quantifying the effects
on sea rise of our recommendations, quantifying the effects on
temperature changes of our recommendations. These seem
foundational to the very charge of this committee.
And I can see that many of you are feeling that bipartisan
tug, to my left. And I just want to give you an opportunity to
throw in a ``yes'' vote on an amendment that really, again, is
foundational to this committee's charge.
I urge adoption and yield back.
Ms. Castor. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Graves. I can see it.
Ms. Castor. Any other members who would like to be heard on
the amendment?
If not, hearing no further debate, the question is on
adoption of the Miller amendment.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of chair, the noes have it, and the
amendment is not adopted.
Mrs. Miller. I would like to request a roll call vote.
Ms. Castor. A roll call vote has been requested. The clerk
will call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Lujan?
Mr. Lujan. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Lujan votes no.
Ms. Bonamici?
Ms. Bonamici. No.
The Clerk. Ms. Bonamici votes no.
Ms. Brownley?
Ms. Brownley. No.
The Clerk. Ms. Brownley votes no.
Mr. Huffman?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. McEachin?
Mr. McEachin. No.
The Clerk. Mr. McEachin votes no.
Mr. Levin?
Mr. Levin. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Levin votes no.
Mr. Casten?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Neguse?
Mr. Neguse. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Neguse votes no.
Mr. Graves?
Mr. Graves. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Graves votes aye.
Mr. Griffith?
Mr. Griffith. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Griffith votes aye.
Mr. Palmer?
Mr. Palmer. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Palmer votes aye.
Mr. Carter?
Mr. Carter. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Carter votes aye.
Mrs. Miller?
Mrs. Miller. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Miller votes aye.
Mr. Armstrong?
Mr. Armstrong. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Armstrong votes aye.
Madam Chair?
Ms. Castor. No.
The Clerk. Madam Chair votes no.
Ms. Castor. The clerk will report the vote.
The Clerk. Six yeas, seven nays.
Ms. Castor. The amendment is not adopted.
At this time, are there any other amendments to be
proposed?
If not, we will move to adoption of the rules.
The question is now on adoption of the rules.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it. The rules
are adopted.
And, without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid
upon the table.
I now ask unanimous consent that the staff be allowed to
make any technical and conforming changes to the rules, subject
to approval of the minority.
Hearing no objections, it is so ordered.
I want to just briefly make an announcement here at the
close that our website is up and running,
climatecrisis.house.gov. The Twitter account is also available.
I urge you all to follow @climatecrisis on Twitter.
And if there is no further business, I would like to thank
everyone for attending today's meeting.
I didn't do final passage on the--okay. Excuse me. Let's go
back to--the question is now on adoption of the rules, all
those--I thought we did--we did do that. Yeah, it was a voice
vote.
They have been working--our staff members have been working
so hard to get to this point. I want to thank the minority
staff and the majority staff for all of their hard work helping
to launch this committee. It is not easy to bring a committee
into existence that doesn't exist.
So thank you to everyone's staff. We look forward to
working together.
So if there is no further business, I would like to thank
everyone for attending today's meeting, and I look forward to a
productive year ahead.
Without objection, this meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:01 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[all]