- THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION FUELS AND VEHICLES
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION FUELS AND VEHICLES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MARCH 7, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-106
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-448 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee
GENE GREEN, Texas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi
G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey
DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
JERRY McNERNEY, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, CaliforniaL RUIZ,
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
Subcommittee on Environment
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas
RAUL RUIZ, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee
GENE GREEN, Texas
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL FLORES, Texas
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
DORIS O. MATSUI, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
officio)
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
3
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................
3
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................
7
Witnesses
John Maples, Senior Transportation Analyst, U.S. Energy
Information Administration.....................................
9
Prepared statement...........................................
11
Answers to submitted questions...............................
102
John Farrell, Laboratory Program Manager, Vehicles Technologies,
National Renewable Energy Laboratory...........................
25
Prepared statement...........................................
27
Answers to submitted questions...............................
105
Joshua Linn, Senior Fellow, Resources for the Future.............
36
Prepared statement...........................................
38
Answers to submitted questions...............................
110
Jeremy Martin, Senior Scientist and Fuels Lead, Clean Vehicles
Program, Union of Concerned Scientists.........................
36
Prepared statement...........................................
53
Answers to submitted questions...............................
113
John Eichberger, Executive Director, Fuels Institute.............
57
Prepared statement...........................................
60
Answers to submitted questions...............................
116
Submitted Material
Statement of VNG, submitted by Mr. Shimkus.......................
96
Report entitled, ``Fueling a Clean Transportation Future: Smart
Fuel Choices for a Warming World,'' Union of Concerned
Scientists, February 2016 \1\
----------
\1\ The information can be found at: https://docs.house.gov/
meetings/if/if18/20180307/106958/hhrg-115-if18-20180307-
sd090.pdf.
THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION FUELS AND VEHICLES
----------
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 7, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment,
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Shimkus
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Shimkus, McKinley, Barton,
Harper, Johnson, Flores, Hudson, Walberg, Carter, Duncan,
Walden (ex officio), Tonko, Peters, DeGette, McNerney, Dingell,
and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Loebsack.
Staff present: Mike Bloomquist, Deputy Staff Director;
Daniel Butler, Staff Assistant; Kelly Collins, Staff Assistant;
Adam Fromm, Director of Outreach and Coalitions; Ben Lieberman,
Senior Counsel, Energy; Ryan Long, Deputy Staff Director; Mary
Martin, Chief Counsel, Energy & Environment; Brandon Mooney,
Deputy Chief Energy Counsel Advisor; Annelise Rickert, Counsel,
Energy; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary; Jason Stanek, Senior
Counsel, Energy; Hamlin Wade, Special Advisor, External
Affairs; Everett Winnick, Director of Information Technology;
Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff Director; Jean Fruci, Minority
Energy and Environment Policy Advisor; Rick Kessler, Minority
Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy and Environment;
Alexander Ratner, Minority Policy Analyst; Andrew Souvall,
Minority Director of Communications, Outreach and Member
Services; and C.J. Young, Minority Press Secretary.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS
Mr. Shimkus. The subcommittee will come to order and the
chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
We have experienced very gradual and incremental change in
the transportation fuels and vehicles over the last several
decades, but there are signs that the pace of change will
accelerate in the years ahead. In the not-too-distant future we
may see cars in showrooms and fuel choices at retail stations
that are noticeably different than what is available today. The
purpose of this hearing is to provide an overview of the
ongoing transition and learn more about what it all means for
the American driving public.
I welcome our distinguished panel of experts. While
nobody's crystal ball is perfect, the individuals and
organizations represented here have done some of the best
thinking about the future of personal transportation and I
thank them for participating in this hearing.
Many factors are contributing to this evolving marketplace
in transportation. One driver, no pun intended, is government
policy. I should stress that this is not a hearing about the
Renewable Fuels Standard, per se, or the Corporate Average Fuel
Economy standards, or incentives for electrical vehicles.
However, these and other federal policies are significant
contributors to the changing fuels and vehicle marketplace and
thus are an important part of the overall discussion.
For example, the Department of Energy is working with other
agencies and national labs on its Co-Optima program to achieve
breakthroughs in high octane fuels used in high compression
engines. The program's goal is to cost effectively boost
efficiency from the internal combustion engines and in so doing
help reach a possible and possibly exceed the targets in both
the RFS and CAFE. I look forward to hearing from Dr. Farrell on
this and other research for which the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory is a contributor.
But policy-driven change is only part of the picture. We
are also seeing technological advances, whether it is getting
EVs closer to the point where they make economic sense for more
people, further progress on natural gas-powered vehicles that
can take advantage of our domestic natural gas abundance,
continued improvement in fuel cells, or other avenues of
research. And for every alternative vehicle breakthrough, there
are alternative fueling infrastructure challenges for which
solutions are being developed.
I might add that today's discussion is not just about
alternative fuels and vehicles. Research is also underway to
improve the efficiency of the internal combustion engine and
help it remain a cost-effective choice in the decades ahead. I
mentioned Co-Optima and its integrated approach to high octane
fuels and internal combustion engines that are optimized for
them, but other research is also achieving breakthroughs in
getting more efficiency out of the conventional technologies.
I should also note that advances in autonomous vehicles,
including passage of the SELF DRIVE Act, have been the subject
of a lot of good work by the Digital Commerce and Consumer
Protection Subcommittee under Chairman Latta. Autonomous
vehicles will also have an effect on the choice of fuels and
vehicles that will be used in the future. It is all related, so
we need to be mindful of everything going on in transportation
research.
Of course, many factors are behind these transitions.
Environmental considerations are certainly a factor, energy
security is also a factor, but we can't lose sight of the most
important thing and that is the impact on the consumer. We want
to make owning, operating, and using a vehicle as affordable as
possible for the American public and I hope this research helps
in that regard.
In any event, change is happening in the transportation
sector and I hope that today's hearing gives us all a better
understanding of it. With that, my time, I am done with my
opening statement. Anyone who wants a minute or a half on
either side, seeing none, I yield back my time and now
recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Tonko,
for 5 minutes.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows.]
Prepared statement of Hon. John Shimkus
We have experienced very gradual and incremental change in
transportation fuels and vehicles over the last several
decades, but there are signs that the pace of change will
accelerate in the years ahead. In the not-too-distant future we
may see cars in showrooms and fuel choices at retail stations
that are noticeably different than what is available today. The
purpose of this hearing is to provide an overview of this
ongoing transition and learn more about what it all means for
the American driving public.
I welcome our distinguished panel of experts. While
nobody's crystal ball is perfect, the individuals and
organizations represented here have done some of the best
thinking about the future of personal transportation, and I
thank them for their participation at this hearing.
Many factors are contributing to this evolving marketplace
in transportation. One driver (no pun intended) is government
policy. I should stress that this is not a hearing about the
Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) per se, or Corporate Average Fuel
Economy (CAFE) standards, or incentives for electric vehicles.
However, these and other federal policies are significant
contributors to the changing fuels and vehicles marketplace and
thus are an important part of the overall discussion.
For example, the Department of Energy is working with other
agencies and national labs on its Co-Optima program to achieve
breakthroughs in high octane fuels used in high compression
engines. The program's goal is to cost-effectively boost
efficiency from internal combustion engines and in so doing
help reach and possibly exceed the targets in both the RFS and
CAFE. I look forward to hearing from Dr. Farrell on this and
other research for which the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory is a contributor.
But policy-driven change is only part of the picture. We
are also seeing technological advances, whether it is getting
EVs closer to the point where they make economic sense for more
people, further progress on natural gas-powered vehicles that
can take advantage of our domestic natural gas abundance,
continued improvements in fuel cells, or other avenues of
research. And for every alternative vehicle breakthrough, there
are alternative fueling infrastructure challenges for which
solutions are being developed.
I might add that today's discussion is not just about
alternative fuels and vehicles. Research is also underway to
improve the efficiency of the internal combustion engine and
help it remain a cost-effective choice in the decades ahead. I
mentioned Co-Optima and its integrated approach to higher
octane fuels and internal combustion engines that are optimized
for them, but other research is also achieving breakthroughs in
getting more efficiency out of this conventional technology.
I should also note that advances in autonomous vehicles,
including passage of the SELF DRIVE Act, have been the subject
of a lot of good work by the Digital Commerce and Consumer
Protection Subcommittee and Chairman Latta. Autonomous vehicles
will also have an effect on the choice of fuels and vehicles
that will be used in the future. It's all related, so we need
to be mindful of everything going on in transportation
research.
Of course, many factors are behind these transitions.
Environmental considerations are certainly a factor, energy
security is also a factor, but we can't lose sight of the most
important thing and that is the impact on the consumer. We want
to make owning, operating, and using a vehicle as affordable as
possible for the American people, and I hope that this research
helps in that regard.
In any event, change is happening in the transportation
sector, and I hope that today's hearing gives us all a better
understanding of it. Thank you.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank you for
holding today's very important hearing, addressing the future
of our Nation's transportation fuels and vehicles. And thank
you to all our witnesses for being here, Mr. Chair. I want to
commend you on assembling an expert panel that can inform
members of ongoing trends and impending changes to our Nation's
transportation sector.
It is beyond a doubt that our transportation sector is
changing, that the mix of vehicles and fuels will be
considerably different in 2050 than they are today. It will
almost certainly be more diverse and cleaner. There are many
benefits to reducing dependence on petroleum from improving
national energy security to protecting consumers against the
price volatility of the global oil market.
But the transportation sector is also key to addressing
climate change. Vehicle miles traveled in the U.S. has
continued to grow since the Great Recession and greenhouse gas
emissions from transportation now exceed emissions from our
power sector. It is clear that effective climate action needs
to consider how to reduce transportation emissions.
Reducing emissions in the power sector has occurred much
more quickly and can be done more cheaply, which is why
electrification of transportation has become a priority for
achieving emissions reduction goals. In recent years,
improvements in electric vehicles have been impressive,
including reductions in battery cost, increased range and
greater changing infrastructure options and, increasingly,
utilities are embracing the tremendous opportunity for increase
on electricity demand. We can imagine an exciting future where
vehicles offer the potential to balance loads on the grid as
energy storage resources.
While impediments still exist for further EV deployment, we
are trending in the right direction. Despite the excitement
around electric vehicles we need to acknowledge that this
transition is not going to happen overnight. The internal
combustion engine will continue to make up a significant
portion of our Nation's vehicle fleet in the coming decades.
We should also acknowledge that electrification will be
more difficult to penetrate certain liquid fuel markets such as
aviation, shipping, and potentially heavy duty vehicles, but we
must make drastic reductions in greenhouse gas emissions
immediately. Therefore, we need a multi-track approach backed
by strong federal policies. This means continuing to make
significant R&D investments and provide tax incentives for
electric vehicles as well as supporting the growth of an
advanced biofuels market.
Alternative fuels such as biodiesel and compressed natural
gas can be cleaner options and displace dirtier fuels for heavy
duty vehicles which is important to not only reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, but also other hazardous air pollutants. And
regardless of the fuel choice, we should ensure that vehicles
are using these fuels as efficiently as possible.
Undoubtedly, CAFE standards played a role in development of
technologies to improve fuel economy. Unfortunately, EPA
Administrator Pruitt is reconsidering the greenhouse gas
standards for model year 2022 through 2025 light duty vehicles
and questioning whether the Agency's initial assumptions about
technology development and costs from 2012 are still accurate
and reasonable.
It is clear from the technical assessment as well as the
robust and conclusive public record that these standards should
be maintained. They are feasible, can be met at lower cost than
originally estimated, and can be achieved through a number of
different technology pathways, many of which are already
commercially available. In addition to saving consumers at the
pump, EPA projects that the model year 2022-2025 standards will
reduce emissions by more than 230 million metric tons by 2050
and nearly 540 million metric tons over the lifetime of model
year 2022 to 2025 vehicles.
Similarly, we know the Administration is considering
whether or not to support changes to the Renewable Fuel
Standard. Like CAFE, this is an area that this subcommittee has
examined and I would caution against unilateral action by the
Administration which may not benefit consumers, put us on the
path towards reducing transportation emissions, or increase
domestic energy security. These federal policies along with tax
incentives, R&D investments, and state policies are important
pieces to shaping the future of transportation in our country.
Ultimately, other countries will continue to embrace
electrification, low emissions liquid fuels, and fuel economy.
They realize that their air quality depends on these
developments and they recognize the threat of climate change as
real and requires major commitments to reduce emissions from
all sectors. The United States should continue to lead and
innovate and ensure that our manufacturers, our automakers, and
our refineries are able to deliver cutting edge vehicles and
fuels for the United States and markets around the world.
With that Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
now recognizes the chairman of the full committee, Congressman
Walden from Oregon, for 5 minutes.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, appreciate it.
Appreciate your leadership on this and so many other issues and
I welcome our panelists here today.
As we explore the emerging trends of motor vehicles and the
fuels that they use, across several federal agencies and
national labs and throughout the private sector research as you
all know is underway to make driving cleaner, safer, and more
efficient. Regardless of whether this work is the result of
government mandates or market forces, it nonetheless is going
on and change is coming to the fuels and vehicles marketplace.
The purpose of this hearing is to get a better sense of
this change and I welcome our witnesses as part of helping us
better understand it. Today, we will hear about the
environmental objectives, efficiency objectives, national
security objectives, and other policies behind the evolving
fuels and vehicles marketplace. But as we have this discussion,
let us not forget the one thing that matters most and that is
the interest of consumers.
Family car, it is the second most expensive purchase after
a house and the average price for a new vehicle has risen to
more than $36,000, up nearly $600 just from a year ago
according to Kelley Blue Book. Yes, that is the average price
and it is quite a burden for households as well as millions of
small business owners and farmers and ranchers who rely on
their vehicles to make a living.
Naturally, the car buying public wants these sticker prices
to go down rather than continue going up, same is true for
fuels. The average household uses about a thousand gallons per
year which makes fill-ups a very significant part of the family
budget. Struggling families and businesses would like to see
breakthroughs to bring down the cost of gasoline or alternative
fuels. It is important to recognize that if new fuels and
vehicles do not deliver consumer benefits then they likely
won't deliver any environmental or other benefits either.
An auto dealer once told this subcommittee that even the
most eco-friendly car won't do any good if it just sits in the
showroom, and nobody I know has ever refuted that logic. Bottom
line, the sources of alternative fuels in the marketplace
relies heavily upon the ability to bring down the cost per mile
traveled and the success of alternative vehicles relies on
avoiding sticker shock.
So the good news is, the breakthroughs in fuels and
vehicles can be done in a way that benefits consumers while
also achieving environmental and other objectives. As someone
who owns and drives a hybrid on both coasts, I hope we can work
together to a future that is cleaner, safer, and more
efficient, and yes, perhaps even less expensive transportation
modes. I welcome this discussion on how we get there. This
committee is committed to this effort and my friend from
Illinois is putting a lot of time into the fuels issue along
with others and so we look forward to your testimony today.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, unless anybody wants the
remainder of my time, I would be happy to yield back so you can
move along with the hearing.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden
Today we are exploring the emerging trends in motor
vehicles and the fuels they use. Across several Federal
agencies and national labs and throughout the private sector,
research is underway to make driving cleaner, safer, and more
efficient. Regardless of whether this work is the result of
government mandates or market forces, it is nonetheless going
on and change is coming to the fuels and vehicles marketplace.
The purpose of this hearing is to get a better sense of this
change, and I welcome our witnesses who are a part of it.
Today, we will hear about the environmental objectives,
efficiency objectives, national security objectives, and other
policy reasons behind the evolving fuels and vehicles
marketplace. But as we have this discussion, let us not forget
the one thing that matters most, and that is the interests of
consumers.
The family car is the second most expensive purchase after
a house, and the average price for a new vehicle has risen to
more than $36,000, up by nearly $600 from just a year ago,
according to Kelley Blue Book. Yes, that is the average price,
and it is quite a burden for households as well as the millions
of small business owners and farmers and ranchers who rely on
vehicles to make a living. Naturally, the car buying public
wants to see sticker prices go down rather than continue going
up.
The same is true for fuels. The average household uses
about a thousand gallons per year which makes fill-ups a very
significant part of the family budget. Struggling families and
businesses would like to see breakthroughs that bring down the
cost of gasoline or alternative fuels.
It's important to recognize that if new fuels and vehicles
don't deliver consumer benefits, then they likely won't deliver
any environmental or other benefits either. An auto dealer once
told this subcommittee that even the most eco-friendly car
won't do any good if it just sits in the showroom, and nobody I
know has ever refuted that logic. Bottom line--the success of
alternative fuels in the marketplace relies heavily upon their
ability to bring down the cost per mile traveled, and the
success of alternative vehicles relies on avoiding sticker
shock.
The good news is that the breakthroughs in fuels and
vehicles can be done in a way that benefits consumers while
also achieving environmental and other objectives. As someone
who owns and drives a hybrid on both coasts, I hope we can look
forward to a future of cleaner, safer, more efficient, and yes
cheaper personal transportation, and I welcome this discussion
on how we can get there.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
now recognizes the ranking member of the full committee,
Congressman Pallone from New Jersey, for 5 minutes.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This morning we will
examine the future of transportation fuels and vehicles, a
future that will be shaped by federal policy.
While we have made significant progress in reducing
emissions and improving fuel efficiency, I believe the Federal
Government can and should do more. Last month, the EPA released
the latest inventory of greenhouse gas emissions. For the first
time, the transportation sector has edged out the electric
power industry as the largest emitting sector. Transportation
now accounts for 28.5 percent of our greenhouse gas emissions,
with passenger vehicles contributing most of these emissions.
While the total emissions from transportation are lower for
2016 than for the peak year of 2005, the trend is still not
good. Overall emissions from this sector increased between 2012
and 2016. History has shown that real progress in fuel
efficiency and emission reduction from vehicles is a direct
result of government policies.
CAFE standards and the emission control programs of the
Clean Air Act have delivered great gains and the Renewable Fuel
Standard program has provided us a reliable source of domestic
fuel that has reduced both our dependence on petroleum and
emissions from fuel combustion. Similarly, Federal tax
incentives, research, procurement, and loan programs have
helped spur the development and deployment of electric
vehicles, battery technology, advanced biofuels, and other fuel
and vehicle options.
But we must do more. Oil prices may be affordable and
supplies may be abundant right now, but that situation can
change. Experience demonstrates that the adjustments of rising
prices is painful for everyone, from individual vehicle owners
to auto manufacturers and all the businesses in their supply
chains. A diverse fuel supply combined with enhanced fuel
efficiency provides an important buffer against rising prices.
And if we do not do more to reduce transportation sector
emissions, the effects of climate change are likely to
accelerate and worsen. Moreover, vehicles are major purchases
and reliable vehicles can remain on the road for up to 25
years, so it may take many years to see substantial changes in
fuel consumption or emission reductions without aggressive
federal policies.
And all of this has implications beyond our own borders.
Two countries with the largest market potential, India and
China, have signaled their intention to move beyond the
internal combustion engine. Meanwhile, a number of European
countries are reducing or phasing out their use. U.S. auto
manufacturers need to remain at the forefront of this industry
and that will only happen if they maintain a diverse fleet of
vehicles with improved fuel efficiency and reduce emissions.
When U.S. auto succeeds, the country's economy also succeeds.
So let me say in closing that I am very concerned about the
direction President Trump is taking on fuels and vehicle
policies. Low fuel prices are already leading automakers and
consumers to discount the importance of fuel economy as a
consideration when making a vehicle purchase. The Trump
administration's apparent intention to weaken the pending
combined CAFE and greenhouse gas emission standards for light
duty vehicles would take us in the wrong direction.
Meanwhile, the Administration's proposal to rescind EPA's
glider truck rule which closes a gaping loophole in freight
truck emission standards has rightly united both truck
manufacturers and environmentalists in opposition. We need to
spur innovation and reward it. We need the transportation
sector to be cleaner and more fuel efficient. However,
technologies to improve fuel efficiency, reduce emissions, and
diversify fuel supplies will not appear on the market without
the technology push provided by strong federal policy.
And rollbacks are, by definition, not a way to move
forward. We can have cleaner, healthier air and vehicles that
cost less to operate delivered by a globally competitive U.S.
automobile industry if we stay the course.
And I don't think anyone else wants my time, so I will
yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. We now
conclude with member opening statements. The Chair would like
to remind members that pursuant to committee rules, all
members' opening statements will be made part of the record.
We want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today
and taking the time to testify before the subcommittee. Today's
witnesses will have the opportunity to give an opening
statement. Your full statements are already submitted for the
record and your opening statement is to summarize that document
and then followed by a round of questions from the members who
will be remaining here.
Our witness panel for today's hearing will include Mr. John
Maples, Senior Transportation Analyst, U.S. Energy Information
Administration, thank you for being here; Dr. John Farrell,
Laboratory Program Manager, Vehicles Technologies, National
Renewable Energy Laboratory; Dr. Joshua Linn, Senior Fellow,
Resources for the Future; Dr. Jeremy Martin, Senior Scientist
and Fuels Lead, Clean Vehicles Program, Union of Concerned
Scientists; and Mr. John Eichberger, Executive Director of the
Fuels Institute.
We appreciate you all being here today. We will now begin
with Mr. Maples, and you are recognized for 5 minutes. Thanks
for being here.
STATEMENTS OF JOHN MAPLES, SENIOR TRANSPORTATION ANALYST, U.S.
ENERGY INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION; JOHN FARRELL, LABORATORY
PROGRAM MANAGER, VEHICLES TECHNOLOGIES, NATIONAL RENEWABLE
ENERGY LABORATORY; JOSHUA LINN, SENIOR FELLOW, RESOURCES FOR
THE FUTURE; JEREMY MARTIN, SENIOR SCIENTIST AND FUELS LEAD,
CLEAN VEHICLES PROGRAM, UNION OF CONCERNED SCIENTISTS; AND JOHN
EICHBERGER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, FUELS INSTITUTE
STATEMENT OF JOHN MAPLES
Mr. Maples. Thank you. Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member
Tonko, and members of the committee, I appreciate the
opportunity to appear before you today. The Energy Information
Administration is the statistical and analytical agency within
the Department of Energy. By law, EIA's data, analyses, and
projections are independent, so my comments should not be
construed as representing those of Department of Energy or any
other federal agency.
My statement focuses on the Reference case of the EIA
Annual Energy Outlook 2018 which presents projections for the
U.S. energy system through 2050. The AEO 2018 Reference case is
a business-as-usual, trend estimate using known technology and
technological and demographic trends and with the assumption
that current laws and regulations remain unchanged throughout
the projection period. My oral statement will focus on light
duty vehicles, passenger cars, and light trucks, which
accounted for 55 percent of total transportation energy use in
2017, the base year for the AEO 2018.
The Reference case includes the CAFE and greenhouse gas
emission standards as issued by NHTSA and EPA for multi-years'
2017 through 2025, as well as the California Zero Emission
Vehicle program adopted by nine additional states-- to see that
map, see Figure 1 in my written statement--and existing tax
credits for alternative and advanced vehicles and fuels.
Total transportation energy consumption peaked in 2017 in
the Reference case at 13.1 million barrels per day. With CAFE
standards and advanced technologies, average new light duty
vehicle economy rises from 33.4 mpg to 48.6 mpg by 2050. Total
vehicle miles of travel grow 18 percent between 2017 and 2050,
yet energy consumption decreases by 30 percent by 2042.
Starting with vehicle sales, sales of conventional gasoline
vehicles continue to dominate, but the share declines from 87
percent today to 71 percent in 2050. Electrified vehicles
including battery electric, plug-in hybrid electric, and full
hybrid electric grow strongly, rising from 4 percent of new
sales in 2017 to 19 percent in 2050. Battery-only electrics
grow to 12 percent due to policies such as California's ZEV
regulation, declining battery cost, and longer-ranged models.
Hybrid electric sales rise to 5 percent from 3 percent,
plug-in hybrid electrics from 1 percent to 2 percent, E85 flex-
fuel vehicles reach 7 percent by 2050, sales of diesel, natural
gas, propane, and fuel cell vehicles are all at 2 percent or
less in 2050.
Now for fuel shares, while petroleum products remain
dominant for light-duty vehicles to 2050, see Figure 5,
gasoline with ethanol falls from 99.5 percent to 91 percent by
2050. The E85 share rises from 0.1 percent to 1.5 percent,
electricity usage grows to 4.7 percent, diesel to 2 percent,
and natural gas is negligible.
The key areas of uncertainty in the Reference case are fuel
prices, the digital economy, consumer acceptance, and potential
changes in policies. Higher or lower fuel prices can change the
relative attractiveness of all vehicle types. In the High Oil
Price case, the sales shares of conventional gasoline vehicles
declines to about 62 percent in 2050 compared to 71 percent in
the Reference case. In the Low Price case, the shares go up a
couple of percent. In all cases, High and Low Oil Prices and
the Reference case, fuel consumption decreases.
On-demand ride-hailing is already affecting how consumers
utilize personal vehicles and mass transit. At this point, the
potential energy impact of autonomous vehicles is unclear and
open to wide variation. Customer acceptance affects the future
market success of vehicle types and alternative fuels. For
example, cost and performance, alternative fuel prices, and the
availability of refueling infrastructure are all going to have
an impact.
Finally, the future regulatory environment is uncertain.
The EIA is currently working on Issues in Focus articles
associated with the AEO2018 that will cover potential impacts
on future energy demand. This analysis will likely be released
in late spring. This concludes my statement and I will be happy
to answer questions from the committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Maples follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields back
his time. The chair now recognizes Dr. John Farrell. You are
recognized for 5 minutes. Thanks for being here.
STATEMENT OF JOHN FARRELL
Mr. Farrell. Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member Tonko,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
address this hearing on the future of transportation. My name
is John Farrell and I am the Laboratory Program Manager for
Vehicles Technologies at the Department of Energy's National
Renewable Energy Laboratory in Golden, Colorado. I manage DOE's
Co-Optimization of Fuels & Engines, or Co-Optima Initiative,
and a range of other transportation R&D work at NREL. Prior to
joining NREL, I worked for 15 years at ExxonMobil's Corporate
Research Laboratory where I oversaw R&D focus on advanced fuels
and vehicles in collaboration with several leading car and
truck companies.
Mobility is foundational to our way of life. Today in the
United States we are on the cusp of a wave of innovation that
will dramatically transform our transportation sector.
Innovations in vehicles, fuels, and infrastructure are being
driven to a large extent by research led by DOE, NREL, other
national laboratories, and our key industry partners. Our work
holds the promise of providing mobility that is more
convenient, affordable, and energy efficient, while at the same
time boosting our Nation's economy and our overall global
competitiveness.
It is often noted that transportation is poised to undergo
simultaneous evolutions due to the advent of connected,
autonomous, shared, and electrification technologies. While the
impact of these advanced mobility technologies will indeed be
wide-ranging, it is also true that vehicles with conventional
internal combustion engines will remain an important component
of our transportation system for decades to come.
That is why DOE and NREL are spearheading the Co-Optima
Initiative which, in collaboration with eight other national
labs and 13 universities, is conducting research that will help
fuel producers and engine makers put the most efficient, high
performance cars and trucks on the road. Much of our work to
date has focused on identifying the benefits of fuel properties
such as octane and enabling high efficiency gasoline engines
and the role that blend stocks such as ethanol could play in
providing these properties near term.
Co-Optima gives us the opportunity to save American
consumers and commercial truck operators up to $35 billion a
year in fuel expenses while maximizing vehicle performance and
efficiency, intelligently leveraging domestic resources such as
non-food biomass, expanding job opportunities, and enhancing
energy security. Research is also on the way on transportation
connectivity and automation. By automating driving and other
functions and enabling vehicles to communicate with each other
and with the transportation network, this complex arena of new
technologies foretells a future with reduced congestion and
smoother traffic flows, saving us all a lot of time and money.
The Sustainable Mobility program at NREL is working to
support and complement DOE's SMART Mobility initiative. A major
goal of this effort is to fully integrate electrified vehicles
with the electric grid to ensure that when large numbers of
electric vehicles enter the marketplace they will work smoothly
with renewable energy sources, with buildings, and with the
entire expanse of our transportation infrastructure.
Fuel cell vehicles are now commercially available and have
a range in refueling times comparable to conventional vehicles
and achieve no tailpipe emissions. Our R&D has played a
critical role in the advancement of technology for fuel cell
vehicles and related hydrogen infrastructure needs. For
electric vehicle charging infrastructure, NREL and the DOE labs
are working on technology that will help establish a national
network of extreme fast-charging stations capable of recharging
batteries in a fraction of the time currently required, and we
are exploring wireless in-road charging options for the longer
term.
Commercial trucking also stands to benefit greatly from the
new technology. DOE and NREL are exploring fuel cell and
battery strategies for truck electrification that could
substantially reduce fuel expenses, lower maintenance costs,
and reduce emissions. The lab has forged strong partnerships
with industry leaders and numerous fleet operators. With fuel
costs amounting to 40 percent of trucking expenses, greater
fuel efficiency could save commercial fleet operators and you,
as consumers, hundreds of millions of dollars annually.
It is increasingly clear that we will need huge amounts of
data and super computers to analyze the model at all if we are
to coordinate and optimize the myriad of new technologies that
will comprise tomorrow's interconnected transportation network.
NREL's portfolio of databases each maintain and provide access
to a wealth of invaluable, real-world, on-road transportation
and energy systems data. These tools are already making a
substantial contribution to the numerous R&D activities I have
described.
As you can see, mobility R&D is critical to our Nation's
transportation future. And as we contemplate the resource
portfolio needed to get us there, we can be assured that the
global race for new technology solutions will only intensify.
Maintaining our leadership and innovation is as important now
as ever. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Farrell follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. Now I would like to turn to Dr.
Linn. You are recognized for 5 minutes and again thank you for
being here.
STATEMENT OF JOSHUA LINN
Mr. Linn. Thank you distinguished members of the
subcommittee for inviting me to speak today. My name is Joshua
Linn. I am an Associate Professor in the Department of
Agricultural and Resource Economics at the University of
Maryland and a senior fellow at Resources for the Future, a
nonprofit and nonpartisan environmental economic think tank.
The views I express today are my own.
New technologies are fundamentally changing the vehicles
people buy and the way they travel. Each year, passenger
vehicles become more efficient, safe, and fun to drive. New car
buyers can choose among an expanding number of vehicle options.
Information technologies continue to create new travel options
such as ride sharing or ride-hailing services and bike share
programs.
The future may bring ever increasing levels of automated
driving. These are exciting technological developments, but
their implications for energy security and the environment are
complex. My central point today is that these innovations
benefit the U.S. economy and that well-designed policies can
foster innovation while ensuring that societal objectives are
met. I will make several specific points based on observations
of recent consumer and automaker behavior.
First, tightening standards for fuel economy and greenhouse
gas emission standards have imposed costs on both automakers
and consumers. Following a long period of constant fuel economy
standards, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
and EPA have been tightening these standards. My research
suggests that consumers undervalue recent improvements in fuel
economy.
Over the past decade, automakers have gradually raised fuel
economy to meet tightening standards. Based on data covering
about a half million recent new vehicle buyers between 2010 and
2014, on average, consumers are willing to pay only about $50
for $100 worth of fuel savings. The fact that consumers do not
want to pay the full hundred dollars implies that automakers
cannot pass on all the costs to consumers.
The regulatory agencies assume that when automakers adopt
fuel-saving technology, they raise vehicle prices sufficiently
to cover costs. But if consumers only pay half the value of the
fuel savings and the technology costs more than consumers are
willing to pay, automakers can't raise prices sufficiently to
cover costs without harming their sales. Thus, undervaluation
implies the cost of tighter standards are borne by both
consumers and automakers.
My second point is that tighter standards have affected
vehicle horsepower and other attributes as well as fuel
economy. An automaker raises the vehicle's energy efficiency
when it adopts fuel-saving technology. The automaker can then
decide whether to use the additional efficiency to boost fuel
economy, horsepower, or both.
Typically, consumers are willing to pay more for horsepower
than for an equivalent amount of fuel economy. Consequently, in
the 1990s and 2000s when standards were changing, or not
changing, automakers adopted fuel-saving technology and added
the efficiency, and used the efficiency to boost horsepower and
increase vehicle size without affecting fuel economy.
During that time, horsepower tended to improve about 2
percent per year on average. Then, when standards began
tightening, automakers used those energy-saving technologies to
boost fuel economy rather than horsepower. In other words,
consumers are foregoing the horsepower improvements under
tighter standards that would have occurred if the standards had
been left untightened. These foregone improvements appear to be
costing consumers several billion dollars per year as compared
to about $20 billion in fuel savings that they are getting from
the higher fuel economy.
The third point is that so far the total cost of the
standards appear to have been modest. The costs are difficult
to observe, but research by my RFF colleagues suggest that
marginal costs may have been $40 to $60 per metric ton of
carbon dioxide, based on trades of compliance credits. These
numbers are suggestive, but they are also modest because they
are comparable to previous estimates of the social cost of
carbon dioxide or the fines paid under the fuel economy
standards for noncompliance.
The tightening standards for vehicle fuel economy and
greenhouse gas emissions have induced technology adoption and
probably some innovation. The automobile industry has
demonstrated quite a lot of ingenuity which has kept the total
cost of the standards to a modest level. As long as standards
continue to provide automakers flexibility to figure out the
best compliance strategies, I fully expect these patterns to
continue in the future.
The fourth point is that gasoline-powered vehicles are
likely to continue dominating the market for some time. Many
policies incentivize consumers to buy or lease plug-ins. These
policies combined may amount to $10- to $20,000 per vehicle of
direct subsidies or indirect subsidies that may be funding
charging infrastructure and the like. Nevertheless, consumers
appear to continue buying, preferring gasoline powered
vehicles. Declining battery costs and other innovations will
surely increase the plug-in market share, but just how much is
difficult to say.
Finally, new information technologies are transforming the
way people travel. This is generally reducing travel costs and
likely to increase total travel as well as total vehicle use.
Fortunately, these changes can be addressed by adjusting the
way that the standards are set. Right now, they provide equal
incentives for changes in fuel economy regardless of how much
the vehicle is driven allowing for that possibility that
vehicles are driven different amounts would correct this
inefficiency of the standards that has existed all along, but
which these changes in travel may be exacerbating.
So again I want to thank you for inviting me to speak today
and look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Linn follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. The chair now recognizes Mr. Jeremy
Martin and you are recognized for 5 minutes. Dr. Martin, I am
sorry.
STATEMENT OF JEREMY MARTIN
Mr. Martin. Thank you very much. Chairman Shimkus, Ranking
Member Tonko, and members of the subcommittee thanks for the
opportunity to testify today.
As has been noted, it is an exciting time to work in
transportation. We are entering a period of change more
profound than any since the automobile era began a century ago.
But while autonomous vehicles get a lot of the attention,
changes in our fuels and vehicles also have important
implications for our economy and our environment. So thanks for
holding this timely hearing and inviting me to share my views.
The fuels of the future will be cleaner and more diverse
and the transition to these fuels is already underway. Any
examination of transportation fuels must start with oil.
Petroleum-based fuels are the dominant source of global warming
pollution in the transportation sector which recently surpassed
the electricity sector to become the leading source of U.S.
carbon dioxide emissions.
There is no path to climate stability that does not involve
drastically cutting our oil use. The Union of Concerned
Scientists has developed a plan to cut projected oil use in
half in 20 years through improvements in efficiency and
innovative clean fuels including electricity and advanced
biofuels. The largest near-term opportunity to cut oil use
comes from efficiency improvements which are not only important
to the climate but also protect consumers from oil price
volatility.
Oil price volatility remains a major risk. EIA's
projections for a decade from now suggest that gasoline could
cost anywhere from $2.19 a gallon to $5.21 a gallon, depending
on the price of oil. This price risk is mitigated by the
improving fuel efficiency of our fleet. No matter what the
price of gas, consumers save because of cost-effective vehicle
efficiency standards. The EIA forecasts that 10 years from now,
thanks to these standards, the average driver will use a
hundred gallons less to drive 10,000 miles than they do today.
Using less oil is the best insurance against oil price
volatility, so protecting vehicle efficiency standards is
critically important.
But while oil is the largest part of the mix today, this is
starting to change. For 50 years, from 1958 to 2008, oil
supplied at least 95 percent of U.S. transportation energy. But
oil's hegemony began as the last coal-fired steam locomotives
were replaced with diesels and it ended when refineries and
gasoline distributors adopted a 10 percent blend as the main
source of gasoline.
Ethanol used as a high-octane blending component of
gasoline is less expensive and less polluting than the fossil
fuel alternatives. But the rapid scale up of corn ethanol to
supply this fuel also had negative consequences, putting
pressure on agricultural commodity markets, exacerbating water
pollution associated with corn farming, and land conversion as
corn acreage expanded to meet the new demand.
More recently, the growth of biofuels has come mostly from
biodiesel produced from soybean oil and other lower value fats
and oils, and biomethane, a waste-based transportation fuel
that displaces fossil fuels while supporting the capture and
destruction of methane, a potent climate pollutant. Cellulosic
ethanol from corn kernel fiber and corn stalks is also growing,
albeit more slowly than originally hoped.
Looking into the future, the importance of electricity as a
transportation fuel is no longer a matter of dispute, although
how quickly this transition occurs remains uncertain. Today,
U.S. companies are leading the way on EV technology, but
without the support of policies the U.S. will cede the field to
economic competitors. This will not stop the inevitable
transition to electric vehicles. However, this transition will
take time and will proceed at different rates in different
parts of the transportation sector. Petroleum and biofuels will
remain an important part of our fuel mix for decades to come,
so it is important to use them wisely.
Smart deployment of biofuels can support the progress of
vehicle efficiency. The success of E10 demonstrates that
ethanol is most valuable when it is used for its high-octane
properties and the Co-Optima project shows the potential to
build on this success. Automakers motivated by rising vehicle
efficiency standards are currently putting engine technologies
in the market such as turbocharging that would benefit from the
deployment of high-octane fuels. However, until cost effective,
high-octane fuel is reliably available, automakers won't sell
cars with the higher compression and downsized engines required
to realize the benefits of the co-optimized system.
Phasing in a new fuel gradually for use by optimized
vehicles will avoid shocks to the agricultural commodity
markets and extend the useful lifetime of investments of
ethanol production while making even deeper cuts in oil use
than will be possible if we remain stuck at the E10 blend wall.
Policies to support fuels and vehicles of the future should
focus on cutting oil use and supporting the growth and
innovation in the cleanest vehicles and fuels and this work is
far from done. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Martin follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. Now I would like to turn
to John Eichberger, Executive Director of Fuels Institute.
Welcome. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF JOHN EICHBERGER
Mr. Eichberger. Thank you Mr. Chairman. And good morning,
committee. Thank you for having me here today.
Real quick about the Institute, we founded in 2013 and we
are a nonprofit, collaborative, peer-reviewed research
organization. We are unbiased. We do not advocate for any
outcomes. Our goal is simply to deliver objective analysis of
market conditions and trends to help decision makers make more
informed decisions. That said, the comments I am delivering
today are my own and they do not represent any specific
position of anybody who is part of the Fuels Institute.
Let me start by noting I have read the written statements
of all my co-panelists and there is almost nothing in their
written statements with which I disagree. It is absolutely an
exciting time to be part of this industry. There is so much
going on. Every day there are new headlines and new reports to
digest and analyze to where the market is heading. But the
headlines don't always reflect reality and it is important to
understand the fundamentals of the market if we want to
appropriately anticipate the direction the market might be
heading.
I truly do believe the electric vehicles will represent a
majority of vehicles in the future. Where I differ with a lot
of other people is the definition of when that future might
arise, and this is not because I don't believe the viability of
the technology. It is because I look at the size of the market
and I know it is going to take time to make a significant
change.
To demonstrate my point I do have a chart. It is in my
written statement, but I will have it on the screen here in a
minute too. I wanted to take a look to see how long it takes
for the market to evolve and so what I did is I plotted if we
were to introduce a new feature into every vehicle sold as of
January 1st, 2017, how long would it take to get to a
significant share of the market?
The numbers I ran using EIA forecast for sales and
scrappage rates means it would take 7 years before that feature
was present in 50 percent of the vehicles on the road. That is
a long turnaround to get something on the market. By contrast,
battery electric and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles sold 1
percent of the vehicles last year. They represent 1 percent of
the vehicles sold last year.
So we have got a long way to go. And that sales rate in
2017 was a 26----
Mr. Shimkus. Will the gentleman suspend for a minute?
Mr. Eichberger. Sure.
Mr. Shimkus. Are we going to put his slide up?
OK, thank you.
Mr. Eichberger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Chart shown.]
Mr. Eichberger. So if you take a look, that is the chart
rate in terms of if every vehicle had a new feature, 100
percent market conversion, 7 years to get a 50 percent market
share. EVs were 1 percent of sales last year, there is a 26
percent growth rate over 2016. And this next chart, if I can
have that one up, I wanted to find out what would happen if we
continued an aggressive sales rate.
[Chart shown.]
Mr. Eichberger. So this plots a 26 percent and a 20 percent
annual growth rate for battery and plug-in hybrid vehicles
through 2035. This results in a potential market share of 43
percent of cars sold in 2035, but only 10 \1/2\ percent of
vehicles on the road. That is the size and scope of this
market. It is going to take a long time. Even with aggressive
sales it is going to take time to get some turnover, which
means in 17 years 90 percent of the vehicles on the road will
still be powered by an internal combustion engine and fueled
with liquid fuels.
The size of the market is enormous. We must not lose sight
of that. Of course there are many factors that could accelerate
the pace of change as outlined in my written testimony. But
regardless, the internal combustion engine is going to dominate
the market for decades to come and we are already seeing that
market evolve. Downsized engines, start-stop applications,
boosted engines, compression ignition, hybrids, variable
compression ratio engines, auto engineers are charting new
advancements all the time overseeing the benefits yielded to
consumers.
Among the top as it has gained a lot of attention recently
over the last several years is to design an engine optimized to
run on a specific higher-octane fuel. I have seen numerous
technical reports indicating that this could provide a great
benefit to efficiency, emissions, and performance for
consumers. Fuels Institute, we have our own report coming out
hopefully this May which seeks to answer some key questions
about a high-octane fuel future.
These questions include how would we produce the fuel, what
are the constituents that would go into building that fuel?
What would be the cost and feasibility and scalability? What
are the distribution issues? What is the anticipated level of
demand for the new fuel and how long might it take to reach
market maturity? There is potential here, but tradeoffs are
probably going to be required and the transition is going to
take time.
The vehicles and fuels market is changing. Engines and
fuels will become cleaner, more renewable and more efficient,
but all transitions take time. I urge the committee to be
suspicious of any prediction of eminent disruptive change. Most
are focused on one causal factor and dismiss the numerous other
factors that will influence consumer decisions. Changing
today's transportation system will not be like introducing the
car engine that replaced the horse and buggy. It will not be
like introducing the smart phone which transformed pretty much
all commerce and social interaction as we know it.
Each example of a major, successful, disruptive event
delivered compelling, immediate, and tangible value to the
consumer that improved their quality of life in some real way
and I question what options are we seeing in the transportation
sector that could deliver similar value and cause
transformative disruptive change? Whatever change is on the
horizon, if the consumer cannot access it or does not want to
buy it, it will not succeed and we wasted time and resources.
I believe change ultimately is coming, but for the
foreseeable future the market is going to look remarkably
similar to the market we have today and the transition to
something different will be measured and incremental. Thank you
very much for inviting me today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Eichberger follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Shimkus. I thank all of you for the testimony. We will
now move to the question and answer portion of the hearing and
I will begin by recognizing myself for the first 5 minutes. I
am going to go on my own, my own route here for a minute.
Dr. Farrell, they are always afraid when I start doing
this. Two things, one is obviously I am very interested in the
Co-Optima study and the potential for high-octane fuel which
has been elaborated by many of you here today. In your opening
statement you mentioned the terminology, non-food biomass. So
being from a corn state, would you, is that just stover and
stalk or would part of that definition be hybrid corn or GMO
corn that is planted specifically for the fuel market?
Mr. Farrell. So the research that we have been doing on
biomass-based routes to producing new fuels acknowledges that
the current technology for producing ethanol from corn is well
established and there are no real R&D challenges associated
with that. When we start looking at cellulose to make ethanol
as well I think we acknowledge that that technology is already
commercial, albeit at low scale, but it also doesn't have the
same resource to challenges.
Within Co-Optima we have been looking at the opportunities
to look at a wide range of woody biomass, of energy crops, of
stover, of waste residues to provide the feedstocks that will
be able to provide high efficiency blend stocks including
ethanol and other alcohols as well. So the research is really
in focus where the greatest uncertainty lies.
Mr. Shimkus. Great, I appreciate that. Then I want to go to
Mr. Eichberger and I appreciated the charts. That is why I
wanted to get them up there. I think that is very helpful in
just trying to figure out and there is public policy that
probably bend that a little bit.
Mr. Eichberger. Of course.
Mr. Shimkus. But let's just take a short term window of 10
years, what a traditional--and we have had this discussion
before, they used to be we called them gasoline stations. In 10
years we may call them what and what would they look like?
Mr. Eichberger. In 10 years they are going to look a lot
like they look today and we call them convenience stores, going
back to my previous job. We are going to see some
diversification. We may see additional fuel blends. We are
seeing some E15 on the market. That may increase. We may see
some more electric vehicle charging stations on the market.
Over the next 10 years we are not going to see a dramatic
change in consumer behavior or the cars they are driving, so
the market for fueling stations will evolve with the vehicle
and the consumer. But we will see some diversification and new
strategies coming forward to satisfy consumer demand.
Mr. Shimkus. And then to everyone, 10 years, different
question, going into an auto dealership, what do you think we
will see as we walk around either the showroom or get out into
the lot?
Mr. Maples? Just a guess, This is kind of a 35,000-foot
view of where we think we are going to be in 10 years.
Mr. Maples. Well, in 10 years, I would agree with the rest
of the panelists that this is going to be primarily a
combustion engine environment. So the vehicles that you are
going to see are going to be a lot more efficient, probably
some level of hybridization whether that is a microhybrid which
doesn't deliver motive power, or some other full hybrid, plug-
in hybrids, and then of course EVs, and then I think that will
be driven primarily by the mandates.
Mr. Shimkus. Dr. Farrell?
Mr. Farrell. I agree with Mr. Maples. I would note that
many OEMs are announcing intentions of producing far more
models based on those provided powertrains. So we will see more
electrified options, but I think the showrooms will look
predominately the same.
Mr. Shimkus. Dr. Linn?
Mr. Linn. Yes, thanks. So suppose we are on the same path
of fuel economy and emission standards and California is
pursuing the Zero Emission Vehicle program, and other states,
in that case I certainly would agree we will see a lot more
options and probably more effort to broaden the market for
those vehicles.
Mr. Martin. Yes. I would certainly expect more EVs. I think
that is the most visible change. And there is some uncertainty
about how much travel people will do in vehicles they own
versus rides that they hire, in which case they wouldn't need
to go to a dealer.
Mr. Eichberger. Mostly internal combustion engines, we will
see a lot more battery electric vehicles. We have to keep in
mind a lot of the automotive industry's announcement of
electrification is going to be dominated by hybrids, so a lot
more hybrids.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. And my time is expiring, but the other
thing that drew my attention was Dr. Linn when you talked
about, and this is my district, we will pay for more
horsepower. We won't pay for more mileage. I am summarizing
that research, but I think that correctly points to at least 33
counties in southern Illinois.
With that I will yield back my time and turn to the ranking
member of the subcommittee, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you again to our
witnesses. This morning we have covered a lot of ground. There
are many federal and state policies, technology developments
and global trends and other nations' mandates that will shape
the future of fuels and vehicles.
So, Dr. Martin, in Mr. Eichberger's testimony he points out
that because of the long time that a vehicle remains on the
road, adoption of new engine technologies or fuels and
increases in fleet fuel economy take decades to fully penetrate
the transportation sector.
As was mentioned earlier, according to EPA's most recent
greenhouse gas emission inventory, the transportation sector
has now overtaken the electricity sector as the largest emitter
of greenhouse gases in the U.S. and in recent years, the trend
is upward for emissions in this sector. I am concerned about
the implications of this for all air emissions including
greenhouse gas emissions.
To make significant emissions reductions in this sector
don't we need both cleaner fuels and more electric vehicles?
Mr. Martin. Yes. We absolutely need to make progress on
both fuels and vehicles and to do so quickly. The long term
that the vehicles stay on the road means it is even more
important to do this up front.
Mr. Tonko. So what do you see as our best options in the
cleaner fuels category?
Mr. Martin. In cleaner fuels there is a range of low carbon
fuels out there. Of course, I think it is important to
recognize electricity as a transportation fuel as a piece of
that story as well as the biofuels we have been deploying
which, you know, are getting significantly cleaner over time.
And there is a lot more potential for biofuels. There is ample
feedstocks to scale that up and to do it in ways that are
cleaner and cleaner over time.
Mr. Tonko. And how much cleaner is today's average
electricity generation than gasoline?
Mr. Martin. My colleague is just updating the analysis that
we do of the mile per gallon equivalent of cars, of electric
vehicle in terms of total pollution, and I think in terms of a
weighted average across the country we are up to about 90 miles
a gallon equivalent for EVs when you weight that based on where
the vehicles are actually being charged.
Mr. Tonko. And electric vehicle sales have been increasing,
but they still make up a very small portion of the vehicles on
our roadways. Should we be investing more in the infrastructure
to support electric vehicles, public charging areas, for
example, to further reduce range anxiety and other barriers to
electric vehicles?
Mr. Martin. It is certainly important to invest in
infrastructure for electric vehicles. I think one of the things
in our experience is that range anxiety is a larger factor
before people buy an EV than after they buy one, especially
with the range increasing. So, most people are finding that
charging at home and charging at work is adequate to meet the
vast majority of their needs.
Mr. Tonko. And I noticed in the executive summary of your
2016 report that you referred, ``years of stagnation in the
improvement of the efficiency of passenger cars. Would you
agree that strong federal regulation, CAFE standards in
particular, are needed to improve the efficiency performances
in vehicles?
Mr. Martin. Yes, absolutely. I think the record is very
clear and I think others alluded to that as well. Without
strong standards the consumers won't see the benefits of
improved efficiency and will remain vulnerable the next time
oil prices go up.
Mr. Tonko. Well, the Trump administration may be moving
toward weakening the combined CAFE and greenhouse gas standards
that were proposed by the Obama administration in spite of a
midterm review document that found there are technologies
available now and some that will be ready soon that will allow
them to meet the standards. I am very concerned that this will
return us to the years of stagnation that we experienced
before. Is that a fair assessment?
Mr. Martin. Yes, absolutely. That is a very real risk. And
I think what we saw before was that American automakers become
less competitive when they allow their fleets to stagnate and
don't invest in improving efficiency and reducing oil use.
Mr. Tonko. So what are some of the most effective ways to
accelerate the transition to cleaner fuels and vehicles?
Mr. Martin. Well, I think the standards that we have in
place making sure those are strong and remain strong through
2025, the technical assessment report makes a very strong case
for leaving them as they are and setting stronger standards
that go further beyond 2025, and looking for ways to support
electrification, advanced biofuels, and integrating these
things thoughtfully together as we move forward.
Mr. Tonko. Well, in the debates about the lifecycle effects
of different fuels and vehicles it is often pointed out that
although electric vehicles do not emit anything directly, they
may be drawing power from electricity sources that produce
emissions. There is certainly a lively debate about the direct
and indirect emissions associated with different biofuels, but
we tend to assume all gasoline is equal in terms of its
associated emissions.
Dr. Martin, is all oil the same in terms of its emissions?
Mr. Martin. Yes, it is a great point. There is a huge
variability in different sources of oil, different extraction
methods, and different refining processes in terms of the
extent of emissions in the production of oil and gas. And since
we use and will continue to use such a large amount of gasoline
and diesel, these emissions from the oil and gas sector are
quite large and there is a lot of opportunity to reduce those
or opportunity for them to go up if they are not attended to
carefully.
Mr. Tonko. All right. With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. You got full use of that 5 minutes. That was
very efficient.
Mr. Tonko. I think we call it Tonko time. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Shimkus. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would love to have
10 minutes because this has been a fascinating discussion. I
would like to thank the panel for being here.
Mr. Eichberger, let me start with you, two quick questions.
One is, today most gas stations carry some combination of
regular, a mid-grade, and then a premium grade. What do you
think the opportunity is in terms of giving consumers choices
in the future where they could dial in from E0 to E85? Is there
anything technologically that would prevent that?
Mr. Eichberger. I have not seen any units entering in the
market to do that. There is nothing technologically to prevent
them from it. I think there are some logical reasons why we
wouldn't want them to do that in terms of controlling the
emissions profile of the fuels. Having consumers make their own
gasoline at the dispenser I don't think is a great idea.
Mr. Flores. Oh, you would have to put limits on it, of
course, so that you wouldn't hurt the emissions restriction or
the emissions profile that you are trying to achieve.
The next question I have for you is what are the challenges
of facing the use of ethanol above E10 and can these challenges
be overcome?
Mr. Eichberger. So there are compatibility issues. Every
piece of equipment that a retailer uses to dispense fuel has to
be listed as compatible with that fuel and up until about 10
years ago there were no dispensers listed for above E10. Some
underground equipment is not listed. The transition is getting
easier, but the challenge becomes that a lot of retailers
aren't the original investors in the underground storage tank
systems so they may not even know what equipment they have
underground. If they can't certify what is underground they
can't move forward with that higher fuel.
Dispensers are fairly easy to upgrade. You can get E25
dispensers for about the same price as an E10 dispenser. But
you have to be absolutely certain that what you have
underground is compatible as well.
Mr. Flores. OK, thank you.
Dr. Farrell, in the past, policymakers have sort of talked
about fuels policy and vehicles policy separately, so we have
heard a lot of chatter about EVs. We have talked about the
Renewable Fuel Standard even though this hearing is not about
that. We have talked about vehicle mileage standards and so
forth.
Tell me about what your thoughts are in terms of
integrating all policies, fuel policy and vehicle policies,
into one coherent comprehensive policy.
Mr. Farrell. I think the opportunity that we are exploring
within the Co-Optima program is really to understand from the
technology standpoint what the options are. So that is one of
the key benefits that we have been able to apply is
understanding where those tradeoffs are in the way we are
unconstrained by what is currently available in the
marketplace. Our hope is that that will be the basis for an
informed policy discussion which we are not participating in
but we fully hope to inform.
Mr. Flores. And I just, you didn't say this, but I am
getting the inference or the implication that you think these
policies should be combined from a policymaker's perspective.
Mr. Farrell. I think from the consumer standpoint, if the
goal is to get higher performing fuels and vehicles in the
marketplace then looking at these as an integrated system is
the most effective way.
Mr. Flores. OK. Thank you very much. The next question for
you is you are researching alternatives to the internal
combustion engines. You are also looking at ways to improve the
efficiency of the internal combustion engine. How much better,
let's say, if you look 10 years in the future what would the
internal combustion engine look like and what would the
efficiency improvement be versus a 2018 engine?
Mr. Farrell. Sure. If we look at the Department of Energy's
goals for the internal combustion engine operating on today's
fuels, by 2030----
Mr. Flores. You could assume they don't have to operate on
today's fuels. Again we are integrating all policy, but go
ahead.
Mr. Farrell. Yes. We will build upon.
Mr. Flores. OK. I am with you.
Mr. Farrell. So based on current fuels we are looking at 25
percent fuel economy benefit by 2030. By----
Mr. Flores. What percent again?
Mr. Farrell. Twenty five percent.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Mr. Farrell. By co-optimizing it and allowing additional
benefits to be realized we can get an additional 10 percent or
35 percent versus today. So that is a significant benefit that
is available.
Mr. Flores. OK, great. And do you have a feel for what the
cost differential would be in terms of cost per vehicle to get
there?
Mr. Farrell. Since we are looking at something 10 years
down the road, the cost implications are difficult and the OEMs
basically have the opportunity to trade off costs with some
other areas, so we don't have good cost estimate at this point.
Mr. Flores. OK, thank you. I look forward to following the
research as you move forward.
In terms of one of the biggest challenges to the adoption
of electric vehicles is their high upfront cost, also the
limitations of current battery technology. Tell me a little
about, if you have done any research on this, in terms of
moving beyond lithium, what that implies for cost. Lithium has
a huge environmental impact that is negative, so tell us about
where you think the EVs could go moving beyond lithium.
Mr. Farrell. Sure. For the near term, I think everybody
thinks that lithium-based batteries will be the main source of
battery power for vehicles. The cost targets that the DOE has
set for the 2022, 2023 timeframe can be achieved with
improvements to current lithium technologies, but to get cost
parity with ICEs requires varied costs that are about a factor
3 lower than they are today. That will require new battery
chemistries. Some of those may still rely on lithium, but some
of the more expensive materials such as cobalt, which has some
strategic element constraints to it, will have to be removed in
order to get those cost constraints down.
Mr. Flores. OK. I would love to have more time, but I have
run out of time. Thank you for your answers.
Mr. Duncan [presiding]. I thank the gentleman and the Chair
will now go to Mr. Pallone for 5 minutes.
And I guess Mr. Peters would be next.
Mr. Peters. I will assume my best New Jersey accent to fill
in for Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank the
witnesses for being here.
I had a question for Mr. Linn. So there is a company called
Achates Power in my district that received one of the largest
ARPA-E grants to do an efficient opposed-piston engine. They
are doing a lot of that for defense. It has implications for a
larger use. It boosts fuel economy, decreases emissions and
also, for the benefit of Mr. Shimkus, his residents, it
increases horsepower.
I wonder what the ability or what you would expect in terms
of innovations like that absent government intervention through
front end research grants or through some other regulatory
approach that would make sure that we do these incentives here
in the United States?
Mr. Linn. All right. So there are already incentives just
from consumers and what they want, right, to improve vehicles.
We see that over decades, vehicles today are a lot different
and a lot better than they were 30 years ago in all sorts of
dimensions.
The way that the sort of policies can affect things are
really in two ways, right. One is providing greater incentive
to target those innovations toward improving fuel economy,
reducing fuel consumption and emissions. The other is on the
more basic research side to address the fact that there may be
various reasons why the private actors aren't conducting as
much research and innovation as they should be.
And so there are reasons to do both of those and that would
encourage more innovation and then also direct it toward
meeting these public social objectives.
Mr. Peters. I am wondering too like what would be the
incentive of if you expected higher prices from something like
a carbon tax obviously I think people would be more
incentivized to invest in these kinds of things. Do you agree
with that?
Mr. Linn. Yes, certainly. We see, when gas prices change we
see the way consumers make decisions about what vehicles to buy
certainly changes. And so, by implication, carbon price would
provide similar types of signals.
Mr. Peters. Maybe ask Mr. Maples what sort of assumptions
you made about the price of fuel as you have calculated the
deployment of electric vehicles what assumptions you made about
future costs of fuel?
You have to turn your microphone on. Want to turn your
microphone on again, please?
Mr. Maples. Oh, sorry. In our Reference case, I think we
have fuel prices going up to $3.47 a gallon by 2050. Again EVs
do get a benefit on the fuel side. The problem with the CAFE
standards, or not the problem, but the issue with the CAFE
standards and how that affects EV sales, you have an incumbent
technology that is improving by, say, 30 percent in which, in
effect, means a reduction in fuel cost of 30 percent. So that
payback differential when comparing a gasoline vehicle to an
EV, for example, is getting smaller.
Mr. Peters. Right.
Mr. Maples. So it is making it more difficult for the EV to
compete against the gasoline vehicle over that projection. So
while there are fuel savings that are available for EVs, it is
really the incremental cost of the vehicles that matter.
Mr. Peters. California's Air Resources Board has simply set
a level of cars that have to be on the road, electric cars that
have to be on the road in the State by a certain time. That is
essentially letting the car manufacturers decide how they are
going to get to that point, but it has obviously created a lot
of deals on hybrids and EVs that have attracted customers.
You didn't make any assumptions in your analysis about the
government doing anything like that nationwide, correct?
Mr. Maples. That is correct. So we only have the eight
States that have currently or, excuse me, the nine States plus
California have currently adopted. We do allow credit trading
among those States, so there is an optimization, if you will,
to achieve that standard.
Mr. Peters. Right. And that would be much more efficient
for California too if we were able to expand that beyond, and I
certainly think if we could get the rest of the country on
board we would be willing to talk about that.
The other thing is, I wonder if you have made any
assumptions about what foreign automakers are going to do in
this space. We have heard the Chinese announce that they want
to do, I think it was 20 percent of all car sales to be, or 20
percent of all cars to be electric. Did you consider that and
would that kind of action by other countries and our
competitors affect your analysis in terms of the rate of
deployment?
Mr. Maples. So we don't specifically address that in the
AEO, but we do have a feedback, a function in the model that as
you build more of these vehicles there are economies of scale
that occur. So we get pretty significant reductions in battery
costs and improvements in our performance of batteries for
those vehicles over the projection, so they are getting far
more cost effective than they are today.
Mr. Peters. Right. And I would just finally conclude by
saying to Mr. Shimkus whose move is that if you drive a Tesla
it is American made, it goes pretty fast. I think you would
enjoy it. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman and apologize for the
name mixup. I will now go to the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thanks to the panel
for being with us. Coming from Michigan we are pretty proud and
committed to internal combustion engines. We appreciate some of
the research that is going on. The University of Michigan is
doing some great research on various things including
autonomous. There are other options that probably assist in
reducing the use of fuels including ride sharing and things
like that, but at this present time the internal combustion
engine is in a pretty good place and having a NASCAR track in
my district I kind of like it as well.
Mr. Maples, you mentioned in your testimony that there are
several technologies available to improve the fuel economy of
internal combustion vehicles. For instance, you mentioned
microhybrid or stop-start technology which feels really weird
at times if you are not used to that. That is for sure. You
project that will be included in about 20 percent of the
gasoline vehicles by 2025. By some estimates, this technology
can improve fuel economy by 5 percent.
Why is it that it is only being offered to a small
percentage of vehicles according to your understanding?
Mr. Maples. So within our evaluation and projection of
technology penetration we have a menu of probably 83
technologies that are available to improve the efficiency of
gasoline vehicles over the projection and so the extent to
which any of these technologies are successful or how
competitive they are against other options that are available
to manufacturers to improve efficiency.
So engine downsizing, turbocharging, some of what has been
discussed here, improved valve train designs and how those
designs operate within that engine can make a big difference
and then there is transmissions and then lightweighting. And so
we have a considerable amount of lightweighting that also
occurs in the vehicle that again has an impact on the amount of
efficiency improvement that is being gained across this menu of
technology.
Mr. Walberg. So because of those multiple options, options
like the stop-start technology, that is the reason why it is
not included in a larger percentage because we have better
approaches for various vehicles than that?
Mr. Maples. That is correct. So it is getting employed in
those vehicles that where it is most cost-effective to do the
microhybrid, the integrated start-stop.
Mr. Walberg. What are some--OK, go ahead.
Mr. Maples. So for others like the pickup trucks we see a
lot more lightweighting in the aluminum, other high strength
steel, transmissions being employed and turbocharging
downsizing, you see more penetration there.
Mr. Walberg. And the cost factors there are justified?
Turbocharging, I assume, is a more expensive approach, but you
are getting performance out of it?
Mr. Maples. Correct.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Are Corporate Average Fuel Economy
standards enough to encourage greater fuel efficiency or are
additional incentives or requirements necessary?
Mr. Maples. Well, yes. EIA doesn't comment on policy, so I
will----
Mr. Walberg. Any other members of the panel that could
comment on that? Yes, sir?
Mr. Martin. I think on the previous point, the fact that
the standards could be met without the full penetration of some
of these cost-effective technologies like stop-start technology
reflects the ability to hit higher standards. And so, I think
there are certainly opportunities to go beyond what is in the
CAFE standards either by setting more stringent standards or
additional policies to support rollout of oil saving fuel
efficiency technology sooner.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. I think
the next colleague to turn to is my friend from California, Mr.
McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the chairman for your generous
yielding and I thank the ranking member. But also the
panelists, I have enjoyed your discussion.
So, history has shown that the petroleum industry is very
volatile over about a 10 or 12 years' time cycle. We have been
at a kind of a low point for a number of years now. Mr. Maples,
you can't foresee what is going to cause these shifts usually.
Do you see a change in the cycle coming and what effect that
would have?
Mr. Maples. So we do project that oil prices are going to
increase in our AEO projection, but we also offer scenarios
that show different potential outcomes of the Low Oil Price
case and the High Oil Price case to try to bound at an upper
level and a lower level what those oil prices could be.
Mr. McNerney. What is your upper bound?
Mr. Maples. Could I get back to you to----
Mr. McNerney. Sure.
Mr. Maples. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. Absolutely.
Mr. Eichberger, your projections seem realistic based on
just the size of the fleet out there and the inertia that it
has, but have you looked at what fuel prices will do in terms
of accelerating the fleet turnover?
Mr. Eichberger. Yes. Fuel prices would accelerate it. We
can take a look at that trend of hybrids. In the past, when
fuel prices were 3.50 interest in hybrids of people in the
market to buy a car was 82 percent. When prices dropped down
below 2, it dropped down to 41 percent and sales of hybrids
dropped as well. So fuel prices is a signal to consumers to
start shopping around for something different.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
One of the things that I want to drill down a little bit is
standards. Mr. Linn, you talked a little bit about standards.
Do you think that higher CAFE standards is beneficial to the
American economy and the American consumer and the auto
industry or any of the three or all of the three?
Mr. Linn. So I would say based on the research I have done
that so far the standards to the sort of individual consumers
and to automakers themselves have been more or less a wash.
There are benefits and costs and they sort of even out. That is
just narrowly on the benefit and cost to the industry itself
and then there are the societal benefits for reducing oil
consumption, reducing emissions. Once you add in those then,
benefits would seem to outweigh the costs.
Mr. McNerney. Yes.
Mr. Martin, you had a little different take on that. Could
you elaborate?
Mr. Martin. Well, I think that there is a large benefit
from fuel economy standards and the consumer savings in fuel
dramatically outweigh the additional cost of the vehicle over
the lifetime of the vehicle. In fact, for a vehicle that is
financed the costs probably outweigh, the fuel savings offset
the costs basically on the day you drive off the lot. So that
is what our analysis reflects, substantial benefits to
consumers from fuel economy standards even under low oil prices
and if oil prices go up substantially larger benefits.
Mr. McNerney. Well, it seems that the auto industry is
always fighting these standards and in my mind it is
essentially harming itself by doing so. Would you agree with
that?
Mr. Martin. Yes, absolutely. They may have a preference not
to invest in new technology and to keep selling the technology
they have, but this will leave them vulnerable to oil price
changes in the future. And particularly in a moment when
electrification is accelerating, getting behind the curve on
technology and oil saving technology, I think, is more critical
in a moment of rapid change then it might have been in decades
past.
Mr. McNerney. Well, you mentioned that the U.S. is leading
in the EVs and car technology now. Is that partly due to the
CAFE standards? Then what is going to happen if the CAFE
standards go away?
Mr. Martin. I think in fuel efficiency technology for the
fleet the CAFE standards are certainly very important. EVs have
other drivers in addition to fuel economy standards, but I
think the range of support for electric vehicles, whether it is
support for research, support for tax incentives, or standards,
without those, one would expect less investment and less
progress from the U.S. industry which could put it in a less
competitive position over time.
Mr. McNerney. All right, thank you.
I am not going to try to be more efficient with my time.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Duncan,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And there is a lot of
focus on an infrastructure package that the White House is
working on that we will be taking up, and I think a big part of
infrastructure should be our electrical grid. That is
hardening, but that is also getting ready for the EVs of the
future.
So, Mr. Farrell, what are the challenges for the electric
grid, thinking of a future of considerably more EVs, and does
our grid have the capacity to handle it at this point and what
suggestions might you have going forward?
Mr. Farrell. I think estimates of the projections of EVs
into the marketplace suggest that the impact on the grid will
be manageable. The overall change in load is a small percentage
of the current because of the large base in which we are
building. So the challenge is not necessarily global, it would
be local, especially if we adopt fast-charging technologies
which are going to be required to give very rapid fills of
batteries on passenger cars, or even especially on trucks and
buses the local impacts could be substantial.
So most of the work that we are doing right now, in terms
of key research in these, are identifying from the
infrastructure standpoint what are the impacts of putting
several megawatts of power into vehicles on a very rapid on-off
cycle how to manage that in terms of the grid reliability.
Mr. Duncan. Right. Generally, looking at infrastructure in
this country I have to ask how we are going to pay for it.
South Carolina just had a massive gas tax increase in our State
to pay for infrastructure roads and bridges needs. EVs don't
pay any gas tax when they refuel and therefore they could
arguably not contribute to the upkeep of the highways even
those they are using those roads.
So, Mr. Maples, are we not already subsidizing EVs because
they are not subject to the gas tax, and what are your thoughts
on this and should EVs be charged something for maintenance and
infrastructure? Should they be subject to some sort of gas tax,
so to speak?
Mr. Maples. So currently in our analysis that is correct.
We are using basically a residential electricity price for the
cost of fuel for electric vehicles. So I am aware that some
States have registration fees to try to cover the gasoline
taxes that aren't currently being paid by electric vehicles so
that could be an option, but otherwise there would have to be
something implemented at either a refueling site, a public
refueling site, or somehow that electricity metered differently
within the home when they are recharging to capture whatever
those taxes should be.
Mr. Duncan. Right. I can make the argument that there are
not enough EVs on the road right now to have a dramatic impact
but, as Mr. Peters was saying earlier, the car companies are
getting prepared for this massive increase in the number of
electric vehicles that we will see in this country and I think
we need to prepare for their impact on the roads and bridges
and they ought to pay their fair share.
Now the electrical suppliers, the companies like Duke
Energy and others, are collecting taxes from the ratepayers,
but I don't see how that is translating to the infrastructure
needs so I think that is something that Congress needs to work
on.
I want to talk more on the rise of electric vehicles and
highlight the research work that International Transportation
Innovation Center is doing in tandem with my alma mater,
Clemson University, in the Greenville, South Carolina area.
They are building a global market of open and closed automotive
test beds for the most advanced innovations in connected,
automated, and sustainable mobility.
Clemson University and ITIC collaborate on a variety of
research activity with the Department of Energy, and Clemson
also has a project under the DOE's Office of Energy Efficiency
and Renewable Energy called Boosting Energy Efficiency of
Heterogeneous Connected Automotive Vehicle Fleets. That is a
big title for something, golly. That is government at its best,
in my opinion, or worst maybe. They utilize their partnership
to develop anticipative and collaborative traffic and vehicle
control algorithms to achieve 10 percent energy savings.
Mr. Farrell, what are the challenges that you see with
integrating, I guess, not only, I guess I am thinking more
autonomous vehicles than I am just electric vehicles in
general. But as we think holistically about EVs and driverless
cars and traffic signals, recharging stations, this is a
tremendous investment on somebody's part, maybe not necessarily
the Federal Government and the taxpayer.
Are you all thinking, Mr. Farrell, about that and how are
you all involved in that just real quickly because you have got
10 seconds.
Mr. Farrell. So our primary role is to understand the
energy implications of an expanded autonomous and connected
fleet, and analyses that we have done showed that under some
conditions in the worst case scenarios you could triple energy
consumption or you could get a 60 percent reduction. So the key
is how to integrate it in an effective way to minimize the
energy impacts.
Mr. Duncan. And you are working with research universities
along those--yes.
Mr. Farrell. That is right.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Carter, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank all of you for
being here.
Gentlemen, I have the honor and privilege of representing
the entire coast of Georgia, from South Carolina all the way
down to the Florida State line, about 110 miles of coastline.
As you can imagine, marine travel and boats are important to
us. And very important, as all of you know and as anyone who
owns an outboard motor knows, fuels can be very damaging to
marine vehicles, to marine boats and outboard motors. It causes
a lot of deterioration, a lot of wear and tear and that is
something I am concerned about.
Mr. Maples, I will go to you first and just ask you, is the
EIA doing anything to look at marine engines and are you
factoring anything in to the future of transportation as a
result of the fuels that we are having and being forced to use
in marine vessels like this?
Mr. Maples. So we do, so we look at the freight industry
marine sector and then we also look at recreational boating and
we make projections of energy consumption in both, and we do
track the gasoline and diesel consumption in recreational
boating separately from that of the rest of the transportation
sector.
Mr. Carter. What is biobutanol? Tell me about that. Are you
familiar with it?
Mr. Maples. I am not that familiar with it.
Mr. Carter. Anyone on the panel familiar with it a little
bit? As I understand it, it is an alcohol produced from
renewable plant-based energy sources or advanced feedstocks
such as cellulosic biomass like wood residues. And from what I
understand, at a 16.1 percent volume blend it actually has
positive impacts on engines and it is less corrosive.
Does anyone know, have we looked at this as a possible
fuel? I am open to anyone who is willing to----
Mr. Eichberger. So biobutanol has been discussed for quite
a while. It is sometimes labeled with the moniker of a drop-in
ready fuel, so compatibility issues are not a big issue
supposedly. It has had a little trouble getting some market
share and there is some limitation in terms of its----
Mr. Carter. Can you tell me why? Is it----
Mr. Eichberger. Quite frankly, I think it is a lobbying
thing.
Mr. Carter. A lobbying thing.
Mr. Eichberger. There are a lot of stakeholders looking for
a piece of this pie and this is another ingredient trying to
get a piece of the fuels market and there is a lot of
competition for it and I think there is some regulatory hurdles
maybe to be overcome. I am not----
Mr. Carter. OK. What are the regulatory hurdles? Can we
help with that? Because if it is actually as it says, if it has
positive impacts on engines and is less corrosive this is what
we need to be looking for. Listen, I get calls all the time in
my office about marine engines and about having to use this
fuel corroding these engines.
Mr. Eichberger. The EPA has looked at it. You can ask EPA
specifically what is their criteria for considering biobutanol
and blend levels and its interaction with other constituents in
fuels. It is going to come from the EPA analysis of how it
interacts.
Mr. Carter. OK. But are there regulatory hurdles that have
to be overcome, is there anything we can do in Congress to
assist this?
Mr. Eichberger. I have been told there are. I do not know
specifically what they are.
Mr. Carter. OK, fair enough. Fair enough. While I have you,
while I am talking to you I will skip over to the question I
have for you. The marine manufacturers again have, they have
raised some concerns about how the fuel blends are marketed to
consumers. For instance, one of them, E15 fuel blends in some
scenarios are being marketed as unleaded 88. Are you familiar
with that?
Mr. Eichberger. I am familiar with that, yes.
Mr. Carter. What is going on with that? Why are they being
labeled like----
Mr. Eichberger. The retailers who are selling E15 blended
fuels are seeking an opportunity to grow their sales and
because E15 has an octane rating of 88 they are able to market
it as 88. They do affix the EPA-required label for which
vehicles E15 is allowed to be used in according to EPA. But
they are----
Mr. Carter. Do you think that causes some confusion among
the----
Mr. Eichberger. There is a lot of confusion with consumers
on all fuels. They like to not have to think about what fuels
they are buying, so when we are thinking about bringing new
fuels to the market we have to really think about how we
educate the consumer. There is no consistency in terms of how
the retailers are selling their E15 other than affixing that
EPA-required label advising consumers which vehicles they can
use them in.
E15 is not approved for marine vessels and so that is
specifically labeled on that fuel it is only for 2001 and newer
vehicles and not these other vehicles.
Mr. Carter. Let me ask you all. Do you all think we can
make it any more confusing? Can we all get together and see if
we----
Mr. Eichberger. We can make it more confusing, absolutely.
Mr. Carter. Gee. Well, we are doing a pretty good job right
now, I guarantee that.
Let me skip over and, Mr. Farrell, I will go to you and ask
you this question. Again I represent South Georgia so, plenty
of pine trees. What about cellulosic fuels? Are we doing
anything with that?
Mr. Farrell. Yes. The Department of Energy is indeed
looking at advanced cellulosic routes to produce biofuels that
could have advantageous energy and emissions profiles, so that
is an active area of interest.
Mr. Carter. Right. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. I am going
to ask unanimous consent, Mr. Johnson, if you wouldn't mind,
for us to go to Mr. Loebsack because he is patiently waiting
and Buddy Carter went over time before you got in the door. So
with that I will recognize the gentleman from Iowa who has
waited patiently, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loebsack. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thanks for holding this hearing today and for allowing me to
waive on. I really do appreciate this on the subcommittee
today. There is a heck of a lot that has been talked about
today, very fascinating stuff.
My main concern as you might imagine being from Iowa is the
RFS so I am going to talk about that for a second. But I do
want just a couple of quick notes. Mr. Walberg talked about
having a NASCAR track in his district. I have one in Newton,
Iowa, but they also host every year the Iowa Corn Indy 300 at
that NASCAR track, so I had to get that in. We also have a
National Advanced Driving Simulator at the University of Iowa.
They do a lot of great work on the issues related to what you
folks are talking about.
And I recently had a ride inside Iowa City with a Tesla
that is advanced to be autonomous. I had a few worries as we
were going through town, braking in time and all the rest, but
it was actually pretty fascinating. So there is a lot to look
forward to, I think, in the future as far as research on these
different vehicles is concerned.
As Mr. Shimkus might expect, I do want to talk about the
RFS a little bit today. It is a hotly debated topic, obviously.
And I know that this is not about the RFS, but as Mr. Shimkus
said, per se, it is not about that today. But it is going to be
important going forward, I think, when it comes to fueling our
automobiles and other vehicles down the road. There are a
number of changes, I think, that are being discussed with
respect to the RFS right now in Congress and I think a lot of
them would be very harmful to rural America to farmers.
And I do appreciate the fact that Dr. Martin mentioned it
is not just ethanol we are talking about here, it is biodiesel
as well and it is advanced cellulosic, so it is a variety of
things that we are talking about. But the RFS really has
substantially benefited, I think, the U.S. economy over the
years. It has created jobs in both renewable fuels and industry
and overall agricultural industry as well, led to a pay raise
for American farmers, about $6,800 per American farm it has
been estimated, and has directly affected folks living in rural
communities. It has lowered gas prices, I think, by giving
consumers choice at the pump which we all know leads to more
money in the pocket of our constituents, so that is very
important.
My home State of course leads the nation in biofuels
production, Iowa, and I am very proud of that. It supports
probably close to 50,000 jobs in Iowa alone and accounts for a
sizable proportion of our economy. Biofuels, I think, are a
clean, homegrown, and high-octane alternative to fossil fuels
which is very important that we have an alternative to fossil
fuels, I think, for national security as much as anything as
well.
The EPA has estimated as biofuel production has increased
since 2007, total cropland acreage has actually dropped not
risen, as some say. And, additionally, the USDA reports that
demand has never been higher for conservation programs as well.
I think there are some myths out there that we have to be very
careful when we talk about the RFS that we set people straight
on this.
Americans are consuming more and more gasoline. Gasoline
consumption set a new record high in 2018 of 9.35 million
barrels per day with further increases expected in 2019, and
yet another reminder, I think, why we have to maintain a strong
RFS. I know that domestic oil production is soaring, but we all
know that production won't last forever and that falling oil
prices are not going to last forever as well.
I am running short on time. I could give a lot more facts
and figures, but I think in the interest of time and given the
fact that I am waived to this committee today, this
subcommittee today, I do just want to ask Mr. Martin. With all
the different statistics that we know in mind, how would you
say the RFS and strong CAFE standards help to address continued
increase in gasoline consumption and carbon emissions?
Mr. Martin. Right. So I think vehicle fuel, vehicles policy
to make vehicles more efficient, fuels policy, and also to get
electric vehicles going, these things work together to cut oil
use and reduce all the burdens that high oil use has on the
U.S., saving consumers money and reducing greenhouse gas
pollution and all the other challenges associated with oil
pollution. So I think the RFS of course is supporting the
development of alternative fuels, but all those pieces fit
together.
Mr. Loebsack. Right, I appreciate that. And I do appreciate
the comments about E15 that were mentioned too, because it is
the case that I know some folks have concerns about that. Mr.
Carter did. But the fact of the matter is that we can make sure
that we label this correctly so that people do not have
problems with their engines. And I know that Senator Cruz has
some concerns about that as well.
But I want to continue to work forward with the President,
with the Administration, with the relevant folks to make sure
that we do have a strong RFS and that we do in fact continue to
contribute to our rural economies. I think it is just
absolutely essential and I think we can have cleaner air and I
think we can reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and make
sure that we have better security for our country as well so we
are not fighting wars for oil down the road.
So thank you again, Mr. Chair, for having me and I
appreciate it. Thanks so much.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired. Again the
chair wants to thank the gentleman from Ohio and then recognize
him for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that
and I was happy to yield.
Mr. Eichberger, many of us that are not from California are
not big fans of the State's disproportionate role in dictating
fuels and vehicle policies. Could you talk a bit about
California's role in technology forcing with regards to fuels
and vehicles and what it may mean for the rest of us?
Mr. Eichberger. Probably not to that extent. What I can
articulate is of the electric vehicles that are being sold in
the market, half of them are being sold to California. I think
that is encouraged a lot by the Zero Emission Vehicle program
they have and the other States that have the ZEV program, and
it does drive some decisions by the automakers to satisfy the
largest market in the union.
Mr. Johnson. OK, all right. Well, thank you.
Mr. Maples, the Annual Energy Outlook for 2018 has
projections out to 2040 and you see the gasoline-powered
internal combustion engine remaining the most popular choice
over that span. Can you explain the staying power of the
internal combustion engine?
Mr. Maples. Sure. So again I think this really comes down
to, for the alternatives to the internal combustion engine the
cost of those alternatives and then the availability of
alternative fuels in that refueling infrastructure, in general,
just a consumer acceptance.
The gasoline vehicle is going to get much better. I think
we have talked about that some here today. You are going to see
significant improvements in fuel economy there, significant
reductions in fuel costs for consumers of those vehicles, which
I think is going to make it even more difficult for some of
these alternatives to compete against it.
Mr. Johnson. Yes. I don't rebuild cars myself, but I know
that here in America ever since the automobile was first
developed it began creating an enthusiastic consumer base for
old cars, rebuilding cars, automobile enthusiasts, and so I
think consumer acceptance for a lot of the new technologies is
a big part of this factor that is keeping the combustion engine
as the mainstay. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Maples. I think that is correct. OEMs right now, for
example, I don't think there are any propane vehicles that are
available produced from an OEM, or natural gas.
Mr. Johnson. Right.
Mr. Maples. But they do sell them as convertible if a
consumer wanted to go and have those converted over. So
otherwise we have plug-in vehicles as an option and then flex-
fuel vehicles.
Mr. Johnson. Sure, OK.
Also to you, Mr. Maples, to what extent is fueling
infrastructure an impediment to increased market penetration of
alternatives?
Mr. Maples. I think with any of these alternative vehicles
there are hurdles and the question is how many hurdles have to
be overcome in order for these options to be successful. Policy
plays a role, but certainly one of the, I think, biggest
hurdles is availability of refueling of those vehicles.
Mr. Johnson. OK, all right.
Mr. Chair, with that I yield back a whole minute and 33
seconds.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
Seeing that there are no further members wishing to ask
questions for this panel, I would like to thank all of our
witnesses again for being here today. Before we conclude, I
would like to ask for unanimous consent to submit the following
documents for the record: A letter from VNG, which is a natural
gas vehicle group; and this, Fueling a Clean Transportation for
the Future from the Union of Concerned Scientists. \*\ Without
objection, so ordered.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\*\ The information has been retained in committee files and can be
found at: https://docs.house.gov/meetings/if/if18/20180307/106958/hhrg-
115-if18-20180307-sd090.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Shimkus. In pursuant to the committee rules, I remind
members that they have 10 business days to submit additional
questions for the record and I ask that witnesses submit their
responses within 10 days if possible upon receipt of the
questions.
Without objection, the committee--before I do that, I
really appreciate it. I think it was a great hearing. Members
were very participative and we learned a lot. So I do
appreciate and, without objection, this committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:49 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]