- ONLINE PLATFORMS AND MARKET POWER, PART 4: PERSPECTIVES OF THE ANTITRUST AGENCIES
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
ONLINE PLATFORMS AND MARKET POWER, PART 4:
PERSPECTIVES OF THE ANTITRUST AGENCIES
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ANTITRUST,
COMMERCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
of the
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
NOVEMBER 13, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-63
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available http://judiciary.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
40-787
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chairman
ZOE LOFGREN, California
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia,
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
Ranking Member
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
Wisconsin
Georgia
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio
CEDRIC L. RICHMOND, Louisiana
KEN BUCK, Colorado
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama
ERIC SWALWELL, California
MATT GAETZ, Florida
TED LIEU, California
MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
TOM McCLINTOCK, California
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
J. LUIS CORREA, California
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania,
BEN CLINE, Virginia
Vice-Chair
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas
W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado
LUCY McBATH, Georgia
GREG STANTON, Arizona
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
DEBBIE MUCARSEL-POWELL, Florida
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
Perry Apelbaum, Majority Staff Director & Chief Counsel
Brendan Belair, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ANTITRUST, COMMERCIAL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island, Chair
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado, Vice-Chair
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
Georgia
Wisconsin, Ranking Member
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland
KEN BUCK, Colorado
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
MATT GAETZ, Florida
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania
W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
LUCY McBATH, Georgia
Slade Bond, Chief Counsel
Daniel Flores, Minority Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
NOVEMBER 13, 2019
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
The Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...................
1
The Honorable James Sensenbrenner, Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law................
2
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chairman, Committee on the
Judiciary......................................................
3
The Honorable Doug Collins, Ranking Member, Committee on the
Judiciary......................................................
47
WITNESSES
The Honorable Joseph Simons, Chairman, Federal Trade Commission
Oral Testimony...............................................
6
Prepared Testimony...........................................
8
The Honorable Makan Delrahim, Assistant Attorney General,
Antitrust Division, Department of Justice
Oral Testimony...............................................
27
Prepared Testimony...........................................
29
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
A statement for the record by the Electronic Privacy Information
Center from the Honorable David N. Cicilline, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...
68
APPENDIX
Responses to Questions for the Record from the Honorable Joseph
Simons, submitted by the Honorable David N. Cicilline,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
76
Responses to Questions for the Record from the Honorable Joseph
Simons, submitted by the Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson,
Member, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
112
Responses to Questions for the Record from the Honorable Joseph
Simons, submitted by the Honorable Pramila Jayapal, Member,
Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...
113
Responses to Questions for the Record from the Honorable Joseph
Simons, submitted by the Honorable Ken Buck, Member,
Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...
117
Responses to Questions for the Record from the Honorable Makan
Delrahim.......................................................
118
A letter regarding the proposed merger of Fitbit and Google from
a group of antitrust and technology experts....................
146
ONLINE PLATFORMS AND MARKET POWER, PART 4:
PERSPECTIVES OF THE ANTITRUST AGENCIES
----------
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 2019
House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial
and Administrative Law
Committee on the Judiciary
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:07 p.m., in
Room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. David Cicilline
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Cicilline, Nadler, Neguse,
Johnson, Jayapal, Scanlon, McBath, Sensenbrenner, Collins,
Armstrong, and Steube.
Also Present: Representative Cline.
Staff Present: David Greengrass, Senior Counsel; John Doty,
Senior Advisor; Madeline Strasser, Chief Clerk; Moh Sharma,
Member Services and Outreach Advisor; Amanda Lewis, Counsel,
Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law; Joseph Van Wye,
Professional Staff Member, Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law; Lina Khan, Counsel, Antitrust, Commercial
and Administrative Law; Slade Bond, Chief Counsel, Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law; Daniel Flores, Minority
Chief Counsel; and Andrea Woodard, Minority Professional Staff.
Mr. Cicilline. The subcommittee will come to order. Without
objection, the chair is authorized to declare recesses at any
time.
We welcome everyone to the fourth in a series of hearings
investigating competition in digital markets, this one focusing
on the perspectives of the antitrust agencies. I now recognize
myself for an opening statement.
We are living through a moment of extreme concentration
across our economy. In industry after industry, just a few
companies dominate critical markets that affect the day-to-day
lives of hardworking Americans. Unchecked by competition,
dominant corporations can abuse their market power to raise
prices for consumers, lower wages, and stifle entrepreneurship
and small businesses, enriching their executives and
shareholders at the expense of everyone else.
One area where this extreme concentration is most troubling
is in the digital economy, where a small number of dominant
platforms have become critical intermediaries for the flow of
commerce and information. While these platforms have delivered
American consumers some benefits, there's growing evidence that
these platforms are now using their power to set the terms of
the market in ways that enrich them but make it impossible to
compete on an even playing field.
Each day, the news is full of reports documenting how
decisions by this handful of corporations increasingly
determine whether a merchant, app developer, or news publisher
sinks or swims.
Because several of these digital monopolies operate
business models premised on the surveillance of Americans, the
power they wield over us is by many measures unprecedented. Six
months ago, this committee initiated a bipartisan investigation
into competition issues in digital markets. This investigation
follows a long tradition of congressional investigations into
monopoly power, including industry-wide assessments of whether
dominant corporations are abusing their market power, whether
our laws are working, and how to reverse the rising tide of
economic concentration.
This investigation is pursuing a similar path, and a key
task for the subcommittee is understanding the enforcement
record of the antitrust agencies. Over the past decade, the
largest technology firms have acquired over 436 companies, many
of which were actual or potential competitors, according to a
New York Times report by Tim Wu and Stuart Thompson, but not a
single one of these acquisitions was challenged by antitrust
enforcers. In fact, only a handful of these were closely
scrutinized. The last major monopolization case brought by
Federal enforcers was Microsoft 20 years ago.
While these problems have plagued enforcement across
markets and not just in the digital economy, the enforcement
gap in these markets has created a de facto antitrust exemption
for online platforms. Have the agencies failed to bring cases
because of unfavorable case law, requiring congressional action
to amend the law? Is this inaction due to a lack of agency
resources, or is it due to a lack of will at the agencies to
enforce the laws on the books?
These are the questions that the subcommittee is looking to
answer through its investigation in areas that I hope will be
fully addressed during today's hearing.
In closing, I want to thank Chairman Simons and Assistant
Attorney General Delrahim for their appearance today and look
forward to hearing their testimony.
And I now recognize the very distinguished gentleman from
Wisconsin, Ranking Member Sensenbrenner, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to welcome Mr. Delrahim and Mr. Simons to our
hearing today.
In the ordinary course of oversight of the antitrust
enforcement agencies we conduct annual or biannual oversight
hearings to examine the waterfront of issues before these
important agencies. But today Assistant Attorney General
Delrahim and Chairman Simons have graciously appeared to
discuss only one set of issues before us, antitrust issues
concerning the tech sector.
Like members of this subcommittee, these key government
officials recognize the importance of making sure that we get
right the applicability of this Nation's antitrust laws for
this critical sector of our modern economy. And like us, each
of them is in the midst of a searching inquiry into whether our
century-old antitrust laws and our government's enforcement of
those laws is adequate for the challenges presented by our new
digital economy.
In our inquiry in the subcommittee, we have thus far looked
at whether entities in the tech sector, particularly the
largest online platforms, have or have not been accumulating
and leveraging market power over competitors and other market
participants. Affected entities include fellow tech innovators,
news publishers, and app developers who depend upon large
online platforms to reach consumers and many others.
We have also examined aspects of online data privacy and
the role that online data plays in competition, particularly
with very large accumulations of consumers' online data.
Today we gather to hear the perspectives of the two
antitrust enforcement agencies on these and other tech issues.
This will help us not only to engage in oversight of these
agencies' activities in the tech sector but also to reap the
benefit of those agencies' expertise and wisdom as we assess
whether or not our antitrust laws and agencies are up to the
task or instead need amendment or added resources.
While this hearing is narrowly focused, it should be noted
that there are a number of issues before the Department of
Justice that Members of Congress are monitoring closely. This
includes the review of consent decrees, and it is my intention
to submit questions for the record on this topic.
I encourage our witnesses and all of us to recognize that
Congress and the antitrust enforcement agencies need to be
careful not to overreach to extend or apply the antitrust laws
in ways that end up punishing success, suppressing innovation,
and ultimately limiting consumer welfare.
I thank the witnesses for coming and yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentleman, the ranking member,
for yielding back.
I now recognize the chairman of the full committee, the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Nadler, for his opening statement.
Chairman Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for convening
today's oversight hearing of the antitrust agencies and our
competition system.
As part 4 of our series of hearings on online platforms and
market power, today's discussion is essential to advancing the
committee's bipartisan investigation into competition in
digital markets.
This hearing occurs at a critical moment. There is growing
evidence that a handful of dominant platforms now control key
arteries of online commerce, content, and communications. A
number of important digital markets are now dominated by just
one or two firms.
For example, Google controls over 90 percent of the global
search market, and Facebook captures over 80 percent of all
global social media revenues. By some estimates, Amazon
controls about half of all online commerce in the United
States.
While the open internet has delivered enormous benefits to
Americans, waves of anticompetitive consolidation in digital
markets have had devastating effects on key elements of our
democracy and economy, such as a free and diverse press. It
also threatens the survival of a key element of our economy,
the American startup. Empirical evidence suggests that the
trends of increasing consolidation of market power in digital
markets pose a threat to technology startups and to innovation
in the U.S. economy.
For example, it has been reported that seed funding for
technology startups, the initial round of investment in a
startup, has declined significantly just from 2015 to 2018.
I am deeply concerned about the antitrust agencies' lax
merger enforcement, which has permitted these harmful levels of
concentration and the rise of market power in the digital
economy.
In addition to rising consolidation, there have also been
allegations of anticompetitive conduct in digital markets. For
instance, as more small and medium-sized businesses become
reliant on the dominant platforms to reach consumers, they have
increasing concerns that discriminatory or exclusionary conduct
by the platforms could destroy their business over the course
of just a few days or months.
Despite mounting evidence of illegal monopolization
activities by some of the dominant platforms and numerous cases
brought by international enforcers, U.S. enforcers appear to be
paralyzed. It has been decades, decades, since the Department
of Justice or the Federal Trade Commission has brought a
significant monopolization case in the tech sector. This is not
just a criticism of the current administration. It has been
decades since a significant monopolization case has been
brought in the tech sector.
Tim Wu, a professor at Columbia University, testified
before the Judiciary Committee in July that the Department of
Justice court challenges against AT&T, IBM, and Microsoft,
quote, ``were foundational in terms of shaking up industry and
creating room for new firms to grow,'' unquote.
I am encouraged by reports of the agencies' current
investigations into the dominant tech platforms, but the
decline in enforcement over the past several decades is
extremely troubling--a decline, I should add, that has occurred
across all industries, not just in the technology sector. I
find it hard to believe that companies in all sectors have
simply ceased engaging in illegal monopolization rather than
the more likely explanation, which is that the agencies have
been and are underenforcing the antitrust laws.
There may be a number of reasons for underenforcement by
the agencies with respect to both anticompetitive conduct and
to merger review, including unfavorable case law, insufficient
enforcement will, and inadequate agency resources, all of which
I look forward to having examined at today's hearing.
One problem Congress can most directly address is ensuring
that the agencies charged with antitrust enforcement have
sufficient funding. Unfortunately, appropriations of these
agencies have declined over the last decade in spite of the
increase in merger activity and an increase in the complexity
of investigations. In real terms, agency funding in 2019, this
year, was nearly 20 percent lower than in 2010.
It is vital that the antitrust agencies have the resources
they need to do their jobs. I doubt that the gentlemen in front
of me will disagree with that statement, at least.
While ultimately it is the responsibility of the antitrust
enforcement agencies to enforce the law, Congress has an
obligation to assess whether existing antitrust laws and
competition policies and the will to enforce those laws and
policies are adequate to address the competition issues facing
our country and to take action if they are found to be lacking.
Over the past 6 months, the committee's bipartisan
investigation into competition in the online marketplace has
explored these questions in the context of digital markets. It
is essential that we continue this important work through
today's hearing and throughout this Congress as we seek to
address competition problems in digital markets for the benefit
of American consumers, small businesses, and workers.
With that, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
today, and I thank them for their participation.
I yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
It's now my pleasure to introduce today's witnesses.
Our first witness, Joseph Simons, was sworn in as Chairman
of the Federal Trade Commission in 2018. Prior to joining the
Commission, Chairman Simons was a partner at Paul, Weiss,
Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison and co-chair of their Antitrust
Group. He's held multiple positions at the FTC throughout his
career, including assistant director for evaluation, associate
director for mergers, and director of the Bureau of
Competition.
Chairman Simons received his A.B. from Cornell University
and his J.D. from Georgetown University Law Center, a fine,
fine institution.
Our second witness is Makan Delrahim, assistant attorney
general for the Antitrust Division of the United States
Department of Justice. Prior to his confirmation in 2017, Mr.
Delrahim assisted President Trump's transition team and was
briefly deputy White House counsel. He previously served in the
DOJ's Antitrust Division in 2003 as deputy assistant attorney
general under President George W. Bush. Before his time in the
executive branch, Mr. Delrahim was chief of staff and chief
counsel to the Senate Judiciary Committee under Chairman Orrin
Hatch.
Mr. Delrahim received his B.S. from the University of
California, Los Angeles and his J.D. from the George Washington
University School of Law.
We welcome our distinguished witnesses and thank them for
participating in today's hearing.
And now, if you would please rise, I will begin by swearing
you in.
Please raise your right hands. Do you swear or affirm under
penalty of perjury that the testimony you're about to give is
true and correct, to the best of your knowledge, information,
and belief, so help you God?
You may be seated.
Let the record show the witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
Please note that each of your written statements will be
entered into the record in its entirety. Accordingly, I ask
that you summarize your testimony in 5 minutes. To help you
stay within that time, there's a timing light on your table.
When the light switches from green to yellow, you have 1 minute
to conclude your testimony. When the light turns red, it
signals that your 5 minutes have expired.
Chairman Simons, you may begin.
TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE JOSEPH SIMONS, CHAIRMAN, FEDERAL
TRADE COMMISSION; AND THE HONORABLE MAKAN DELRAHIM, ASSISTANT
ATTORNEY GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, ANTITRUST DIVISION
TESTIMONY OF JOSEPH SIMONS
Mr. Simons. Chairman Cicilline, Ranking Member
Sensenbrenner, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to appear before you today. I am pleased to
talk about the Commission's current competition enforcement
activities and policy priorities, particularly with regard to
digital platforms. I'm also very happy to appear alongside my
esteemed colleague, Assistant Attorney General Makan Delrahim.
Please know that the written statement that I submitted is
on behalf of the Commission. My oral statement and responses to
your questions today are my own and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Commission or any individual
commissioner, other than me.
First, I want to thank the committee for its work in areas
that are core to our mission, such as pay for delay settlements
and drug companies' abuse of the regulatory processes to thwart
competition. I also very much appreciate your support in
addressing recent court challenges to our 13(b) authority,
which is critical.
Today, I want to briefly highlight the recent FTC
competition enforcement matters and developments at the agency.
In particular, the agency has taken notable actions to prevent
anticompetitive mergers and conduct, including in digital
markets, that are of interest to this committee and others.
Over the past 2 years, the Commission has had 43 merger
enforcement actions, including seven in litigation for which we
are undefeated. These cases have implications across the U.S.
economy in markets for specialized software, medical devices,
industrial chemicals, and familiar consumer staples.
With respect to conduct, the FTC recently voted unanimously
to bring a monopolization case involving vertical restraints on
a digital platform. The FTC's complaint against Surescripts
alleges that Surescripts is a monopolist in two multisided
platforms, one connecting doctors to pharmacies and one
connecting doctors to PBMs. The complaint alleges that
Surescripts used exclusive contracts and similar arrangements
to protect its dominant positions in both markets.
In another matter, last year the Commission ruled that 1-
800 Contacts had unlawfully entered into agreements with rivals
to restrict the scope of truthful, nondeceptive online
advertising. As the Commission learned through its earlier
research program on advertising restrictions, agreements among
competitors to restrict otherwise lawful advertising often
reduces competition. The FTC continues to monitor closely the
behavior of participants in similar markets.
In an effort to deepen our focus on technology markets and
make it a real emphasis, our Bureau of Competition shifted
internal resources earlier this year to establish a Technology
Enforcement Division. This dedicated group is investigating
competition in U.S. technology markets and will recommend
enforcement action where warranted.
For example, as Facebook recently publicized, our
Technology Enforcement Division has commenced an antitrust
investigation into some of Facebook's business practices.
Finally, we continue our robust policy work, including
hearings on Competition and Consumer Protection in the 21st
Century. We held quite a number of hearings focused on various
parts of the technology sector, such as multisided platforms,
algorithms, artificial intelligence, and data security. We
expect to begin releasing output soon, including technology
platform guidance.
We are committed to using our resources efficiently to
protect consumers and to promote competition, to anticipate and
respond to changes in the marketplace, and to meet current and
future challenges.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The statement of Mr. Simons follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Chairman.
I now recognize Mr. Delrahim for 5 minutes.
TESTIMONY OF MAKAN DELRAHIM
Mr. Delrahim. Thank you, Chairman Cicilline, Ranking Member
Sensenbrenner, Chairman Nadler, and distinguished members of
this subcommittee. Thanks for inviting me to be before you
today at this oversight hearing.
We begin by thanking the subcommittee for continuing the
bipartisan support of the Antitrust Division's work to protect
competition on behalf of American consumers, workers, and
entrepreneurs. I also want to thank you for your leadership and
oversight of some of the most challenging issues of today, such
as the competitive impact of online platforms.
We have submitted a longer statement for the record. In the
interest of time, I just wanted to highlight a couple of the
issues just for your benefit and the committee's benefit here.
Recently, just this past week, we announced the formation
of the Procurement Collusion Strike Force. It's an effort with
U.S. attorneys across the country, the FBI, the Department of
Defense's DCIS, as well as a number of inspectors general, and
our efforts there are to detect, prevent, and prosecute
criminal activity, especially when taxpayers are the victims at
all levels of the government.
I will place some of the other general matters of our
statement in the record. We will, with your permission,
supplement the previous statement. But I wanted to highlight a
few of those, but I want to get into the issue that is germane
to your particular interest in this hearing, which is the
online platforms and our activity there.
Related to that, I should also mention that we--that the
United States sought and was granted the privilege of hosting
for the first time the ICN's, the International Competition
Network's annual conference. This is the most important
conference of global competition enforcement agencies, and our
host status for the 2020 ICN will allow the Antitrust Division
and the Federal Trade Commission to showcase our ideals by
promoting fundamental due process as well as a broad range of
important policy issues, including digital platform competition
and cartel enforcement at this event next May.
Now on to the Department's activities in digital platform
markets. I know the subcommittee continues to focus on the way
that consumers engage with online platforms. I'm pleased to
report that the division is hard at work reviewing business
practices by market-leading online platforms, which we
announced in July.
To date, Facebook and Google have both publicly disclosed
investigations by the division. These companies are not the
only focus of our review. They are, however, an important part
because of the significant role they play in the lives of so
many American citizens and because they occupy a unique role in
the modern era of personalized advertising supported by user
data.
The work we are doing is focused in part on understanding
how personalized advertising transactions work and their
competitive dynamics. We're looking at how these dynamics
create value for advertisers, content creators, and the
American consumers who use these advertising-supported
platforms.
By understanding these competitive dynamics, we can
determine if the market leaders have monopoly power, how do
they exercise such monopoly power, and whether the source of
that power is from merits-based competition or if the source of
that power is exclusionary or anticompetitive conduct.
Other online platforms make money in other ways, and we are
reviewing those other business models as well.
The common thread is this: Online platforms bring together
users who access information services on the platform with
third party providers, products, services, or advertisement.
We're concerned with the ways that the platform operators can
manipulate the conditions for competition.
In some instances, the platform operators may have the
incentive to improve the platform for the benefit of all of
those users. In other instances, the platform operator also may
compete against users of the platform and may have an incentive
to disadvantage or exclude competitors.
Of course, the division did not begin its work
investigating online platforms when we announced the reviews in
July. Indeed, we've had a section dedicated to industries
governed by information technology and network effects for more
than 20 years.
It was this section that in 2008 investigated and decided
to file suit against Google and Yahoo for an agreement that
would have eliminated Yahoo as an independent source of online
search advertising. This tech section coordinated its
investigation with 15 States and Canada, and ultimately, the
parties dropped their plans for the agreement rather than face
a lawsuit in this field.
That section also dealt with online zero price business
models and in 2012 litigated and won an injunction against H&R
Block and TaxACT, that merger. The challenge was in part based
on evidence that TaxACT was a maverick online startup that
threatened the behemoth incumbent with a freemium business
model in the market for online tax preparation services.
The division also investigated and secured a settlement in
Google ITA in 2015. That settlement resolved allegations in the
complaint that Google's merger with a producer of airfare
pricing and shopping systems would harm competition among
online flight search platforms, resulting in reduced choice and
less innovation for consumers.
Although I'm not able to discuss the particulars of our
ongoing investigations, I think these examples of past cases,
along with some recent public remarks, can assure you that the
Antitrust Division will ask the right questions as we
investigate whether any platform acquired or maintained its
monopoly power through anticompetitive conduct.
I look forward to your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Delrahim follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Delrahim.
Before we begin the questioning, I recognize the ranking
member of the full committee, Mr. Collins, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
And thanks for being here. This is, again, one of the
bright spots, and I appreciate the chairman and ranking member
on our side, and also the full committee chairman, that we can
continue this. This is something that's needed to be done and,
Mr. Delrahim and others, I thank you for being here.
This antitrust investigation is continuing to be one of the
bright spots on this committee's agenda this term, and the
importance of digital technology in our constituents' lives
grows every day. The tech sector is one of the greatest forces
for innovation and wealth creation in the world and our
economy. Rarely in history have we witnessed such a
transformative change in how we go about our lives.
Much of that change is very much for the good, but not all.
Among these changes are the ways that companies compete, both
fairly and unfairly, to provide goods and services to
consumers. It is, therefore, critical that we work on a
bipartisan basis to understand whether our current antitrust
laws or our antitrust enforcement agencies are able to keep up
with the task of the tech sector in the present time. We will
have accomplished something important together if we can
determine whether our antitrust laws need updating for the
digital economy or whether the antitrust agencies need
Congress' help to assure vigorous antitrust enforcement in the
tech sector.
From the start of our inquiry, I made it clear that
overarching principles are guiding me in this inquiry.
First, while some tech companies have become very big, and
big is not necessarily bad, companies that offer new
innovations, better solutions, and more consumer benefit at
lower prices often become big, and they benefit society.
Proposals to break up big companies just because they are big
risk throwing out the baby with the bathwater and are simply
punishing success.
Second, just like existing antitrust laws, proposals for
new legislation should aim to keep the free market free.
Proposals to construct broad new regulatory regimes should be
viewed with caution. Experience shows that regulatory solutions
often miss the mark, solve problems less efficiently than free
markets, and can create new opportunities for anticompetitive
companies to suppress competition through rent seeking. That is
especially true when the regulations attempt to take on
evolving problems in fast-moving markets.
The principle is particularly important to me as we seek a
better way to protect privacy of consumers' online data. I
announced in July of this year that I would be introducing
legislation this term to achieve better protection, and I'm
working hard on that legislation, and it is strongly animated
by the principles that I have just laid out.
Other proposals, like laws adopted in Europe and
California, threaten to entrench the market power of large
incumbent tech companies under the cloak of protecting online
data privacy. I want us to instead enact new Federal law that
better protects privacy without making it harder for new and
small innovative companies to enter the market, jostle with the
giants, and strive to become the blockbuster companies of
tomorrow. We've got to keep that pipeline open.
The heads of the antitrust agencies before us today also
have stated principles they believe should guide antitrust
inquiries into the tech sector, and I'm looking forward again
to hearing your thoughts. We have talked many times before
about this, and I appreciate that as we go forward.
Again, this is what we need to be doing, and I think we
have had long conversations in this arena, and I believe that
the disruptors in our economy, many of these in the tech
sector, have brought forth many, many good things.
But I think we're also dealing in an new age and a new
environment, and this is a good look forward. Where are we
right now?
Mr. Delrahim, we've talked many times about many things,
and especially through music last year. Again, I appreciate
your concern there. I still reiterate I'm looking forward as we
move forward on consent decrees and others that that is not
something that can be done without a lot of discussion and talk
as we move forward. So I do appreciate that. And thanks for
being here.
And again, Mr. Chairman, this is really a good time, and I
appreciate your continued interest in this, and yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Collins.
We will now proceed under the 5-minute rule. I recognize
the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Delrahim and Mr. Simons, for coming
today to testify.
The concentration of power in the digital marketplace is
something that should concern every American, and your agencies
are on the front line in addressing unlawful uses of market
dominance. Digital companies are acquiring their competitors at
an alarming rate. Few, if any, platforms are truly
interoperable, and the collection of and capitalization on user
data has reached unprecedented heights.
I'm also concerned that barriers to bringing antitrust
cases have grown too high for the average American. Since the
1980s, case law has snowballed to create evidentiary standards
that prevent harmed individuals from commencing meritorious
suits with any hope of success.
I'm looking forward to talking with you all today about the
manipulation of market power through data and the FTC's efforts
to enforce our laws.
Mr. Delrahim, a year ago you argued in a speech that,
quote, ``data, even large amounts of it, may not act as an
entry barrier in every digital market,'' end quote.
Specifically, you said, quote, ``while there has been a
temptation to use data as a proxy for price when determining
the anticompetitive effects of a merger or conduct,'' end
quote, that the value of consumer data, quote, ``should not be
confused with price.''
But just last week in a speech at Harvard Law School, you
indicated that large amounts of data can entrench dominant
players in digital markets and cuts out emerging competitors.
You said that data is, quote, ``analogous to a new currency,''
end quote, and that antitrust enforcers need to be vigilant
about the collection, aggregation, and commercial use of
consumer data, end quote.
Has your view on the role of data in the digital
marketplace changed since your speech last year?
Mr. Delrahim. Mr. Johnson, thanks for the question. I think
both of those statements, I stand by them. I think, one----
Mr. Johnson. They tend to be inconsistent.
Mr. Delrahim. Well, let me explain. Let me explain. I don't
think that you can directly correlate data with a particular
price, partly because data has multiple dimensions to it.
For example, just the user data, your data or my data,
could be collected by numerous people here in what we term as a
nonrivalrous asset, meaning that its value does not diminish by
the number of people who would have it. If I had a $10 bill, by
the time I gave it to the second person, a dollar to the second
person, it would be only worth $8.
However, usage data is different, and that's something
we're trying to grapple with looking at that. By that, I mean
your data from 2015 to 2017, your viewing habits, your
purchases is not something that could be replicated by a new
entrant who could start in 2019.
So your usage data has a completely different value, it is
much more unique than your user data, so we have to be careful
about what kind of data and how we look at it, which is why
this, what you guys are doing in the oversight, is so critical,
and what we continue to do to learn in this industry, the
competitive impact of data, is so important.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Do you believe that antitrust enforcers' past reluctance to
view concentrated control over data as an entry barrier has
been a mistake?
Mr. Delrahim. You know, I think it would be unfair for me
to critique my predecessors' involvement of these. Every single
transaction has different dimensions, and, frankly, our
understanding of the marketplace. This is a fast-evolving
market, and I think what the agencies know today may not be
what they knew 10 years ago.
Mr. Johnson. Let me ask you this as my time is running out.
Mr. Delrahim. Sure.
Mr. Johnson. Do you believe that the FTC, Mr. Simons, do
you believe that the FTC has an overbearance on a policy that
indicates to me that you feel like the risk of litigation is
something that is a primary consideration in deciding whether
or not to file a complaint in the case of a merger or in
anticompetitive conduct?
Mr. Cicilline. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Simons. So we find ourselves in a situation where we're
resource constrained. So when you live in that kind of
environment, you want to be careful about the complaints you do
file. You don't want to file---- you want to focus on the ones
that have a better chance of success and also the ones that
have the most impact.
So in that sense, we are concerned about litigation risk,
and if we had more resources, we could bring more cases.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. I now recognize the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Sensenbrenner.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Last week I was in Berlin and Brussels talking about
privacy, talking about competition, expressing my fear that the
Europeans, led by the Germans, are attempting to use their laws
on this as a way of, number one, forcing us to adopt their laws
rather than enforcing ours; and secondly, being used very
subtly as a protectionist mechanism for European data
platforms.
Let me start out by saying that basically U.S. antitrust
law was designed to protect consumers. European antitrust law
is designed to protect the competition. I cast my vote with the
consumers, and I think that 100 years ago our predecessors in
Congress got it right. We have to improve and reform both our
enforcement in an increasingly globalized economy as well as
dealing with the policy differences that the United States and
our foreign competitors have had.
Let me say that I have expressed repeatedly that Europe's
General Data Protection Regulation, or GDPR, has been designed
to squeeze out competitors and help entrench large incumbents,
and it has enervated innovation.
Are either of your agencies looking at that, particularly
leading up to this international conference that will be held
here next May?
Mr. Simons. So we're very focused on the privacy issue, and
in particular we've encouraged Congress to consider and adopt
Federal privacy legislation.
But one of the things we're very focused on and concerned
about in that effort is the issues that you've just raised with
respect to GDPR in Europe. We're very concerned that adopting a
program like that could end up doing exactly the opposite of
what we're trying to do with our competition mission, which is
to entrench the large dominant platforms at the expense of the
smaller competitors and the new entrants.
By requiring opt-in consent on such a widespread basis, you
put the consumer in a situation where the consumer is probably
only likely to consent--confine that opt-in consent to so many
competitors in the marketplace, and of course, the dominant
ones would be the most likely to be able to get the consent.
And also they're consumer facing. So, for example, data
brokers who aren't consumer facing would have a difficult time
potentially getting that kind of opt-in consent and competing
in the marketplace. And those are the folks that are providing,
I think, at least in our country, data to new entrants and to
smaller competitors as a kind of a substitute for what Google
and Facebook collect.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, you know, let me express my
concern that if the Europeans turn that screw too tightly, it's
going to have a very bad impact on transatlantic commerce,
which will end up having a result of a recession or worse on
both sides of the Atlantic.
Now, I don't think from what I heard in Europe last week
that they really have considered that very much. More
importantly, they really don't care as long as the European
platforms get a leg up on the American platforms.
So when we're dealing with these issues, I think we have to
be very, very careful that the unintended consequence of what
we're doing is not to end up encouraging protectionist policies
on the part of our foreign competitors in the name of, quote,
antitrust enforcement, or, quote, privacy protection.
You know, I agree with you, we need to have a Federal
privacy law, which would make my arguments in Europe a lot more
persuasive, I would say, but at the same time we've got to be
very careful not only in what we want to accomplish, but making
sure that it's limited to what we want to accomplish rather
than having a lot of unintended consequences which hurt
consumers on both sides of the Atlantic.
And with that statement, I yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the distinguished gentlelady from
Washington, Ms. Jayapal.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you both for being here.
I wanted to start in a slightly different direction, and
I'll direct these questions to you, Assistant Attorney General
Delrahim, and that is to discuss no-poach agreements, which
are, as you know, agreements that employers make with each
other in which they agree not to recruit each other's
employees. And these agreements have been found to inhibit
competition among employers, which, in turn, harms workers.
The FTC and the DOJ's joint guidance states that
competition among employers for employees, quote, ``helps
actual and potential employees through higher wages, better
benefits, and terms of employment.''
Three years ago, the Department of Justice's Antitrust
Division took a formal public instance that no-poach clauses
are, per se, illegal, correct?
Mr. Delrahim. Correct.
Ms. Jayapal. And that joint FTC-DOJ guidance explicitly
states from an antitrust perspective, and this is a quote,
firms that----
Mr. Delrahim. Let me just clarify.
Ms. Jayapal. Yeah.
Mr. Delrahim. What we call naked no-poach. These are
horizontal no-poach agreements. So there could be some
variations to that. And these are vertical arrangements.
Sometimes we see those in the franchise systems.
Ms. Jayapal. Well, I am going to that. And the joint FTC-
DOJ guidance explicitly states from an antitrust perspective
firms that compete to hire or retain employees are competitors
in the employment marketplace regardless of--and this speaks to
what you were just saying--whether the firms make the same
products or compete to provide the same services, which seems
extremely clear.
But I've been a bit concerned that the DOJ recently has
started to wobble away from that very clear position. And your
Department actually actively argued in favor of more lax
standards for franchise employers that use no-poach agreements.
And I'm specifically going to refer you to a brief that
your Department filed in Stigar v. Dough Dough in the Eastern
District of my State, Washington State, arguing that franchise
companies should be held to a different standard than other
kinds of employers when they use no-poach agreements. Is that
what you were arguing?
Mr. Delrahim. We were arguing based on the law, and I'm
happy to explain. Ultimately, we want to protect competition
and the worker, and I'm happy to explain our reasoning for
that.
We argued in multiple cases, including the Duke-North
Carolina, where we took an unprecedented step, for the per se
treatment of that when the defendants, not only were they
arguing for rule of reason treatment, but also seeking State
action immunity. So we did that. Not only did we argue, but we
intervened in that.
In the franchise matters, we argued not so much that
they're per se illegal, but that the rule of reason should
apply when it's inside that system. And the reason for that
is--some of you may know my background. I worked in my father's
gas station for 8 years.
Ms. Jayapal. Let me just, just because I have very little
time, let me just----
Mr. Delrahim. But this is really important for the workers
that you're concerned about as we are.
Ms. Jayapal. Right. And here is my question, I guess, is
why the Department would choose to use this discretion that you
have in situations, and in fact to the point where our attorney
general in my home State of Washington actually had to submit a
brief where they again explicitly clarified that no-poach
agreements were per se illegal and that the distinction that
you were making or that your Department was making was not
consistent with past positions.
The American Antitrust Institute actually wrote a paper
directly disagreeing with your Department's stance on this
issue.
And so I guess the question I have is, when the agency is
supposed to protect workers, and I believe that that's what you
have been trying to do, from the harms of anticompetitive
corporate behavior, why expend significant energy and precious
resources in filing these briefs that allow large franchising
corporate chains to get away with using no-poach agreements
under, I would argue, under pretty flimsy justifications,
having read some of the documents in this case?
Because at the core of this is the fact that millions of
workers are affected when employers make these agreements that
undermine competition, and they, and we, I am really hoping
that your agency intervenes on behalf of these workers.
I want to give you just 5 seconds.
And then I do have a question for Mr. Simons, if you want
to say anything, very brief.
Mr. Delrahim. Well, if I could ask the chairman, this
requires more than a 5-second response, and I do not want to
leave your constituents and this committee with the wrong
impression that somehow that there's a distinction.
I would like to explain--this stuff is, you know, it's
complicated--but why it actually--our position actually
benefits the exact worker that you are concerned about and the
attorney general of Washington is concerned about--that's not
what the case law is--and how our arguments actually protect
those workers, not the reverse.
So I'm happy to explain that. Would you like me to do that
now?
Ms. Jayapal. My time has expired, unfortunately, but I'm
happy to take any information that you have on this.
Mr. Delrahim. Mr. Chairman, can I just quickly explain why
this is so important? Let me just give you one analogy, and
this is Jiffy Lube.
So if you're a franchisor and you have a franchise system
and you have the folks who would invest, let's say, $350,000 to
buy a Jiffy Lube franchise, and they would like to--and they
invest that. So these are hardworking people employing locals.
And if they want to train the new mechanic to do whatever
they do, oil changes, the other car repairs, they need to train
that and make sure that the competitor within that--the other
Jiffy Lube 5 miles down the road is not going to now after 6
weeks of training and the investments that they make to train
that employee and probably have paid them, that that person is
going to compete.
So within reason, and we said this is why it's a rule of
reason, not a per se illegality, it's important for them to
have that assurance, that small business owner. Why? Because if
they don't, and if the attorney general from Washington's rule
is in place for those vertical restraints, what do you think
will happen with that new small business owner?
What they will do is say, you know what, employee? You go
train yourself before I pay you and put you on the payroll, or
I won't pay to train you to come in.
This is a critical issue----
Mr. Cicilline. I've let you go over 2 minutes.
Ms. Jayapal. Yeah. And, Mr. Chairman, I just want to say
that I think that this is a very important issue because it is
a rewrite of previous Department policy and a different
direction that the Department is going in making this new
distinction.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. I now recognize the gentleman from North
Dakota, Mr. Armstrong, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simons, you said just earlier that consumers will only
do a limited amount of opt-ins, when we're talking about that.
And I'm curious about that, particularly because if they're
standardized like a lot of them are on a platform, I mean, I
would think after you've done 10, you won't care if you do 30.
So I'm just interested in the rationale behind that.
Mr. Simons. I mean, that's possible, but the other thing
that might happen is people might not want their information
spread so widely. It increases the risk of a breach.
Mr. Armstrong. And I think that's an important part, and
I'm actually going to disregard the privacy part when I ask
these questions because that is one of--I mean, the flip side
to sharing data is more people have my data.
Mr. Simons. Right. Exactly.
Mr. Armstrong. And I think that is an area where we
continue to go.
Mr. Delrahim, you gave a speech in Israel, and it discussed
how not all data is alike. And I'm generally curious as to what
types of data are more susceptible to being used in an
anticompetitive manner. Because I think from somebody like me
who doesn't----
Mr. Delrahim. Sure.
Mr. Armstrong [continuing]. I mean, understand this, which
I think is most consumers, like, data is this one all-
encompassing word, but it's very different, correct?
Mr. Delrahim. It is. It is very different. It takes many
forms. And we have to take a look at that and its actual
competitive impact.
And as we look at the GDPR regime that Mr. Sensenbrenner
raised, in addition to what Chairman Simon said, the other
thing we look at is whether that regulatory regime actually
creates barriers to new entry, is the cost of that collection,
and whereas an incumbent may have already gathered certain
data.
But as I mentioned to Mr. Johnson, there is user data,
there's usage data, and there's different qualities and
attributes for each sets of data.
Mr. Armstrong. And then I'm going to actually let you
continue talking about the Washington versus--the franchise
deal because, I mean, in a completely different sector, this is
something we saw happen an incredible amount in North Dakota,
which when our economy was growing is small businesses having
employees taken by larger businesses after they invest.
I mean, I think one thing that particularly with any
specific skill set is the first 3 months, 6 months to a year
when you're training a highly skilled employee, the investment
you're putting into them from a business perspective far
outweighs the return you get. So you're relying on that
employment to pay off in year 2, year 3, year 4.
And I know 5 seconds wasn't enough, so I'm going to allow
you some time to answer it.
Mr. Delrahim. The chairman was generous enough to allow me
more than 5 seconds, which I did.
But I think you raised a point that I think is really
important, because we have to take a look at each of these
restraints. Again, not a horizontal. We argued, we filed in the
Wabtec case in Pennsylvania, we filed in the Duke-North
Carolina case, a number of these, where we have gone in
aggressively saying that this should be per se illegal.
However, when it is within the system like franchise, as I
explained, the rule of reason should apply. Are these
reasonable restraints?
If you're saying that you can never leave for the next 6
years once I train you, well, I think a judge could find that
unreasonable. However, there's limits and there's a test that
our Supreme Court has put down, and I would submit what we have
submitted is well within what the laws and the precedents,
legal precedents are.
Mr. Armstrong. And then would you expound on how that
actually protects workers?
Mr. Delrahim. It absolutely protects workers because it
provides that small business owner the incentive to actually
invest and train that employee. So the new employee who wants
to enter the workforce can now get trained by that franchise
owner because for those first 6 weeks that they're learning how
to do a tune up or a brake you don't want them to walk across
the street to the other competitor.
And so those, within reason, can be--and every case is
different. Every franchise, every restraint will be--should be
treated differently. They should not be banned as per se
illegal all the time because some plaintiffs' class has brought
that case.
Mr. Armstrong. And then so that's where you mean the
reasonable test comes in.
Mr. Delrahim. Yes. There's a set of tests in its duration
and its effect, and we look at those, as do the courts. And
there's a set of case law that guides the factors that go into
analysis.
Mr. Armstrong. And then I guess this can be for either one
of you, but I'll ask Mr. Simons.
As we talk about data sharing and how this creates a
competitive edge, I ignored it for 4 minutes and 30 seconds.
But how do we factor that privacy concern into this
conversation?
Mr. Simons. So you mean on the competition side?
Mr. Armstrong. Well, if somebody has my data and we're
requiring them to share my data, that means two people have my
data.
Mr. Simons. Right. So there's a tradeoff. I mean, you just
have to balance one against the other. And if it's voluntary in
terms of who shares--you know, whether the consumer's data is
shared or not, that leaves it up to the consumer.
Mr. Armstrong. So you're saying voluntary on the front end.
Mr. Simons. Yeah. I mean----
Mr. Armstrong. It has to be voluntary----
Mr. Simons. I mean, a consumer can make a judgment--maybe
there's an issue with how informed the consumer is--but the
consumer can make a judgment about, do I want to be able to
port all my data from one player to another, and now my data is
in two places, and did I just double the risk of my data being
breached?
Mr. Armstrong. Wouldn't they do that on the front end,
right? I mean----
Mr. Simons. Yes.
Mr. Armstrong. On whatever service they're getting, they're
going to do it----
Mr. Simons. Yes.
Mr. Armstrong [continuing]. That's the first question
they're going to get.
Mr. Simons. Right.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline. I now recognize the gentleman from Colorado,
Mr. Neguse, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
leadership in hosting this important hearing.
And thank you to both the witnesses for your testimony
today.
I just want to deviate from my prepared remarks for a
minute because I'm struggling to follow this last exchange
between Representative Armstrong and Mr. Simons. Help me
understand your argument that informed consent--that
essentially providing a GDPR-type condition here in the United
States, that that would somehow put at risk data privacy. I'm
not----
Mr. Simons. And it's just something to consider. It's a
factor to consider.
And so the consideration is by requiring the consumer to
opt--let me give you an example. Let's suppose, and this is a
little bit stylized, but let's suppose you have a situation
where you've got data that's not very sensitive at all, and you
have data that's very sensitive. And let's suppose also that
the data that's not very sensitive is data that's very kind of
useful for doing targeted advertising, okay?
And so if you had an opt-in for both of those categories,
the sensitive and the nonsensitive, you might end up in a
situation where a consumer is just, for whatever reason, maybe
it's just inertia, they don't want to automatically give
consent to every business that they come across on the
internet, right.
Because a lot of--like, for example, for smaller players
and for new entrants for sure, they don't have a reputation
maybe that's recognizable to the average consumer. So you're
immediately reluctant to----
Mr. Neguse. But how does that harm data privacy to the
extent that a consumer decides----
Mr. Simons. Oh. It doesn't necessarily harm data privacy so
much, but what the harm is, is to competition. Because in my
stylized example, you might have a situation where you don't
really have harm from the nonsensitive data being used without
opt-in consent to the consumer, but you have harm to
competition because the small players and the new entrants are
less likely to get access to it.
Mr. Neguse. Has the FTC done any kind of empirical study to
demonstrate whether or not the new GDPR regulations implemented
in Europe have resulted in a dilution of concentration of
market power of various email providers and so on and so forth?
Mr. Simons. It would be an increase in concentration. We
haven't done any ourselves, but other people are doing
analysis, and the preliminary work suggests that it's
concentrating share in the dominant platforms.
Mr. Neguse. So if you could provide----
Mr. Simons. Sure. Be happy to.
Mr. Neguse [continuing]. The specific study that you're
referring to, that would be helpful for this committee to
consider, obviously.
Mr. Simons. There's a few of them, but it's preliminary.
Mr. Neguse. Well, and given that last point then, I think
it would be important for us to contextually remember that
since it doesn't seem as though there's finality to that just
quite yet.
Mr. Simons. No. There's not finality.
Mr. Neguse. I do want to just talk briefly about the
settlement with Facebook earlier this year and give you an
opportunity to kind of explain the methodology that the FTC
used to reach the regulatory settlement that you reached.
Obviously, as I'm sure you're aware, there are a number of
us in both Chambers of the Congress who were deeply
disappointed, in our view, with the terms of the settlement, a
$5 billion settlement. As you know, Facebook generated about
$56 billion in revenue just last year, in calendar year 2018.
So by my estimates, the settlement would entail about a month's
worth of revenue for Facebook.
Mr. Simons. Yeah, about 9 percent.
Mr. Neguse. About 9 percent.
Mr. Simons. About 23 percent of their profits.
Mr. Neguse. Well, yeah, in a single year. And again, there
are a number of other aspects of the settlement that I'd like
to get to, and my time is limited. But if you could perhaps
explain the methodology as to how you reached that outcome.
Mr. Simons. Yeah. So, first of all, let me say that I'm
very disappointed that you all are disappointed. And let me try
to explain why I think what we did was a terrific outcome for
consumers.
So we have--first of all, I think the settlement alone
stands as very--as very aggressive and much more than anything
anyone else around the world has done. They haven't even come
remotely close. In fact, if you took all the enforcement
actions from all the privacy authorities around the world and
combined them, they wouldn't even get close. So that's one.
Two, even if we wanted to do more, we don't have the
authority to do more. We do not have the authority to impose
fines or on our own increase the injunctive relief. We have to
go to court.
So what we did is we negotiated long and very hard with
Facebook to get the best relief we could get in a settlement
and compare--then compare that to what we would have gotten if
we had gone to court. It would have taken several years to go
to court. We may have won, we may have lost. But even if we had
won----
Mr. Neguse. I appreciate that. Let me reclaim my time.
Mr. Simons. Even if we had won, we would not have come
anywhere close to what we----
Mr. Neguse. Sure. I'll reclaim my time. Sir, I wanted to
give you a chance to be able to explain. I have limited time.
And I appreciate your explanation. And what I was going to say
is that ultimately one point that I think you and I both agree
on is that the tools that the FTC has under existing statute,
in my view, and I suspect perhaps in yours, could be
strengthened.
And given the trend lines that are moving in this direction
and the challenges that your agency faces in terms of dealing
with these particular disputes, I would think that this
committee could provide some leadership on that front. And so I
look forward to having more conversations in that regard.
Mr. Simons. I would be thrilled to do that.
Mr. Cicilline. And I'll just let the committee know we're
going to do a second round, so you'll have some opportunity to
follow up.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Chairman Simons, in a letter for today's hearing, Marc
Rotenberg, the president of EPIC, states, and I quote, that
it's increasingly clear that data protection, competition, and
innovation are all on the same side in a healthy internet
economy. The critical challenge now for the committee is to
ensure that the Federal Trade Commission fulfills its mission
and safeguards these interests. The current path is not
sustainable.
And, Chairman Simons, how do you respond to concerns that
the FTC has failed to act in response to numerous antitrust and
privacy complaints over the past decade and has effectively
ignored the obvious cost to personal privacy that has resulted
from consolidation in the digital marketplace over this period?
And do you agree that market consolidation in digital markets
is coming at the expense of strong user privacy?
Mr. Simons. Well, first of all, I reject that argument.
Mr. Cicilline. Which argument?
Mr. Simons. Well, the one you just stated from EPIC.
So first of all, on the privacy side, we have a hundred-
year-old statute that was not in any way designed to anticipate
the privacy issues that we face today. My predecessors at the
FTC did an amazing job inventing essentially out of whole cloth
a privacy regime that is the most aggressive in the world.
So I think if you want us to do more on the privacy front,
then we need help from you. We've done as much as we can do
with the tools we have. What I was trying to explain before was
that we do not have authority even remotely approaching what
GDPR has, what the California Act has as well. So if you want
us to do more, you need to give us the authority.
In terms of----
Mr. Cicilline. So I----
Mr. Simons. I'm sorry. Go ahead.
Mr. Cicilline. So I take it from that, you do agree with
the last statement that I made, that market consolidation in
digital markets is, in fact, coming at the expense of strong
user privacy. You're just suggesting you need some additional
tools to respond to that.
Mr. Simons. Well, what I've said before is that the privacy
issue was a critical issue to the U.S., to our country, and it
involves very significant social and societal values. And in
order to do privacy the right way, it has to be done with those
values in mind, and you need--that needs to be----
Mr. Cicilline. My question was a simple one. You are seeing
in your work that, in fact, user privacy has been harmed as a
result of this market consolidation in the digital marketplace.
You just said that part of the reason is, if we want you to do
more to protect user privacy, you need additional tools.
Mr. Simons. Right.
Mr. Cicilline. So I take it that's made on some
observations you're making about the marketplace.
Mr. Simons. Well, we have ongoing investigations involved
in the digital marketplace, and so that's under study. I mean,
not study, they're under investigation. It's not a study.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Mr. Delrahim, in a speech that was referenced that you gave
on Friday you quote Professor Shoshana Zuboff, who I've had the
opportunity to meet with, and you say, in speaking of her
research and her recent book, you say that she has termed the
commercialization of predicting human behavior and the
accompanying encroachment on privacy as a form of surveillance
capitalism or the unilateral claiming of private human
experience as free raw material for translation into behavioral
data.
And so as we consider ways to protect America's privacy,
particularly in light of how these protections may reinforce
market power, shouldn't we think about addressing this
underlying business model on behavioral advertising?
I mean, some have suggested we should ban it completely.
Some folks, like Roger McNamee, have recently made statements
about sort of recognizing the control of your data as a human
right. And isn't that sort of the underlying problem that we
have to address in some way in our responding to the work of
Professor Zuboff and this behavioral data collection?
Mr. Delrahim. Well, Mr. Chairman, you know, that's an
important issue. That's a big public policy debate outside of
antitrust. As I've explained, privacy and data protection could
be a quality element for the purposes of antitrust, and if you
have competition between different platforms, then you could
compete on some of those avenues, particularly where there's a
revealed preference by the user that they value privacy, and I
think more and more consumers do.
As for a broader debate of whether or not we should, you
know, ban that type of marketplace, as Professor Zuboff
advocates, or place some limits or at least some disclosures, I
think that's a debate for this body to have. I just enforce the
laws that you write.
Mr. Cicilline. But do you view that there is, in the
consideration of competition and the effectiveness of the
market, whether there's competition, that the impact on privacy
is a factor? I think you already said that.
Mr. Delrahim. Absolutely.
Mr. Cicilline. How do you think that about that issue in
your competition enforcement work?
Mr. Delrahim. Well, we look at it, and there is--you know,
what I'm happy about, with respect to some of this public
discussion about antitrust, is there's this misconception that
somehow, you know, the standards by which we enforce the laws
is limited to price effects or just quantity effects, and it's
not. The courts have repeatedly said quality, innovation,
choice are elements of this, of antitrust, and the consumer
welfare standard. It's just that I think we have to hone our
skills, as well as familiarize the judges more with it because
we haven't had many cases on those, certainly not as many as we
readily prove with price effects. So I think we have to take a
look and describe these types of harms as the Division has done
in other cases.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. My time is expired.
I now recognize Mr. Armstrong, the gentleman from South
Dakota, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Armstrong. Still North Dakota.
Mr. Cicilline. Still North Dakota.
Mr. Armstrong. There's been suggestions that companies with
large data repositories be forced to share that data with
smaller competitors, especially since data is nonrivalrous.
That seems, to me, like an extreme intervention from the
government. I'm going to just start with, do those proposals
concern you?
Mr. Simons. Yeah. So it's nonrivalrous in the sense that
you can duplicate it without diminishing the other--you know,
the initial copy. The problem is it may be expensive and costly
to produce the data set in the first place. So one example of
that that we've had in our enforcement involves title plants.
So it's all publicly available, right, because that's where--
you know, the title plants are collecting title information and
they're getting it from public sources either online or they go
to the courthouse and have to get it.
So it's expensive, though, to create that title plant in
the first place. And if you made the person who creates the
title plant in the first place duplicate it for free, then
what's the incentive to create it in the first place?
Mr. Armstrong. Do you----
Mr. Delrahim. I agree with that. You know, look, that's not
to say that somehow the laws would not allow us to force that.
We have a high burden to meet, should we want to force data
sharing, but I agree with Chairman Simons that we should be
very wary about doing that. Now, if there's a merger and you
have two data sets, and we look at those as assets, and there's
an overlap where they would have too much data, then that's one
where we could say, you must sell this off--one of the sets off
before we allow the merger to go through.
But as far as a company who has invested and gathered that
data through investment and hard work, we should be, you know,
very careful to not force that sharing upon them as the Supreme
Court has warned us in the past.
Mr. Armstrong. And again, I'm just prefacing this, that
this is not even discussing the privacy part of that
conversation, which is a whole different issue. And I think
that's important in that when we talk about this, we always
have to make sure that--again, that privacy is part of that
conversation. Because forcing somebody to sell their data or
share their data is running into that as well.
Mr. Delrahim. Unless they acquired it illegally, and that's
a whole different story.
Mr. Armstrong. Well, then we're talking criminal law, and
then I can actually probably sound fairly smart about it.
So when dealing with artificial intelligence and machine
learning often the benefits of innovation, an increase with
larger data sets, that provides a benefit to consumers in a lot
of instances, and we're going to continue to go down this road.
How do we approach large collection of data in the sense that
it harms consumers or is used anticompetitively but also in
certain circumstances can benefit consumers?
Mr. Delrahim. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Simons. So I think it's very fact-specific. It depends
on the circumstances, and you have to weigh one against the
other.
Mr. Armstrong. Which gets into our problem, is if you get
to be so fact-specific that it's a little difficult for us to--
I mean, we have to give you guys the tools--I agree with Mr.
Neguse when he left--but also at the same time, at some point
in time, we have to draw some kind of bright line laws. I mean,
that's regardless of where you're at in any situation. At some
point in time, we have to find some area where the regulation
hits a certain point.
Mr. Simons. Well, our whole statute and the whole statutory
regime is based on reasonableness. And so reasonableness means
fact-dependent.
Mr. Delrahim. Well, you look at the effects and you look at
the harms. I think that's what we--you know, in balancing that,
at least for competition. That's not to say that should you
come up with some kind of a regime that affects that. But we
should be very careful because there are some--lots of consumer
benefits, lots of efficiencies, lots of transactions.
We just had our trilateral meeting in Ottawa just a few
weeks ago, where, you know, the Canadian enforcement officials,
the Mexican enforcement officials, Mr. Chairman and I, had the
privilege of attending. And, you know, to my surprise at least,
the president of the antitrust authority in Mexico said she
welcomed for the first time Amazon's entry into their market.
They liked that because it lowered the price to the consumers,
because Walmart had such a big market share in Mexico.
So I think we have to be careful about the possible
positive effect some of these technologies could have. We have
to just make sure that we're eliminating the harm that they'll
create.
Mr. Armstrong. Well, and I agree, and I agree with the
reasonableness and fact-specific, but also, at some point in
time, if there isn't some guiding, I mean, roadmap, then--
reasonableness is a great word because it sounds great, but
reasonableness can vary significantly depending on who is
hearing the case, and it's hard to continue to build a company
or to start innovation if your sole basis is, well, we'll cross
that bridge when we get there.
Mr. Simons. Yeah. So one of the things we've done in the
past and we're going to do in the future is put out guidelines
or commentaries that try to explain what are the things we look
at, and give the, you know, the private bar and business
community a better sense of what is--what is over the line
versus what is not over the line.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. The gentleman's time is expired.
I recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
In the digital marketplace where data is the currency and
one player has developed not just a corner on the market, but
is the market, and the cost of acquiring the data has long
since been exceeded by the profit, by the multibillion dollar
profits that have been made, how can you promote competition in
that digital marketplace if allocation of data from the only
market player is off the table?
Mr. Simons. Well, you want to make sure that they acquired
their position lawfully, because if they didn't--if they
didn't----
Mr. Johnson. It's a given that they--well, I mean, assuming
that the data was acquired in a legally permissible manner.
Mr. Simons. If it's acquired in a legally permissible
manner and it's used in a legally permissible manner, then----
Mr. Johnson. But would anticompetitive----
Mr. Simons. No. Well, if it's used for an anticompetitive
purpose, then we could go after it, and we would.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. All right. Okay.
Mr. Simons, Facebook has repeatedly misrepresented how it
uses individuals' data, and I worry whether the FTC's
settlement releases Facebook for misrepresentations that the
public is only now learning about. For example, TechCrunch
reported in September that Facebook had publicly exposed the
phone numbers of 133 million U.S. users. Assuming Facebook had
not told users it would be exposing their phone numbers this
way, and assuming Facebook exposed their numbers before the
settlement was finalized in June, would Facebook's misconduct
be released from liability under the settlement agreement?
Mr. Simons. It would be released under the settlement
agreement to the same extent it would be released if we went to
litigation and won. No difference.
Mr. Johnson. In August, Bloomberg reported that Facebook
had paid contractors to transcribe users' audio chats. Did the
FTC settlement release Facebook from liability for that
conduct?
Mr. Simons. I'm sorry, could you repeat that? I didn't
catch that.
Mr. Johnson. Facebook paid contractors to transcribe users'
audio chats. Did the settlement release Facebook from liability
for that conduct?
Mr. Simons. It released Facebook from order violations that
occurred prior to June 12 that did not continue past June 12.
It did not release Facebook from Section 5 violations that we
didn't already know about.
Mr. Johnson. Just yesterday, CNET reported that when some
users scroll through Facebook's app on their iPhones, Facebook
activates users' cameras and starts watching them. Did the FTC
settlement release Facebook from liability for that----
Mr. Simons. I can just say what I just said and also remark
that it's inappropriate for me to comment on whether or not
we're conducting nonpublic investigations and----
Mr. Johnson. Well, no, I'm just asking whether or not----
Mr. Simons. And that's all part--that's all part of----
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. That misconduct had been exempted
by the settlement agreement.
Mr. Simons. I don't know enough to know the answer to that
question because I don't know enough to know--I don't have
enough facts to know.
Mr. Johnson. Does the FTC----
Mr. Simons. But let me say one thing--and I'm sorry to
interrupt you--which is that you can be assured that if there's
something in the press that raises a privacy issue, our staff
is either already looking at it or we'll immediately start
looking at it when they see the media report.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. But yet you need more manpower in order
to be able to respond to these complaints that seem to
proliferate continuously?
Mr. Simons. Yes. We could use more resources, definitely.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Does the FTC list anywhere the full universe of known order
violations and known Section 5 violations for which the FTC
granted the release to Facebook?
Mr. Simons. No.
Mr. Johnson. You do not list those offenses?
Mr. Simons. I'm sorry, maybe I didn't understand your
question.
Mr. Johnson. Yeah. Does the FTC list anywhere the full
universe of known order violations and known Section 5
violations for which you granted Facebook a release?
Mr. Simons. I believe they're in the complaint.
Mr. Johnson. In the complaint. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Georgia, Mrs. McBath,
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all for
being here today.
And I want to discuss what your work means for consumers.
In our past hearings, we've talked about the consumer welfare
standard, the idea that antitrust enforcement should focus on
helping our consumers. We've discussed how that approach can
sometimes overlook other effects such as employee mobility in
the wages.
But what's striking to me is that even with this standard
that is supposed to be putting consumers first, consumers are
still losing out. They're still far behind. A recent New York
Times piece reported that consolidation is estimated to cost
the typical American household about $5,000 per year, and with
few competitors, huge companies can keep charging us all more
without more worrying that we'll actually--that we will
actually take our business elsewhere, actually be able to do
that without considering that we can take our business
elsewhere.
One place that we've seen this is with the merger of
Ticketmaster and Live Nation. Anyone who's bought a ticket
online can tell you that the price that you see at first is
often much less than what you'll pay at the time--by the time
all the fees are included and all the fees that are added on.
So in 2016, the New York State attorney general said that, and
I quote, these fees constitute evidence of abuse of monopoly
power, end quote.
So my question today is for you, Mr. Delrahim. Your office
recently acknowledged that it's investigating whether Live
Nation flouted the 2010 consent decree it agreed to when
merging with Ticketmaster. Reporting by The New York Times
suggests that Live Nation has actually retaliated against
venues that use ticket platforms other than Ticketmaster,
violating the consent decree and undermining competition. So
behavioral remedies like this consent decree are essentially a
promise that a company won't abuse its increased market power
following a merger. In your view, is this a cautionary tale
about the wisdom of using behavioral remedies?
Mr. Delrahim. Absolutely, Congresswoman, it is. And I gave
a speech almost 2 years ago about the problems with behavioral
remedies. Now, to assure you we have tried to do certain
things, we have--all of our consent decrees the last 2 years
have four new provisions in there that make them actually more
enforceable. That particular consent decree is still active,
and other than acknowledging what I acknowledged at the
previous hearing, I won't comment on it.
Mrs. McBath. Okay. Also, you've been deeply critical of the
use of behavioral remedies in the past, observing that they are
merely temporary fixes for an ongoing problem. Yet the
Division's proposed remedy for the Sprint-T-Mobile merger,
includes a long list of things that T-Mobile must do. These
include offering operational support, handling billing support,
and meeting specific traffic management requirements. And the
Division says that its settlement requires the merged entity to
divest to Dish, yet the success of the remedy is contingent on
all of these behavioral conditions. How can you square this
with your stated commitment to structural remedies?
Mr. Delrahim. Well, Congresswoman, as you just mentioned,
the actual remedy itself is structural. There's transition
agreements to effectuate and maximize the success of such
structural remedy, just as we did in Bayer-Monsanto where we
divested about $11 billion of assets. But through that period,
Bayer and Monsanto had to provide transition services to BASF,
and I've never said that those should be somehow shied away
from.
But the actual ultimate remedy, like we had in Comcast-NBCU
or Live Nation-Ticketmaster or some of the host of some of
these, we should be careful. We should be something of a last
resort. If there's a structural remedy available, that's what
we should be going for.
Mrs. McBath. Okay. Thank you.
And, Mr. Simons, the FTC held a workshop earlier this year
to address concerns about the online ticket sales. At that
event, numerous participants called on the FTC to mandate
transparent upfront pricing. What is the FTC doing to address
this call to action?
Mr. Simons. We're still putting together the results of the
workshop, and so the staff will make a recommendation to us.
Mrs. McBath. And may we have a live update or may we have
access to that information to this committee once that's made
available?
Mr. Simons. The committee can ask for, you know, can ask
for anything, and we're very responsive.
Mrs. McBath. Okay. So then for the record, I'm asking that
you make that----
Mr. Simons. Well, I mean, the chairman----
Mrs. McBath [continuing]. Available to the committee.
Mr. Simons. Yeah. If the chairman wants it, then we give
it. It's done very simple.
Mrs. McBath. Okay. Thank you. My time is expired.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
And that gives me a moment to say thank you, Chairman
Simons. Your staff has been terrific in providing technical
assistance on our drug pricing effort to reduce prescription
drug prices, so----
Mr. Simons. And we are thrilled to do it.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Thank you for that.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I want to turn, as you both know, Google is under--
currently, under really immense antitrust scrutiny by State and
Federal enforces as well as this subcommittee. And
notwithstanding the scrutiny, Google has nevertheless announced
a series of data-driven transactions over the past several
months, including its multibillion dollar acquisition of Fitbit
and Looker. As I've said before, Google's proposed acquisition
of Fitbit would threaten to give it yet another way to surveil
users and entrench its monopoly power online.
Earlier today, a coalition of public interest
organizations, including Open Markets, Public Citizen, and
EPIC, sent a letter to the FTC urging it to block Google's deal
to buy Fitbit. As they note, ``the hubris of the executive team
to pursue an acquisition of this size, a proposed $2.1 billion,
while under Federal and State antitrust investigations is
astonishing,'' end quote.
So I'd ask you, Chairman Simons and Mr. Delrahim, do you
think we need to consider a merger moratorium for dominant
platforms during the course of these ongoing investigations?
Mr. Delrahim. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think there's a lot
that can be done short of a merger moratorium. I think by doing
that, we might risk actually harming consumers, because there
could be--there could be mergers and transactions that could be
procompetitive. That is not to say that if they're gaining more
market share in the same defined market----
Mr. Cicilline. So how about a qualified moratorium, a
moratorium unless it was demonstrated that it was
procompetitive?
Mr. Delrahim. Flipping the----
Mr. Cicilline. It seems like your answer is no, but it
seems like in this context where there is significant harm
being imposed upon consumers, it seems like something worth
considering, but I take it you disagree?
Mr. Delrahim. I don't necessarily disagree. I don't have a
clear administration position on that, but we'd be delighted to
explore that with you or, look, there's burdens of proof that
you can play with as well, if people have certain market power.
Mr. Cicilline. Chairman Simons.
Mr. Simons. And we're looking at the uncon--we're looking
at consummated mergers as part of our Technology Enforcement
Division mandate.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Chairman Simons, I'm particularly concerned about the FTC's
investigative process and whether the FTC makes best efforts to
identify the full extent of the violations, especially when it
comes to assessing individual liability. And so my first
question is, did the FTC depose Mark Zuckerberg or Sheryl
Sandberg rather than other senior employees or outside counsel
who may lack decisionmaking authority at Facebook as part of
the investigation into Facebook's 2012 consent decree
violation?
Mr. Simons. It's inappropriate for me to talk about the
specific details of the investigation that haven't--in a public
forum that haven't been released before.
Mr. Cicilline. An investigation that's concluded?
Mr. Simons. Yes. So, for example, we don't turn over the--
we don't make public the----
Mr. Cicilline. I'm not asking you to make public--I'm just
asking were they deposed, did an action happen? Did the FTC
depose Mr. Zuckerberg or Sheryl Sandberg as part of that,
rather than--or did they depose either of them?
Mr. Simons. Oh, okay. So I understand actually that was
been public already, so, no, we did not.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay. Did the FTC depose any high level
executive at Facebook as part of this investigation?
Mr. Simons. That's not public.
Mr. Cicilline. Well, at the FTC's press conference, Jim
Kohm, Associate Director of the Enforcement Division of the
Bureau of Consumer Protection, suggested that the FTC used its
power to depose Mark Zuckerberg as leverage to secure a larger
settlement sum. He said, and I quote, ``part of getting this
tremendous result is we didn't need to depose him, but we could
use that to get more protections for the public.''
And so my question is, is it FTC practice to use
depositions as a bargaining chip to secure a higher settlement
sum? And if the purpose of a deposition is to gather more
facts, isn't it problematic to trade that away? How can the FTC
determine what would constitute an appropriate settlement if
the FTC hasn't finished gathering all the relevant facts
particularly from the executives of the company?
Mr. Simons. So we looked at millions and millions of pages
of documents, and even if you--even if we didn't look at his
specific files, there would be emails between him and somebody
else. And we would have the somebody else's files, right, and
their documents.
Mr. Cicilline. You can understand why this would be of
concern to the public, that we would have traded away the right
to question the decisionmaker at Facebook in a piece of
litigation that you are trying to determine if they violated a
consent decree.
Mr. Simons. Well, so we know they violated a consent--the
consent order, and then that's why--that's why we prepared a
complaint and were prepared to sue them. And the settlement
that we reached, in my mind at least, I was assuming that if
we'd gone to litigation or investigated more--we were already
investigating plenty and it was taking a long time, and I
wanted the consumers protected. I didn't want this to go on
forever. So my own view was that even if we had discovered
several more or a handful or even a lot more violations of the
consent order, we still wouldn't have gotten nearly the relief
we got if we had gone to court.
Mr. Cicilline. So let me just ask my last question, Mr.
Chairman, in 2008, the FTC approved Google's acquisition of
DoubleClick, despite many red flags that the deal raised for
user privacy and which groups like EPIC pointed out. At the
time of the transaction, Google made certain privacy
commitments that it broke within a few years. And again, with
this notion of repeat offenders, when reviewing transactions,
how does the FTC factor in a history of misrepresentations and
broken promises by one of the merging parties?
Mr. Simons. Yeah. So one thing is clear, they don't get the
benefit of the doubt. We assume the worst.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay.
Mr. Simons. And we conduct ourselves accordingly.
Mr. Cicilline. I want to thank our witnesses.
I hope you understand that the passion of this subcommittee
and these questions are because these are issues we care deeply
about, and we're reflecting the concerns of our constituents on
all of these issues, and I hope this will continue to be an
ongoing conversation because you both play a very important
role in this work.
This concludes today's hearing. Thank you again to our
witnesses.
Without objection, all members will have 5 legislative days
to submit additional written questions for the witnesses or
additional materials for the record.
And before I gavel out, I'd just ask unanimous consent that
a letter from the Electronic Privacy Information Center be made
a part of the record and a letter to Chairman Simons and
Commissioners Chopra, Phillips, Slaughter, and Wilson be made
part of the record.
Without objection, the hearing is adjourned.
[The information follows:]
MR. CICILLINE FOR THE RECORD
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
[Whereupon, at 3:32 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
MS. JAYAPAL FOR THE RECORD
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
MR. BUCK FOR THE RECORD
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
[all]