[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.A.S.C. No. 116-7]
HEARING
ON
NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
AND
OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES
HEARING
ON
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY,
CYBERSECURITY, AND
INFORMATION ASSURANCE
__________
HEARING HELD
FEBRUARY 26, 2019
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-233
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES
JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island, Chairman
RICK LARSEN, Washington
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
JIM COOPER, Tennessee
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas
RO KHANNA, California
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
JASON CROW, Colorado, Vice Chair
DON BACON, Nebraska
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
JIM BANKS, Indiana
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
Josh Stiefel, Professional Staff Member
Peter Villano, Professional Staff Member
Caroline Kehrli, Clerk
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Langevin, Hon. James R., a Representative from Rhode Island,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Intelligence and Emerging Threats and
Capabilities...................................................
1
Scott, Hon. Austin, a Representative from Georgia, Subcommittee
on Intelligence and Emerging Threats and Capabilities..........
3
WITNESSES
Crall, BGen Dennis, USMC, Senior Military Advisor for Cyber
Policy and Deputy Principal Cyber Advisor, Office of the
Secretary of Defense...........................................
6
Deasy, Dana, Chief Information Officer, Office of the Secretary
of Defense.....................................................
4
Hershman, Lisa, Acting Chief Management Officer, Office of the
Secretary of Defense...........................................
3
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Crall, BGen Dennis...........................................
60
Deasy, Dana..................................................
49
Hershman, Lisa...............................................
37
Langevin, Hon. James R.......................................
33
Stefanik, Hon. Elise M., a Representative from New York,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Intelligence and Emerging
Threats and Capabilities...................................
35
Documents Submitted for the Record:
[There were no Documents submitted.]
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
Mr. Langevin.................................................
67
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
Mr. Brown....................................................
74
Mr. Conaway..................................................
71
Mr. Kim......................................................
74
Ms. Stefanik.................................................
71
.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY, CYBERSECURITY, AND INFORMATION ASSURANCE
----------
House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Emerging Threats and
Capabilities,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, February 26, 2019.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:05 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James R.
Langevin (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM RHODE ISLAND, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND
EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES
Mr. Langevin. The subcommittee will come to order.
I want to take this opportunity, first of all, to welcome
our witnesses here today. And we welcome today's hearing on the
Department of Defense information technology, cybersecurity,
and information assurance. This is the subcommittee's first
hearing on the Department's current IT [information technology]
status, its modernization efforts, and its strategic direction
for the foreseeable future.
Our witnesses today are Ms. Lisa Hershman, the Acting Chief
Management Officer; Mr. Dana Deasy, the Department's Chief
Information Officer; and Brigadier General Dennis Crall, the
Deputy Principal Cyber Advisor.
The Defense Department's IT infrastructure is as important
to the mission as the weapons platforms that our service
members employ. We cannot expect the services to maintain
combat superiority if the technology that we rely on is
deficient, outdated, insecure, or inoperable. IT should never
be considered a back-office function as it may have been in
previous eras.
The challenge of managing the Department's IT is
highlighted best by the sheer number of topics that we will be
hearing about today, including cybersecurity, business systems,
artificial intelligence, data management, JEDI [Joint
Enterprise Defense Infrastructure], and the Cyber Excepted
Service.
IT reform and modernization require appropriate stewardship
by the Department's leaders, many of whom are seated here
today. Over the past several years, Congress has endeavored to
ensure that the Department is structured in a way that gives
senior leaders the authorities that they need to carry out
their responsibilities.
For example, Congress created and elevated the position of
CMO [Chief Management Officer] and gave that individual the
responsibility for business systems. Additionally, Congress
provided new standard-setting and budget authorities to the CIO
[Chief Information Officer] that took effect at the beginning
of the calendar year. All of this was done with an
understanding that the PCA [Principal Cyber Advisor] also has a
critical role to play with respect to cybersecurity of such
systems.
Given how dynamic the IT space is, it is reasonable for
this subcommittee to continually take stock of how the
Department is implementing statutory changes and whether the
outcomes match congressional intent. For this reason, I am
eager to hear from the witnesses how the new roles,
responsibilities, and authorities are being implemented and
whether any of the changes made in recent years ought to be
modified further. This includes discussion of the resources
dedicated to the office of the PCA and coordination mechanisms.
In addition to organizational changes, the Department is
taking positive steps to embrace new technologies. Initiatives
such as the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center and the Joint
Enterprise Defense Infrastructure cloud initiative seek to
capitalize on emergent technologies with significant potential
benefits for the Department. This subcommittee is invested in
the success of these efforts, if managed correctly, and with an
understanding of how these dollar investments at the OSD
[Office of the Secretary of Defense] level coincide with
efforts by the services and agencies, such as the other 300-
plus cloud computing initiatives.
Success of the Department in the IT space is predicated not
only on the software and hardware that we buy and maintain, but
equally on the workforce that we employ. The Pentagon cannot
succeed in this new era if we are not recruiting and retaining
the very best possible workforce. So I am pleased that the
workforce is consistently raised as a priority issue and
flagged as one of the premier lines of effort in the DOD
[Department of Defense] Cyber Strategy.
The competition for talent, of course, in this space we
know is fierce, which is one of the reasons Congress created
the Cyber Excepted Service [CES], a personnel system built
specifically to attract top-tier talent with competitive
salaries. The DOD CIO was designated as the Department's lead
in crafting this new personnel system. To date, CES has only
been implemented at U.S. Cyber Command Joint Forces
Headquarters, DOD Information Networks, and DOD CIO
Cybersecurity. Today provides us an opportunity to ensure the
appropriate resources are dedicated to swift implementation
across the entire Department.
Finally, I remain concerned about cybersecurity across the
Department. While we have made significant progress in securing
the DODIN [Department of Defense Information Network],
particularly as U.S. Cyber Command matures, the theft of DOD
data from contractors and the security of weapon systems
themselves are both challenges that we absolutely have to
address. Congress has taken steps in recent years to evaluate
the risk posed by our DIB [defense industrial base] supply
chain, but I am going to be interested to hear more about how
the CIO's office is leveraging its position and expertise to
take more steps to mitigate this risk.
So, with that, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
today about how they are posturing the Department for success.
And before we go to our witnesses, I would like to now turn it
over to the ranking member--or the acting ranking member, Mr.
Scott, for any opening statements that the ranking member may
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Langevin can be found in the
Appendix on page 33.]
STATEMENT OF HON. AUSTIN SCOTT, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM GEORGIA,
SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND EMERGING THREATS AND
CAPABILITIES
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Chairman Langevin, and welcome to our
witnesses here today. Ranking Member Stefanik is delayed due to
a markup proceeding that is taking place on the Education and
Labor Committee. I would simply ask that her entire statement
be entered into the record, and yield back to the chairman so
we can hear from our witnesses prior to votes. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Stefanik can be found in the
Appendix on page 35.]
Mr. Langevin. I would like to turn it over to our
witnesses. Ms. Hershman, we will start with you. Thank you.
STATEMENT OF LISA HERSHMAN, ACTING CHIEF MANAGEMENT OFFICER,
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
Ms. Hershman. Thank you, Chairman Langevin, Ranking Member
Stefanik, and other members of this subcommittee, for the
opportunity to testify today on the Department's information
technology, cybersecurity, and information assurance. I am Lisa
Hershman, the acting Chief Management Officer. Today, I would
like to outline my roles, responsibilities, and priorities, the
Department's aggressive work to reform and modernize business
operations, and the monumental changes in our management of
data throughout the enterprise.
As acting CMO, it is my responsibility to deliver optimized
business operations to assure the success of the National
Defense Strategy. This is only made possible by the elevation
of the CMO as the number three in the Department and the
increased authorities granted by the National Defense
Authorization Act [NDAA]. My goal as acting CMO aligns directly
with the intent of the NDAA, efficiency for lethality, which is
executed by reforming the Department's business processes,
systems, and policies, to gain increased effectiveness, higher
performance, and reprioritized resources.
Integrity and consistency of every measure is a cornerstone
of my approach. Working closely with the comptroller and
military departments, we define standards to reform in
execution--for reform--and have validated our efforts in the
budget. Because of this effort, the Department has realized a
total of $4.7 billion in program savings in fiscal year 2017
and 2018. However, reforming the business operations of the
Department must not only be focused on financial savings, but
also on creating a sustainable impact by establishing a culture
of continuous improvement focused on results and
accountability.
The Department's priorities of reform are based upon the
fiscal year 2019 NDAA, the President's Management Agenda, the
senior leader Reform Management Group, and the first DOD-wide
financial audit. While we execute reform in many areas, IT
infrastructure, business systems, and data management have some
of the most significant opportunity for improvement.
Our current IT and business systems environment is
extremely complex, with hundreds of business systems, thousands
of data centers, hundreds of cloud efforts, and thousands of
applications, in addition to 65 CIOs. It is extremely difficult
for us to deliver an effective, innovative, or secure IT
environment. As the CIO for Defense Business Systems, working
closely with the PCA and the CIO, it is our collective
responsibility to reverse this environment.
We are executing business systems reform in three major
areas: eliminating redundant systems, maximizing shared service
delivery, and streamlining business operations in areas like
procurement through category management. Through initiatives in
these areas, we have already made progress towards simplifying
the IT landscape, reducing operational costs, and enabling
business process integration.
As we execute reform, we remain ever mindful that the goal
is delivery of secure, relevant, clean data to support business
decisions, while IT infrastructures and business systems act as
vehicles by which the data travels.
I want to personally thank you for supporting the data
needs of the Department through the NDAA. This law provided CMO
with the framework to establish common enterprise data and data
management and analytics as a shared service. To ensure data
management had the full dedication it requires, I hired the
Department's first chief data officer, Mr. Michael Conlin.
As outlined in my implementation plan for common enterprise
data, we will make decisions based on accurate, timely business
data as opposed to internal boundaries and past experiences.
This is a monumental shift in the way the Department conducts
its business operations, and I am committed to ensuring the
priority of data management in my role.
Thank you for the opportunity to outline my roles,
responsibilities, and priorities, and provide details of our
work in reforming the Department's IT, business systems, and
data management. I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hershman can be found in the
Appendix on page 37.]
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Ms. Hershman.
And now turn it over to Mr. Deasy.
STATEMENT OF DANA DEASY, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, OFFICE OF
THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
Mr. Deasy. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify before the subcommittee today on the current efforts
underway pertaining to the Department's information technology
and cybersecurity. I am Dana Deasy, the Department of Defense
Chief Information Officer. Today, I would like to highlight key
areas of the Department's digital modernization, including
cloud, AI [artificial intelligence], C3 [command, control and
communications], and cyber, as well as a separate effort on IT
reform.
Earlier this month, the Department submitted its cloud
report and strategy. As stated in that submission, DOD will
remain a multicloud environment with both general purpose and
fit-for-purpose clouds as part of our long-term strategy. As I
have discussed with some of you previously, JEDI is a
pathfinder, general purpose, enterprise-wide cloud. As part of
our strategy, JEDI will enable DOD to learn how to implement an
enterprise cloud solution, taking advantage of economies of
scale and enhanced data-driven decision making.
The National Defense Strategy makes clear that the
character of warfare is changing. Competitors like Russia and
China are investing heavily in modernization in AI to refine
the future of warfare. DOD must do the same. The AI strategy
emphasizes the need to increase speed and agility, which will
deliver AI-enabled capabilities, the importance of evolving our
partnerships with industry and academia, and the Department's
commitment to lead military, ethics, and AI safety. The Joint
Artificial Intelligence Center [JAIC] is the focal point for
carrying out the DOD AI strategy. JAIC will accelerate DOD's
delivery and adoption of AI to achieve our global mission.
The emergence of digital technologies has introduced new
challenges to the traditional C3 landscape. In order to take
advantage of the new digital capabilities and to protect our
warfighter from corresponding weaknesses, we must modify and
modernize our C3 systems. In order to facilitate economic
growth while accounting for national security, DOD CIO, working
with OUSD(R&E) [Office of the Under Secretary of Defense,
Research and Engineering] and Federal partners, will play a key
role in the Department's effort in the implementation of 5G.
Turning to cyber, DOD released its 2018 Cyber Strategy this
past September. The Cyber Strategy articulates how DOD
implements the National Defense Strategy in cyberspace. DOD's
CIO, working closely with DISA [Defense Information Systems
Agency] and PCA, implements the DOD Cyber Strategy, in close
coordination with the military departments and component CIOs.
DOD CIO and PCA co-lead weekly meetings focused on cyber issues
with the Deputy Secretary of Defense, military departments, and
OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense] principals present.
The Department has created the Cyber Top Ten, which help us
to prioritize where and how we apply resources and innovation
to execute our Cyber Strategy. The Cyber Top Ten focuses on
remediation strategies for a complex cyber landscape, with
components ranging from information networks to our cyber
workforce and supply chain risk management, and beyond.
DOD CIO works closely with the Protecting Critical
Technology Task Force to identify technical solutions to
enhance protection of the defense industrial base. For the
first time, DOD CIO is reviewing and certifying all IT budgets,
which includes cyber, across the Department.
DOD CIO now has the authority to set and enforce IT
standards across the Department. The Department's cyber
workforce is critical to our mission success. Authorities
provided by Congress, such as the Cyber Excepted Service, has
allowed the Department to adjust existing personnel policies
and to implement new policies that account for this dynamic
need in an increasing important mission area. DOD CIO is
working closely with the CMO to modernize business systems and
to eliminate legacy networks, infrastructure, and applications.
In closing, I want to emphasize the importance of our
partnership with Congress in all areas, but with particular
focus on digital modernization and IT reform. I look forward to
continuing to work with Congress in these critical areas. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify this afternoon, and I do
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Deasy can be found in the
Appendix on page 49.]
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Director.
And, General, the floor is now yours.
STATEMENT OF BGEN DENNIS CRALL, USMC, SENIOR MILITARY ADVISOR
FOR CYBER POLICY AND DEPUTY PRINCIPAL CYBER ADVISOR, OFFICE OF
THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
General Crall. Thank you, Chairman, Ranking Chairman, and
members. I appreciate the opportunity to come here and talk to
you a bit and answer your questions from an implementation or
outcome side of this equation here in front of you.
So I am honored to lead the Office of the Principal Cyber
Advisor's cross-functional team. This was put in motion in NDAA
language back in 2014, section 932. And while that predates by
a few years language in the 2017 NDAA, section 911, which gets
after cross-functional teams writ large and encourages that in
the Department, I think it meets the vision, or at least I hope
it does, that Congress was looking at in a cross-functional
team.
And I am going to say this with some measured enthusiasm,
because while I am excited about what I would consider to be
our launch point and where we are right now, there is a lot of
really heavy lifting ahead. And the measure of our
effectiveness is really yet to be proven, but I am optimistic
that we are going to get to where we need to be. So it is a
really good start for the team and getting after the strategy
that was just mentioned.
So to the point, the cross-functional team is focused on
outcomes. It doesn't do us a lot of good to have a Cyber
Strategy or a Posture Review that shows gaps and not really
have a means to close those gaps and show outcomes and
improvement. That is what I am focused on 24/7, is the team
looking at getting the outcomes and implementing the strategy
and learning from that as we go through our process.
We are also taking a hard look at our measures of
effectiveness. I have made comments before that I used to think
that one of the hardest things to do in this line is to start
new work. I have learned that it is to stop work that is
currently in progress. So to make good decisions where maybe
things have gone past their point of good investments, and the
Department needs to be more flexible to turn to those things
which really pay bigger dividends. We are looking at all of
those.
So, really, what is the recipe? Just very quickly, what
makes, I think, our efforts unique this go-around than maybe
what you have seen in the past. There are only a few
ingredients, the first of which I would say is we have got
really good team members. We are allowed to pick them, and they
come from a good cross-section across the Department. And
because we are looked at normally as not having a bias, because
we have so much diversity in background, that we are normally a
trusted entity that can defuse some of these problems and move
the Department forward.
We have got a solid strategy, as Mr. Deasy mentioned.
Strategies are only good if the lines of effort within them are
actionable, that you can do them. Not just, you know,
proclamations or really good statements you can pin to a wall
or aspire to, but things you can actually measure your progress
against. We have got a good strategy.
We also have a very good Posture Review. The gaps that are
included in there are very honest and allows us to put
resources against those gaps and really provide substance to
the way that we are working and moving forward.
We also bring together all the stakeholders. We are at this
table for a reason. Work very closely with the DOD CIO, the
CMO, with CAPE [Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation], the
Joint Staff, services. These aren't just tangential things or
passing in the hallways but integrated into our planning
efforts and daily battle rhythms. So we work just not with each
other but closely with each other, which I think is important.
We also have great leadership within DOD. We have got an
Acting Secretary of Defense who has been laser focused on this
in his previous role and current role and who is performing the
duties of the Assistant Secretary of Defense now that are
really focused on a battle rhythm where we are in front of them
at least in a formal meeting every other week, going through
what our scorecards, our outcomes, challenges and successes
are. So we have very close interest within the Department.
And lastly, I would say, and certainly not least, is the
interest here in this body. Congress has done us well to
establish the cross-functional team and put us on a good glide
slope to achieve results. So I thank you for the language that
we have in the NDAA, and also your staffers who are sitting in
the back. I assure you this: They know what I do as well as I
know what I do, because they have been in my office spaces,
they have read through our work, they have seen our product and
how we are moving forward, and they have been extremely helpful
at keeping us on path.
So, with that, I thank you for the opportunity, and look
forward to taking your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Crall can be found in
the Appendix on page 60.]
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you, General.
And I thank our witnesses for your testimony. We will now
go to questions. We are expecting votes around 2:30, so we are
going to get through as many as we can and then we will recess
and then we will be coming back.
As is the case with the full committee, the chair and
ranking member are not on the clock, but it is up to us to keep
ourselves in check. After that, we will recognize members
according to seniority, according to who was here first at
gavel.
So, with that, let me start on the Cyber Excepted Service.
So obviously, we touched on this topic. I am glad you all have
mentioned it. Congress created the Cyber Excepted Service for
the Department of Defense to be able to hire a skilled and
talented cyber workforce. I understand, though, that less than
five individuals from your office are dedicated to
implementation of this authority, which is significantly
delaying utilization of new hiring authorities across the
Department. So as I noted in my opening statement, the
workforce is the pinnacle of IT reform, modernization, and
assurance.
So, Mr. Deasy, I am going to go to you first. Can you
please describe the resources your office has dedicated to
implementation of CES and why not more dedicated--why we have
more dedicated implementation authority that might be needed?
Mr. Deasy. So first off, so as General Crall pointed out,
this is a very important tool set you gave us. I will tell you
that as I dug into this, this isn't a case of the volume of
people we need inside of my respective organization or working
on General Crall's cross-functional team. This is about
competencies that need to exist in them. This is a new way of
doing business.
And, more importantly, the P&R [Personnel and Readiness]
organization and the respective mil [military] services need to
train up, I think, at a faster rate the people that they need
to bring on board to actually accelerate Cyber Excepted
Service. If you look at where we are today, as you pointed out
in your opening remarks, U.S. Cyber Command, DISA, DOD CIO
office is well on its way. Where we need to up the game and up
the speed is inside the respective mil services.
Now, General Crall here is living this on the front line
each and every day, in terms of how we are tackling this, so I
respectfully would see if he would want to add any comments to
this.
General Crall. Thank you, sir.
I would add, sir, really to the point of your question, in
our implementation experience thus far, we have identified
inside the building, and I have a request that we are putting
together now that will be making its rounds to Mr. Deasy here
shortly, that asks for some more resourcing inside the building
to get after unfolding this a bit faster. So that is one area,
just to be blunt. We could do a little bit better inside the
building to get after it, and I am articulating what those
specific needs are. So that is forthcoming.
The second piece that we are looking at is for all the talk
in implementation, one area that the Department is focused on
that, again, we have got to pick up the pace a bit is in how we
do security clearances. The onboarding process can be very
frustrating. So while we might have four of the five elements
of the recipe right in bringing people on, if we can't bring
them on quickly because they are held up in the security
clearance process, it is a potential that they lose some
interest and we don't garner the result we are looking for. So
there is an effort underway right now to get after both of
those critical areas.
Mr. Langevin. I am concerned about the slowdown with the
security clearance process as well. And I know we are looking
at alternatives, including using technology as perhaps a pilot
project to see how the two would compare, using algorithms and
data analytics to speed that process along more quickly. But I
share your concern about the clearance process.
And I will be interested, General, to hear more about the
resources that are requested to more fully implement the work
that you are doing.
Ms. Hershman, has your office been able to utilize CES, and
what is your perspective?
Ms. Hershman. We have not to this point, so we don't have
that perspective yet.
Mr. Langevin. Why is that?
Ms. Hershman. We are just actually about 6 weeks into
managing the business systems piece.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Well, we are going to want to follow up
with you on that and to see the degree you will be able to
utilize CES.
To all of our witnesses, I mentioned in my opening
statement, Congress has enacted major statutory changes
regarding the position of CIO, CMO, and PCA over the years. How
are such changes being implemented, and what challenges or
overlap have been identified?
Ms. Hershman. So Dana and I have from the very beginning
worked very closely, primarily from the reform standpoint, but
we have been able to come to an agreement on how the roles and
responsibilities are bifurcated. In general, we as CMO manage
all the business systems and the data pieces of the Department.
The CIO manages the network.
If we use a little bit of a visual to describe this, if you
picture walking into this room, you have lights, you have the
microphones, you have the monitors that are working. CMO would
own everything that you would see, the lights down to the plug,
and then the CIO would manage from the outlet to all the wiring
that is behind. We also have the data, non-weapon system data,
but all the business data that feeds in and shares both of the
organizations.
So Dana and I have worked closely together. He has been
part of my Reform Management Group. We also meet regularly in
one-on-ones to make sure that the roles, responsibilities, and
so forth are clear. And to date, we are handling any
exceptions. Not everything is always black and white. One of
the, I shouldn't say issues, but topics that came up at an
early point was, I think it was Microsoft Office, and we were
wondering is that considered more of an application or is that
more of a business tool.
So Dana and I work closely with our teams to manage by
exception. We sit on each other's cross-functional teams. I am
also a member of the CIO Cyber cross-functional team. They are
members of our Defense Business Council, which reviews software
applications and so forth and certifies them in terms of dollar
and value. We also--I am trying to think on some of the other
teams. My chief data officer meets regularly with his team. So
we have formed a good partnership and, to date, haven't had any
real issues.
One last thing that I will add that we have done with
regard to reform, and it is something new that we have done
with the fiscal year 2019 new year, is that it used to be that
CMO was seen as the only one who owned reform. And this year,
because many of my colleagues are responsible for
implementation, we work closely with colleagues and partners
like Dana where we share in the metrics and the outcomes of our
reform efforts.
So, Dana, I would invite you to add.
Mr. Deasy. So specifically what I will talk about is the
new authorities that kicked in as of January 1st this year, two
types of authorities. One was I am now in a position to
actually review the entire Department of Defense IT budget,
which is at $40-plus billion. So we came up with a process this
year to actually go through and look at the highest priorities,
which you will hear us talk about today, and to identify where
there are gaps or where there is full alignment around the
execution towards that digital modernization strategy. I
actually issued to the Secretary back at the end of January the
first ever certified budget for the Department of Defense.
Second, the other part of that speaks to standards and
frameworks. And we now have the authority to identify standards
and frameworks. So far, I will actually say that I think that
will probably be used by exception. If I have the right working
relationships and we have the right alignment, my ability to
have to use that right to actually overrule will hopefully not
be the norm but will be the exception. To date, I have not had
to actually execute that authority, as we have strong alignment
on the digital modernization program activity. But at a point
where we do need to do that, I will be sure to use that
authority.
Mr. Langevin. So the CMO mentioned governing by exception.
How are we institutionalizing the CMO and CIO roles,
respectively?
Mr. Deasy. I will start by saying that what we did was, as
Ms. Hershman pointed out, there are growing pains any time you
take activity and you split it across organizations. There is
friction that occur. So we thought the right way to do this was
to have our respective organizations sit down and literally map
out what are all of the areas where you can step on and have
cross activity.
We had a working team that went through that, and then at
the end, she and I respectively signed a memo that describes
the activity set that is going to be done by my office and the
activity set that will be done by her office.
Mr. Langevin. Is that something that you can share with us?
Would that be appropriate?
Ms. Hershman. Yes. Actually, we have that going through
final signature and review now.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. The thing is, we are really interested
in to make sure that this all works well together, and that we
want to get our heads around whether this is, you know, not
just personality-driven, but it is process-driven, that we have
this more institutionalized, if you will. So that the next
people that will be occupying your roles, again, it is not
personality-driven, but it is actually institutionalized going
forward, and we take best practice or we take the best out of
the work that you are doing and make sure that there is
continuity.
So I am going to have additional questions, and it looks
like we are going to votes right now, but I will turn to the
ranking member for questions, and hopefully we can get through
her questions and then we will recess after that.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Chairman Langevin.
I wanted to build upon your question, and also expand on
your opening testimony, Ms. Hershman. You very clearly outlined
the disparate, fractured, and duplicative nature of our current
IT and business systems environment. We have more than 1,800
business systems across the portfolio, thousands of data
centers, hundreds of cloud efforts, some 65 CIOs, and a total
budget of almost $42 billion per fiscal year.
With all of these complications in terms of the
Department's overall strategy to reform this area, what does
this need to look like 5 years from now? And equally as
important, how do you intend to get there?
Ms. Hershman. What it is to look like 5 years from now is
actually very difficult to project, only because of the
changing nature of both technology and how we do business. What
we all can agree on is that this needs to be less complicated
so it is easier to manage, not only from a--you know, from
using the systems within the organization, but also to ensure
that data that flows through these multiple systems is also
properly protected.
So one of the things that we have done is certainly align
these initiatives with how it supports our National Defense
Strategy. We also, from a reform perspective, are looking at
what will create the biggest impact, create the greatest value,
and what is the timing? In fact, some of these initiatives, we
are taking a very different approach, in that we are not
necessarily waiting all the way to the end of the project to
produce results. We are actually taking iterative, prototype,
minimum viable product type approaches to start deliver and
test as we continue to go through the program or the project.
So we also have used--I was a--the CMO was a cosponsor for
the comptroller's audit. We are using audit findings to also
help inform reform. So those are just some examples of how we
are collectively looking at what is most important, where are
our biggest risks, what are our biggest vulnerabilities, and
how can we mitigate or solve those problems, and are ordering
or reordering our initiatives accordingly.
Ms. Stefanik. Let me ask you about the efficiencies and
cost savings that you talked about. Do you expect the cost of a
modernized and efficient IT and cyber budget to remain at
approximately $42 billion per year?
Ms. Hershman. It is difficult to answer that question on
the expectations for the budget, only because we are working
with what we know now, and there are always new opportunities
or new issues that could pop up. So I can't really speak to the
budget and cost.
Ms. Stefanik. Okay. And my final follow-up. Mr. Deasy, do
you have anything to add? I would like to get your perspective
on what this needs to look like 5 years from now. How do we get
there? And the budget question, in terms of do we anticipate
this costing $42 billion per year?
Mr. Deasy. Yeah. I would say that if we look at the
emergent technologies, such as cloud, AI, modernization of C3,
and what we are going to have to do to secure the Department of
Defense, I think the question really is one of are we getting
the most out of every dollar, not if $42 billion is right. It
may be in the future that the Department of Defense budget,
from an IT standpoint, actually needs to go up for what it
needs to do for the business. To me, the real question is, are
we getting the most out of every dollar? So that I would say is
kind of part one to your question.
Two, what does the world look like in the future? I
envision it a world where every new application will be cloud
first. When we are going to look at consolidation of business
systems, we will take the opportunity as we migrate on the
cloud to do standardization and consolidation of business
systems. We will use that opportunity to start using data
management in a much more joined-up common way. And we will use
things like AI robotics to actually help us deliver a much more
efficient--back to my first question of how do you deliver a
much more efficient budget.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. So votes have been called. We will
recess until about 5 minutes or so after votes.
So, with that, the subcommittee stands in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Langevin. The committee will come to order.
Again, I want to thank our witnesses for testifying here
today. Sorry for the delay getting restarted, but we are going
to go now.
The gentlelady from Pennsylvania, Ms. Houlahan, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you so much to all of you for coming. I have a few
questions for you. The first one is to Ms. Hershman. I was
wondering a little bit about the capabilities of our domestic
manufacturing. Twenty percent of our memory chips are only made
in this country and the rest come from international sources.
And I was wondering if you had any concerns that we need an
organic source, a domestic source of these kinds of manufacture
of these kinds of chips, to make sure that we are secure with
the work that you do and also for business in general.
Ms. Hershman. I would say, in general, we share your
concerns. However, my role does not deal with that directly, so
I will defer to Mr. Deasy or Mr. Crall.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you.
Mr. Deasy. So do I believe that we need a domestic supply
chain for key chip? Absolutely. All you have to do is look at
things like 5G. And the need to have an industrial base in the
U.S. where we can get secure technologies such as what you are
referring to is something I think we need to focus more on,
yes.
General Crall. Ma'am, I wouldn't add any more to that.
Ms. Houlahan. So the following question is, what sort of
legislative help can we as a Congress provide to you so that we
can enable that to happen?
Mr. Deasy. I would tell you, I am not sure I am the right
expert, being the CIO, to tell you what the policy requirements
and how best that we legislate that. I would be happy to get
the people engaged inside the Pentagon that would be best able
to address that particular question.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. My next question has to do with
small businesses. In addition to being a veteran, I am also an
entrepreneur. And we know that small businesses play a really
critical part in our defense industrial complex, and they are
obviously mostly supply chain-related in most cases. And they
are largely fairly inadequately prepared to deal with issues of
cybersecurity as they are growing or starting up.
And so my question is, how is the Department working with
entities like small businesses and up and down the supply chain
to make sure that cybersecurity practices and IT systems are
protected from the threats that we know exist and that larger
companies are capable of handling?
Mr. Deasy. So I share this concern. When we start talking
about small businesses at what I will call tier two, tier three
down in the supply chain, they don't have the wherewithal, the
financial wherewithal, nor the knowledge domain expertise
wherewithal at the sophistication levels of tier one.
A couple things that we are looking at in this space is,
one is how do we use the NIST [National Institute of Standards
and Technology] Framework and how do we take that framework to
help educate the tier two and tier three in a way that is more
effective for them to use. Two is, I am a firm believer in that
we need to develop an independent standard, kind of like what
we have for CMMI [Capability Maturity Model Integration] for
development or ISO [International Organization for
Standardization] 9000 for quality. I think this needs to be
developed. I think if we could get this developed in this
country, this would actually help better educate and focus
small business on the talent they would then need to hire.
I think the last thing is we are looking at how do we use
technology that we are starting to put in place maybe at cloud
technology that would allow us, instead of passing data to them
and then them having to secure it, how could we keep the data
on our own premises and they could connect into it. So that is
another thing that we are evaluating.
Ms. Houlahan. Excellent. Thank you very much.
And the last question I have is that my understanding from
our briefings here and then also at the NSA [National Security
Agency] is one of the biggest vulnerabilities for all of us
employees, regardless of where we work, is spear-phishing
attacks. And I am wondering what you have done to make sure
that you are holding people accountable, if you are holding
people accountable, for these kind of mistakes; and are there
any practices that we can adopt from the accountability for
individuals--are there best practices that we can adopt from
accountability from individuals that you have found effective?
Mr. Deasy. Yeah, I will be happy to take that. So coming
from private industry, one of the stats that we know exists out
there is if you look at all the vulnerabilities that get
created, both inside government as well as private industry, it
is human error still tends to be the number one cause of the
vulnerabilities. And at the top of that list is spear phishing
or just general phishing.
To that end, I think best practices that I have seen in
private industry have been around training programs where you
actually create test-phishing campaigns. You use those. You
actually then phish a set of employee base that you want to
start with. And it is real time, because what comes back to
them is the fact that they have just been phished. They get
educated in real time on what they are seeing in that email
that would have shown them the attributes of what a phishing
looks like. And then you follow through with a round two, and
you reach a point where if someone continues to fail, then you
take other actions, which would include increased training.
Ms. Houlahan. Wonderful. Thank you.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. I thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Scott is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I appreciate the Department's total force perspective
and using all facets of civilian and military forces to get
ahead of our adversaries. We have granted new hiring
authorities for Cyber Excepted Services, direct hire authority,
and pay adjustments in salaries.
How far are we along with the implementation of this? And
are there other barriers that are holding you back from
recruiting and training the right people? If so, how do we
intend to overcome these barriers? How are you working with
universities, ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] programs
to create a conduit of new talent for this career field? And
what additional resources do you need from Congress in the way
of either language in the National Defense Authorization Act or
other forms of legislation to assist you in this field?
General Crall. Sir, I would be glad to take that question.
And I appreciate the scope that you just framed that, because
those are really kind of a mixed bag for us on areas that I
would say--and I will cover them--that I think we are doing
better in some and not so well in others.
So I would like to take a look at really our target
audience. The Department--and I have testified on this before,
that the Department has to do a better job, and we are looking
at ways to ensure we understand the market properly. In many
cases, we think we know where we should be recruiting, and we
may not be recruiting to the level that we should.
So understanding the type of applicant that we are
searching for and the needs of those applicants, we need to
bolster our understanding a little bit better. So we are
looking at a way to kind of package that.
I think your comments are spot on on internships, for
example. We do too few of them. Academia has proven their
willingness to work with us, and as a department, we have just
got to really take advantage of those where it makes sense. We
have several of these near our bases that would be attractants
to these things, and we are still underutilized.
I think on the ROTC front, we are doing a little bit
better. And I realize that may not be a detailed or satisfying
enough answer, but we are addressing that. And I talk to the
services about how they run their programs, and it is clearly
an area of interest in the college environment.
But the last piece I would say is our biggest challenge,
and we have covered this a little bit earlier today and I would
just reemphasize it. Rolling this out at a level that is
sufficient I think is a fair criticism where the Department has
to do better. So the phase one of the Cyber Excepted Service
was modest by design of under about 500 billets that we put
out, to make sure that we knew what we were doing. Were we
trained properly? Could we track those individuals properly?
And you are right, Congress has given us a lot of
enhancements, from pay to direct hire, et cetera. This next
phase, which we are in right now, is going to bring that
exponentially higher in number. And the resources in the
building are lacking for us to both internally and then at the
service level to make sure we can handle that workload, and we
are addressing it.
Mr. Scott. And when you say resources, do you mean money?
Do you mean physical resources?
General Crall. People, sir.
Mr. Scott. People.
General Crall. Which could be viewed as money.
Mr. Scott. Sure. Yes.
General Crall. But looking at people, to dedicate the right
number and the mix to get after this at scale. And that scale
has to change for us to meet pace.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Anybody else like to comment on that?
Mr. Deasy. So having spent most of my career in private
industry, I would say that one of the problems is a whole-of-
government issue we have to address, and that is most cyber
people never come across government in their career. They just
don't touch it. They don't intersect with government. What does
that mean? That means when they are thinking about progressing
their career and taking that next step, they don't stop to have
a conversation with themselves saying, well, what about an
opportunity of doing a career inside of government?
And I think that is one of the things that we in the DOD
need to step up and address, but I think others are going to
need to address as well is, how do we create exposure that even
lets the average person in private industry even know what the
opportunities could look like for them in government? Because
once we do bring these people in and we expose them to the
mission, they get pretty excited about it, but it is how do we
create a better avenue of awareness I think is part of what we
have to address.
Mr. Scott. I have only got about 30 seconds left, but you
brought something up on the periphery of it has been on my
mind. This issue where several employees of a company that we
contract with did not want to push forward with the contract
because it was a DOD contract.
I am very concerned about how few companies there are out
there that are actually good in these fields that we are
talking about. And when you have a small group of select
employees, their ability to create problems with that contract
and their perception of DOD I think is very wrong. I mean, it
was the Department of Defense that went to Africa when we had
the outbreaks of potentially contagious diseases. I mean, we
are in the business of helping people.
And I do hope that--I know you are paying attention to it
and interested in further conversations about the private
sector and the challenges there with select groups who do not
want to work with us. But thank you for your time.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
Before I go to Mrs. Trahan, General, if I could just follow
up with you on Mr. Scott's question. You answered and you
talked about resources you need, and you said people. Can you
help the committee understand the amount of people we are
talking about in numbers? Is it 10? Is it 50? Is it 100?
Ballpark it for us. Not to hold you to that, but we are trying
to get our arms around this as well, and your perspective would
be helpful.
General Crall. Yes, sir. So my evidence behind my number I
am just going to admit is a bit sketchy. But to do service to
your question, the Department had looked at having between five
or six people full time to do the initial planning and rollout,
which, again, was kind of modest.
So my ballpark estimation would be at least that number of
5 or 6 and likely something closer to the order of 10
internally if we are dealing with thousands that need to be,
you know, brought in and the training that is required, because
they have to travel to some of these places to make sure that
training takes place and it is understood well. So that would
be my ballpark estimate, sir.
Mr. Langevin. That doesn't seem like a significant increase
over what--so that seems to be eminently doable. You are
talking about an additional number of people that are needed?
General Crall. It does seem that way, yes, sir.
Mr. Langevin. So which office needs to provide those
resources?
General Crall. Sir, I think that would come across several
offices potentially to do that. And I am not an expert, but I
think the requirement for that that I am piecing together, I am
trying to answer that question now to submit to Mr. Deasy. So
to be fair, he hasn't received my request, but I think that
will rest with him eventually, and we will have to look within
the Department as to where the resources come to get those
hirees.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. I appreciate it. Your candor is very
helpful and it helps us to understand the scope of the
challenge and what we need to do to get this right.
With that, let me recognize Mrs. Trahan from Massachusetts
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
You mentioned the opportunity in government and how some
folks in the private sector don't even entertain that
possibility. Given the recent shutdown, what is the value
proposition? What is the--how are we going to attract and
retain the best and the brightest from everything from MIT
[Massachusetts Institute of Technology] to competitive
community colleges to help us tackle this problem?
Mr. Deasy. So it is clearly the mission. And let me bring
it to life through an example. We run a yearly competition
where universities compete on a cyber challenge, and then we
bring the winning university in for a day into the Department
of Defense. And in that, they get a chance to meet with my
office. They get a chance to meet with several of the
principals, the COCOMs [unified combatant commands], the
military side. And by the end of this day, every single one of
them says the same thing: I had no idea just how amazing it
could be to do this sort of work if I had not had the
opportunity to come in and spend a day and just get exposed and
talk to people and hear firsthand from the people out in the
field why cyber matters.
So I cannot stress the importance enough for a lot of young
people if they never get exposure, they never talk to someone
in uniform, they are just not going to put in the forefront of
their mind coming and working for the DOD.
Mrs. Trahan. That is helpful. And are these employees that
we are attracting, do they have that label essential/
nonessential associated with them? How would they be affected
by a potential shutdown, for example?
Mr. Deasy. I am not sure I could--I would have to look into
the specific nature of how they are classified and come back
and answer that.
Mrs. Trahan. That is great. I am interested in knowing what
the consequences are when we shut down the government, how that
is actually going to affect our cybersecurity strategy.
But I will shift gears. The success of our--I believe I
just read something where you were quoted, Mr. Deasy, that the
success of our AI initiatives relies on robust relationships
with industry, with our allies, certainly with academia, to
meet the needs of speed and agility specifically. What role do
our allies play in that?
Mr. Deasy. So interesting enough, I just had a conversation
with our Five Eyes CIOs just yesterday on this very topic. I
would say, right now, we are clearly in the leadership role.
And I think the biggest role that we are going to play is help
to educate them and help them to understand what it took for us
as a Department of Defense to establish a Joint Artificial
[Intelligence] Center capability, as they are all looking to
establish a like capability. So I think our role will be one of
leadership and how we went about doing this.
Mrs. Trahan. Great. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mrs. Trahan.
I recognize Mr. Waltz now for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just wanted to thank you all for coming, by the way. And,
General, I wanted to pick up, or, Mr. Deasy, on your comment
about human capital and the challenges that you are having with
human capital. What role do you see the Guard and Reserve
playing in there?
It seems to me if there is any entity that flows back and
forth between civilian and uniformed or even government
service, it would be the Guard and the Reserve that can kind
of, one, stay current on the civilian side as technology paces
so quickly, but then flow back in as they come in and off of
orders. Where do they fit in the broader strategy?
General Crall. Sir, you know, the question is timely. We
just had a chance to take the team down to Augusta, Georgia,
and talk to a lot of the units that are down there that are
practicing this. And the Guard and Reserve is really a staple
of the conversation, not an add-on. So a lot of the Guard and
Reserve units are extremely active, very competent, cutting-
edge technology trained, and a very integral part of what we
do.
So I can't comment onto the adequacy, you know, if we are
doing enough or not enough, but I know that many of those Guard
units have quite a bit of operational time under their belt as
well. So very proficient, very impressive. And we use them
regularly, not just in their activated time periods, but in
their civilian period as well.
And I would admit, I don't believe that is limited just to
cyber. I think that is pretty common. In my, you know, noncyber
experience in the Marine Corps, we have been augmented in
almost every MOS [military occupational specialty] that I can
think of by Guard units and Reserve units who have performed
brilliantly.
Mr. Waltz. Fair enough. But I would think that it would be
quite unique to cyber, right, or at least the technology field,
right? So you could have where that civilian skill set then is
so--I can't think of anywhere else that on the civilian side is
outpacing the military from a technological standpoint.
General Crall. Well, maybe, sir, because here is an area
where it depends on what kind of mission we are talking about.
So if we are talking about defensive missions and those
individuals have experience doing kind of our protection type
of work possibly. On the offensive side, I would argue that I
think within the military, that capability, it is really the
only legal place you could do some of that work. And that
allure is there. So it would depend on the skill set.
Mr. Waltz. Fair enough. Switching gears to JEDI, and
apologies if you have already answered some questions along
these lines, but just talk to me about how critical JEDI is.
How critical is the success of JEDI and other DOD enterprise
cloud initiatives in supporting future AI?
And along those lines, then what are the--I am assuming you
are going to say it is critical and you are going to tell me
how critical. But then what are the drivers or delays to
implementations, and what are we losing as implementation is
delayed?
Mr. Deasy. So not specific to JEDI, but just what are the
critical benefits. So what is the problem set we are trying to
solve for inside the Department of Defense? Number one is if
you look at what it takes today to stand up compute capability
from the time that a service or a COCOM sees a need to the time
that you bring the assets inside the Department, test them,
stand them up, make them operational, that is a multi-month
period.
Benefit number one of cloud is the ability to purpose and
stand up compute capability in literally hours. So you solve
for how do you solve for episodic needs where you need to stand
up compute capability. That is very important, as you can
imagine, to the Department.
Two is when we build capability today inside the
Department, we always have to think about peak need. So you buy
enough necessary hardware for that peak capacity. The second
beauty of cloud is called elasticity. You ramp up and scale
more compute as you need it; and as you don't need it, you can
scale it down, and it happens in real time.
The third one is resiliency. The idea with the cloud is
that if you write your application from day one to be cloud
native, you get built-in resiliency. As it finds itself in an
unhealthy condition or as it finds itself needing to use other
resources, it has the intelligence to do that. In a world where
we can't have a not fail mission set, the resiliency, as you
can imagine, becomes mission-critical.
Mr. Waltz. What are we losing as this moves forward? I
mean, I understand the process is moving forward, and----
Mr. Deasy. Yeah.
Mr. Waltz [continuing]. You are not going to get into
protests and, you know, all of the industry issues.
Mr. Deasy. No.
Mr. Waltz. But what are we losing as this----
Mr. Deasy. The biggest thing we are losing right now is--
the Department of Defense needs to bring data and integration
together. It has been a constant conversation; it is not a new
conversation. Our enterprise cloud, for the first time, allows
us to establish a common platform where we can bring data
together in a common way.
What will happen is, the longer we delay standing up a JEDI
capability, you are going to--the military services are going
to need to go solve for mission sets, and they are going to
continue to stand up in their own individual environments. And
I don't see that as being beneficial over the long term to the
Department.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have exceeded my
time.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Waltz.
We are going to go to a second round of questions now.
So, following up on the JEDI issue, obviously this is a big
deal for the Department, something Congress is following very
closely. I have been frustrated that we haven't moved it along
more quickly.
But, Mr. Deasy, just last week, news reports emerged about
a potential conflict of interest related to the JEDI program.
It would be an understatement to say that I was frustrated that
the subcommittee and our staff had to learn about the
development, from what we understand, through a presser rather
than from Department staff.
You know, given the significant congressional attention to
the effort of ensuring that the transition of cloud is
successful, we really do expect and anticipate better
communication from the Department moving forward on this issue.
And I wanted to ask for your commitment to improving
communication with Congress to prevent a surprise issue like
this happening again.
Mr. Deasy. Absolutely.
I will take it that I did not get back to you in as timely
of a way as we should have. We were walking a very fine line
between an ongoing conversation with the Department of Justice
around what we could say and we couldn't say. We got the
clarity on a certain day this last week, and as soon as I got
that clarity, I called.
We did put a holding statement out to the press, but I
wanted to be able to share with further clarity beyond the
holding statement with you. And that is what I was waiting to
get from the Department of Justice.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Well, good communication and----
Mr. Deasy. Absolutely important.
Mr. Langevin [continuing]. Timeliness is essential. And I
would appreciate your commitment to doing that.
So, on this topic, again, the Department recently
identified more than 300 cloud initiatives across the
Department. So how does JEDI relate to those initiatives?
Mr. Deasy. We believe that inside those 300 initiatives are
what I will call general purpose cloud computing, meaning that
many of those initiatives do not need what I will call a unique
cloud stack but they can be best served through something
referred to as JEDI. And then we have some that sit inside
there that are truly going to need what we call fit-for-purpose
or unique cloud capability.
Until we can get a direct line of sight as to how soon we
will be able to stand up a general purpose cloud capability,
obviously, the cloud initiatives need to continue. As soon as
we know within line of sight of what I will say is probably
within 60 days of when we think we will actually be able to go
live, then we will be able to go back to some of the early
portions of those cloud initiatives, where they are still in
the early days, and redirect them. That is our intent.
So the fine line we are walking right now is not to impede
the need for mission success where people are standing up on
the cloud, but as soon as we can provide clarity to the DOD on
when the enterprise cloud will be available, to then redirect
those activities onto JEDI.
Mr. Langevin. So your best guess in, you know, the world of
cloud, what percentage do you think are unique, specific to
each of the departments, and what are more common, what
percentage is going to be more common in cloud?
Mr. Deasy. Yeah, the way I like to have this conversation
is, it depends if we are talking legacy or what I like to refer
to as brownfield or if you are talking greenfield, new
applications that need to be written.
I am a strong believer that the vast majority, probably 85,
90 percent, of all things in the future that we were to build
could go onto either a fit-for-purpose or a general purpose
cloud.
So then that begs the question, what about the world of all
the applications you have today? Many of those applications,
just the sheer cost and the magnitude of lifting them and
reporting them onto the cloud would be cost-prohibitive, would
be time-prohibitive, and would probably not serve the
Department well.
So what you really have to do is you have to then go
through your legacy estate based on the cloud we are eventually
going to stand up--and that is actually a key statement--based
on what it is we are going to stand up, and then be able to
start targeting what would the services look to do what is
called a report, where they are going to rewrite the
application, or a lift and shift, where they are going to take
the application and bring it over as is and put it onto the
cloud.
So there are various ways we can move over. But the big
thing hanging out there right now is, until we know what that
architecture in that cloud is going to look like, it is very
difficult to start estimation exercises.
Mr. Langevin. Okay.
And, Ms. Hershman, from your perspective on business
systems, what capabilities will JEDI bring to reform? And how
does the chief data officer you recently hired intend to
utilize JEDI, and how is he working with the CIO on data
management?
Ms. Hershman. So, yes, sir, that it does have a big impact
on what we are doing in CMOs. Mr. Deasy explained that it has
an interrelationship with data.
So Mr. Conlin, our chief data officer, does work with Mr.
Deasy and his team. We were very fortunate in that Mr. Conlin
comes from industry and also has a cyber background, which
makes him a very unique find.
What I also am struggling with, similar to my colleagues
here, is those hiring authorities. While previously, before the
business systems role, we had not looked purely at IT but just
from a data management standpoint, we too have difficulty with
the hiring.
There isn't--there are two--actually, there are two pieces
to that. Number one is there isn't a single data scientist
position description anywhere in government. So that is one
thing that we need to refine and improve. We have also come
under some challenges with hiring data scientists. All of
industry is also looking for the same talent type.
So, while previously you asked me about the CES, we were
looking more to align with hiring authority and the
compensation freedom that an organization like DARPA [Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency] is able to have, which is
why we are now looking at the CES to see if that applies to us.
So both from a reform standpoint and also to be able to
support JEDI and what we need to contribute from a data
standpoint, those resources are becoming very critical.
And just to anticipate what you had asked General Crall
earlier as well, when we are talking numbers, we are also
looking for just single digits.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Good to know. That is helpful for us to
understand. Thank you for that.
The last question that I will have, and then I want to turn
to the ranking member. General Crall, from your perspective,
how would JEDI improve or impact cybersecurity efforts? And
will cyber protection teams [CPTs] have the appropriate
accesses to a commercial cloud if there is a security issue?
General Crall. Yes, sir. I think, one, I am probably not
best suited to talk about the CPT's accesses. I think U.S.
Cyber Command would be in a better position to do that. And I
can certainly take that back, sir, to give you a--to have them
respond with a direct answer to the question.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 67.]
Mr. Langevin. Okay. So how do you, in your work, interact
with the cyber protection teams?
General Crall. So I would say maybe the first part of your
question talked about my work and how JEDI might impact that
would be maybe a more appropriate question for me to answer,
sir. And I will start with that and then come back to the
second piece, if you are amenable to that.
Mr. Langevin. Sure. Yes.
General Crall. What I think would be a real help to us,
when we start looking at how applications behave and what it
means to get an authority to operate on the distant end, how do
you move something through the system from design so that,
secure and hosted, it really streamlines the ability and
implementation in our strategy to get to our end state much
faster.
We spend a lot of time at the service level doing some
activities that are less than desirable, somewhat antiquated,
and expensive to try and make up for what a cloud environment
could provide us. So from a security implementer, for pieces of
that cybersecurity strategy, that is a game changer for us.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you. And then the other part
of it?
General Crall. Yes, sir. I think I would like to come back
to you, again, on the CPT.
And my work specifically with CPTs, I am part of a team in
a composite that looks at readiness. So when we start looking
at readiness levels across the Department, that really has been
my focus on both CMTs [combat mission teams] and CPTs, as Cyber
Command continues to drive at setting those standards. We take
a look at translating those standards into the way that we can
evaluate those teams against those readiness metrics.
So I play a small role in that process within the
Department to ensure those standards are clear, published, and
we are driving to them.
Mr. Langevin. Fair enough. Thank you.
I now yield to the ranking member for as much time as she
may consume.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you.
General Crall, can you expand upon DOD's top 10 cyber
priorities from the Cyber Strategy? I know we have an unclass
[unclassified] slide here that I don't think we have gone over
today.
And then if you could answer, which of the priorities do
you anticipate will be the most difficult?
[The slide referred to is for official use only and
retained in the committee files.]
General Crall. Yes, ma'am.
So the cartoon graphic that you have in front of you really
kind of lays out the areas that do have our focus. And maybe
the takeaway from this is, I understand it is imperfect, right?
It is two-dimensional. It is meant to be read linearly, maybe
left to right, when, in fact, some of these things appear in
many parts of our network. But it is just a simple way to frame
what we are talking about.
If you look at the gold box of network and information-
sharing, that is where some of the immediate efforts we have,
even here in fiscal year 2019. And those callout boxes in gray
and blue describe in the areas of endpoint management,
identity, our enterprise development operations, and our cyber
workforce where they have the attention of the Department.
So the way that we are looking at this--and maybe the
takeaway is, if you pressurize one set of this or if you try
and handle security or effectiveness or functionality in one
end, then you depressurize something else, and that is where
your risk is going to come. So it is important that we look at
this holistically.
And I will say, the CIO is certainly geared to describe
that relationship as he is driving this as an enterprise to
make sure that we are paying attention to every one of these
parts.
To answer your second question about what do you think is
the most difficult, I would answer ``yes'' to that question.
There is nothing easy on this slide at all. And maybe to take a
look at maybe increasing levels of difficulty, I will say that
scale and scope of some of these are really daunting tasks. So
I wouldn't want to pick any out in particular.
But I know the members are very familiar with 1647 and
1650, weapons systems and critical infrastructure. That is a
pretty big lift in the Department.
Having to modernize our encryption, that is a very heavy
lift that is extremely complicated that not only goes to the
central repository of how that encryption is designed and
disseminated but all the way to the tactical devices that we
use on the battlefield. So it is a wide, very complex problem.
Position, navigation, and timing, again, would be another
challenge.
Those things that appear to the right-hand side, that
tactical edge, probably affect the force in volumes and ways
that we are still getting our arms around.
I don't know if that is a satisfying answer, ma'am. But
that is what I----
Ms. Stefanik. It is helpful to outline a little bit the
thinking behind this slide. I think the other members of the
committee, we will share that with them.
My next question is for Mr. Deasy.
Can you provide this committee with specific updates and
specific initiatives from the Joint AI Center--in particular,
the national mission initiatives and also added component
mission initiatives?
Mr. Deasy. So, as you know, we received towards the end of
last year our initial funding to stand up JAIC. We now have our
initial billets in from the services side as well as the
civilian side.
We have identified two national mission initiatives right
now. One of them is in the predictive maintenance space, and
one is in the humanitarian space. So let me take you through
each of those.
What we were looking for when we talk about a national
mission initiative is something that touches all services, a
common problem they are looking to solve for, and, most
importantly when it comes to AI, access to data that is
meaningfully available. Because if you think about AI, AI needs
data. You are ingesting that data, and then you are running it
through a machine-learning algorithm, and then you are coming
out with, hopefully, an operational output.
Predictive maintenance was, if you think of the amount of
money we spend inside the Department of Defense just on
maintenance, we broke out maintenance and we said: Aircraft,
significant amount.
We said, what is an asset that we are using that all
services use that have common problems with maintenance? We
looked at the Black Hawk, the UH-60 [medium utility
helicopter]. And what we found was, if you look at engine wear
in conditions where there is a great deal of sand out in desert
conditions, that turns to glass. And so what if we could do a
predictive analytics to go in, teach a machine to look at all
that sensor data coming off of those vehicles, and be able to
start to predict in advance of when the glass condition is
occurring so you could actually repair it in advance?
So that is the one we are working on right now. That is the
first NMI [national mission initiative] on the predictive
maintenance side.
The second one, the humanitarian side, was we wanted to
look at one that had a whole-of-government where we could take
a leadership in. And we said there was two significant
conditions that are occurring. One was if you look at the
hurricanes we had this past year, and one was if you look at
the wildfires that occurred out in California. So let's take
each of those.
On the wildfire one, what is the problem you are trying to
solve there? You are trying to solve for the fire line, where
it exists. And what if you could take imagery instead of the
human asset having to go out, visually look at the fire line,
but actually use artificial intelligence to look at the fire
line, determine where it is moving, and be able to overlay that
onto a handheld device that a firefighter is using?
Hurricanes. The other example there is hurricanes cover a
large, vast area. So can we use imagery over a large, vast area
to determine where the flooding is occurring, how high the
flood waters are, and whether there is human risk space or
other types of assets in a risk space? So, once again, we are
going to use the imagery data to be able to look at risk space.
Why are those both important to us? Because the algorithms
that we will develop to intelligently learn fire lines are the
algorithms we will develop to intelligently learn a better way
of looking at flood, is we will be able to apply that to other
mission sets inside the Department of Defense.
That is the value of JAIC. The value of JAIC is to take
those algorithms that are developed for purpose A and then be
able to reapply them elsewhere inside the Department of
Defense. So we think we will be able to reapply those
algorithms elsewhere.
Ms. Stefanik. So just to follow up on the reapplication of
those two national mission initiatives, you know, one of my
greatest concerns when we think about emerging threats is
China's investment in AI capabilities and China's investment in
data, that this is a strategic priority.
My question is, do you believe that those two identified
national mission initiatives will ensure that we not just keep
pace with how China is investing in AI but we will be able to
catapult how we are approaching AI not just from DOD but from a
whole-of-government approach?
Because my concern is that, while those are two very
important issues--predictive maintenance and humanitarian
assistance--that scope is quite limited when you look at the
scope of China's investment utilizing AI for part of its
defense strategy.
Mr. Deasy. So, of course, those in themselves aren't going
to solve for what you are bringing up. We are going to need a
series of national mission initiatives.
As I pointed out, we just literally started this up in late
December, and here we are now in February. I think the fact
that we have been able to stand up an initial set of billets
with two NMIs in approximately 60 days says volumes to just how
smart and quickly we are working this.
But to your very point, we are going to need a number of
national mission initiatives in different areas.
I think part of the thing that you are probably getting at
is also vis-a-vis where China is; you know, do we have the
ability to outpace them. I think Dr. Portis said it best in a
testimony that I did with her recently. China may be at a level
of investment where we compare to ourselves as quite
significantly higher, but if you look at the vast talent, the
U.S. still holds the majority of the talent when it comes to
AI. And what we have to do is we have to learn how to quickly
leverage and bring that talent in.
Which is why I am so passionate about the need that JAIC
has to connect to the academia world and to the private-sector
world. Because our success is going to require those
partnerships to go well beyond two NMIs.
Ms. Stefanik. And another question regarding the JAIC. In
previous testimony, we have heard about the hundreds of AI
initiatives with the DOD. How, specifically, are those
individual AI missions or initiatives being integrated into the
overall strategy from the JAIC?
Mr. Deasy. Right now, there is not a significant amount
going on inside of JAIC to integrate those individual projects.
Where that integration will take place--and it goes back to Mr.
Waltz's question earlier--is going to be how do we stand up an
enterprise cloud capability where all of those individual
projects can benefit.
Cloud itself does not do a whole lot; it is what you put on
top of it that matters. And what we need to put onto that cloud
is data. And data is what is going to drive the success of a
lot of our AI initiatives across the Department of Defense.
I have been asked many times what will slow us down, and
what will always slow us down is our access to data, our
ability to quickly integrate that data, and then to turn that
data into something that we can then apply machine learning.
Ms. Stefanik. Yeah. No, I understand, Mr. Deasy, the
importance of cloud and the importance of data in terms of the
fuel when it comes to AI. But my question--and I am going to
continue asking these tough questions of the Department--is,
when we are creating a Joint AI Center and we are failing to
integrate the hundreds of other AI initiatives within the
Department, that is of concern here, because it means that we
are not looking at this from a whole-of-department approach.
Again, I understand the connection to moving to the cloud,
to access to data, but we need to continue pushing the
Department when it comes to how we are addressing AI, because I
am fearful we are falling behind our adversaries in terms of
how they are addressing this.
I want to ask a budget question as it relates to AI. We
know that AI is a very shiny object. And if we label everything
as AI, it is going to exponentially increase cost.
So how are you dealing with this initiative and identifying
true AI capabilities that the Department will need, in terms of
your fiscal year 2020 budget request?
Mr. Deasy. So we are working closely with the various
components and the services on defining the categorization for
AI.
I want to point out that we are not ignoring 300. We are
learning how to quickly get a flywheel going of how to bring in
and integrate these initiatives. And I cannot stress that our
flywheel is about 60-some days old now and we are integrating
at a rapid rate.
What we want to be able to do is to take all of those
initiatives and define which of them are actually, truly NMIs
and how can we better integrate those in the JAIC.
And then the real question is, where they are not national
mission initiatives and they are actually individual
components, we have set up a requirement that if they are of a
certain dollar value they need to go through JAIC, they need to
be validated by JAIC to ensure that they are being set up the
right, successful way. So JAIC will intersect with CMIs that
exist out in the services when they hit a certain dollar
threshold.
Ms. Stefanik. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. I thank the ranking member.
So just a last couple of questions, if I could.
Going back to the discussion on cloud, Mr. Deasy, I just
wanted to say, so a fit-for-purpose cloud obviously can only be
pursued with an exception from the CIO's office. Do you have an
estimate of how many exceptions you are going to issue?
Mr. Deasy. Earlier, there was a question asked about the
ongoing 300-plus cloud initiatives, and I pointed out that one
of the things we need to do is to go through and take a
determination of how many of those are more general purpose
versus what will be truly fit-for-purpose. That is something we
still have to do.
Right now, obviously, our focus is to make sure we know
what the architecture is going to look like for our general
purpose, which will help inform us on things that will stay
fit-for-purpose or move over. So it would be really
inappropriate for me--I would be surely guessing as to a
certain percentage or a number of those 300 that will be
migrated onto general versus fit-for-purpose until we
understand the overall architecture.
Mr. Langevin. Okay.
And the last question I had for you, Mr. Deasy and for the
panel: After CES phase two is unveiled and implemented, will
there be a petition process for DOD components to participate
in CES, such as the case of Ms. Hershman and the data
scientist?
Mr. Deasy. I think I understand the nature of your question
as taking Cyber Excepted Service and how do we expand it to
beyond. So I will tell you right now, we are already using
those authorities on how we are approaching AI. We are going to
need to use those authorities, clearly, when it comes to things
like data scientists.
So one of my asks back to Congress is to continue to help
us on how we take the great work we have done with CES and
think about other technologies that we are going to be
confronted with and we are going to want to leverage inside the
Department and be able to use the goodness of CES beyond its
original cyber intended purposes.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. But there will be a petition process
within----
Mr. Deasy. Yeah.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Very good.
That is all I had at this point. Anything from the ranking
member?
Okay.
So, in closing, let me just say, if I could, Mr. Deasy--and
I appreciate the work that you and all of you are doing on
these important topics.
If I could just mention, I think that the approval request
for resources, if they can move quickly to implement the Cyber
Excepted Services, those requests, they are approved quickly--
it doesn't seem like a large number of people we are talking
about--that would be helpful to move things along more
effectively. But I leave that to you to work out, and we will
be following up with this closely.
I really do thank all of you for your testimony and for the
work you are doing. I look forward to following up further at
either hearings or briefings.
But, with that, if there are no further questions, the
committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:21 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
February 26, 2019
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
February 26, 2019
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING
THE HEARING
February 26, 2019
=======================================================================
RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN
General Crall. A modern digital infrastructure is critical to
defending against cyber-attacks as well as enabling machine learning
and artificial intelligence. The DOD cloud initiative is part of a
larger effort to modernize information technology across the DOD
enterprise. Consolidating currently disparate efforts at the enterprise
level will enable the Department of Defense to provide greater security
and ensure greater reliability of the department's digital
infrastructure. The DOD Cloud Initiative includes multiple cloud
efforts, including JEDI Cloud. JEDI will allow DOD to take advantage of
economies of scale, ensure superiority through data aggregation and
analysis, and lay the foundational technology for artificial
intelligence and machine learning.
[See page 21.]
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING
February 26, 2019
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. STEFANIK
Ms. Stefanik. In your testimony, you claimed $4.702 billion in
programmed savings in FY17 and FY18. Can I get a list of these savings
and where you found them?
Ms. Hershman. The Department has saved $4.702B through reform
efforts in FYs 2017 and 2018 combined, and is on track to save more
than $6B in FY 2019. This achievement is a collective effort by key
stakeholders in the Department. The CMO, Military Departments, and the
USD(C) identified, validated, and presented savings formally in the FY
2020 budget that were reinvested in priorities identified in the NDS.
The Department was successful in meeting or exceeding many of its
priority initiatives, including those related to achieving
efficiencies, effectiveness and cost savings, audit readiness, and
improving the quality of the Department's business operations. The list
below includes some areas in which the Department has found found
savings:
Management Headquarters Reductions
Services Requirements Review Board and Contractor Courts
IT Circuit Optimization
Enterprise Licensing Agreements
Data Center infrastructure
Military Health IT Optimization
Defense Travel Modernization
Defense Agencies and DOD Field Activities Civilian
Personnel Reductions
Defense Media Activity Business Process and Systems
Review
Ms. Stefanik. What is your savings goal for the next five years?
Ms. Hershman. Over the next five years the Department is projecting
a $44.9B savings in ongoing reform initiatives. These reform savings
will be garnered from business process improvements, business systems
improvements, policy reforms, weapons systems acquisition reform,
divestments, and better alignment of resources to the National Defense
Strategy. Additionally, studies are underway to further streamline or
consolidate 4th Estate functions, with the intent on a more efficient
structure.
Ms. Stefanik. How are you re-investing the $4.702 billion?
Ms. Hershman. DOD is actively institutionalizing reform and is
committed to reinvesting the savings in the Military Departments in
support of readiness and lethality priorities. The FY 2020 budget
request builds on our success with the FY 2018 and FY 2019 budgets to
repair damaged readiness and marks a key shift in preparing to deter or
defeat great power adversaries well into the future.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. CONAWAY
Mr. Conaway. Are any of the witnesses concerned about the
investments China is making in Chinese companies to pursue Artificial
Intelligence and Machines Learning capabilities? If so, how important
is it for the United States to have a robust technology industrial
base?
Ms. Hershman. CMO will defer to DOD CIO's response to this
question.
Mr. Conaway. How does a winner take all cloud competition help
bolster that robust industrial base?
Ms. Hershman. CMO will defer to DOD CIO's response to this
question.
Mr. Conaway. What are the cyber risks of placing too much of our
national security sensitive data within the infrastructure of one cloud
provider?
Ms. Hershman. CMO will defer to DOD CIO's response to this
question.
Mr. Conaway. Are you aware of any assessments underway at DOD or
DNI to assess the implications of a vulnerability in a cloud providers
infrastructure and how that vulnerability could impact data held across
the national security enterprise?
Ms. Hershman. CMO will defer to DOD CIO's response to this
question.
Mr. Conaway. What are security benefits of cloud diversity?
Ms. Hershman. CMO will defer to DOD CIO's response to this
question.
Mr. Conaway. Are any of the witnesses concerned about the
investments China is making in Chinese companies to pursue Artificial
Intelligence and Machines Learning capabilities? If so, how important
is it for the United States to have a robust technology industrial
base?
Mr. Deasy. There are three reasons to be concerned about the
investments China is making in AI and Machine Learning.
First, the significant scale and strategic focus demonstrated by
Chinese Artificial Intelligence (AI) investments and their stated goal
to dominate the global AI technology landscape. As stated in the recent
Executive Order 13859 of February 11, 2019 ``Continued American
leadership in AI is of paramount importance to maintaining the economic
and national security of the United States and to shaping the global
evolution of AI in a manner consistent with our Nation's values,
policies, and priorities.''
Second, the Department of Defense is concerned about the powerful
tools available to the Chinese government to coerce commercial Chinese
companies to support Chinese military AI development.
Finally, the Department is concerned that Chinese military leaders
have explicitly stated that their investments in AI are aimed at
closing the gap in military power between China and the United States.
China seeks to use AI as a tool to ``leapfrog'' the United States'
current global leadership position in military technology. Given the
progress in AI demonstrated by China over the past few years, that is
not something the U.S. should take lightly.
The strength of the U.S. technology industrial base and the
commercial AI ecosystem is a critical source of U.S. competitive
advantage. Just as commercial spending on computers and other
information technology has historically far outpaced DOD spending, so
too does commercial investment in AI. DOD should seek to effectively
partner with American companies and draw upon the innovativeness of
American AI experts. This partnership must, however, remain consistent
with American values.
Mr. Conaway. How does a winner take all cloud competition help
bolster that robust industrial base?
Mr. Deasy. The Department will implement a commercial General-
Purpose enterprise-wide cloud solution, Joint Enterprise Defense
Infrastructure (JEDI), for the majority of systems and applications.
However, the DOD's Cloud Strategy defines the need for additional fit
for purpose clouds to meet specific needs and gaps. DOD expects that
cloud technology and offerings will continue to become more
interoperable and seamlessly integrated, enabling lower transaction
costs and better inter-cloud security features across multiple
providers. DOD is best served by a robust, competitive, and innovative
technology industrial base.
Further, maximizing competition is critical to a robust and
comprehensive enterprise-wide environment for all cloud-related
contracting actions and not limited to any one particular contract.
Cloud-related contracting actions go beyond just contracts for hosting
environments (whether the environment is JEDI, milCloud 2.0, DEOS, or
other fit for purpose needs). More critically, the engineering and
migration support necessary to develop and deploy systems and
applications are often suited to companies with more agile and nimble
capabilities, which often may be appropriate for smaller specialized
business entities.
Mr. Conaway. What are the cyber risks of placing too much of our
national security sensitive data within the infrastructure of one cloud
provider?
Mr. Deasy. Applications and data within a single cloud environment
are able to maximize the native security features of cloud technology,
which includes robust and automated failover and redundancy features.
The risks are managed according to the sensitivity of the data by
adding controls at the specified security level. It is also important
to note that a single cloud environment does not mean that all data and
applications are hosted in a single physical environment where
everything is vulnerable to a single attack. Rather, the provider will
have varying levels of logical and physical isolation available, based
the sensitivity of the data, which will work in concert with the
Department's existing cyber security tool sets. Leveraging a single
versus multiple cloud provider environment reduces the number of
potential vulnerabilities, since with each provider comes additional
connection points and accreditations, resulting in the possible
increase in both vulnerabilities and time and cost.
Mr. Conaway. Are you aware of any assessments underway at DOD or
DNI to assess the implications of a vulnerability in a cloud providers
infrastructure and how that vulnerability could impact data held across
the national security enterprise?
Mr. Deasy. The Department continues to perform an ongoing
comprehensive risk assessment of cloud security risks. The risks are
managed according to the sensitivity of the data by adding controls at
the specified security level. This assessment is not limited to a
particular current or future program, but rather is a holistic
assessment across the Department's cloud portfolio. The Department's
assessment is ongoing, continuously analyzing and understanding how to
characterize risks and effectively mitigate them. The Department has
also been looking closely at the work being done by groups outside of
the government.
Mr. Conaway. What are security benefits of cloud diversity?
Mr. Deasy. The benefits of cloud diversity include more variety of
choices in services, to include cyber security services, partnerships
and unique solutions along with the increased availability of hosting
locations, which provides physical diversity. Cloud diversity is
beneficial, which is why DOD's Cloud Strategy is to remain a multiple
cloud environment.
However, technical complexity increases, based on the number of
cloud providers and available offerings. The risk associated with
deploying wide-reaching cloud diversity entails understanding how to
deploy and secure workloads properly in any cloud environment while
also understanding and utilizing all of the services available to help
secure workloads across multiple cloud environments, when necessary.
Mr. Conaway. Are any of the witnesses concerned about the
investments China is making in Chinese companies to pursue Artificial
Intelligence and Machines Learning capabilities? If so, how important
is it for the United States to have a robust technology industrial
base?
General Crall. China's 2017 national AI strategic plan calls for
Chinese technology to be on par with that of the United States by 2020
and for China to become the world leader in AI by 2030. In 2019,
China's aggressive pursuit of and investment in AI has significantly
closed the technology gap with the United States. China now ranks first
in the quantity and citations of AI research papers, holds more AI
patents than the US and Japan, and exports armed autonomous platforms
and surveillance AI. However, China's January 2018 ``White Paper on
Artificial Intelligence Standardization'' points out that the China's
AI ecosystem lags in several key areas: top talent, technical
standards, software platforms, and semiconductors. These are strengths
in our technology industrial base that the United States must
capitalize on to maintain a leading edge in AI development.
Mr. Conaway. How does a winner take all cloud competition help
bolster that robust industrial base?
General Crall. I agree with DOD(CIO) as the Department will
implement a commercial General-Purpose enterprise-wide cloud solution,
Joint Enterprise Defense Infrastructure (JEDI), for the majority of
systems and applications. However, the DOD's Cloud Strategy defines the
need for additional fit for purpose clouds to meet specific needs and
gaps. DOD expects that cloud technology and offerings will continue to
become more interoperable and seamlessly integrated, enabling lower
transaction costs and better inter-cloud security features across
multiple providers. DOD is best served by a robust, competitive, and
innovative technology industrial base.
Further, maximizing competition is critical to a robust and
comprehensive enterprise-wide environment for all cloud-related
contracting actions and not limited to any one particular contract.
Cloud-related contracting actions go beyond just contracts for hosting
environments (whether the environment is JEDI, milCloud 2.0, DEOS, or
other fit for purpose needs). More critically, the engineering and
migration support necessary to develop and deploy systems and
applications are often suited to companies with more agile and nimble
capabilities, which often may be appropriate for smaller specialized
business entities.
Mr. Conaway. What are the cyber risks of placing too much of our
national security sensitive data within the infrastructure of one cloud
provider?
General Crall. I agree with DOD(CIO) as applications and data
within a single cloud environment are able to maximize the native
security features of cloud technology, which includes robust and
automated failover and redundancy features. The risks are managed
according to the sensitivity of the data by adding controls at the
specified security level. It is also important to note that a single
cloud environment does not mean that all data and applications are
hosted in a single physical environment where everything is vulnerable
to a single attack. Rather, the provider will have varying levels of
logical and physical isolation available, based the sensitivity of the
data, which will work in concert with the Department's existing cyber
security tool sets. Leveraging a single versus multiple cloud provider
environment reduces the number of potential vulnerabilities, since with
each provider comes additional connection points and accreditations,
resulting in the possible increase in both vulnerabilities and time and
cost.
Mr. Conaway. Are you aware of any assessments underway at DOD or
DNI to assess the implications of a vulnerability in a cloud providers
infrastructure and how that vulnerability could impact data held across
the national security enterprise?
General Crall. As the DOD(CIO) has emphasized, the Department
continues to perform an ongoing comprehensive risk assessment of cloud
security risks. The risks are managed according to the sensitivity of
the data by adding controls at the specified security level. This
assessment is not limited to a particular current or future program,
but rather is a holistic assessment across the Department's cloud
portfolio. The Department's assessment is ongoing, continuously
analyzing and understanding how to characterize risks and effectively
mitigate them. The Department has also been looking closely at the work
being done by groups outside of the government.
Mr. Conaway. What are security benefits of cloud diversity?
General Crall. As stated by the DOD(CIO), the benefits of cloud
diversity include more variety of choices in services, to include cyber
security services, partnerships and unique solutions along with the
increased availability of hosting locations, which provides physical
diversity. Cloud diversity is beneficial, which is why DOD's Cloud
Strategy is to remain a multiple cloud environment.
However, technical complexity increases, based on the number of
cloud providers and available offerings. The risk associated with
deploying wide-reaching cloud diversity entails understanding how to
deploy and secure workloads properly in any cloud environment while
also understanding and utilizing all of the services available to help
secure workloads across multiple cloud environments, when necessary.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BROWN
Mr. Brown. In June 2017 the administration issued EO 13800 to
``Strengthen the Cybersecurity of Federal Networks and Critical
Infrastructure.'' Yet, after the first defense-wide audit was completed
in November 2018, Deputy Secretary of Defense Patrick Shanahan stated
``We failed the audit. But we never expected to pass it.'' The
subsequent report stated that the IT systems have ``systemic shortfalls
in implementing cybersecurity measures to guard the data protection
environment'' and ``issues exist in policy compliance with
cybersecurity measures, oversight, and accountability.'' How are these
two efforts--the EO and the audit--informing each other? What explains
the significant noncompliance with cybersecurity standards almost two
years after the EO was issued?
Mr. Deasy. The DOD follow-on activities to EO 13800 and DOD actions
to remediate FM Audit Notice of Findings and Recommendations (NFR) have
important intersections. Following analysis of the FM Audit NFRs, DOD
developed a prioritization approach that seeks to prioritize addressing
those findings with a nexus to both cybersecurity and material
weakness. These analyses and prioritization efforts pointed to the need
for enterprise capabilities in support of Identify, Credential and
Access Management (ICAM). Following DOD efforts to respond to EO 13800,
DOD developed its top 10 Cyber Priorities. Among areas identified as
the ``first four,'' were strategic initiatives associated with ICAM.
These efforts are in alignment with ongoing Cyber Hygiene Scorecard
efforts, which identified and tracked needed improvements associated
with credential management, privileged users, and access control.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KIM
Mr. Kim. As you are well aware, the overwhelming majority of
internet traffic travels via undersea cables. Importantly, there are
three major cable landing points in my home State of New Jersey. These
cables and accompanying infrastructure are vital to economic and
national security. What efforts are currently underway either internal
to government or in partnership with the private sector to keep
telecommunications infrastructure secure and accessible to the Defense
Department?
Mr. Deasy. The DOD partners with the Department of Homeland
Security, Intelligence Community, other government agencies, and
Industry on a routine basis to ensure the security and resiliency of
undersea cables, landing sites and associated infrastructure.
Specifically the DOD CIO, partners with Joint Staff, United States
Strategic Command, Defense Information Systems Agency, and Defense
Threat Reduction Agency to secure cable landing points by funding and
remediating physical and cyber vulnerabilities found.
[all]