- SECURING OUR NATION'S CHEMICAL FACILITIES: BUILDING ON THE PROGRESS OF THE CFATS PROGRAM
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
SECURING OUR NATION'S CHEMICAL FACILITIES: BUILDING ON THE PROGRESS OF
THE CFATS PROGRAM
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 27, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-3
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-379 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Peter T. King, New York
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
John Katko, New York
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
John Ratcliffe, Texas
J. Luis Correa, California
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Xochitl Torres Small, New Mexico
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Max Rose, New York
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Mark Green, Tennessee
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan
Van Taylor, Texas
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri
John Joyce, Pennsylvania
Al Green, Texas
Dan Crenshaw, Texas
Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Michael Guest, Mississippi
Dina Titus, Nevada
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Chris Vieson, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Statements
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
1
Prepared Statement.............................................
3
The Honorable Mike Rogers, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Alabama, and Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
4
Prepared Statement.............................................
6
Witnesses
Mr. David Wulf, Director, Infrastructure Security Compliance
Division, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency,
U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
7
Prepared Statement.............................................
9
Mr. Nathan Anderson, Acting Director, Homeland Security and
Justice, U.S. Government Accountability Office:
Oral Statement.................................................
12
Prepared Statement.............................................
14
For the Record
The Honorable Mike Rogers, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Alabama, and Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Letter.........................................................
4
Appendix
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for David Wulf........
51
Question From Honorable Xochitl Torres Small for David Wulf......
52
Questions From Honorable Cedric Richmond for David Wulf..........
52
Questions From Honorable Michael Guest for David Wulf............
53
Question From Honorable Michael Guest for Nathan Anderson........
54
Questions From Ranking Member Mike Rogers for Nathan Anderson....
54
SECURING OUR NATION'S CHEMICAL FACILITIES: BUILDING ON THE PROGRESS OF
THE CFATS PROGRAM
----------
Wednesday, February 27, 2019
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Bennie G. Thompson
(Chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Thompson, Langevin, Richmond,
Correa, Torres Small, Rose, Underwood, Slotkin, Cleaver, Green,
Clarke, Barragan, Demings, Rogers, McCaul, Walker, Higgins,
Lesko, Taylor, Joyce, Crenshaw, and Guest.
Chairman Thompson. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order. At the request of the Ranking Member, we will
begin the hearing. He will join us momentarily.
The committee is meeting today to receive testimony on
securing our Nation's chemical facilities, building on the
progress of the CFATS program. Since 2007, the Department of
Homeland Security has administered a regulatory program that
covers security measures at high-risk chemical facilities to
protect against the threat of terrorist attack.
Through CFATS, DHS works with chemical facility owners and
operators to make sure they have safeguards in place to prevent
a bad actor from gaining access to dangerous chemicals stored
on-site. In the past, this program has enjoyed broad bipartisan
support on and off the Hill.
Officials in the Bush administration, including former
Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff, were among the
first to call for a Federal rule to secure chemical facilities.
Officials from the Trump administration, among the most recent,
last November, DHS Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen wrote to Congress
urging us to reauthorize CFATS.
We continue to face one of the most serious terrorist
threat environments since 9/11. Foreign terrorist organizations
are urging recruits to use simple weapons, including toxic
chemicals, to target public spaces and events. Clearly, this
threat has not abated.
Yet the Department's authority to carry out CFATS came very
close to lapsing last month which caused this committee to pass
a short-term bill extending the program until 2020. For 8
years, CFATS was tied to the annual appropriations cycle.
Lacking the certainty of a multi-year authorization, DHS
struggles to keep staff, develop long-term policies and work
with a regulated community that did not know if the rules would
apply the following year. In 2014, Congress worked on a
bicameral, bipartisan basis to finally put an end to this
pattern by passing a multi-year authorization.
I had hoped to work collaboratively in the last Congress,
as we did in 2014, to give CFATS a long-term reauthorization.
Unfortunately, that did not come to pass, and we once again
found ourselves with no alternative but to pass another short-
term extension. As Chairman, I do not intend to let that happen
again.
This committee is acting early this Congress to get a
reauthorization bill across the finish line. However, I do not
plan to let reauthorization become an excuse to water down
regulatory requirements or diminish the overall security value
of the program.
CFATS is already designed to give flexibility and deference
to facility owners and operators. The requirements are non-
prescriptive, meaning that regulated facilities can choose
security measures that work for their unique environment so
long as their site security plan generally adheres to a set of
risk-based security principles. When DHS inspectors go out and
find that a facility's security plan falls short, they work
with that facility to address vulnerabilities.
Thanks in part to the leadership of Director Wulf, who is
testifying here today, the CFATS program is in place where
Congress can build on a foundation that has already been laid.
For example, there are currently half as many high-risk
facilities in the United States as there were in 2007.
I would like to understand how DHS is encouraging
facilities to voluntarily reduce and remove chemical security
risk and how we might put that data to good use.
I also see reauthorization as an opportunity to figure out
what is working and what is not. That may mean taking another
look at how CFATS handles whistleblowers or deciding if an
expedited approval program is a good use of DHS's limited
resources.
Finally, there are some areas where the program continues
to fall short. Six years ago, there was a fertilizer plant
explosion in West, Texas, that caused catastrophic damage and
took the lives of first responders who had been called to the
scene.
On the screen above you is a picture of that scene where
volunteer firemen went to that location not knowing what they
were going to, and they lost their lives. So we need to close
that loophole because as a volunteer fireman myself, those
public-spirited first responders did not know what they were
going to until it was too late.
So if CFATS had been in place, those individuals probably,
given the information available, would not have approached it
in the same light. So whatever we need to do to make sure
information is being shared, this is a challenge we will
address.
I look forward to hearing from the panel today about how we
might improve CFATS and make sure we give DHS and the regulated
community the civility and certainty of a long-term
reauthorization program.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
February 27, 2019
Since 2007, the Department of Homeland Security has administered a
regulatory program that covers security measures at ``high-risk''
chemical facilities to protect against the threat of terrorist attack.
Through CFATS, DHS works with chemical facility owners and operators to
make sure they have safeguards in place to prevent a bad actor from
gaining access to dangerous chemicals stored on-site.
In the past, this program has enjoyed broad, bipartisan support on
and off the Hill. Officials in the Bush administration, including
former Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff, were among the
first to call for a Federal rule to secure chemical facilities. And,
officials from the Trump administration are among the most recent.
Last November, DHS Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen wrote to Congress
urging us to reauthorize CFATS: ``[W]e continue to face one of the most
serious terrorist threat environments since 9/11. Foreign terrorist
organizations are urging recruits to use simple weapons, including
toxic chemicals, to target public spaces and events.''
Clearly, this threat has not abated.
Yet, the Department's authority to carry out CFATS came very close
to lapsing last month--until this committee passed a short-term bill
extending the program until April 2020.
For 8 years, CFATS was tied to annual appropriations cycles.
Lacking the certainty of a multi-year authorization, DHS struggled to
keep staff, develop long-term policies, and work with a regulated
community that did not know if the rules would apply the following
year. In 2014, Congress worked on a bicameral, bipartisan basis to
finally put an end to this pattern by passing a multi-year
authorization.
I had hoped to work collaboratively in the last Congress, as we did
in 2014, to give CFATS a long-term reauthorization. Unfortunately, that
did not come to pass, and we once again found ourselves with no
alternative but passed another short-term extension.
As Chairman, I do not intend to let that happen again. This
committee is acting early this Congress to get a reauthorization bill
across the finish line. However, I do not plan to let reauthorization
become an excuse to water down regulatory requirements or diminish the
overall security value of the program.
CFATS is already designed to give flexibility and deference to
facility owners and operators. The requirements are non-prescriptive,
meaning that regulated facilities can choose security measures that
work for their unique environment, so long as their site security plans
generally adhere to a set of risk-based security principles. When DHS
inspectors go out and find that a facility's security plan falls short,
they work with that facility to address vulnerabilities.
Thanks in part to the leadership of Director Wulf, who is
testifying here today, the CFATS program is in a place where Congress
can build on the foundation that has already been laid. For example,
there are currently half as many ``high-risk'' facilities in the United
States as there were in 2007.
I would like to understand how DHS is encouraging facilities to
voluntarily reduce or remove chemical security risks, and how we might
put that data to good use. I also see reauthorization as an opportunity
to figure out what's working, and what's not. That may mean taking
another look at how CFATS handles whistleblowers or deciding if the
expedited approval program is a good use of DHS's limited resources.
Finally, there are some areas where the program continues to fall
short.
I was extremely troubled by a report GAO released last year showing
that first responders and emergency planners are still not getting the
information they need to respond to an incident at a CFATS facility. As
a former volunteer fire fighter, I am deeply concerned that--6 years
after the tragic fertilizer plant explosion in West, Texas--we still
have not yet figured out how to put the right information in the hands
of the brave men and women running into a building in an emergency
while everyone else is running out. When first responders show up at an
incident, they need to know what's on the other side of the door.
Period.
Whatever we need to do to make sure information is being shared--
this is a challenge we will address.
I look forward to hearing from the panel today about how we might
improve CFATS and make sure we give DHS--and the regulated community--
the stability and certainty of a long-term reauthorization for the
program.
Chairman Thompson. I now recognize the Ranking Member of
the full committee, the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Rogers, for
an opening statement.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sorry I am late. Thank
you for holding this important hearing.
Before I begin, I would like to express my extreme
disappointment that the Majority staff denied the Minority's
request for a witness at today's hearing. Under Rule 11 of the
rules of the House, the Minority is afforded at least one
witness at each committee hearing. If denied a witness, the
Minority is entitled to separate hearing to take testimony from
its witnesses.
So pursuant to rule of the House, I am providing the
Chairman with a letter signed by the Republican Members of the
committee formally invoking our right to a separate hearing of
the full committee to hear from Minority witnesses. I ask
unanimous consent that a letter be made part of the record.
Chairman Thompson. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Rogers. The rules require the Chairman to schedule a
hearing in a reasonable period of time. We request a hearing as
soon as possible.
CFATS is a critical program aimed at keeping dangerous
chemicals out of the hands of terrorists. In the past,
Republicans and Democrats have worked together to reauthorize
CFATS and make improvements to the program. I hope the
tradition of bipartisanship on this issue can continue, despite
the actions taken by the Majority today.
CFATS has been a successful program because it gives
industry flexibility to secure their facilities with guidance
from the Department of Homeland Security based on each
facility's unique risks and attributes. Fortunately, we have a
solid program that works well as a starting point. Only small
tweaks are needed to make an already good program even better.
I believe that with bipartisan, bicameral process we can
quickly give stakeholders the certainty they need and move a
long-term reauthorization of CFATS to the President's desk. I
hope the Chairman will join me in providing stability and
certainty regarding chemical security and avoid taking actions
which would undermine enactment of a bipartisan long-term
reauthorization.
I look forward to working collaboratively with the
Majority, the Senate, the stakeholders, and DHS to reauthorize
CFATS program. I also look forward to today's witnesses.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Ranking Member Rogers follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Mike Rogers
February 27, 2019
CFATS is a critical program aimed at keeping dangerous chemicals
out of the hands of terrorists. In the past, Republicans and Democrats
have worked together to reauthorize CFATS and make improvements to the
program.
I hope the tradition of bipartisanship on this issue can continue,
despite the actions taken by the Majority today. CFATS has been a
successful program because it gives industry flexibility to secure
their facilities, with guidance from the Department of Homeland
Security, based on each facility's unique risk and attributes.
Fortunately, we have a solid program that works well as a starting
point. Only small tweaks are needed to make an already good program
better. I believe that with a bipartisan, bicameral process we can
quickly give stakeholders the certainty they need and move a long-term
reauthorization of CFATS to the President's desk.
I hope the Chairman will join me in providing stability and
certainty regarding chemical security--and avoid taking actions, which
would undermine enactment of a bipartisan, long-term reauthorization. I
look forward to working collaboratively with the Majority, the Senate,
stakeholders, and DHS to reauthorize the CFATS program.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. In response to the
Ranking Member's request, we will do so in writing. But
consistent with the rules that we adopted for this committee,
similar to the rules we have had before, we offered a
Government witness to this Government panel.
From my understanding, that was not accepted, but you could
have had a Government witness. It was--we will respond in
writing, but the rules we apply are the same rules that this
committee has always operated under. Other Members of the
committee are reminded that under the committee rules, opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
I welcome our panel of witnesses. First, I would like to
welcome David Wulf, the director of the Infrastructure Security
Compliance Division at the DHS Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, CISA.
Mr. Wulf has been CFATS through some of its difficult
challenges and helped it mature into an internationally-
renowned chemical security program. I am thankful for his
leadership on CFATS and look forward to his testimony.
Next, I would like to welcome Mr. Nathan Anderson from the
Government Accountability Office Homeland Security and Justice
Team. Mr. Anderson has contributed to GAO's substantial body of
work on the CFATS program, including a report GAO issued last
July, which I expect will play a major role in informing CFATS'
reauthorization and provide important context to our
conversation today.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statement will be
inserted in the record. I now ask each witness to summarize his
or her statement for 5 minutes, beginning with Mr. Wulf.
STATEMENT OF DAVID WULF, DIRECTOR, INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY
COMPLIANCE DIVISION, CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY
AGENCY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Mr. Wulf. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Rogers, and other Members of the committee. I really do
appreciate the opportunity to be here today to provide an
update on the progress of the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism
Standards program, or CFATS, the progress that the CFATS
program continues to make in fostering security at high-risk
chemical facilities across the Nation.
When I last testified before this committee in 2014, the
CFATS program was in a very different place, having faced some
significant challenges in its early years. But we had
implemented a comprehensive corrective action plan and had made
some measurable forward progress. At that time, I emphasized
the importance of long-term authorization for this critical
National security program.
I am very grateful for the leadership you and the committee
demonstrated in securing the 4-year CFATS authorization that
was signed into law in December 2014. I am grateful, of course,
as well for your role in attaining the 15-month extension of
that authorization through April 2020 that was enacted last
month.
I am very appreciative that this committee is holding
today's hearing and is again taking a lead role to ensure
continuing long-term authorization of CFATS. I look forward to
working with you to continue to enhance and to evolve our
program.
Now, as I am sure you will hear me say once or twice today,
the stability that has come along with long-term authorization
has driven unprecedented progress as our team has worked with
CFATS-covered facilities to make America's high-risk chemical
infrastructure a truly hard target with literally tens of
thousands of security measures having been put in place at
high-risk chemical facilities across the Nation.
These facilities have achieved, on average, a 55 percent
increase in their security posture as a direct result of CFATS.
The stability afforded by long-term authorization has
facilitated our planning and execution of important
programmatic improvements, a few of which I will detail in a
moment, while it has also afforded regulated industry
stakeholders with the certainty they deserved as they planned
for and made significant investments in CFATS-related security
measures.
Now, I know that as the reauthorization process proceeds,
you will have the opportunity to hear directly from industry
and other stakeholders about their experience with CFATS.
The gains I have just noted would not have been possible
without the commitment and hard work of companies and our
various other stakeholders across the Nation who have put into
place CFATS-focused security measures and, in many cases, have
provided important feedback and ideas that have helped us to
improve our processes and our effectiveness as we have evolved
and enhanced the program over the past 4 years.
So I see many of those stakeholders in the room, and I
appreciate their presence here today. I would also like to
acknowledge Nathan Anderson and the important role the GAO has
played in reviewing our operations and making many helpful
recommendations over the past several years.
Of course, I want to acknowledge our hard-working CFATS
team, some 250 folks here in Washington and across the Nation
who have built a truly world-class program and who are laser-
focused on securing America's highest-risk chemical
infrastructure.
So about those programmatic improvements I mentioned, what
have we been doing to make CFATS even stronger as we have
enjoyed the stability of long-term authorization over the past
4 years? Well, we have improved processes. We have eliminated
bottlenecks.
We have seen unprecedented progress in the pace of
inspections and in the review and approval of facility site
security plans, eliminating a backlog of security plan reviews
6 years ahead of earlier GAO projections.
We have developed and launched an improved risk assessment
methodology that effectively accounts for all relevant elements
of risk. We have reassessed the level of risk associated with
nearly 30,000 facilities across the country.
We have implemented the CFATS personnel surety program,
affording the highest-tiered CFATS-covered facilities the
ability to ensure that individuals with access to critical
assets have been vetted for terrorist ties.
We have dramatically reduced burden across our stakeholder
community, having built and launched a streamlined, more user-
friendly suite of on-line tools through which facilities submit
risk assessment surveys, also known as Top Screens, and develop
their site security plans.
While the stability afforded by long-term authorization has
yielded all of this progress over the past 4 years, we are
certainly not done yet. Continued long-term authorization will
be absolutely critical to ensuring that we are able to focus on
driving even more effective and even more efficient approaches
to fostering chemical security across the Nation.
Now, as we are all too aware, the threat of chemical
terrorism remains a real and a very relevant one. Around the
globe, our adversaries continue to seek, to acquire, and to use
in attacks chemicals of the sort that trigger coverage under
CFATS. The threat stream continues to reflect that chemical
facilities themselves remain an attractive target for our
adversaries.
I can tell you with certainty that the work we are doing in
concert with our committed stakeholders across the wide variety
of industries and facilities that compose the CFATS-covered
universe is making a real difference in protecting the Nation.
Having had the opportunity to work closely with my
counterparts in other nations and to co-chair the G7 Global
Partnership's Chemical Security Working Group, I can tell you
as well that what we are doing here in the United States
through CFATS, the culture of chemical security you have helped
us to build with your support for long-term CFATS
authorization, is absolutely the envy of the world.
With its targeted focused on the highest-risk facilities,
with its 18 comprehensive risk-based performance standards
addressing physical, cyber, and insider threats, and with its
non-prescriptive flexible approach to regulation, CFATS is
well-suited to enhancing security across the very diverse
universe of high-risk chemical facilities.
So before I wrap up, I would like to again thank the
committee and your top-notch staff for your leadership on CFATS
and on chemical security writ large.
We are fond of saying that chemical security is a shared
commitment, and not unlike the role that industry and other
stakeholders who have embraced and helped us to build this
program in so many ways, and the role of our committed and very
talented team at DHS, the role of Congress and the role of this
committee in shaping and authorizing CFATS for the long-term
has been hugely important.
I am looking forward to working further with you, as we
drive toward reauthorization this year.
So thanks again. Thank you so much. I look forward to your
questions, and to the dialog here today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wulf follows:]
Prepared Statement of David Wulf
February 27, 2019
introduction
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers, and Members of the
committee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss the development and maturation of the Department of Homeland
Security's (DHS) regulation of high-risk chemical facilities under the
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) Program.
I also want to thank you for your efforts in extending the
program's authorization for an additional 15 months so that we may
continue to work together toward the long-term reauthorization of this
critical National security program. Since the program's inception,
CFATS has fundamentally improved chemical security in the United
States. Our threat landscape is constantly evolving and the threat of
chemical terrorism remains a very real and very relevant one. For this
reason, fostering the security of high-risk chemical facilities
continues to be of the utmost importance. Given the wide diversity of
facilities that store chemicals, CFATS--and its flexible, targeted
approach, is an essential tool in this effort.
cfats program overview
The CFATS Program is a vital part of our Nation's counterterrorism
efforts, addressing physical, cyber, and insider threats to our
Nation's highest-risk chemical facilities. Since the CFATS Program's
creation, we have engaged with industry to identify and regulate high-
risk chemical facilities to ensure they have security measures in place
to reduce the risks associated with the possession of chemicals of
interest and to keep dangerous chemicals out of the hands of those who
wish to do us harm.
The cornerstone of the CFATS Program is the development,
submission, and implementation of Site Security Plans (SSPs), or
Alternative Security Programs in lieu of SSPs, documenting the security
measures that high-risk chemical facilities utilize to satisfy the
applicable Risk-Based Performance Standards (RBPS) under CFATS. Due to
the diversity of facilities that hold chemicals of interest, it is
important to note these plans are not ``one-size-fits-all,'' but are
in-depth, highly customized, and account for each facility's unique
circumstances.
In order to determine whether a facility is covered under CFATS,
DHS utilizes a risk-assessment methodology that takes into account
threat, vulnerability, and the consequences of a potential attack. To
begin the process, a facility in possession of threshold quantities of
CFATS chemicals of interest submits a Top Screen to the Department's
Infrastructure Security Compliance Division. Since we began collecting
this information in 2007, more than 40,000 unique facilities have
reported chemical holdings. Based on the information received in the
Top Screens, DHS determines which facilities are at high-risk of
terrorist attack or exploitation and assigns each of these to a tier.
Facilities determined to be high-risk must submit a Security
Vulnerability Assessment (SVA) and a SSP, or a SVA and an Alternative
Security Program (ASP), to DHS for approval. Tier 3 and 4 facilities
also have the option of submitting an Expedited Approval Program (EAP)
SSP in lieu of an SSP or ASP. The plan must include security measures
meeting the RBPS established in the CFATS regulation. For facilities
other than those submitting an EAP SSP, the Department performs an
authorization inspection at the facility prior to approving a security
plan to ensure that the measures contained in the security plan are
appropriate given the facility's specific security issues and unique
characteristics. Once a facility's plan is approved, DHS conducts
regular compliance inspections to verify that the facility is
implementing the agreed-upon security measures.
cfats act of 2014 afforded crucial stability and certainty
In December 2014, Congress passed the Protecting and Securing
Chemical Facilities from Terrorist Attacks Act of 2014 (CFATS Act of
2014). This statute, which enjoyed strong bipartisan and stakeholder
support, brought stability for both the Department and the regulated
community and provided stakeholders with confidence in the program's
future. Enacting a multi-year CFATS authorization as Congress did in
2014 marked an important turning point for the program. Among other
things, it:
Provided industry stakeholders with the certainty they
needed to plan for and invest in CFATS-related security
measures to harden their critical sites against possible
terrorist attack or exploitation;
Afforded the stability needed to enable the Department to
make programmatic improvements as well as strategic, long-term
planning decisions regarding staffing, program development, and
process efficiencies; and,
Sent a clear message to potentially covered ``outlier''
facilities that the CFATS Program is here to stay.
With long-term authorization, chemical facilities have become
further incentivized to engage with the Department with regard to
facility security. Returning to the instability of short-term renewal
of CFATS Program either through regular order or the appropriations
process would represent a significant step backwards for the Nation's
chemical security efforts, inhibit programmatic progress and long-term
planning, and undermine stakeholder confidence in the longevity of the
program. In short, the absence of long-term CFATS authorization puts
America's chemical security--and the security of our communities--at
risk.
accomplishments since the cfats act of 2014
Due in large part to the stability afforded by passage of the CFATS
Act of 2014, I am pleased to report today that much has been
accomplished and that our program continues to make significant forward
progress. Through the collective efforts of our dedicated workforce,
industry, and other stakeholders, and through the support and
leadership of Congress, the CFATS program has matured significantly in
this time and is poised to continue this progress in the coming years.
Clear examples of the gains made by the CFATS Program since the
passage of the CFATS Act of 2014 include:
A dramatic improvement in the pace of inspections, reviews,
and approvals resulting in the elimination of a backlog once
projected to take 7 to 9 years to clear, nearly 6 years ahead
of schedule;
Development and deployment of an enhanced risk-tiering
methodology that affords a more accurate reflection of a
facility's risk--a methodology that is grounded in science and
has been vetted by external experts from across Government,
industry, and academia;
Streamlining of the SSP-development process and the
stakeholder ``user experience,'' reducing the burden on
facility operators without sacrificing security through the
launch of the CSAT 2.0 suite of on-line tools; and,
The closing of a critical gap in the security of our
Nation's highest-risk facilities through the implementation of
the CFATS Personnel Surety Program (screening for terrorist
ties).
extensive outreach
DHS continues to prioritize outreach designed to ``get the word
out'' about the program, share information with partners, make
available compliance assistance materials, provide education and
training, and to otherwise foster chemical security. This outreach,
which has been central to the success of CFATS, has involved extensive
engagement with a diverse group of representatives across the chemical
security community, including industry stakeholders; law enforcement
and emergency responders; Federal and State partner agencies; labor
organizations, Federal partners, industry associations, labor and
interest groups, and international partners among many others.
DHS conducts outreach to members of the chemical industry, other
industries whose members routinely use threshold levels of CFATS
chemicals of interest, and stakeholders with an interest in chemical
facility security. The Department has also prioritized coordinating
with Federal and State, local, Tribal, and territorial (SLTT)
regulatory agencies to provide resource materials and to obtain data to
assist with identifying Chemical Facilities of Interest. In fiscal year
2018, as a result of the data set comparisons, we identified
approximately 697 potential chemical facilities of interest. From the
program's inception, DHS has made more than 3,500 presentations to its
regulated community and attended more than 16,600 meetings with our
Federal, SLTT, and industry stakeholders.
The Department has developed strong relationships with national
organizations to leverage their networks and outreach activities and,
in fiscal year 2018, DHS conducted Nation-wide outreach to more than
350 State and local offices and more than 850 Local Emergency Planning
Committees/Tribal Emergency Planning Committees across the Nation.
Also, outreach to first responders is incorporated into the
development of SSPs through Risk-Based Performance Standard 9 (RBPS
9)--Response. This standard requires covered facilities to have a
documented, comprehensive crisis management plan that details how the
facility will respond to security incidents and requires the facility
to run exercises and drills--and make contact with local first-
responders. DHS verifies this outreach during on-site compliance
inspections. In many instances, the Department has facilitated contact
between the first responders and the facilities.
During the summer of 2018, as part of the Department's on-going
efforts to maximize outreach to critical stakeholder communities and as
a supplement to 11 previous annual Chemical Security Summits, the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency's (CISA) Office of
Infrastructure Security held a series of DHSChemSecurityTalks in which
we reached more than 300 facility owners and operators, Government
partners, and industry stakeholders. This inaugural series of three 1-
day events, held in Oakland, California, Chicago, Illinois, and
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, was designed to take the chemical
infrastructure security discussion and CISA's largest regulatory
program, CFATS, beyond the National Capital Region and into the very
communities that CFATS protects.
The Department also continues to play a leadership role in
encouraging a global culture of chemical security. In support of this,
I am privileged to co-chair the Chemical Security Working Group of the
G7 Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of
Mass Destruction, leading the U.S. engagement with the G7 on chemical
security and helping to ensure cooperation among the international
community on chemical security efforts. Additionally, in 2018, the
Department, along with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
INTERPOL, co-hosted the inaugural Global Congress on Chemical Security
and Emerging Threats in Lyon, France. The Global Congress convenes a
community intent on countering chemical and explosive terrorism by non-
State actors and their access to chemical agents. The Congress explored
specialized case studies highlighting emerging trends, identified
lessons learned and best practices relating to chemical incident
attribution and response and discussed evolving technologies and
tactics. CFATS is recognized globally as a model chemical-security
framework world-wide and the Department regularly responds to requests
to work with other governments as they strive to build cultures of
chemical security on a par with the security-culture CFATS has fostered
in the United States.
personnel surety program
Vetting those who have access to chemicals of interest and other
sensitive parts of high-risk chemical facilities is a key aspect of
facility security. Under RBPS 12, Personnel Surety, facilities must:
(1) Implement measures to verify and validate identity, (2) check
criminal history, (3) validate legal authorization to work in the
United States, and (4) identify people with terrorist ties. While all
Tier 1 through 4 facilities have been implementing the first three
elements of RPBS 12, in December 2015 the Department began working with
Tier 1 and Tier 2 facilities to implement the fourth element. This
effort was begun in December 2015, after the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) approved the Department's Information Collection Request
for the CFATS Personnel Surety Program (RPBS 12[iv]) in accordance with
the requirements of the Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA).
The CFATS Personnel Surety Program closed a critical gap by
enabling facilities in these two tiers to submit names to DHS for
vetting individuals' potential terrorist ties. Going forward, the
Department is planning to expand its implementation to tiers 3 and 4,
to enable all high-risk chemical facilities to ensure that those with
access to critical assets have been vetted for terrorist ties. The
Department is in the process of requesting OMB's approval, through the
PRA process, to collect information on individuals who have or who are
seeking access to high-risk chemical facilities for all four Tiers.
conclusion
Through CFATS and the hard work of our industry stakeholders who
continue to put in place security measures to harden America's highest-
risk chemical facilities, we have collectively accomplished much since
2014. This progress would not have been possible without the stability
and certainty afforded by enactment of the Protecting and Securing
Chemical Facilities from Terrorist Attacks Act of 2014.
Long-term reauthorization will allow the Department and the
chemical security community to continue to work together to secure the
Nation's chemicals and keep them out of the hands of our adversaries.
The Department will be able to continue to focus on pursuing more
efficient ways to implement the program, to include the enhancement of
existing materials and tools, while industry will have the confidence
to continue to make important investments in security.
Chemical security is very much a pressing need, and, in view of the
continuing high level of chemical-terrorism threats, must remain a
continuing high priority for the Nation. The CFATS program has
positioned the United States as a world-leader in building the culture
of security necessary to secure our Nation's highest-risk chemical
facilities. I look forward to working with this committee to chart a
path toward long-term--or permanent--reauthorization of this critical
National security program, and I thank you in advance for your
continuing leadership on this issue. I look forward to your questions.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Wulf. We feel your
passion.
We now recognize Mr. Anderson to summarize his statement
for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF NATHAN ANDERSON, ACTING DIRECTOR, HOMELAND
SECURITY AND JUSTICE, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
Mr. Anderson. Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers, and
Members of the committee, good morning. My testimony today is
primarily based on work we have conducted over the past few
years.
Compared to where CFATS' program was shortly after its
inception, DHS has made substantial progress in a number of
areas. There is room for improvement, particularly in reaching
out to first responders.
I will speak first to the Department's efforts to identify
high-risk chemical facilities. Just identifying the universe of
facilities that should even be regulated under CFATS, has been
and may always be a huge challenge.
There is no one complete data source of facilities that
have chemicals. In 2014, we found that DHS used self-reported
and unverified data to determine the risk of facilities holding
toxic chemicals that could threaten surrounding communities if
released. We recommended that DHS should better verify the
accuracy of facility-reported data.
DHS implemented this recommendation by revising its
methodology so it now calculates the risk of toxic release,
rather than relying on facilities to do so.
We have also reviewed the Department's access to assess
regulated facilities' risks. We did those to place chemical
facilities into the appropriate risk tier.
Several years ago, we found that the Department's risk
assessment approach did not consider all of the elements of
risk associated with a terrorist attack involving certain
chemicals. They treated every facility as equally vulnerable to
a terrorist attack, regardless of location or on-site security.
We recommended that DHS enhance its risk-assessment
approach to incorporate all elements of risk and conduct a peer
review after doing so.
DHS agreed with both recommendations and has implemented
actions to address both of them. For example, DHS worked with
Sandia National Lab to develop a model to more comprehensively
estimate the consequences of a chemical attack.
Our assessment of the Department's efforts to review and
approve chemical facilities' security plans also identified
challenges that DHS has taken steps to address. DHS is to
review security plans and visit facilities to ensure their
security measures meet DHS standards.
In April 2013, we reported a 7- to 9-year backlog for those
reviews and visits. At that time, DHS officials told us they
were exploring ways to reprioritize resources and streamline
inspection requirements. Recently, DHS reported to Congress
that it had eliminated its backlog by realigning resources
toward security plan reviews.
A key quality assurance function involves actions to ensure
compliance. In 2015, we reported that DHS had conducted
compliance inspections of 83 of the roughly 1,700 facilities
with approved security plans at that time.
We found that nearly half of the inspected facilities were
not fully compliant with their approved security plans, and
that DHS did not have documented procedures for managing
facilities' compliance.
We recommended that DHS document procedures from managing
compliance. As a result, DHS revised CFATS procedures, which we
are currently reviewing to determine if they sufficiently
document the processes being used to track uncompliant
facilities and ensure facilities implement plan measures as
outlined in their security plans.
On a positive note, DHS recently told us that they have
conducted more than 2,000 compliance inspections.
Let me now turn to our most recent work, which addresses
DHS's efforts to conduct outreach with stakeholders and first
responders.
In late 2018, we reported that DHS assured that some CFATS
information that first responders and emergency planners may
not have all the information they need to minimize the risk of
injury or death when responding to incidents at high-risk
facilities.
We recommended that DHS should, among other things, take
actions to improve information sharing with first responders
and emergency planners. DHS concurred with this recommendation
and reported in September 2018 that they are taking actions to
implement it.
In closing, our work has found that DHS has made progress
in efforts to implement and manage its CFATS program. As CFATS
continues to evolve, it will be important to focus on how DHS
should measure the security impact of the program, what DHS is
doing with all of the information it collects, and how such
information is being communicated to the industry, first
partners, and others.
It will also be important to focus on how the program
evolves to face new challenges, such as cybersecurity.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rogers, Members of the
committee, this concludes my statement. I will be happy to take
any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Anderson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Nathan Anderson
February 27, 2019
critical infrastructure protection.--progress and challenges in dhs's
management of its chemical facility security program
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers, and Members of the
committee: Thank you for the opportunity to discuss our past work on
the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) efforts to manage its
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) program. Thousands
of facilities that produce, use, or store hazardous chemicals could be
of particular interest to terrorists who might seek to use toxic
chemicals to inflict mass casualties in the United States. These
chemicals could be released from a facility to cause harm to
surrounding populations; they could be stolen and used as chemical
weapons or as their precursors (the ingredients for making chemical
weapons); or they could be stolen and used to build an improvised
explosive device. Past incidents remind us of the danger that these
chemicals pose, including the 2013 ammonium nitrate explosion at a
fertilizer storage and distribution facility in West, Texas, which
killed at least 14 people and damaged or destroyed at least 200 homes,
and the 1995 domestic terrorist attack on the Federal building in
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, where 168 people were killed using ammonium
nitrate fertilizer mixed with fuel oil.
The Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2007,
required DHS to issue regulations to establish risk-based performance
standards (performance standards) for securing high-risk chemical
facilities.\1\ DHS subsequently established the CFATS program in 2007
to, among other things, identify high-risk chemical facilities and
assess the risk posed by them; place facilities considered to be high-
risk into 1 of 4 risk-based tiers (with tier 1 being the highest risk
tier and 4 being the lowest); assess facility security; approve
security plans prepared by facilities; and inspect facilities to ensure
compliance with regulatory requirements.\2\ DHS's CFATS rule
established 18 performance standards that identify the areas for which
a facility's security posture are to be examined, such as perimeter
security, access control, and cybersecurity.\3\ To meet these
standards, facilities are free to choose whatever security programs or
processes they deem appropriate so long as DHS determines that the
facilities achieve the requisite level of performance in each of the
applicable areas. The Protecting and Securing Chemical Facilities from
Terrorist Attacks Act of 2014 (CFATS Act of 2014), enacted in December
2014, in effect, reauthorized the CFATS program for an additional 4
years, while also imposing additional implementation requirements on
DHS for the program.\4\ In January 2019, the Chemical Facility Anti-
Terrorism Standards Program Extension Act, was enacted and extended the
authorization by 15 months.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Pub. L. No. 109-295,  550, 120 Stat. 1335, 1388-89 (2006).
\2\ See 72 Fed. Reg. 17,688 (Apr. 9, 2007) (codified as amended at
6 C.F.R. pt. 27).
\3\ DHS has enumerated 18 risk-based performance standards that
chemical facilities must meet to comply with CFATS. See 6 C.F.R. 
27.230.
\4\ See Pub. L. No. 113-254, 128 Stat. 2898 (2014); 6 U.S.C. 
621-629. The act amended the Homeland Security Act of 2002, Pub. L. No.
107-296, 116 Stat. 2135 (2002), as amended, by adding Title XXI--
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards--and expressly repealing the
program's authority under the fiscal year 2007 DHS appropriations act.
\5\ See Pub. L. No. 116-2, 113 Stat. 5 (2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DHS's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency's
Infrastructure Security Compliance Division (ISCD) manages the CFATS
program. According to DHS, the Department received approximately $911
million for the CFATS program for the period beginning fiscal year 2007
through fiscal year 2018.
My testimony today summarizes our past work examining DHS's
management of the CFATS program, and provides updates on actions DHS
has taken to address our prior recommendations. This testimony is based
on our reports issued from July 2012 through August 2018.\6\ For these
reports, we reviewed applicable laws and regulations, DHS policies and
procedures, DHS data on tiered facilities, information on the approach
DHS used to determine a facility's risk, and process for reviewing
security plans. We also interviewed DHS officials about how facilities
are placed in risk-based tiers, how DHS assesses risk, and how it
reviews and approves facility security plans. Additional details on the
scope and methodology are available in our published reports. In
addition, this statement contains updates as of September 2018 from DHS
on actions it has taken to address the recommendations made in our
prior reports.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: DHS Is Taking Action
to Better Manage Its Chemical Security Program, but It Is Too Early to
Assess Results, GAO-12-515T (Washington, DC: July 26, 2012); Critical
Infrastructure Protection: DHS Efforts to Assess Chemical Security Risk
and Gather Feedback on Facility Outreach Can Be Strengthened, GAO-13-
353 (Washington, DC: Apr. 5, 2013); Critical Infrastructure Protection:
DHS Efforts to Identify, Prioritize, Assess, and Inspect Chemical
Facilities, GAO-14-365T (Washington, DC: Feb. 27, 2014); Critical
Infrastructure Protection: Observations on DHS Efforts to Implement and
Manage Its Chemical Security Program, GAO-14-608T (Washington, DC: May
14, 2014); Chemical Safety: Actions Needed to Improve Federal Oversight
of Facilities with Ammonium Nitrate, GAO-14-274 (Washington, DC: May
19, 2014); Critical Infrastructure Protection: DHS Action Needed to
Verify Some Chemical Facility Information and Manage Compliance
Process, GAO-15-614 (Washington, DC, July 22, 2015); Critical
Infrastructure Protection: Improvements Needed for DHS's Chemical
Facility Whistleblower Report Process, GAO-16-572, (Washington, DC: Jul
12, 2016); Critical Infrastructure Protection: DHS Has Implemented Its
Chemical Security Expedited Approval Program and Participation Has Been
Limited, GAO-17-502 (Washington, DC: June 29, 2017); Critical
Infrastructure Protection: Progress and Challenges in DHS's Management
of Its Chemical Facility Security Program, GAO-18-613T (Washington, DC:
June 14, 2018); and Critical Infrastructure Protection: DHS Should Take
Actions to Measure Reduction in Chemical Facility Vulnerability and
Share Information with First Responders, GAO-18-538 (Washington, DC:
Aug. 8, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The work upon which this statement is based was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted Government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
dhs has made progress addressing past challenges, but some actions are
still under way
Our past work has identified progress and challenges in a number of
areas related to DHS's management of the CFATS program, including: (1)
The process for identifying high-risk chemical facilities; (2) how it
assesses risk and prioritizes facilities; (3) reviewing and approving
facility site security plans; (4) inspecting facilities and ensuring
compliance; and (5) efforts to conduct outreach with stakeholders and
first responders.
Identifying High-Risk Chemical Facilities
In May 2014, we found that more than 1,300 facilities had reported
having ammonium nitrate to DHS. However, based on our review of State
data and records, there were more facilities with ammonium nitrate
holdings than those that had reported to DHS under the CFATS
program.\7\ Thus, we concluded that some facilities weren't required to
report to DHS and some that were required may have failed to do so.\8\
We recommended that DHS work with other agencies, including the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), to develop and implement methods
of improving data sharing among agencies and with States as members of
a Chemical Facility Safety and Security Working Group.\9\ DHS agreed
with our recommendation and has since addressed it. Specifically, DHS
compared DHS data with data from other Federal agencies, such as EPA,
as well as member states from the Chemical Facility Safety and Security
Working Group to identify potentially noncompliant facilities. As a
result of this effort, in July 2015, DHS officials reported that they
had identified about 1,000 additional facilities that should have
reported information to comply with CFATS and subsequently contacted
these facilities to ensure compliance. DHS officials told us that they
continue to engage with States to identify potentially non-compliant
facilities. For example, as of June 2018, DHS officials stated that
they have received 43 lists of potentially noncompliant facilities from
34 State governments, which are in various stages of review by DHS. DHS
officials also told us that they hired an individual to serve as the
lead staff member responsible for overseeing this effort.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ GAO-14-274. We reviewed Emergency Planning and Community Right-
to-Know Act of 1986 data from Texas and Alabama, which have different
reporting criteria than CFATS. Under section 312 of the act and
Environmental Protection Agency's regulations, facilities with 10,000
pounds or more of ammonium nitrate generally must submit an annual
chemical inventory report to their designated State and local
authorities. 42 U.S.C.  11022, 40 C.F.R.  370.10(a)(2)(i).
\8\ Consistent with law and regulation, certain facilities--
including, in general, facilities regulated under the Maritime
Transportation Security Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-295, 116 Stat.
2064), public water systems or wastewater treatment facilities,
facilities owned and operated by the Department of Defense or the
Department of Energy, and facilities subject to regulation by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission or in accordance with the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954--are not subject to regulation under CFATS and are referred
to as excluded facilities. See 6 U.S.C.  621(4); 6 C.F.R.  27.110(b).
In addition, pursuant to its authority under 6 C.F.R.  27.210(c), DHS
has extended the deadline for submitting CFATS reports until further
notice for certain agricultural production facilities, such as farms,
ranches, turfgrass growers, golf courses, nurseries, and public and
private parks. See Notice to Agricultural Facilities About Requirement
To Complete DHS's Chemical Security Assessment Tool, 73 Fed. Reg. 1640
(Jan. 9, 2008).
\9\ Executive Order 13650--Improving Chemical Facility Safety and
Security established a Chemical Facility Safety and Security Working
Group, composed of representatives from DHS; EPA; and the Departments
of Justice, Agriculture, Labor, and Transportation, and directed the
working group to identify ways to improve coordination with State and
local partners; enhance Federal agency coordination and information
sharing; modernize policies, regulations, and standards; and work with
stakeholders to identify best practices. See Exec. Order No. 13,650
(Aug. 1, 2013), 78 Fed. Reg. 48,029 (Aug. 7, 2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DHS has also taken action to strengthen the accuracy of data it
uses to identify high-risk facilities. In July 2015, we found that DHS
used self-reported and unverified data to determine the risk
categorization for facilities that held toxic chemicals that could
threaten surrounding communities if released.\10\ At the time, DHS
required that facilities self-report the Distance of Concern--an area
in which exposure to a toxic chemical cloud could cause serious injury
or fatalities from short-term exposure--as part of its Top Screen.\11\
We estimated that more than 2,700 facilities with a toxic release
threat had misreported the Distance of Concern and therefore
recommended that DHS: (1) Develop a plan to implement a new Top Screen
to address errors in the Distance of Concern submitted by facilities,
and (2) identify potentially miscategorized facilities that could cause
the greatest harm and verify that the Distance of Concern of these
facilities report is accurate.\12\ DHS has fully addressed both of
these recommendations. Specifically, in response to the first
recommendation, DHS implemented an updated Top Screen survey in October
2016 and now collects data from facilities and conducts more accurate
modeling to determine the actual area of impact (formerly called the
Distance of Concern), rather than relying on the facilities'
calculation. In response to the second recommendation, DHS officials
reported in November 2016 that they reassessed all facility Top Screens
that reported threshold quantities of chemicals posing a toxic release
threat, and identified 158 facilities with the potential to cause the
greatest harm. In April 2018, DHS officials reported that all of these
facilities have since been reassessed using updated Top Screen
information and, where appropriate, assigned a risk tier.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ GAO-15-614.
\11\ Any chemical facility that possesses any of the 322 chemicals
in the quantities that meet or exceed the threshold quantity or
concentration outlined in Appendix A to the DHS CFATS rule is required
to complete the Chemical Security Assessment Tool (CSAT) Top Screen--
which is the initial screening tool or document whereby the facility is
to provide DHS various data, including the name and location of the
facility and the chemicals and their quantities at the site. See 6
C.F.R.  27.200(b); see also 72 Fed. Reg. 65,396 (Nov. 20, 2007)
(codified at 6 C.F.R. pt. 27, App. A).
\12\ We recalculated the Distance of Concern for a generalizable
sample of facilities--a simple random sample of 475 facilities from the
population of 36,811 facilities that submitted Top Screens since the
inception of the CFATS program in 2007 through January 2, 2015--and
compared these results to what facilities reported in their Top Screen
submission. Based upon this sample, we estimated that 4,173 facilities
with a toxic release chemical misreported the Distance of Concern, with
an associated 95 percent confidence interval of 2,798 to 5,822
facilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Assessing Risk and Prioritizing Facilities
DHS has also taken actions to better assess regulated facilities'
risks in order to place the facilities into the appropriate risk tier.
In April 2013, we reported that DHS's risk assessment approach did not
consider all of the elements of threat, vulnerability, and consequence
associated with a terrorist attack involving certain chemicals. Our
work showed that DHS's CFATS risk assessment methodology was based
primarily on consequences from human casualties, but did not consider
economic consequences, as called for by the National Infrastructure
Protection Plan (NIPP) and the CFATS regulation. We also found that:
(1) DHS's approach was not consistent with the NIPP because it treated
every facility as equally vulnerable to a terrorist attack regardless
of location or on-site security, and (2) DHS was not using threat data
for 90 percent of the tiered facilities--those tiered for the risk of
theft or diversion--and using 5-year-old threat data for the remaining
10 percent of those facilities that were tiered for the risks of toxic
chemical release or sabotage. We recommended that DHS enhance its risk
assessment approach to incorporate all elements of risk and conduct an
independent peer review after doing so. DHS agreed with our
recommendations and has implemented actions to address both of them.
Specifically, with regard to our recommendation that DHS enhance
its risk assessment approach to incorporate all elements of risk, DHS
worked with Sandia National Laboratories to develop a model to estimate
the economic consequences of a chemical attack. In addition, DHS worked
with Oak Ridge National Laboratory to devise a new tiering methodology,
called the Second Generation Risk Engine. In so doing, DHS revised the
CFATS threat, vulnerability, and consequence scoring methods to better
cover the range of CFATS security issues. Additionally, with regard to
our recommendation that DHS conduct a peer review after enhancing its
risk assessment approach, DHS conducted peer reviews and technical
reviews with Government organizations and facility owners and
operators, and worked with Sandia National Laboratories to verify and
validate the CFATS program's revised risk assessment methodology.
To further enhance its risk assessment approach, in the fall of
2016, DHS also revised its Chemical Security Assessment Tool (CSAT),
which supports DHS efforts to gather information from facilities to
assess their risk. According to DHS officials, the new tool--called
CSAT 2.0--is intended to eliminate duplication and confusion associated
with DHS's original CSAT. DHS officials told us that they have improved
the tool by revising some questions in the original CSAT to make them
easier to understand; eliminating some questions; and pre-populating
data from one part of the tool to another so that users do not have to
retype the same information multiple times. DHS officials also told us
that the facilities that have used the CSAT 2.0 have provided favorable
feedback that the new tool is more efficient and less burdensome than
the original CSAT. Finally, DHS officials told us that, as of June
2018, DHS completed all notifications and processed tiering results for
all but 226 facilities. DHS officials did not provide an estimated
target completion date for these pending risk assessments, noting that
completing the assessments is highly dependent on the facilities
providing the necessary Top Screen information.
Reviewing and Approving Facility Site Security Plans
DHS has also made progress reviewing and approving facility site
security plans by reducing the time it takes to review these plans and
eliminating the backlog of plans awaiting review. In April 2013, we
reported that DHS revised its procedures for reviewing facilities'
security plans to address DHS managers' concerns that the original
process was slow, overly complicated, and caused bottlenecks in
approving plans.\13\ We estimated that it could take DHS another 7 to 9
years to review the approximately 3,120 plans in its queue at that
time. We also estimated that, given the additional time needed to do
compliance inspections, the CFATS program would likely be implemented
in 8 to 10 years. We did not make any recommendations for DHS to
improve its procedures for reviewing facilities' security plans because
DHS officials reported that they were exploring ways to expedite the
process, such as reprioritizing resources and streamlining inspection
requirements. In July 2015, we reported that DHS had made substantial
progress in addressing the backlog--estimating that it could take
between 9 and 12 months for DHS to review and approve security plans
for the approximately 900 remaining facilities.\14\ DHS officials
attributed the increased approval rate to efficiencies in DHS's review
process, updated guidance, and a new case management system.
Subsequently, DHS reported in its December 2016 semi-annual report to
Congress that it had eliminated its approval backlog.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ GAO-13-353.
\14\ GAO-15-614.
\15\ Department of Homeland Security, National Protection and
Programs Directorate, Implementation Status of the Chemical Facility
Anti-Terrorism Standards: Second Semiannual, Fiscal Year 2016 Report to
Congress (Washington, DC: December 9, 2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, we found in our 2017 review that DHS took action to
implement an Expedited Approval Program (EAP).\16\ The CFATS Act of
2014 required that DHS create the EAP as another option that tier 3 and
tier 4 chemical facilities may use to develop and submit security plans
to DHS.\17\ Under the program, these tier 3 and 4 facilities may
develop a security plan based on specific standards published by DHS
(as opposed to the more flexible performance standards using the
standard, non-expedited process). DHS issued guidance intended to help
facilities prepare and submit their EAP security plans to DHS, which
includes an example that identifies prescriptive security measures that
facilities are to have in place. According to committee report
language, the EAP was expected to reduce the regulatory burden on
smaller chemical companies, which may lack the compliance
infrastructure and the resources of large chemical facilities, and help
DHS to process security plans more quickly.\18\ If a tier 3 or 4
facility chooses to use the expedited option, DHS is to review the plan
to determine if it is facially deficient, pursuant to the reporting
requirements of the CFATS Act of 2014.\19\ If DHS approves the EAP site
security plan, it is to subsequently conduct a compliance inspection.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ GAO-17-502.
\17\ See 6 U.S.C.  622(c)(4). Under the CFATS rule, once a
facility is assigned a final tier, it is to submit a site security plan
or participate in an alternative security program in lieu of a site
security plan. An alternative security program is a third-party or
industry organization program, a local authority, State, or Federal
Government program, or any element or aspect thereof that DHS
determines meets the requirements of the regulation and provides an
equivalent level of security to that established by the regulation. See
6 C.F.R.  27.105. Chemical facilities assessed by DHS and considered
to be high-risk are placed into one of four risk-based tiers (with tier
1 being the highest-risk tier and 4 being the lowest).
\18\ S. Rep. No. 113-263, at 9-10 (Sept. 18, 2014).
\19\ A facially-deficient site security plan is defined as a
security plan that does not support a certification that the security
measures in the plan address the security vulnerability assessment and
risk-based performance standards, based on a review of the facility's
site security plan, the facility's Top Screen, the facility's security
vulnerability assessment, or any other information that the facility
submits to ISCD or ISCD obtains from a public source or other source. 6
U.S.C.  621(7). Specifically, ISCD determines that an EAP site
security plan is deficient if it: Does not include existing or planned
measures which satisfy applicable Risk-Based Performance Standard;
materially deviates from at least one EAP security measure without
adequately explaining that the facility has a comparable security
measure; and/or contains a misrepresentation, omission, or inaccurate
description of at least one EAP security measure. A facility is to
implement any planned security measures within 12 months of the EAP
site security plan's approval because ISCD has determined that it is
unlikely that all required security measures will be in place when a
facility submits its plan to ISCD.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2017, we found that DHS had implemented the EAP and had reported
to Congress on the program, as required by the CFATS Act of 2014.\20\
In addition, as of June 2018, according to DHS officials, only 18 of
the 3,152 facilities eligible to use the EAP had opted to use it. DHS
officials attributed the low participation to several possible factors
including:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ GAO-17-502.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DHS had implemented the expedited program after most
eligible facilities already submitted standard (non-expedited)
security plans to DHS;
facilities may consider the expedited program's security
measures to be too strict and prescriptive, not providing
facilities the flexibility of the standard process; and
the lack of an authorization inspection may discourage some
facilities from using the expedited program because this
inspection provides useful information about a facility's
security.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ An authorization inspection consists of an initial, physical
review of the facility to determine if the Top Screen, security
vulnerability assessment, and site security plan accurately represent
and address the risks for the facility.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We also found in 2017 that recent changes made to the CFATS program
could affect the future use of the expedited program.\22\ As discussed
previously, DHS has revised its methodology for determining the level
of each facility's security risk, which could affect a facility's
eligibility to participate in the EAP.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ GAO-17-502.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inspecting Facilities and Ensuring Compliance
In our July 2015 report, we found that DHS began conducting
compliance inspections in September 2013, and by April 2015, had
conducted inspections of 83 of the inspected 1,727 facilities that had
approved security plans.\23\ Our analysis showed that nearly half of
the facilities were not fully compliant with their approved site
security plans and that DHS had not used its authority to issue
penalties because DHS officials found it more productive to work with
facilities to bring them into compliance. We also found that DHS did
not have documented processes and procedures for managing the
compliance of facilities that had not implemented planned measures by
the deadlines outlined in their plans. We recommended that DHS document
processes and procedures for managing compliance to provide more
reasonable assurance that facilities implement planned measures and
address security gaps. DHS agreed and has since taken steps toward
implementing this recommendation. Specifically, DHS revised CFATS
Standard Operating Procedures that, as of February 2019, we are
reviewing to determine if they sufficiently document the processes and
procedures currently being used to track noncompliant facilities and
ensure facilities implement planned measures as outlined in their
approved site security plans.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ GAO-15-614.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In August 2018, we reported that our analysis of DHS data since our
2015 report showed that DHS has made substantial progress in conducting
and completing compliance inspections.\24\ Specifically, our analysis
showed that DHS increased the number of compliance inspections
completed per year since DHS began conducting compliance inspections in
2013 and that, for the 2,466 high-risk facilities with an approved site
security plan as of May 2018, DHS had conducted 3,553 compliance
inspections.\25\ Of these, DHS issued corrective actions to 2
facilities that were not in compliance with their approved site
security plan.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ GAO-18-538.
\25\ In accordance with the CFATS regulations, as a general matter,
DHS intends to require facilities in Tiers 1 and 2 to update their Top
Screen every 2 years, and for Tiers 3 and 4 every 3 years. DHS conducts
compliance inspections on a regular and recurring basis. DHS officials
stated that compliance inspections are prioritized based on several
factors including tier and the number of planned security enhancements
required at facilities.
\26\ In addition to these two corrective actions, we reported in
August 2018 that, since fiscal year 2015, DHS has issued 5 additional
orders to 4 high-risk facilities with final penalties totaling
$38,691.88. Of these 5 orders, 3 included the failure of a facility to
submit an approvable security plan and 2 included the failure of a
facility to submit a Top Screen.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In our August 2018 report, we also found that DHS developed a new
methodology and performance measure for the CFATS program in order to
evaluate security changes made by high-risk chemical facilities, but
that the methodology does not measure the program's impact on reducing
a facility's vulnerability to an attack. We found that DHS could take
steps to evaluate vulnerability reduction resulting from the CFATS
compliance inspection process. We recommended that DHS incorporate
vulnerability into the new methodology to help measure the reduction in
the vulnerability of high-risk facilities to a terrorist attack, and
use that data in assessing the CFATS program's performance in lowering
risk and enhancing National security. DHS agreed and is taking steps to
implement this recommendation. Specifically, in September 2018, DHS
reported making progress toward the implementation of 2 new performance
metrics by the end of the first quarter of fiscal year 2019. DHS
officials stated that these metrics should, among other things,
evaluate the progress of individual facilities in enhancing their
security while part of the CFATS program and be used to demonstrate an
increase in the security posture across the population of CFATS
facilities.
Conducting Stakeholder and First Responder Outreach
In April 2013, we reported that DHS took various actions to work
with facility owners and operators, including increasing the number of
visits to facilities to discuss enhancing security plans, but that some
trade associations had mixed views on the effectiveness of DHS's
outreach.\27\ We found that DHS solicited informal feedback from
facility owners and operators in its efforts to communicate and work
with them, but did not have an approach for obtaining systematic
feedback on its outreach activities. We recommended that DHS take
action to solicit and document feedback on facility outreach consistent
with DHS efforts to develop a strategic communication plan. DHS agreed
and has implemented this recommendation by developing a questionnaire
to solicit feedback on outreach with industry stakeholders and began
using the questionnaire in October 2016.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ GAO-13-353.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In August 2018, we reported that DHS shares some CFATS information
with first responders and emergency planners, but these stakeholders
may not have all of the information they need to minimize the risk of
injury or death when responding to incidents at high-risk
facilities.\28\ While certain facilities are required under the
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 to report
some chemical inventory information, which local officials told us they
rely on to prepare for and respond to incidents at chemical facilities,
we found over 200 chemicals covered by CFATS that may not be covered by
these reporting requirements.\29\ We also reported that DHS developed a
secure interface called the Infrastructure Protection (IP) Gateway that
provides access to CFATS facility-specific information that may be
missing from required reporting. However, we found that the IP Gateway
is not widely used at the local level and officials from 13 of 15
selected Local Emergency Planning Committees we contacted--consisting
of first responders and covering 373 CFATS high-risk facilities--said
they did not have access to CFATS data in the IP Gateway. We
recommended that DHS should take actions to encourage access to and
wider use of the IP Gateway and explore other opportunities to improve
information sharing with first responders and emergency planners. DHS
concurred with this recommendation and reported in September 2018 that
they are taking actions to implement it. Specifically, DHS has revised
3 fact sheets and an outreach presentation to include information on
the IP Gateway and how to request access to it. In addition, DHS plans
to ensure contact is made with first responders representing the top 25
percent of CFATS high-risk chemical facilities by no later than March
2019 so that they are properly prepared to respond to incidents at
these facilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ GAO-18-538.
\29\ Under Section 312 of the Emergency Planning and Community
Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (EPCRA), facilities are required to submit an
emergency and hazardous chemical inventory form--referred to as a Tier
2 form. See 42 U.S.C.  11022. The purpose of this form is to provide
State and local officials and the public with specific information on
potential hazards. This includes the locations and amount of hazardous
chemicals present at a facility during the previous calendar year.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers, and Members of the
committee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to
respond to any questions that you may have at this time.
Chairman Thompson. I thank all the witnesses for their
testimony. I remind each Member that he or she will have 5
minutes to question the panel.
Now, I will recognize myself for questions. You saw the
picture on the screen earlier about the 12 first responders in
West, Texas who, unfortunately, lost their life because they
were basically responding to an incident that we could possibly
cover on the CFATS.
Now, the law requires DHS to share such information as is
necessary. So, Mr. Anderson, you indicated in your testimony
that GAO surveyed first responders and emergency planners last
year about whether such critical information is getting shared.
Tell us what you found in that survey?
Mr. Anderson. Of course. As part of our work, we looked at
13 or interviewed 13 to 15 local emergency planning committees.
These committees cover about 373 high-risk facilities. Thirteen
of those 15 local emergency planning committees did not have
access to the information in CFATS that could potentially be
useful to first responders and emergency planners.
Chairman Thompson. So the majority of the information that
was available, just was not being shared?
Mr. Anderson. I think it is a situation of access. DHS has
stood up something called the IP Gateway, which is a forum and
a vehicle for communicating that kind of information to first
responders. I think this is a situation where the first
responders either did not have access or were not familiar with
how to use the IP Gateway system.
Chairman Thompson. So Mr. Wulf, can you provide the
committee with what do you see as a way forward in this
respect?
Mr. Wulf. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity.
So obviously the sharing of information with first
responders is of the utmost importance and is something that we
highly prioritize as a result. Those who may be called upon to
respond to incidents at facilities, high-risk facilities, or
other facilities, holding chemicals, need information about
those facilities.
They need information about the chemical holdings so they
know what they are walking into when they attempt to save lives
and property.
So we have redoubled our efforts over the past couple of
years, to reach to local emergency planning committees.
In fact, in 2018, we visited more than 800 of those local
emergency planning committees, and we are right now in the
midst of a push to reach emergency planning committees
associated with the highest population, CFATS-covered
facilities in the various counties, the top 25 percent of those
counties across the country.
I think another important thing to remember is that CFATS
and our chemical security inspectors across the country promote
sharing of information with first responders and do that in a
way that connects them directly with facilities.
So one of the CFATS risk-based performance standards, RBPS
9, is focused on response, and it requires that every high-risk
facility reach out to make contact with their local first
responders. In many cases our inspectors, our CFATS team,
facilitates that contact and that communication.
So I think that is another important way in which we are
continuing to get the word out. We are pushing, as well,
information about that IP Gateway and signing more and more
folks up every day----
Chairman Thompson. So----
Mr. Wulf. To gain access to the portal.
Chairman Thompson. Before I lose my time, you know, that
was this requirement that at least 25 percent that you
referenced in your comments would be done by the end of March.
Where are you percentage-wise with hitting that target?
Mr. Wulf. We are on track to have that done by the end of
March.
Chairman Thompson. After that, what is the next target?
Mr. Wulf. We will continue, you know, circling back. We
have met with literally thousands of local emergency planning
committees.
We are committed to continuing to ride that circuit and to
ensure that relevant folks, those who have a need-to-know
information about chemical facilities and chemical holdings,
because they may be called to run into those facilities, have
the information----
Chairman Thompson. Well, the reason I said that, as I look
at the membership of the committee present, a lot of us
represent volunteer fire departments in our respective
districts.
So I think it is really incumbent upon us to push this
information out to those departments so that those first
responders who are unpaid, doing their civic duty, would not be
put at risk simply because the information that is available is
not being shared.
Can you give the committee some kind of a guestimate as to
when the process can be completed?
Mr. Wulf. Well, you know, I would say that it is going to
be an on-going kind of continuing effort. I don't think we will
ever stop the outreach.
But we will get through those 25 percent highest-density
counties in the next month. I would suspect that, you know,
toward the end of this calendar year we will have gotten to
most of the other LEPCs across the country, as well. In many
cases, those will be repeat visits.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
I will now recognize the Ranking Member of the full
committee is the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Rogers, for
questions.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I gather from your
opening statements that CFATS is working well. Is that a fair--
now you suggested some improvements, but generally, it is
working well?
Mr. Anderson. The program has progressed over the years and
has implemented the majority of GAO's recommendations so on
that score, yes.
Mr. Rogers. You mentioned some recommendations, but I
didn't hear anything major that you thought needed to be
improved. Is that accurate?
Mr. Anderson. We don't have any open recommendations that
would be easily directed to, you know, like the safety of a
facility itself.
Our recommendations that are open and not implemented do
deal with whether or not first responders have all the
information they need. So on that score, I would consider that
a major recommendation, ensuring that the people who respond to
these events have the right kind of information.
The other recommendation that we have that is currently
open is on whether or not the program itself can speak to just
how much risk is reduced.
As the program evolves, we would like to see them get to
the point where they can say, for X number of dollars invested,
here is how much risk has been reduced through this process,
through CFATS.
Mr. Rogers. OK.
Mr. Wulf, how would you distinguish CFATS from other
security regulatory programs, like EPA, OSHA, ATF?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, so I appreciate the question. CFATS is a
very comprehensive, very security-focused regulatory program.
So programs administered by EPA and OSHA focus primarily on
safety. Our program, the CFATS program, is a security-focused
anti-terrorism program.
At its core our 18 risk-based performance standards
addressing physical security measures to deter, detect, delay
terrorist attacks, cybersecurity, insider threat, and the
various security-focused threat streams.
So I think it is a program that is flexible in its
approach, which I think is well-suited to the wide diversity of
facilities that compose the CFATS-regulated universe. It is a
program that is very well-suited to its task.
Mr. Rogers. Great. Mr. Wulf, do you feel that any CFATS
facilities are subject to duplicate security regulations from
the jurisdiction of other Federal agencies?
Mr. Wulf. So that is a a good question. I would say that
given the comprehensive nature of the CFATS program, although
there are certainly facilities that are touched by a variety of
different programs, CFATS is in all cases bringing something
additional to the table.
Where facilities are, perhaps, doing things under a
different program, if they are putting in place measures, say,
to satisfy ATF requirements, but those measures also work to
satisfy our DHS CFATS requirements, we absolutely encourage
facilities to take credit for and apply those measures within
CFATS. They are not required to duplicate work for CFATS.
Mr. Rogers. Great, thank you. That is all I have.
I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes other Members for questions they
may wish to ask the witnesses. In accordance with our committee
rules, I will recognize Members who were present at the start
of the hearing, based on seniority on the committee,
alternating between Majority and Minority. Those Members coming
in later will be recognized in the order of their arrival.
The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes the gentleman from
Rhode Island, Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
for holding this important hearing.
I want to thank our witnesses for your testimony this
morning.
I am glad we touched on the issue of cybersecurity in the
facility issues and inspections that are done.
So I want to start with Mr. Wulf, if I could? DHS does
provide that cyber is one of the l8 performance standards
facilities must address.
So I want to start out with the question of what
cybersecurity guidance does the CFATS program actually provide
to facilities? What cybersecurity requirements does CFATS make
of facilities?
Mr. Wulf. I appreciate that question. CFATS has been in
many ways, I think, ahead of the curve with cybersecurity. So
cybersecurity has been an important part of the program since
its inception.
I would say broadly speaking our focus is on working with
facilities to ensure that they have policies and procedures in
place essentially to deter, to detect, and/or to delay cyber
intrusions.
So, you know, we work with them. We have our inspectors
trained. Many of our inspectors have been provided advanced
cybersecurity training.
We have cybersecurity experts in our headquarters who work
with facilities as they develop their site security plans, as
they think through ways in which they can appropriately
restrict access to critical cyber systems, ways in which they
can restrict privileges, ensure that they have appropriate
patches in place, that they are, you know, that they are in the
best position possible to protect themselves against malware,
against ransomware, against the, you know, the panoply of cyber
threats that are out there.
Mr. Langevin. So what are the specific requirements, the
cyber requirements that you put on these facilities? How do you
audit those requirements to determine compliance?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, so we will conduct inspections of facilities
across all of their risk-based performance standards and that
includes cyber.
So, you know, even before a facility site security plan is
improved, our inspectors will be out helping facilities to
develop the policies and procedures they will put in place from
a cybersecurity perspective. When their plans have been
approved, we will be back on a regular cycle of compliance
inspections.
So as I mentioned earlier, CFATS is a non-prescriptive,
flexible program. So we don't have hard and fast requirements.
We have standards that facilities need to meet.
So, you know, we will work with facilities to assess what
works for a particular facility given its particular operations
and the level of integration of its cyber systems with its
chemical processes and industrial control systems, et cetera.
Mr. Langevin. So am I to understand that they are setting
their own standards?
Mr. Wulf. They are not setting their own standards. They
have some flexibility in the types of policies and procedures
they can apply to meet the spirit of the cybersecurity standard
under CFATS.
But no two chemical facilities are alike. So some
facilities have cyber systems that are very highly integrated
with their industrial control systems, with their chemical
processes. Some have no integrations whatsoever. So there may
be a difference from facility to facility, as to what we are
going to ask them to have in place to get to a place where we
can approve their site security plan.
Mr. Langevin. OK. I have other questions for you, but I am
going to go to Mr. Anderson, if I could?
Mr. Anderson, staying on the topic of cybersecurity, what
does GAO evaluate the maturity of the CFATS cybersecurity
reviews to be? Do you have suggestions on how those elements of
SSPs can be improved?
Mr. Anderson. Thank you. We haven't done a deep dive audit
into the cyber realm. But we have touched on it in our recent
work. I think our conclusion is that this may be an area, cyber
specifically, where there may be a capability gap.
As you may know, GAO produces a high-risk list every 2
years highlighting certain programs that are vulnerable and at
high risk for fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement.
The cyber area within DHS is one of those where recently we
did raise the question about whether or not they have the right
human capital resources to address the cyber threat.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, we may want to ask for a specific GAO report
on this particular topic with respect to cyber to make sure
that there is no gap, if we could--something you would
consider?
Chairman Thompson. Absolutely. I will work with Tim Richman
on making sure we get that request.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Walker.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to our panel today.
Mr. Wulf, as the director of the infrastructure security
compliance division, my question for you is does every employee
at each location have access to all areas of the facility? Or
do certain chemical facilities have Classified areas? Could you
address that for me?
Mr. Wulf. Sure, I appreciate the question. The short answer
is, it varies from facility to facility based upon, you know,
the facility management, the facility security officers'
assessment as to what makes sense given that facility's
particular operation.
So you may find a facility with restricted access to
certain critical assets. You may have a facility on which all
employees have access to all parts of the facility.
Mr. Walker. Are there any of those scenarios that concern
you? Or are you familiar with enough to know, as you said, the
varying scenarios? Can you deep dive a little bit more for me?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. So, you know, as we work with facilities on
an individual basis, which we do as each one develops its
comprehensive site security plan, you know, we assess whether
it makes sense to have a more restricted area where high-risk
chemicals of interest are stored.
Whether it makes sense for a particular facility to more
fully restrict access to some of its employees or perhaps to
contractors who are, you know, coming in and out of the
facility.
Mr. Walker. Yes. Do you have any concerns of any of the
areas that you have overlooked or reviewed?
Mr. Wulf. I would say that we have, you know, identified
areas of concern as we have worked with facilities to develop
their site security plans. We have been able to address those
in the course of that SSP development process.
So I would not approve a plan about which I had concerns.
Mr. Walker. So let me make sure. Is that process in
development or are you saying that it is past tense, that those
have been resolved in those concerns?
Mr. Wulf. Those have been resolved and the site security
plans have been approved.
Mr. Walker. Some proposed reforms have included requiring
all employees at a facility to be notified of the security
requirements under CFATS. Do you agree, Mr. Wulf, that having
front office staff, like an accountant or receptionist, know
the CFATS plan would add additional security to a chemical
facility? Do you agree with that?
Mr. Wulf. So the law requires facilities, to the extent
practical, to involve employees who have relevant security
expertise in the development of their site security plans. That
is, I would say, not likely to include administrative staff.
Mr. Walker. So going back to my previous question, that
wouldn't be a concern for you? That in this case the accountant
or the receptionist know the CFATS plan? You don't think that
would help as far as adding additional security to a chemical
facility?
Mr. Wulf. I don't imagine that would be particularly
helpful.
Mr. Walker. OK. Could you describe the additional security
risks that may arise from a proposal like this? Can you go in a
little bit more detail? What--would be the issue here?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. So I think the core of the issue on the
sharing of information in the employee context or otherwise is,
you know, the importance of ensuring that those folks who have
a need-to-know information, that includes certainly the first
responders we discussed earlier, or sort-of a key facility
security-focused personnel have the information that they need
to develop plans and to execute security plans.
There are processes in place within CFATS, within our risk-
based performance standards, that ensure that other employees
at facilities, even those who, you know, might not be privy to
all the details of a security plan or of chemical holdings on
the facility are, you know, are brought into training, are
brought into exercises and drills on incident response so they
have what they need in the event of an incident.
But I don't believe that all employees need access to the
security features of a plan.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Wulf.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New Mexico,
Ms. Torres Small.
Ms. Torres Small. Thank you, Chairman Thompson.
Mr. Wulf, you spoke about--and I was glad to see that you
mentioned DHS outreach to the chemical security community in
your prepared statement and also to see that you had talked
with over 800 local emergency planning communities, based on
your questions with Chairman Thompson.
I would like you to speak specifically to outreach to rural
communities. If there are any--I represent the bottom, more
than one-half, of New Mexico. So we have a fair number of large
rural communities there.
So I would like you to speak slightly to if there is any
additional outreach you do in these communities where volunteer
firefighting departments are in a deeper need.
Mr. Wulf. Absolutely. I appreciate that, and we certainly
want to and do get out, you know, to both urban, suburban, and
rural communities. We want to ensure that all who have a need-
to-know information about high-risk chemical facilities, about
the chemical holdings have access to that information.
So absolutely, we make an extra effort to get out to rural
communities. We have about 150 inspectors across the country.
We have actually put in place across the country some new
regional offices at which we have put in place regional
outreach coordinators, training, and exercise coordinators.
We have additional firepower at the kind-of agency level as
well now to help with that outreach. So very much committed to
continuing on that path.
Ms. Torres Small. Do you have any specific resources
tailored toward these rural communities?
Mr. Wulf. I think they are, essentially, the same resources
that we provide to all first responders, so access to the IP
Gateway tool. You know, we facilitate connections between those
first responders and facilities in their areas of
responsibility and ensure that that happens for each and every
facility, rural or otherwise.
Ms. Torres Small. In the questions that Chairman Thompson
asked, I am glad to hear that DHS is on track for the March
2019 deadline for doing the outreach to the high-risk chemical
facilities. Does that information sharing include the specific
chemical holdings stored on the sites that the first responders
would be responding to?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, it does. So first responders who have a
facility in their sort-of area of jurisdiction can have access.
We want them to have access to that information.
Ms. Torres Small. Right. I want to switch gears just a
little bit in terms of it appears that DHS relies heavily on
the CFATS facilities to reach out to local emergency
responders. Then you have inspectors who come in and confirm
that that has occurred. Is that accurate?
Mr. Wulf. In some cases, that is accurate. We will confirm
in every case. In some cases we will actually proactively
facilitate the introduction and make sure that that happens and
in many cases participate in those meetings.
Ms. Torres Small. If it turns out that there hasn't been
outreach by the facility, would that result in disproving of a
facility's site security plan?
Mr. Wulf. It absolutely would. We would not approve a plan
where that outreach connection has not been made.
Ms. Torres Small. Great. We also discussed a little bit the
outreach that is done to employees of facility plans, so the
training and exercise and drills that are done, but also
limiting access on a need-to-know basis.
I would like to know a little bit about the input
requirement, that there is a requirement to get input from at
least one employee, where applicable, or a labor union
representative informing the facility plan. Do inspectors
confirm that that input requirement has been complied with?
Mr. Wulf. Inspectors will raise that issue during an
inspection and will hear from facilities to what extent they
have involved employees and/or as kind-of relevant resident
bargaining unit members in the process. So yes, those
discussions happen during inspections.
Ms. Torres Small. Are inspectors required to speak with
those employees or union representatives?
Mr. Wulf. It is not a requirement.
Ms. Torres Small. If it is determined, even if they are not
speaking with the employees or labor unions, that there was not
an employee or labor union representative consulted, does that
result in disproving of the security plan?
Mr. Wulf. It does not. It does not. So, you know, we sort-
of leave to the discretion of those who are responsible for
security of the facility the extent to which it actually is
practical to involve, you know, however many employees in the
process.
Ms. Torres Small. Even though the CFATS Act requires that
input?
Mr. Wulf. Well, the CFATS Act talks about involvement to
the extent practical.
Ms. Torres Small. Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes gentlelady from Arizona, Mrs.
Lesko.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question is for Mr.
Wulf. The question is, you know, some would say that Department
of Homeland Security should mandate that CFATS facilities,
regulated facilities, should adopt inherently safer
technologies to improve security.
I have been told that these facilities are opposed to that.
So I guess I am asking if you think that is necessary and at
what rate are the facilities already developing these safer
technologies without Federal mandates?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, that is a good question. I appreciate it. I
would say that organically CFATS has promoted the consideration
and implementation of facilities of inherently safer
technologies and processes.
So, you know, over the course of the program's history more
than 3,000 facilities have either reduced their holdings of
high-risk chemicals of interest or eliminated them completely,
substituting other less risky chemicals or have changed their
processes and have actually come out of the program, been
determined no longer to be high-risk.
You know, to my mind that is a success. That is a win for
the program without really the need for an inherently safer
technology mandate.
Mrs. Lesko. I have another question for either one of you
and that is how do you work? I heard earlier how you work with
local responders and a gateway program that they look at. I
don't know if that is on-line or what it was.
But how do you work with the States and local agencies? How
do you communicate with them or does every State have an agency
that deals directly with you? How does this work?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, it varies by State, so, you know, some
States have multiple agencies that touch facilities holding
chemicals. Some States have one. In some States it is the State
fire marshal, in some States it is the fire marshal plus the
State Department of Environmental Quality, the State Railroad
Commission or otherwise.
So on a State-by-State basis, we engage with the relevant
agencies both State and local levels. We prioritize the sharing
of information about the list of facilities we have under our
purview, both those that we have tiered as high-risk and those
that we have determined to be not high-risk.
We kind-of share lists with those State agencies. We
crosswalk those lists and we strive to identify what we call
potential chemical facilities of interest, essentially
potential outlier facilities with an eye toward bringing into
the program to ensure that we are getting the relevant reports
to run through our risk assessment methodology from facilities
that have threshold quantities of chemicals of interest.
So that is an area in which we have really stepped up our
efforts in recent years. We have put into place a leader within
our organization whose full-time responsibility is to
coordinate the outreach that we do for the purpose of bringing
into the fold those potential outlier facilities.
Mrs. Lesko. One last question, Mr. Chairman.
Yesterday, I think it was yesterday, we had testimony from
some cybersecurity folks from the Federal Government and one of
the things that was identified as a problem is in cybersecurity
there are these different silos. They are always working on
cybersecurity in just that one area and don't really share
information.
Do you see that as a problem in this sector as well?
Because what they were trying to say is usually attackers,
hackers or foreign governments will not only attack one area,
but they will try and attack all of the areas.
Mr. Wulf. Yes, and I think that is absolutely a concern and
it is something that the design of CFATS guards very much
against. So we have 18 risk-based performance standards that
facilities work with us to, you know, as they work with us they
put into place security measures focused not only on physical
security, but also on cybersecurity, on insider threat, on the,
you know, the wide variety of kind of threat vectors that
exist.
So, you know, we believe that a high-risk chemical facility
that has an improved site security plan and is implementing
that site security plan has hardened itself very effectively
against multi-faceted attacks.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back my time.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Michigan, Ms.
Slotkin.
Ms. Slotkin. Good evening--or good morning--Lord, not good
evening. Thanks for being here. I really appreciate you guys
doing this. I am from Michigan and we have a large of number of
these facilities, including two in my district. Then just
outside my district in Detroit, we had a big chemical fire in
years that passed. So this one is really of interest to my
community.
I guess my first question, Mr. Wulf, is just on
accountability. So how would a Member of Congress know after
March whether the facilities in his or her district have
communicated effectively with local law enforcement, that there
is a shared understanding of kind-of the risks? Like, how would
I know that after March?
Mr. Wulf. Are you talking about the communication with the
first responders?
Ms. Slotkin. Yes, just making sure--yes, because I think we
had this Detroit fire years ago, years ago. But my
understanding is we did not have full awareness by the first
responders. We didn't lose anyone, but it certainly was a
potential risk. So how would I feel comfort that my local
responders have been informed with what they need?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. So I think I can tell you with confidence
that all facilities within the CFATS program, all facilities
covered by CFATS, will have made connections with their
relevant local first responders. It is a requirement of the
program.
It is the focus of one of our risk-based performance
standards, number 9 of 18. It is something that we verify and
facilitate. So you can rest assured that that is happening
across the 3,300 highest-risk chemical facilities and their
relevant first responders across the country.
Ms. Slotkin. Then are you the senior accountable official
if for some reason that didn't happen, right? Of course, I want
that all to happen and I want them to check the box, but if for
some reason that hasn't happened as it should, are you the
senior accountable official for making sure?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. Yes.
Ms. Slotkin. OK.
Mr. Wulf. Call me.
Ms. Slotkin. OK, great. Then on cyber, similarly, so again,
a Congresswoman was mentioning this. So if we started to see
trends in, you know, these hacktivists or these cyber threats
against chemical facilities, would you know about it?
If we started to see a systematic attempt either in one
State or in a series of States to go after these facilities, is
there a reporting mechanism? Are people telling you about the
threats that they see? Are you capturing the trends?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, so we have within our broader organization a
cybersecurity division and National cybersecurity and
communications integration center that is focused on threats
Nationally. That is crunching all of the intelligence, the
threat streams, and that is communicating with us.
So we are in the mix to get that information and we are
certainly on a daily basis focused on kind-of the continuing
cyber and other threat streams that concern our facilities.
Ms. Slotkin. Then I am a former CIA officer and so I get a
lot of--I guess they would call them complaints from people
back home, generally about the lack of information sharing
between sort-of folks in Washington seeing maybe some of the
Top Secret- or Secret-level information on threats related to
cyber and then what actually distills down. It is a consummate,
you know, complaint that I hear.
So what is your responsibility to go the other direction
and inform facilities if you are seeing things that raise your
eyebrows? What is your mandate to do that?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, and it something that we take very seriously
and, you know, as the situation might warrant we have
mechanisms in place to reach to facilities and talk to them
about ways in which they can harden, you know, potentially even
further against specific threats.
In fact, CFATS program accounts for that, part of a couple
of our risk-based performance standards are focused on specific
threats and elevated threats. We require facilities to put into
their site security plans measures that they would increase in
the event we reach out to them and tell them that there is a
specific or a more generalized elevated threat that they need
to concern themselves with.
Ms. Slotkin. Last, so again are you the senior accountable
official if for some reason there was a threat against a
specific facility or a bunch of facilities in one State and
that information didn't get to the facility so they could
protect themselves that is under your mandate?
Mr. Wulf. For CFATS facilities----
Ms. Slotkin. Yes.
Mr. Wulf. Absolutely.
Ms. Slotkin. OK, great.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. But you raised two
good questions.
One is, Mr. Wulf, can you provide the committee with how
many actions you have brought on facilities inspected that have
been found in noncompliance?
Mr. Wulf. Sure. I guess it is kind-of a two-part answer
because of the way the CFATS program and our enforcement
processes work. Of course, you know, we strive to work with
facilities to bring them into a compliance, and by and large,
facilities have done a good job and are in compliance with
their plans.
In upwards of 80 cases we have had to resort to our
enforcement authorities and to issue an administrative order
that per the law gives facilities a certain amount of time to
get their act together and alleviate whatever the issue might
be.
We have gotten to the point with 5 facilities where we have
had to issue a civil monetary penalty and that has proven in
those cases to be the additional impetus facilities needed to
come into compliance.
Chairman Thompson. So everybody is in compliance?
Mr. Wulf. Everybody is currently in compliance. You know,
it is a dynamic population, right? So facilities are in
different stages of perhaps working on their site security
plans, getting them to approval, but facilities against which
we have enforced and issued civil penalties have come into
compliance.
Chairman Thompson. The last question is those 2 facilities
in Ms. Slotkin's district, is there a directory that she can go
to or is there is a way that she can get with you and you can
say these 2 facilities are compliant?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, absolutely. If they are CFATS facilities we
are glad to sit down and talk through, you know, what exists
in----
Chairman Thompson. Was really what she was trying to get
to.
Mr. Wulf. Pardon me?
Chairman Thompson. That was what she was trying to get to.
Mr. Wulf. Yes, we are glad to get you that information and
talk through it with----
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Crenshaw.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you both for
being here and giving your testimony. I think we have made some
important strides in streamlining this program. It is an
important program for my constituents in Houston.
We have a lot of these facilities, of course, and look
forward to giving it a long-term extension to this program so
that we can have some certainty for the industry and for the
American people.
Director Wulf, I want to quickly--I know you answered
something inherently about safer technologies a minute ago. I
just want to get a sense from you, if we were to mandate
inherently safer technologies, how feasible would that really
be for you to regulate----
Mr. Wulf. I think that would be a pretty tough--to crack
from a pure regulatory standpoint.
Mr. Crenshaw. OK. You can expand on that a little bit if
you would like.
Mr. Wulf. Yes. No, so I, you know, I think CFATS by its
nature promotes the consideration of inherently safer
technologies and the implementation of inherently safer
technologies----
Mr. Crenshaw. It is incentives based on the tiering
system----
Mr. Wulf. Right, exactly.
Mr. Crenshaw. To sort-of have safer technologies.
Mr. Wulf. So facilities make risk-based decisions to change
their processes, to change their chemical holdings, maybe to
substitute safer chemicals. But I would say, you know, we at
DHS are focused on security. I think it would be difficult for
us to regulate it in the area of what is safer or not.
Mr. Crenshaw. Right.
For Director Anderson, has the GAO assessed how much new
standards on inherently separate technologies would cost?
Mr. Anderson. We have not looked at that question
specifically. You know, just to expand upon what Director Wulf
was saying, the waterfront of types of facilities is highly
variable. You have huge, like, petrochemical facilities and
then very, very small mom-and-shop places that are in rural
areas. So mandating a specific technology solution may
encounter challenges.
I think one of the things we have routinely heard in our
conversations with industry is about the flexibility of the
program and the implementation of the 18 risk-based performance
standards. That is what I can speak to. To answer your question
directly, we have not looked at the technology.
Mr. Crenshaw. Right.
Director Wulf, back to you. Should the risk-based
performance standards be modified or reflect evolving threats
from drones or other unmanned aerial vehicles?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, so the drones question is an important one,
for sure and it is a continually evolving sort-of threat
vector. I think as they stand the risk-based performance
standards account for, and we certainly engage with facilities,
on the reporting of significant incidents.
We do take in a, you know, decent number of reports
associated with overflight or flights nearby high-risk chemical
facilities of unmanned aircraft systems.
So I think we have the tools in place from an incidents
reporting standpoint. Our counterparts at the Federal Aviation
Administration I know are working toward a broader framework,
and we are working with them----
Mr. Crenshaw. Right.
Mr. Wulf. On that for critical infrastructure.
Mr. Crenshaw. Because it is prohibited under Federal law to
interfere with the operation of a drone right now. So is that
part of the conversation? I mean to allow essentially
facilities to defend themselves.
Mr. Wulf. Yes.
Mr. Crenshaw. Is that conversation on-going?
Mr. Wulf. I think that is probably part of the broader
conversation for sure. You know, it is an issue that we at the
Department are looking at, not just from a chemical facility
angle, but across all critical infrastructure sectors.
Mr. Crenshaw. OK. Again, I want to encourage all to focus
on these new problems with drones as they become more
prevalent.
Last question I have for--either one of you can, I think,
take this. Is there any discussion about the level of scrutiny
placed on the tier 4 operators and whether that is necessary?
Whether that really needs to be as stringent as it is, given
that the low level of danger from tier 4 chemical facilities.
Is that in discussion at all? What kind of feedback are you
getting from the industry on this?
Mr. Wulf. So I think there is pretty broad consensus that
tier, you know, Tier 4 facilities, Tier 3 facilities as well,
which make up the majority of our covered chemical facilities
are high-risk facilities. They are still among the less than 10
percent of facilities that we have determined to be at high
risk of terrorist attack or exploitation.
We do have the tiering system in place, so we do apply
kind-of different standards to the lower-tiered but still high-
risk facilities. It seems to be an approach and a framework
that continues to work well.
Mr. Crenshaw. OK. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wulf. Absolutely. Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Orlando,
Florida, Mrs. Demings.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to both of our witnesses for joining us today.
Mr. Wulf, my questions are for you. When DHS is considering
whether a facility is high-risk, do you include in that
methodology, or whatever process you use, would you factor in
if the facility would be located to an elementary school for
example or a nursing home or a hospital?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, so we factor in--that is a good question. We
tier for a couple of major different threat streams, one of
which focused on theft and diversion of chemicals, the other
which is focused on facilities where there could be a release
into a surrounding community. In those cases of release, we
absolutely factor in the surrounding population.
One of the things we were able to make some significant
headway on, as we kind-of basked in the stability that was
afforded by long-term authorization, was a complete retooling
of our risk assessment methodology. So we are now more
accurately able to model those surrounding populations and tier
more accurately.
Mrs. Demings. Also, studies show that chemical facilities
tend to be concentrated in low-income and minority communities.
In determining facility risk, does DHS consider whether a
facility is in close proximity to other chemical facilities
that could exacerbate the impact of an attack on an already
vulnerable population?
Mr. Wulf. We certainly consider what is in the surrounding
area by way of population as we do our tiering.
Mrs. Demings. So when you consider the proximity to those
populations, those low-income, already very vulnerable areas,
what do you factor into it? What is it exactly that you are
considering or looking at?
Mr. Wulf. Well, we are considering where the population is
located in proximity to a facility and we are kind-of modeling,
you know, were there to be an incident that caused a release of
chemicals, you know, what part of that population would be
impacted and, you know and what number of fatalities could
potentially occur as we are thinking about the tiering.
Mrs. Demings. OK, so when you say where the population is
located, what exactly does that mean? Could you help me with
that?
Mr. Wulf. It means, like, how many people are located
either, you know, during the day or at night in their homes, in
their businesses, the schools, and how close they are to the
facility.
Then we look at what type of chemical we are talking about,
what quantities of chemicals we are talking about, what the
prospect is for release of those chemicals, what quantity could
be released.
Then, you know, there is sort-of a plume modeling effort
designed to get us to a place where we can model what the
consequences would be of a release of chemicals caused by
terrorists.
Mrs. Demings. OK. Finally, what are you doing to make sure
security measures aren't interfering with precautions taken in
anticipation of extreme weather or natural disasters?
As the Chairman indicated, I come from Florida, so I wonder
what are you doing to make sure there are no conflicts there as
you are implementing your security measures? Or at least that
you are working together to make sure there are no conflicts?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, we, you know, we strive to, and we do, in
fact, work in close cooperation with agencies that are focused
on safety, that are focused on response to natural disasters.
So that includes as we continue to implement the provisions
of an Executive Order from 2014 that followed the West Texas
incident, to work closely to coordinate with EPA, with OSHA,
with ATF and to, you know, harmonize to the extent absolutely
possible our respective programs. So and to communicate as
frequently and effectively as we possibly can.
Mrs. Demings. OK, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Taylor.
Mr. Taylor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a question, Mr. Wulf, for you. So I understand that
there are some facilities that are exempted by statute and some
that are included. Do you have any thoughts for us on, you know
these facilities I am worried about that are exempted and I am
concerned that these facilities that I am doing, I don't really
see why I am doing that.
So I mean, we write the laws with the best of intent, but
not necessarily the implementation is the best. So you are
implementing so what do you see in terms of what should be in
the mix and what isn't in the mix?
Mr. Wulf. Yes.
Mr. Taylor. Can you speak to that?
Mr. Wulf. So there are a number of exemptions, of
exclusions, from the authorities. So, you know, broadly those
exclusions apply to facilities that are covered by other
security-focused programs, so nuclear facilities covered by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, facilities owned by the
Department of Defense and a handful of others. It also includes
an exemption for water and wastewater facilities.
I think that, you know, a dozen years into implementation
of the program, a pretty opportune time to kind-of take a look
at where we are with the exclusions and maybe to study what
might make sense going forward with respect to facilities that
are excluded from the program. We are open as well to talking
about, you know, about what facilities are included.
You know, as I mentioned earlier, I think the comprehensive
nature of CFATS makes it very much value-added across the
entire universe of 3,300-plus facilities that are currently
covered as high-risk. I think it is an important program. So I
would say there are not facilities that which I am saying, why
are we doing this?
Mr. Taylor. OK.
Mr. Wulf. We are adding value across the board.
Mr. Taylor. Then sort-of building on that conflicts
discussion, are you finding yourselves duplicating effort with
other agencies and where they are, you know, where the person
on the ground is saying, wow, you are telling me to do it this
way but I have got this other agency telling me to do it
another way.
I mean, are you finding conflict or maybe even at the
statutory level where one law says this and another law says
that? Are you seeing conflict there that needs to be clarified?
Mr. Wulf. I don't think we are seeing conflict. I think we
are seeing rare instances in what is needed to require, what is
needed to meet our standards, meet the intent and spirit of the
18 CFATS risk-based performance standards is above and beyond
what might be required by other programs.
So I don't view that as a conflict. I view that as a
facility that has been assessed to be at high risk of terrorist
attack or exploitation having to have in place security
measures beyond those that might be required or that might be
needed by other programs at facilities that aren't high-risk
CFATS facilities.
Mr. Taylor. So are you saying that you don't see conflict?
I mean, you are not running into other agencies in doing what
you are doing?
Mr. Wulf. Well, I mean we are certainly covering facilities
that are covered by other agencies and their programs. No
question about that. I would say almost every facility we
regulate is visited as well by, you know, EPA and/or OSHA, in
some cases by Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives, and by State regulators.
But I think CFATS is unique and it is an extraordinarily
comprehensive program that is targeted at the highest-risk
facilities, facilities that are at the highest risk of
terrorist attack or exploitation.
So there is some overlap, absolutely, in the universes of
facilities that we cover as compared to other facilities. You
know, that is among the reasons we prioritize working closely
both at the National and regional levels with other regulatory
agencies.
Mr. Taylor. Mr. Chairman, actually, one final question.
How are you handling changes? I mean when a facility wants
to change something, add a new cracker or whatever it may be,
is what you are doing getting in the way of that or is
securities just for the whole structure, doesn't matter if they
are subtracting or adding people, services, plant on the
ground?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, unless they are changing their holdings of
high-risk chemicals of interest, it should not have an impact.
We are always, always willing and able to work with facilities
as they are thinking about design changes, changes to their
processes to talk them through what impact it might have and
options they might have, if there is going to be a potential
impact under CFATS.
Mr. Taylor. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from California,
Ms. Barragan.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to start by
thanking you for making this a priority and for pushing this
and having this hearing. When I saw the photo before we
started, of the explosion in West, Texas, it reminded me very
much of a facility that is of great concern in my Congressional
district.
Now, I represent the Port of Los Angeles, and it is a huge
economic engine. It touches every Congressional district.
Should there be an incident there, certainly an explosion like
that, it would be devastating to the economy and really to the
surrounding areas.
Mr. Wulf, I know you and I had a chance briefly to speak
before the hearing started. I wanted to make sure to get over
here to follow up. I want to talk a little bit about this
facility that is of great concern in my district. As you are
aware of it, it is, I call them the LPG storage tanks, they
store large amounts of butane and some propane.
Now, these are tanks that are right next to a park where
children play, within a very close radius of schools where
children go to school and not very far at all from residential
neighborhoods and the Port of Los Angeles.
I understand that you have been out to the facility, is
that correct, Mr. Wulf?
Mr. Wulf. If we are talking about the same facility, then
yes I have.
Ms. Barragan. Yes, and is this facility part of the CFATS
program?
Mr. Wulf. The facility I visited is part of the program.
Ms. Barragan. Yes. Do you know if anyone at DHS has
assessed the devastating impacts that would occur should there
be a leak or an explosion to that facility?
Mr. Wulf. So, you know, so that is exactly what CFATS is
focused on. So, you know, in determining the high-risk status
of that facility we absolutely would have modeled the potential
effects of a release caused by a terrorist act on the
surrounding population, absolutely.
Ms. Barragan. So one of the questions I often get from
constituents, will ask questions like how high-risk is it? Is
that information public that you might be able to share with us
on what the possible result would be if there was an explosion
there and the risk level?
Mr. Wulf. Well, portions of our risk-tiering methodology
are Classified----
Ms. Barragan. Yes.
Mr. Wulf. It is certainly a discussion we could have.
Ms. Barragan. OK. You know, one group, a consulting group
that has done a study on it, concludes that the devastation
from a blast could stretch as far as 6.8 miles from the
facility, and that is within the realm of not just residential
homes, but the Port of Los Angeles.
Again, when I see the photo of what happened in Texas, I
noticed there wasn't too many residential around there. I
didn't even see anything around that area. So it is critically
important for me that we reauthorize the program, but that we
are also making sure that there is on-going inspections.
Because I think I read in our report that there had been
lapses in safety regulations and things like that. Now, my
understanding is because of CFATS' early instability DHS did
not begin carrying out compliance inspections for several years
with the bulk of inspections conducted after 2015.
However, since that time, compliance inspections have
spiked to over 3,500, and now the question is whether
inspectors are being pressured to rush through inspections to
get numbers up.
Mr. Wulf, how much time do inspectors have to carry out
inspections and how can we be sure these inspections are not
merely a paperwork exercise or rubber stamp?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, I appreciate that question and inspectors
are absolutely not pressured to move through inspections
quickly. We do have time frames in place for the submission of
reports. I want to say generally about 2 weeks to get a report
done, but if an inspector for whatever reason needs additional
time, needs to spend an extra day at a facility, or make a
return visit to a facility, absolutely is something that we
make sure can happen under our program.
You know, I would say as well with regard to the facility
and potential impacts, I am glad to have additional discussions
about that specific facility but that, you know, those are
exactly the sorts of impacts that CFATS is designed to address.
It is exactly the reason that high-risk facilities are in
the CFATS program and have to put into place security measures
focused on 18 comprehensive risk-based performance standards
and submit to inspections. So absolutely glad to have that----
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you, and I will certainly follow
up with you to have that conversation.
I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wulf, Mr. Anderson, thank you both for appearing today.
I represent south Louisiana. The chemical industry is vital
to Louisiana's economy. In Louisiana it is a $50.5 billion
industry. It provides over 25,000 direct jobs and an additional
83,000 supporting jobs.
In my district alone, this industry generates nearly $60
million in Federal tax revenue and employs nearly 7,000 direct
employees. These are families that I work for.
State-wide, Louisiana ships 7.9 billion in chemical-related
products to customers world-wide. Needless to say, ensuring
these facilities are secure is vital to my State and district
and by extension the entire country.
Mr. Wulf, based on your testimony, the CFATS program is
effective and its success has positioned the United States as a
world leader in chemical facility security. As with any
Government program I understand there is always room for
improvement.
I am certainly willing to work with my colleagues and I
thank the Chairman for his leadership and the Ranking Member as
well. I am willing to work with my colleagues in this body to
address how we can improve CFATS and provide a long-term
authorization for this important program. A long-term
authorization is a significant quest in my mind.
Mr. Wulf, given the success of the program in its current
state, do you believe it would be in the best interests of our
National security to approve a clean, long-term, re-
authorization of CFATS and then address any needed changes as
issues arise in a bipartisan manner through this body and
committee?
Mr. Wulf. I would say that absolutely a long-term
authorization for CFATS is key to our ability to continue to
focus on chemical security and it was the foundation for the
improvements that we were able to make over the last 4 years.
I think the foundation of the program is a very strong one.
The program is effective and successful.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, sir. Reflective of your answer
regarding protecting the people's treasure, which we are
responsible for in this body, do you believe that the increased
certainty of a long-term or permanent re-authorization would
allow Government and industry to work more uniformly to develop
better practices, improve inefficiency of the program and thus
maintaining the peoples' investment?
Mr. Wulf. No question about it. So chemical industry
companies across the country have made significant investments,
have made capital investments in CFATS-focused security
measures. They continue to deserve to know that the program is
here for the long haul.
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Anderson, do you concur with that
assessment, sir?
Mr. Anderson. GAO doesn't take a position on that but we
would note that----
Mr. Higgins. You work very closely with CFATS though do you
not, sir?
Mr. Anderson. I am sorry, what was that?
Mr. Higgins. You work very closely with CFATS and you
recognize that long-term stability encourages efficiency in any
program, do you not?
Mr. Anderson. Long-term stability absolutely increases
certainty in budgets and periodic reauthorization also provides
a good catalyst for oversight, which is the role we fill.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, sir. But oversight is an on-going
endeavor, is it not? Legislation can be changed as needed to a
long-term program, a long-term authorization.
Mr. Anderson. True.
Mr. Higgins. Yes, sir.
Mr. Wulf, last question. With political infighting in
Congress over minor changes, again--and we had a bipartisan
manner, we are willing to work together--but would political
infighting in Congress over minor changes to the currently
effective CFATS program while it remains in limbo under short-
term authorization, be a disservice to our Nation's mission to
prevent terror attacks?
Mr. Wulf. We are absolutely better-positioned to secure
America's highest-risk chemical infrastructure with a long-term
authorization. No question about it.
Mr. Higgins. I thank you for your answer.
Mr. Chairman, I apologize that I have not been able to
attend the entire hearing. You know that happens sometimes, but
I respect you, sir, and the Ranking Member, and I yield the
balance of my time.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Rose.
Mr. Rose. Chair, it is Staten Island. Thank you, Chair.
Chairman Thompson. At some point I will get it right.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Rose. Mr. Wulf, thank you again for being here. Thank
you for your service to this country. Let us talk about fusion
centers. What has been the role of fusion centers throughout
the coordination process? Has this been an institutionalized
role? Have they been your direct point of contact?
I understand you could reply to that question by saying,
they have been great and that is it, but I actually want to
know what their role has been as mandated by the Department and
if there has been a variable role across States?
How we can use this as a point of improving the role of
fusion centers as the lead in terms of coordinating issues such
as this between the Federal Government, States, localities, and
the private sector?
Mr. Wulf. I appreciate that question, and I do think there
is probably more that we can do on a National basis. So fusion
centers have been an important focal point for us in
coordinating, in connecting the CFATS program with State and
local law enforcement and first responders. So it is a node.
In some cases we have had chemical security inspectors sit
at fusion centers. Certainly on the other side of our house,
the voluntary side of their house, our protective security
advisors are very much looped in, tied to the fusion centers
across the country.
But I think it is important for us to continue to think
about ways we can even further harness across the country----
Mr. Rose. So I take it then this has been ad hoc though?
Mr. Wulf. It has sort-of varied across the various
jurisdictions, absolutely.
Mr. Rose. So what has been the best example of a fusion
center taking the lead? You don't have to name the State but I
just want to know what the model looked like when that fusion
center took the lead here.
Mr. Wulf. Yes, so I think the model looks like, you know, a
chemical security inspector or a local supervisory inspector or
chief of regulatory compliance being well-connected with a
fusion center and being plugged in by virtue of that fusion
center connection with law enforcement and first responders
across a given, you know, either metropolitan area or a State
and pushing tools like the infrastructure protection gateway
through which first responders and law enforcement can have
access to CFATS information about the high-risk facilities in
their jurisdictions.
So that is what I think the optimal model is.
Mr. Rose. So that is the optimal best model. What has been
the worst case you have seen?
Mr. Wulf. I don't know if I have a--I guess worst case are,
you know, any situations in which, you know, those
relationships haven't been built. I am not going to say that
has happened but it is a discussion of certain----
Mr. Rose. Theoretically.
Mr. Wulf. Latitude we continue having. Yes.
Mr. Rose. OK, so moving on, in terms of the voluntary
participation of the private sector, it seems as if this is
actually a great case in which we have been very successful in
that regard.
What type of lessons learned can we draw out of this to
transfer to issues of cybersecurity, general counterterrorism,
where we have to involve the private sector but we are often
struggling to get them to come forward? What type of lessons
learned can we glean from this?
Mr. Wulf. Right. So I mean, in this case, we do have a
regulatory framework so there, you know, there is an obligation
for facilities that, and companies that operate facilities,
that have threshold quantities of chemicals of interest in our
regulation to report information to us. If they are assessed as
high-risk to be part of the program to develop site security
plans and be subjected to inspections.
But I would say that on a purely voluntary basis the
chemical industry writ large, and that cuts across a variety of
critical infrastructure sectors, has been fully committed and
bought in to this program and has helped us to drive forward
key improvements to the program.
So one of the ways that happens is through something we
call the Critical Infrastructure Partnership Advisory Council
framework. So we bring together sector councils of, you know,
chemical industry or as the case may be, oil and natural gas
industry folks, to talk about ways in which we can continue to
enhance our respective critical infrastructure protection and/
or chemical security efforts.
I do think that is a good model and it is one that the
Department is also using on the cybersecurity front and across
others.
Mr. Rose. Right. I take it that the best model in this case
was that this was mandatory with private-sector involvement.
That was the pathway to success then.
Mr. Wulf. The regulatory framework I think has helped for
sure.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
I yield my time.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you, gentleman from Staten Island.
Now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. McCaul.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is great to be back
in the old committee room. It looks kind-of nice.
Just let me say at the outset, you and I, Mr. Chairman, I
think enjoyed a very bipartisan relationship. We got along most
of the time and that is how I think this committee should
operate.
It came to my attention that the Minority, and in this case
our side of the aisle, was not entitled to call a witness at
this hearing. I believe that both the House and committee rules
do provide for the Minority to be able to call a witness at the
hearing, and I hope that we can adhere to that in the future
moving forward.
Having said that, I commend both of you, you and the
Ranking Member, for this hearing. I tried to get this thing,
long-term extension, and we had resistance in the Senate. The
best we could get was a 15-month extension.
When I talk to chemical facilities in the private sector,
they need that kind of certainty. They don't really want to be
regulated but if they are, and they prefer CFATS over other
regulatory entities and they prefer DHS, how important, I
guess, from--well, Mr. Wulf, I mean, I know how important it
is.
I applaud, again, the Chairman and Ranking Member for
trying to get a long-term extension. I hope Senator Johnson and
his committee will take this up as a long-term extension rather
than a short-term because the private sector needs that kind of
certainty, in my judgment. Can you explain to me how important
that is?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, I think the importance cannot be overstated.
I know we have personally visited CFATS-covered facilities that
have put in place security measures and they need the certainty
that comes along with knowing that the program is not going to
go away.
That if they are going to make capital investments in
addressing the 18 CFATS risk-based performance standards,
putting in place security measures that sometimes require on
industry budget cycles 2-, 3-, 4-year capital planning, they
need to know that the program will be around in 3, 4, 5 years.
So long-term authorization is hugely important, not only
for industry but for our ability in the Government to plan for
and execute the program.
Mr. McCaul. That is a great point. Not only from the
private sector, any businessman is going to need more long-term
certainty for sure, but the Government to be able to implement
this effectively. I think the GAO probably points that out as
an issue. Is that right, sir? Is that----
Mr. Anderson. While we at GAO don't take a formal position
on reauthorization, we do note the benefits that can accrue and
to add to the list that you both have talked about, it helps
the DHS to retain top talent when there is a longer-term
reauthorization period and that kind of certainty.
At the same time I would simply note, though, that in the
past, reauthorization has been an excellent catalyst for
program improvement. So that is something that should be noted.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you. Now, the report itself, though, I
found some parts troubling and that was identifying high-risk
facilities, not fully utilizing threat information and ensuring
compliance.
Director Wulf, what have you done to address those
concerns? Can you also touch on your outreach efforts to the
private sector in the chemical facilities?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, absolutely. So I think the, you know, I
think you are referring to our risk-tiering methodology and the
extent to which in the past we focused largely on the
consequences of a potential terrorist attack, less so on
vulnerability and threat.
Actually one of the things that the long-term
authorization, the 4-year authorization we attained in 2014
enabled us to do was to completely retool that risk-tiering
methodology so that we are now as fully as possible accounting
for all relevant elements of risk to include not only
consequences and vulnerability but threat as well. So, you
know, that was a huge outgrowth of long-term authorization.
Outreach, we continue very much to prioritize outreach, to
continue to prioritize working with the various industries that
are part of the CFATS-covered universe of chemical facilities.
You know, one of the things we prioritize, you know, within
that area is getting the word out about the program.
So we work through National industry associations. We work
through local chambers of commerce to ensure that we are
communicating as widely, as broadly as possible the basics of
the CFATS program so the facilities that are using chemicals,
that are storing chemicals have the awareness they need to be
able to meet their obligations to report to us information
about their holdings----
Mr. McCaul. If I could just conclude, you know well GAO
plays an important role. We make these kind of requests, not to
be adversarial and for, like, gotcha moments, but rather
working together to improve Government operations. I am glad so
see that you are adhering to these recommendations to improve
your operations.
With that, I will yield back.
Mr. Wulf. It has been very helpful.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
In order to make sure the record is complete, let me assure
the former Chairman that the rules we are operating under are
the same set of rules. Both of these are Government witnesses.
We offered the Minority a Government witness. They chose not to
provide a Government witness, so that is really the only reason
you don't have a witness.
We now recognize the gentlelady from north Chicago, Ms.
Underwood.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
organizing this hearing on DHS's Chemical Facility
Antiterrorism Standards program and for your leadership in
extending this important program.
Securing our chemical facilities is vital to our National
security and to ensure that our communities remain safe. I
consider it really important to have a robust security plan in
place for high-risk facilities and am pleased that DHS can
effectively reduce the risk for potential targeting by bad
actors.
So my questions are for Mr. Wulf. Sir, as we look to
reauthorize the program there is interest in DHS developing
voluntary best practices informed by lessons learned for
facilities who may want to lower their risk and possibly their
regulatory burden. Is that something that you think that
facilities would find useful?
Mr. Wulf. I think it is. As I mentioned earlier in these
proceedings, over the course of the program's existence more
than 3,000 facilities have either reduced their holdings of
high-risk chemicals, have eliminated them, have substituted
safer chemicals or changed their processes such that they are
no longer considered high risk and are not covered by the
program's requirements.
So, you know, we have gathered information as these
facilities have come out of the program. We have kind-of
categorized the what, you know, the reduction, the elimination,
the change in process, the change in sort-of delivery or other
procedures.
But, you know, we would certainly be open to discussing
additional authority to enable us to further mine the how and
to, you know, put us in a position to share that information on
a voluntary basis with other facilities.
Now, keeping in mind that CFATS is focused, you know, I
think appropriately as a risk-based program, it is targeted at
America's highest-risk facilities, so those facilities at the
highest risk of terrorist attack or exploitation. That is less
than 10 percent of the facilities that submit Top Screens for
risk assessment by us.
So the additional 30,000 facilities that aren't covered by
CFATS could certainly benefit from the lessons that have been
derived from the practices that have been used at facilities
that have lowered their risk.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you. So DHS has said that CFATS has
encouraged many facilities, as you said, to voluntarily
eliminate, reduce, or modify their holdings of certain
chemicals of interest in order to reduce the number of high-
risk facilities throughout the country.
So does DHS, in fact, capture the data on how facilities
are reducing the risk? If so, how can DHS use that data to help
other facilities?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, I think, you know, we have captured what
facilities have done, you know, whether they have reduced,
whether they have eliminated, whether they have changed a
process, but I think there is more that we can do to kind-of
mine those practices, mine those approaches----
Ms. Underwood. Yes.
Mr. Wulf [continuing]. And share them more broadly.
Ms. Underwood. OK, thank you. Now, we have seen a rise in
cyber attacks against U.S. critical infrastructure often
carried out by foreign governments, criminal organizations, or
terrorist groups and obviously the chemical sector is among the
most frequent targets, so what type of cybersecurity measures
are CFATS facilities required to adopt?
Mr. Wulf. So that is a good question and cybersecurity is
an important part of the CFATS program and, you know, our
inspectors and other personnel are trained specifically in
carrying out the cyber piece of the CFATS inspections.
They work with facilities as they develop their site
security plans and as they put in place policies and procedures
that are designed to protect their cyber systems, to, you know,
to detect cyber attacks and to address cyber attacks as they
might occur.
So, you know, CFATS is a non-prescriptive program. We
can't----
Ms. Underwood. Right.
Mr. Wulf [continuing]. Require any specific measures, but
we can require a cybersecurity posture that is appropriate to
the facility's level of cyber integration. You know, facilities
vary in the level to which cyber systems impact their chemical
processes, their industrial control systems, or for that matter
their physical security systems.
So, you know, different measures might be appropriate
depending upon that level of integration of the cyber system.
So, you know, we work with facilities on an individual basis as
they tailor cybersecurity postures that are appropriate to
their operations.
Ms. Underwood. So how much cybersecurity training do the
inspectors then receive, the CFATS inspectors?
Mr. Wulf. So all inspectors receive a kind-of base level of
training on cybersecurity and for that matter on the other
risk-based performance standards.
We have a more advanced cybersecurity training that we have
run probably about half of our inspectors through. So that is
an additional week or 2 of advanced cyber training and they are
then capable of working with the facilities with somewhat more
integration of their cyber systems with chemical processes.
For those facilities that have the highest level of
integration we have folks who focus on nothing but
cybersecurity at our headquarters. So cyber experts----
Ms. Underwood. OK.
Mr. Wulf. Who actually have eyes on every facility's site
security plan and who are available to work with inspectors as
they work with facilities that have that sort-of highest degree
of cyber complexity.
Ms. Underwood. Well, thank you, Mr. Wulf and Mr. Anderson
for being here today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you, Madam Vice Chair, a good
question.
Now, I recognize the gentleman from Houston, Mr. Green.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the witnesses for appearing as well.
Mr. Chairman, I want to extend a special expression of
appreciation and gratitude to you because the intelligence that
has been accorded me indicates that this is the first time
since the 113th Congress that we have had a full committee
hearing on this CFATS program and that the program would have
expired had you not intervened and enacted a stop-gap measure.
So I appreciate greatly what you have done because this
program is something that is near and dear to a good many
Texans because of what happened in the town of West in Texas.
We had a number of persons who were first responders, and I am
sure the story has been told, but some things bear repeating.
First responders didn't know what they were rushing into.
It is a wonderful thing to accord first responders the proper
equipment. The equipment is necessary, but they also have to
have intelligence and they rushed in.
They were on the site without intelligence. Fifteen persons
lost their lives, so this is important to a good many of us and
especially to some of us who are from Texas.
I would like to start with the CFATS Act of 2014 which
requires DHS to create an experimental new program. DHS has
performed diligently and the program has been implemented and
seems that as of June 2018 only 18 facilities have taken
advantage of this program.
My query is does it make good sense to keep a program that
appeals to 18 facilities? I am sure that there are some other
projects that merit our attention. There are some other goals
that we should review in the area of cybersecurity first
responder outreach. DHS probably has a lot of energy that it
has put into this that may have been used otherwise.
So quickly if you would, please, give me some sense of why
a program that has accommodated 18 facilities at some great
expense should be maintained?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, I think it is--I appreciate the remarks, and
it is a fair question. You are referring to the expedited
approval program that enables on, I guess, an expedited basis
the certification of facility security plans where those
facilities adhere to a prescriptive list of security measures.
You know, I think it is fair to say, as you noted, that a
very small number of facilities have taken advantage and
availed themselves of the program.
Mr. Green. If I may? Just so that we may understand that is
the size of the language. When you said small how many could
have taken advantage of it and juxtapose that to the number
that have?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. So it applies to, you know, Tier 3 and 4
facilities so that would be 90 percent of our regulated
universe could have taken advantage, so upwards of 2,500
facilities could have.
Mr. Green. Of the 2,500, 18 or thereabout?
Mr. Wulf. Eighteen have.
Mr. Green. Yes, OK. Continue please.
Mr. Wulf. I think some of that owes itself to the fact that
most facilities were well through the process of developing
their site security plans through the normal process at the
time the expedited approval program was rolled out, though we
certainly, you know, did our best to publicize its
availability.
The fact that most facilities appreciate the contact that
they are able to have with inspectors throughout the the normal
process of developing their site security plan. That tends to
improve those plans.
So, you know, although we have had a few additional
facilities since the re-tiering of facilities occurred within
the last couple of years that have availed themselves of the
program, the overall number is very small. The fact of the
matter is that our on-line system through which facilities
develop their SSPs is now significantly more streamlined,
significantly more user-friendly. So it is certainly----
Mr. Green. Permit me to----
Mr. Wulf. Less----
Mr. Green [continuing]. Ask. It is I----
Mr. Wulf [continuing]. To use this other program.
Mr. Green. I don't mean to be rude----
Mr. Wulf. No worries.
Mr. Green [continuing]. And unrefined, but I have to ask
because I have another question. Is it time to review this
program so that we can ascertain whether or not it is something
that we should continue with?
Mr. Wulf. I would say yes, it is certainly time to take a
hard look at it.
Mr. Green. OK. I am going to leave it at that because I
have another question. This relates to hexavalent chloride or
chromium, excuse me, also known as chromium-6, which is quite
prevalent around the country and is also a carcinogen.
We have had a scare in my home town of Houston, Texas and
we have gotten news reporters who have been looking into
chromium-6. EPA has not provided us with the proper guidelines
that we have been waiting on for some time. That doesn't mean
that we won't get them.
But OSHA not only regulates workplaces that use it, but
also has referred to it as the most toxic form of chromium. My
question is, is this something that you should give us some
additional attention to?
Mr. Wulf. It is something that we will certainly look at.
Off-hand, I am not certain that it is one of the 322 chemicals
of interest that trigger coverage under CFATS, but I will
absolutely take a look.
Mr. Green. I would greatly appreciate it.
Mr. Chairman, I greatly appreciate the times you have
extended, and I will yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. If you will provide
Mr. Green, Mr. Wulf, with whatever information you have on
that? I am certain, based on Mr. Wulf's comment he will give
you whatever information in return.
Mr. Wulf. Absolutely.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I shall do so.
Chairman Thompson. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Kansas City, Mr. Cleaver.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for calling
this hearing because this is something that I am very much
concerned about and at our hearing yesterday I raised similar
issues.
Because the EPA no longer updates its list of the locations
of these facilities, chemical facilities, it is difficult for
me to just pinpoint exactly where they are. Now, they have a
map and you can look at the map and kind-of get an idea.
I am from Missouri and so I am concerned about what the map
suggests, which is the rural parts of Missouri. If you put a
comma there for a moment, one of the things that I am concerned
about and it has been driving me crazy since the days that I
was mayor of Kansas City, and it is that for the most part the
Federal Government ignores the middle of the country as it
relates to the possibility of terrorist attacks.
So we lean toward the East Coast, the West Coast, the North
Coast and I remind people that it was shortly after Easter
1996, I think it was, when the Murrah Federal Building in
Oklahoma City, not too far from Kansas City, was the first
major terrorist attack.
I can't remember now. It was just under 200 people killed,
about half of them little children at a preschool inside the
Federal building. I have a little 3-year-old grandson who is at
a Federal daycare center right now.
We just can't seem to get the kind of attention to deal
with these issues. Now that there is no update we don't know. I
will also remind everyone, remind you and maybe everyone on the
committee, that it was ammonium nitrate used by McVey, Timothy
McVey.
Ammonium nitrate is fertilizer. I represent a rural area.
Everybody uses fertilizer to survive. We have 85,000 jobs in
Missouri related to agriculture. We export about $14 billion a
year that support those jobs and many of those are in my
district, the soybeans and corn. I can't tell you how--and so
you know there are facilities all over.
A terrorist with a IQ above room temperature can figure out
the most vulnerable places in our country and the places that
create the least amount of risk to them. It is, frankly, a part
of the district I represent.
I am open for you to tell me how we can correct this by
next Thursday?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Cleaver. Or Wednesday or whatever.
Mr. Wulf. I appreciate all that. I will take the first
crack. Absolutely agree that, you know, the terrorist threat is
not a, you know, bi-coastal threat. It is an all-of-America
threat.
You know, for our part, you know, we work closely with
fertilizer retailers with fertilizer manufacturers, many of
whom are part of the CFATS program and have put into place
comprehensive security measures designed to address the CFATS
risk-based performance standards.
Our broader organization has placed a regional office in
Kansas City to focus on some of the Midwestern States. There is
one in Chicago as well. So, you know, very focused on working
with retailers of fertilizer, with manufacturers of fertilizer,
as with all other companies and entities that hold high-risk
chemicals and that are covered under CFATS.
Mr. Cleaver. Are the facilities open in Kansas City?
Mr. Wulf. Pardon me? There is a regional office in Kansas
City, so our chief of regulatory compliance sits in Kansas
City.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes. How many people? I am just curious.
Because I wasn't even aware.
Mr. Wulf. There are probably 20 folks across the
infrastructure protection enterprise in that regional office
and there are protective security advisors and our chemical
security inspectors in every State in the region.
Mr. Cleaver. I will get in touch with them quickly.
Mr. Wulf. Yes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it very
much. This is a major issue in my community, so thank you very
much for this hearing.
Chairman Thompson. Absolutely.
A couple of takeaways, Mr. Wulf, I think based on what I
heard, I think it would help us if you could provide us with a
master list of the facilities that have been regulated. I think
that would help a lot.
Mr. Wulf. Yes.
Chairman Thompson. But I heard questions from several
Members and we can just kind-of share that information.
So the other has to do with the data of the inspections
that you make. Do you collect that data?
Mr. Wulf. Oh, absolutely. Our inspectors produce a report
of each and every inspection and that runs through our
compliance branch here in----
Chairman Thompson. So who do you share that data with? Just
internally?
Mr. Wulf. It is for our internal use for making decisions
about approving site security plans and for, you know, as
necessary engaging in enforcement activities. But some of that
data is the type of data, you know, some of the data on the
chemical holdings and specifics of the facility is the sort of
information that we share with first responders, law
enforcement, and others in the local community who have a need
to know that information.
Chairman Thompson. OK.
Mr. Anderson, have you all looked at any of that data
collection and sharing?
Mr. Anderson. Well, we have certainly looked at both
aspects, the data collection piece and the recommendation that
we made in that report has been implemented by DHS. So from,
you know, from our view in terms of the data on assessing risk,
for example, DHS has implemented our recommendations.
The information sharing point though, that is still open
and I think that that is, you know, a valid point of emphasis
from our standpoint. The information sharing with first
responders so that there is full visibility over what those
threats may be if there is an incident.
Chairman Thompson. Well, and I think that is what Mr.
Cleaver and Ms. Slotkin and Underwood, Rose, a number of
Members are interested in, whether or not what we collect
through our CFATS process is actually pushed out to especially
first responders.
Mr. Anderson. Absolutely.
Chairman Thompson. Or communities that are at risk just
given the location of many of those facilities.
So I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony and
the Members for their questions. The Members of the committee
may have additional questions for the witnesses and we ask that
you respond expeditiously in writing to those questions.
Pursuant to the Committee Rule VII(D), the hearing record
will be held open for 10 days. Hearing no further business, the
committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for David Wulf
Question 1a. Since 2007, DHS reports that ``CFATS has encouraged
many facilities to voluntarily eliminate, reduce, or modify their
holdings of certain chemicals of interest in order to reduce the number
of high-risk facilities'' throughout the country.\1\ The total number
of high-risk facilities in the United States has dropped from 7,000 in
2008 to only about 3,300 today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ CFATS Fact Sheet, https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/
publications/cfats-fact-sheet-07-16-508.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
How does DHS verify the accuracy of the information facilities are
submitting to show a reduction in risk?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. Can you explain some of the primary ways a facility
might reduce their risk level--for instance by storing chemicals in
lower quantities, using more secure containers, or building security
into new constructions?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1c. Does DHS have a system in place to collect and analyze
this data to help DHS understand how facilities are reducing risk?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. In your testimony, you agreed that there is an
opportunity for DHS to use this data to develop voluntary best
practices that could help other facility owners and operators find ways
to reduce risk, while also maintaining the program's non-prescriptive,
risk-based approach.
Are there additional authorities DHS would need in order to
aggregate, anonymize, and analyze data on facilities that successfully
reduce risk?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2b. Are there additional authorities DHS would need in
order to use this data to develop best practices for reducing chemical
security risks?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2c. Are there additional authorities DHS would need in
order to share such best practices with other chemical facility owners
and operators, or with the public?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. The Protecting and Securing Chemical Facilities from
Terrorist Attacks Act of 2014 (CFATS Act of 2014) requires DHS to share
``such information as is necessary to help ensure that first responders
are properly prepared and provided with the situational awareness
needed to respond to security incidents'' at high-risk chemical
facilities.\2\ In 2018, GAO surveyed first responders and local
emergency planners and found that many of them either were not aware of
CFATS facilities in their district, did not have access to the specific
chemical holdings at those facilities, and sometimes had not even heard
of the CFATS program.\3\ Specifically, GAO interviewed 15 local
emergency planning committees (LEPCs), representing 373 high-risk
facilities, and found that 13 of the LEPCs interviewed did not have
access to sufficient CFATS information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Pub. L. 113-254.
\3\ GAO-18-538.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
You testified that you can say ``with confidence'' that all 3,300
CFATS facilities ``have made connections with their relevant local
first responders,'' and that inspectors verify these connections in
each and every case. How do you reconcile this with GAO's recent
reporting?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3b. Has DHS made contact with all 13 of the LEPCs GAO
interviewed and found did not have access to information on CFATS
facilities? Have those LEPCs been given an IP Gateway account?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3c. What training does DHS provide new IP Gateway account
holders on how to utilize the portal effectively?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3d. Has DHS successfully completed its goal of conducting
outreach to LEPCs in the top 25 percent of districts with the highest
number of CFATS facilities? What is the next milestone?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3e. Does DHS prioritize outreach to LEPCs in districts
with one or more Tier 1 facilities, or is it based on the number of
CFATS facilities, regardless of Tier?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3f. In your testimony, you agreed that first responders
``need information about the chemical holdings so they know what they
are walking into when they attempt to save lives and property.'' Are
there any circumstances where a facility would be justified in
withholding such information on the grounds that it is protected
chemical terrorism vulnerability information (CVI)?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3g. Are you aware of instances where a facility has
withheld information on chemical holdings, or other information
important for first responders to properly respond to an emergency or
security incident, on the grounds it is protected under another Federal
or State regulation?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3h. Is DHS currently working with Federal and State
regulators, and chemical facilities, to harmonize information
protection regimes and make sure first responders and LEPCs are given
appropriate access to information?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3i. Going forward, does DHS plan to be more proactive in
making sure first responders and LEPCs have IP Gateway access? Will the
IP Gateway feature more specific information, and do so more broadly,
on the basis of GAO's 2018 report?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. On December 6, 2016, I wrote to the Secretary of DHS
requesting an IP Gateway account. On January 11, 2017, then-Under
Secretary of the National Protection and Programs Directorate Suzanne
Spaulding responded that ``a representative of the Department's Office
of Legislative Affairs will contact your staff to coordinate the
provision of access to the IP Gateway.'' Despite multiple follow-up
requests, I have yet to receive an IP Gateway account. Please provide
the aforementioned IP Gateway account, as well as:
(a) a master list of CFATS regulated facilities, per your testimony
before the committee on Feb. 27, 2019;
(b) a master list of facilities that were at one point covered by
CFATS, but have since been determined to no longer present a high level
of risk, and thus were released from the program; and
(c) the standard operating procedures currently used by CFATS
inspectors.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Honorable Xochitl Torres Small for David Wulf
Question. Mr. Wulf, during the hearing you stated that DHS makes
``an extra effort'' to reach out to rural communities to ensure they
have access to information on high-risk chemical facilities. Can you
please elaborate on what these ``extra efforts'' entail and how they
differ from DHS outreach efforts to non-rural communities?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Cedric Richmond for David Wulf
Question 1a. The CFATS Act of 2014 requires facilities to seek
input from at least one knowledgeable employee, and where applicable,
labor union representatives, in the development of site security plans.
At this time, do CFATS inspectors confirm, as part of each
inspection, that a facility has complied with this requirement?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. Are inspectors required to speak with the employees or
union representatives consulted, or check any records at the facility?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1c. Would failing to consult with an employee or union
representative be grounds for disapproving a site security plan?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1d. In your testimony, you mentioned that DHS gives
facilities discretion on whether to consult with employees because the
law provides for consultation only ``to the greatest extent
practicable.'' What authorities would DHS need to verify that this
consultation is truly happening to the greatest extent practicable?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. In 2018, GAO found that DHS was missing an opportunity
to show its value as a National security program by tracking and
measuring facility security pre-CFATS, compared to security post-
implementation of a CFATS site security plan.
How is DHS planning to measure the extent to which facilities
reduced vulnerabilities as a result of the CFATS program?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2b. Are there other Federal programs that have adopted
similar mechanisms to track vulnerability reduction that the Department
can use as a model?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2c. How might this recommendation help DHS understand the
ways in which CFATS facilities are eliminating or reducing on-site
vulnerabilities?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. We have seen a rapid rise in the frequency and
sophistication of cyber attacks against U.S. critical infrastructure,
often carried out by well-resourced, determined foreign governments,
criminal organizations, or terrorist groups. The U.S. chemical sector
is among the most frequent targets.
What cybersecurity measures are CFATS facilities required to adopt?
Are facility site security plans ever disapproved due to cybersecurity
deficiencies?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3b. How much cybersecurity training do CFATS inspectors
receive?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. The CFATS program is carried out by a division of the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), which is DHS's
main cybersecurity arm. Does CFATS leverage the cyber resources and
expertise of the NCCIC, the US-CERT, the ICS-CERT? Are there
opportunities to do so?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5a. In the past, there have been questions about the CFATS
risk-tiering methodology, and whether the program is capturing the
Nation's highest-risk facilities.
When DHS is considering whether a facility is high-risk, does it
consider characteristics about the neighboring infrastructure? For
instance, would it matter if the facility was located next door to an
elementary school, nursing home, hospital, or sensitive Government
building (e.g., a military base)?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5b. Does the methodology consider the potential health
consequences that could result from exploitation of chemicals of
interest, or strictly potential loss of life?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5c. Studies show chemical facilities tend to be
concentrated in low-income and minority communities. In determining
risk, does DHS consider whether a facility is in close proximity to
other chemical facilities that could exacerbate the impacts of an
attack?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. Because of CFATS early instability, DHS did not begin
carrying out compliance inspections for several years, with the bulk of
inspections conducted after 2015. However, since that time compliance
inspections have spiked to over 3,500, and now the question is whether
inspectors are being pressured to rush through inspections to get
numbers up. How much time do inspectors have to carry out inspections?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 7. What should lawmakers be doing to address the statutory
exemptions for certain types of potentially high-risk facilities like
water treatment systems and nuclear power plants? Is there an
opportunity to study security gaps?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Michael Guest for David Wulf
Question 1. Of the 40,000 unique facilities that have reported
chemical holdings since 2007, how many of them ultimately were secured
through CFATS?
How many of them are still secured through the CFATS
program?
What are some of the reasons a facility may no longer be in
the CFATS program?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Why has participation in the Expedited Approval Program
been so low?
What improvements can be made to encourage more
participation?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. How does DHS work with facilities to improve
compliance?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Honorable Michael Guest for Nathan Anderson
Question. How does the CFATS program account for vulnerability in
its performance measures, and what is the program's methodology to
improve security?
Answer. In August 2018, we reported that DHS began development of a
new methodology and performance measure for the CFATS program in 2016
called the guidepost-based site security plan scoring methodology.\1\
DHS officials stated they planned to use the methodology to evaluate
the security measures a facility implemented from initial state--when a
facility submits its initial site security plan--to the facility's
approved security plan. DHS officials stated the purpose of the
methodology is to measure the increase in security attributed to the
CFATS program and stated that the methodology is not intended to
measure risk reduction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: DHS Should Take
Actions to Measure Reduction in Chemical Facility Vulnerability and
Share Information with First Responders, GAO-18-538 (Washington, DC:
Aug. 8, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We found that DHS's new methodology and performance measure for the
CFATS program does not measure the program's impact on reducing a
facility's vulnerability to an attack and that DHS could take steps to
evaluate vulnerability reduction resulting from the CFATS compliance
inspection process. We recommended that DHS incorporate vulnerability
into the new methodology to help measure the reduction in the
vulnerability of high-risk facilities to a terrorist attack, and use
that data in assessing the CFATS program's performance in lowering risk
and enhancing National security. DHS agreed and is taking steps to
implement this recommendation. Specifically, in September 2018, DHS
reported making progress towards the implementation of two new
performance metrics by the end of the first quarter of fiscal year
2019. DHS officials stated that these metrics should, among other
things, evaluate the progress of individual facilities in enhancing
their security and be used to demonstrate an increase in the security
posture across the population of CFATS facilities. We are currently in
the process of obtaining an update from DHS on the status of efforts to
implement this recommendation.
Questions From Ranking Member Mike Rogers for Nathan Anderson
Question 1. In regards to access to information for first
responders: What is the difference between ``did not use'' and ``did
not have access to'' Chemical Vulnerability Information through the
portal?
Answer. In August 2018, we reported that while the Infrastructure
Protection (IP) Gateway is a mechanism for sharing names and quantities
of chemicals at CFATS high-risk facilities with first responders and
emergency planners, we found it is not widely used by officials at the
local level.\2\ For example, according to DHS, there were 14 accounts
categorized at the local level whose access to the IP Gateway layer
includes the names and quantities of chemicals at CFATS facilities. A
local account indicates the individual with access is a county- or
city-level employee or contractor.\3\ Additionally, while not
generalizable to all Local Emergency Planning Committees (LEPCs),
officials representing 7 of the 15 LEPCs we interviewed were not aware
of the IP Gateway and officials representing 13 of the 15 LEPCs stated
that they do not have access to CFATS information within the IP
Gateway. Of the 13 officials that reported they did not have access, 11
said that it would be helpful or critical to have access for several
reasons. Specifically, officials representing these LEPCs stated that
this information would assist them to better prepare and respond to
incidents and help emergency planners prioritize the most critical
sites among the thousands of facilities that they oversee. We
recommended that DHS should take actions to encourage access to and
wider use of the IP Gateway and explore other opportunities to improve
information sharing with first responders and emergency planners. DHS
concurred with this recommendation and reported in September 2018 that
they are taking actions to implement it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ GAO-18-538.
\3\ Account requests for access to the IP Gateway are made via a
web-based registration form that asks the individual requesting access
to identify the type of employee they are. Options include: Federal,
State, Local (City/County), and Tribal/Territory.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 2. Of the first responders surveyed, how many of them
failed to obtain statutorily-required training to review Chemical
Vulnerability Information?
Answer. We reported in August 2018 that CFATS data available in the
IP Gateway includes, among other things, facility name, location, risk
tier, and chemicals on-site and is accessible to authorized Federal and
other State, local, Tribal, and territorial officials and responders
with an established need to know, which is determined by DHS.\4\ We did
not audit DHS officials nor the officials representing the 15 LEPCs we
interviewed to determine if any of them failed to obtain statutorily-
required training to review Chemical Vulnerability Information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ GAO-18-538.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 3. Besides the Emergency Planning and Community Right to
Know Act, first responders have access to chemical hazard information
under the Clean Air Act's Risk Management Plan, the Toxic Release
Inventory, Toxic Substances Control Act, and other Federal statutes.
Did GAO ask the first responders if they used these authorities to
obtain information necessary to respond to facilities?
Answer. In August 2018, we reported that in our interviews with 15
LEPCs--whose jurisdictions included 373 high-risk chemical facilities
regulated by the CFATS program--we found that officials rely on
information reported on chemical inventory forms required by the
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 in order to
prepare for and respond to incidents at CFATS facilities.\5\ While we
interviewed officials to determine what Federal Government and other
resources and information they have access to or may receive in order
to prepare for or respond to an incident at chemical facilities in
their area, we did not ask about each individual authority outlined
above. Additionally, we did not review the extent to which the CFATS
chemicals of interest are covered by the disclosure requirements
outlined in the above-listed authorities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ We interviewed officials representing 15 LEPCs out of more than
3,000 known LEPCs. We selected LEPCs from different States to include
counties with some of the highest number of facilities in each State.
The number of high-risk CFATS facilities located in each LEPC ranges
from a low of 11 to a high of 88 across our sample.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
[all]