- PERSPECTIVES ON CHILD NUTRITION REAUTHORIZATION
[Senate Hearing 116-128]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-128
PERSPECTIVES ON CHILD
NUTRITION REAUTHORIZATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,
NUTRITION, AND FORESTRY
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
APRIL 10, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-224 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, NUTRITION, AND FORESTRY
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas, Chairman
MITCH McCONNELL, Kentucky
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
JONI ERNST, Iowa
AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
MICHAEL BENNET, Colorado
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
ROBERT P. CASEY, Jr., Pennsylvania
CHARLES GRASSLEY, Iowa
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
RICHARD DURBIN, Illinois
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
James A. Glueck, Jr., Majority Staff Director
DaNita M. Murray, Majority Chief Counsel
Jessica L. Williams, Chief Clerk
Joseph A. Shultz, Minority Staff Director
Mary Beth Schultz, Minority Chief Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
Wednesday, April 10, 2019
Page
Hearing:
Perspectives on Child Nutrition Reauthorization..................
1
----------
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY SENATORS
Roberts, Hon. Pat, U.S. Senator from the State of Kansas,
Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry....
1
Stabenow, Hon. Debbie, U.S. Senator from the State of Michigan...
2
Panel I
Lipps, Brandon, Acting Deputy Under Secretary for Food, Nutrition
and Consumer Services, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Washington, DC.................................................
5
Larin, Kathryn, Director, Education, Workforce and Income
Security, U.S. Government Accountability Office, Washington, DC
7
Panel II
Mathiasmeier, Josh, Director of Nutritional Services, Kansas
City, Kansas Public Schools, Kansas City, KS...................
25
Halligan, Michael J., Chief Executive Officer, God's Pantry Food
Bank, Lexington, KY............................................
27
Waits, Lauren, Director of Government Affairs, Atlanta Community
Food Bank, Atlanta, GA.........................................
29
Wagner, Kati, Vice President, National CACFP Sponsors
Association, Round Rock, TX....................................
31
Lanre Falusi, Dr. Olanrewaju, Pediatrician, Children's National
Health System and Past President, American Academy of
Pediatrics DC Chapter, Washington, DC..........................
33
----------
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Lipps, Brandon...............................................
42
Larin, Kathryn...............................................
46
Mathiasmeier, Josh...........................................
67
Halligan, Michael J..........................................
70
Waits, Lauren................................................
81
Wagner, Kati.................................................
91
Lanre Falusi, Dr. Olanrewaju.................................
124
Document(s) Submitted for the Record:
Roberts, Hon. Pat:
U.S. Department of Agriculture Office of Inspector General,
Improper Payments Review Results...........................
136
Question and Answer:
Lipps, Brandon:
Written response to questions from Hon. Pat Roberts..........
142
Written response to questions from Hon. Debbie Stabenow......
156
Written response to questions from Hon. John Hoeven..........
160
Written response to questions from Hon. Cindy Hyde-Smith.....
161
Written response to questions from Hon. John Thune...........
164
Written response to questions from Hon. Amy Klobuchar........
165
Written response to questions from Hon. Tina Smith...........
166
Larin, Kathryn:
Written response to questions from Hon. Pat Roberts..........
168
Mathiasmeier, Josh:
Written response to questions from Hon. Pat Roberts..........
175
Written response to questions from Hon. Debbie Stabenow......
176
Written response to questions from Hon. John Hoeven..........
177
Written response to questions from Hon. Amy Klobuchar........
178
Halligan, Michael J.:
Written response to questions from Hon. Pat Roberts..........
179
Written response to questions from Hon. Debbie Stabenow......
181
Written response to questions from Hon. John Hoeven..........
183
Waits, Lauren:
Written response to questions from Hon. Pat Roberts..........
186
Written response to questions from Hon. Debbie Stabenow......
187
Wagner, Kati:
Written response to questions from Hon. Pat Roberts..........
189
Written response to questions from Hon. Debbie Stabenow......
192
Lanre Falusi, Dr. Olanrewaju:
Written response to questions from Hon. Pat Roberts..........
193
Written response to questions from Hon. Debbie Stabenow......
194
Written response to questions from Hon. Amy Klobuchar........
194
PERSPECTIVES ON CHILD NUTRITION REAUTHORIZATION
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 10, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 216, Hart Senate Office Building, Hon. Pat Roberts,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Roberts, McConnell, Boozman, Hoeven,
Ernst, Hyde-Smith, Braun, Grassley, Thune, Fischer, Stabenow,
Brown, Bennet, Gillibrand, Casey, Smith, and Durbin.
STATEMENT OF HON. PAT ROBERTS, U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF
KANSAS, CHAIRMAN, U.S. COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, NUTRITION, AND
FORESTRY
Chairman Roberts. I call this hearing of the Committee on
Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry to order.
This hearing examines child nutrition programs which have
consistently benefited from broad bipartisan support. The
Committee looks forward to that continuing today as we hear
perspectives on child nutrition reauthorization.
I remind everybody that the last child nutrition
reauthorization was completed in 2010, 8 to 9 years ago, I
would say to my distinguished Ranking Member, so it is again
necessary to take a fresh look to find ways to provide
certainty, to reduce administrative redundancies, and allow
flexibility at the local level to better serve participants and
stakeholders.
School food service directors are constantly stretching
every dollar to provide nutritious, affordable meals to their
students, and they are finding new and creative ways to prepare
foods in a manner so that students will eat them. Ever-changing
rules in reporting makes this far more difficult.
I have visited many Kansas schools as there are close to
300 school districts in Kansas. Now, considering how many
districts there are in the entire United States and how
different each district is, it is clear that a one-size-fits-
all approach simply will not work for everyone.
The same is true for nonprofits and charitable
organizations and, of course, for the participants--the
children, the students, the mothers, and families who use these
programs. This includes the National School Lunch Program, the
National School Breakfast Program, the Summer Food Service
Program, the Child and Adult Care Food Program, and the Special
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and
Children, commonly referred to as ``WIC.'' There is also the
Special Milk Program, the Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program,
the Farm to School Program--do you know of any other program?
Senator Stabenow. We have got a few.
Chairman Roberts. Other programs that are part of this
process. Combined, these programs account for $30 billion in
annual mandatory and discretionary spending, so it is important
for us--meaning Congress, and more directly this Committee--to
review how these programs are working. Today we will hear from
the Department of Agriculture's Food and Nutrition Service
about how they are managing these programs. To that end, it is
ordered that this letter and attachment on program integrity
and related issues from the Department's Deputy Secretary
Stephen Censky, dated June 20, 2018, be included in the
Committee record of today's hearing.
[The following information can be found on page 136 in the
appendix.]
Chairman Roberts. We will also hear from the Government
Accountability Office about how the Department of Agriculture
is administering these programs. On our second panel, we will
be hearing from those who are operating and implementing these
programs at the ground level.
There is a pathway for child nutrition programs to be
reauthorized in a bipartisan manner yet this year, and today's
hearing is the first step in this process.
I now turn to our distinguished Ranking Member, Senator
Stabenow, for any opening remarks she may have at this time.
STATEMENT OF HON. DEBBIE STABENOW, U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN
Senator Stabenow. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for holding this very, very important hearing. Thank you to all
of the witnesses that are joining us today.
I am very proud of the work we have done together on the
Committee to expand access to healthy foods for families. Our
recent farm bill strengthened nutrition education and made
nutritious food more affordable, with incentives for fruits and
vegetables and produce prescriptions.
The foundation of healthy families, as we all know, and a
healthy future really starts with our children. As this
Committee begins the reauthorization process, it is important
to remember how critical child nutrition is to the future of
our country. Whether it is ensuring a mother is getting enough
calcium to build healthy bones for her baby or making sure that
a 10-year-old is not fighting hunger pains in math class, child
nutrition is about building a stronger future.
It is also important to our national security.
Interestingly, the National School Lunch Program was created in
the 1940's because General Lewis Hershey came before Congress
to explain that recruits were being rejected due to
malnutrition. Today over 750 retired generals--many have come
before this Committee in the past--and other military leaders
are sounding alarm bells again, this time because young adults
are too overweight to serve. With 14 percent of children as
young as 2 showing signs of obesity, we have to address this
issue early, and everywhere our children are forming healthy
habits is an area we need to focus on.
In the past decade, we have certainly made progress to help
improve healthy eating in cafeterias, daycare centers, and
while children are out and about and out of school.
In my home State of Michigan, nearly 1,600 schools and
cities from Dexter to Detroit are using farm-to-school
initiatives to grow their own salad greens, tomatoes, and
peppers. Michigan is leading the way in using Summer EBT to
ensure students do not go hungry during the summer months when
school is out. The expansion of this program in Flint has been
critical to helping families mitigate the impact of lead in
their children.
Additionally, Michigan was one of the first States to roll
out the community eligibility provision, an improvement that
expands access to healthy meals for children while reducing
paperwork for schools and families.
There are examples like these happening everywhere in the
country in communities in every State represented on this
Committee. Even though we have seen great progress, it is vital
that we keep moving forward, not backward, and that certainly
is one of my goals, to make sure we keep moving forward. I know
the Chairman joins in that as well.
Obesity rates for adolescent children continue to rise, yet
at the same time, over 12 million children in this country do
not have enough to eat. This is a crisis of both child
nutrition, child health, and hunger. We need to address this
crisis by improving access to nutritious foods so our kids get
healthy, not hungrier.
Our children need healthy lunch options, and they also need
wholesome breakfasts and after-school snacks, and we know
hunger does not take a break when school is out for the summer.
Whether it is a summer meals program at the YMCA to help
prevent the summer learning slide or a veggie van driving out
to a rural community to ensure children have healthy meals in
July, we need to do better.
We also know many moms and babies rely on WIC to provide
healthy food at home during these critical first stages of
life. As important developmental milestones continue throughout
childhood, we should make sure young children are not falling
through the cracks either. Our child nutrition programs help
set up our children up for success.
We can and should look for ways to streamline paperwork and
make it easier for providers to focus on serving healthy meals
to kids. However, we can and should do that without
backtracking on the progress we have made on healthy food and
critical access.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to working with you and the
members of the Committee, as we always do together, in this
case to strengthen our child nutrition programs, and I know
that you and I agree that the health and well-being of our
children is not a partisan issue. This is an issue of the
future, and I look forward to success once again in our
Committee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. I thank our distinguished Ranking Member.
On our second panel we have a witness, Mr. Michael J.
Halligan, who is chief executive officer of God's Pantry Food
Bank in Lexington, Kentucky. It is my honor to recognize our
distinguished Leader for his introduction of that witness.
Leader McConnell.
Senator McConnell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Stabenow. I appreciate the opportunity to have a chance to cut
in here to introduce someone from Kentucky who will be on the
next panel.
I am really pleased to have the opportunity to introduce my
fellow Kentuckian, Mike Halligan, who runs God's Pantry Food
Bank based in Lexington and who will be on today's second
panel, as I said.
God's Pantry has been serving Kentuckians in need since
1955. Today it operates in 50 counties in central and eastern
Kentucky. It represents one part of a nationwide system of
organizations working to create a hunger-free America.
Mike joined God's Pantry in 2017 after more than 30 years
in senior positions throughout the food and grocery industries.
With its affiliates and partners, including Kentucky
Agriculture Commissioner Ryan Quarles, God's Pantry distributed
more than 34 million pounds of food in the last Fiscal Year to
those in need in my State.
The heartbreaking fact is that one in five Kentucky
children experience food insecurity. Worse still, these kids
are also more likely to suffer chronic health and developmental
issues throughout their lives as a result. Youngsters should be
able to concentrate on school and on learning the skills they
need to succeed. They should not have to worry about where they
will find their next meal.
At God's Pantry, Mike and his team address this problem
head on. Through programs at schools, libraries, and churches,
his organization works hard to ensure children have year-round
access to nutritious meals.
For example, to fill in for the absence of school lunches
during the summer months, God's Pantry goes into many Kentucky
communities to deliver meals and snacks free of charge.
In our State, which has many diverse regions and
communities, that can pose a serious logistical challenge.
Helping get the food needed to children in Lexington, an urban
area, is quite different from helping kids in the mountains of
Appalachia. God's Pantry manages to do both. Instead of a one-
size-fits-all Federal program, Mike and his team need the
flexibility to reach children wherever they can do the most
good.
Right now, Federal restrictions limit his ability to send
kids home from school with food over the weekend, and not every
kid is able to find transportation to get meals during the
summer months when the school buses are not running.
So as we consider reauthorization of the child nutrition
programs, I hope we can address these challenges to ensure that
red tape is not getting in the way of serving those who need
our help.
Mike's successful track record of helping Kentuckians will
bring a valuable perspective, and I am confident this Committee
will benefit from his testimony today.
So, Mr. Chairman, Senator Stabenow, thank you once again
for giving me an opportunity to sort of butt in here and for
the opportunity to introduce this fine Kentuckian who is doing
a lot of extremely important work in my State.
Thank you very much.
Chairman Roberts. Senator McConnell, I can certainly
emphasize that you are not butting in. You are welcome here
anytime on any subject that you would like to participate in on
the sometimes powerful Senate Agriculture Committee.
[Laughter.]
Senator McConnell. See you later.
Chairman Roberts. We now welcome the first panel of
witnesses before the Committee this morning.
Mr. Brandon Lipps--welcome, Brandon--Acting Deputy Under
Secretary for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services within the
Department of Agriculture, and he also serves as the
Administrator of the Food and Nutrition Service as well as the
Acting Deputy Secretary of Food, Nutrition, and Consumer
Services at the Department. As the FNS Administrator, he
oversees the 15 nutrition assistance programs at the
Department. Prior to his time at the Department, Mr. Lipps
served as the chief of staff in the Office of Chancellor Robert
Duncan at Texas Tech University.
I would tell the distinguished Ranking Member that we
should extend our sympathies to the Red Raiders and----
Senator Stabenow. Not really.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Roberts. The Red Raiders are from the Big 12
Conference. They play Kansas State University. I think we
actually somehow beat you one game, but I am not sure about
that. I was cheering for you all the way.
Senator Stabenow. I was not.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Roberts. He previously worked on nutrition issues
as a staff member of the House Agriculture Committee.
STATEMENT OF BRANDON LIPPS, ACTING DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY FOR
FOOD, NUTRITION, AND CONSUMER SERVICES, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE, WASHINGTON, D.C.
Mr. Lipps. Thank you, Chairman Roberts and Ranking Member
Stabenow, and thank you for the opportunity to testify today on
reauthorization of child nutrition and WIC programs. I
appreciate your comments with regard to my alma mater. We know
the Big 12 is a powerhouse, and we will continue to try to show
that as we move forward.
I am Brandon Lipps, the Acting Deputy Under Secretary for
Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services at the U.S. Department
of Agriculture. As you know, nutrition assistance programs
leverage the Nation's agricultural abundance that is important
to this Committee and to all of us to ensure that every
American has access to wholesome, nutritious food.
This Committee is keenly aware of the critical importance
of all of these programs. Just to mention a few, on an average
day almost 30 million children receive a school lunch and 15
million children receive a school breakfast. Over 4.5 million
receive meals and snacks in child-care settings through the
Child and Adult Care Feeding Program, which we refer to as
CACFP. Last summer, almost 146 million meals were served to
approximately 2.7 million children through the Summer Food
Service Program. WIC served a monthly average of 6.9 million
women, infants, and children in Fiscal Year 2018. These
programs ensure access to nutritious food so that children can
grow, learn, and develop properly.
I join you today to contribute to a reauthorization process
that builds on the programs' history of success, while also
advancing the administration's nutrition priorities--to improve
customer service for our participants, to protect and enhance
integrity, and to strengthen the bonds between FNS programs and
self-sufficiency.
When I am on the road, I say that self-sufficiency at the
Food Nutrition Service begins in our WIC Program. Infants who
do not have proper nutrition cannot develop into children who
can learn in our schools. Any teacher will tell you that school
children who do not have adequate nutrition and full stomachs
do not learn well in class. Those kids cannot develop into
self-sufficient adults contributing to society if we do not
give them the start that they need through these programs.
I would like to share some of our activities today related
to the child nutrition and WIC, particularly in the areas of
customer service and integrity.
Secretary Perdue, as you know, has placed a robust focus on
customer service across the Department. Great customer service,
we believe, starts with listening to our customers and
addressing their needs and challenges.
I have had the chance to visit many of our programs, one of
the favorite parts of my job, from WIC clinics to summer stops
to daycare centers that operate our CACFP Program. I have
consistently heard the importance of these programs in ensuring
that children can grow and learn, but also the importance of
local flexibilities to ensure kids will eat the foods that we
provide through these programs.
This sentiment echoes what both the Secretary and I have
heard since before we started these jobs at USDA. That is why
one of the Secretary's first actions was to extend school lunch
flexibilities related to milk, whole grains, and sodium.
We also heard that our education and training standards for
our food service professionals in schools put a hiring strain
particularly on many small school districts. So we revised
those rules to allow more flexibility.
I am proud of these successes, but there is more to be
done, so we continue to listen to our customers each and every
day through formal and informal settings. We do this because
local nutrition operators know their student customers and
their communities best. Similarly, I have held roundtables with
the WIC community, including operators, business partners, and
participants, to better understand the challenges of operating
this very important program. Hearing and heeding the customer's
voice is just good business. We all know that, whatever
business we are in.
Just as important as good customer service is strong
program integrity to ensure public confidence in these
programs. Here again we listened and heard that school meal
program operators needed better tools to improve integrity and
efficiency in easy-to-use ways. FNS has responded with new
resources such as web-based school meals applications to
minimize errors. We also proposed in the Fiscal Year 2020
budget to strengthen income eligibility verification processes,
to focus more on applications at high risk for error.
Finally, in the last reauthorization, Congress set the
expectation that all WIC agencies implement electronic benefit
transfer by October 2020. The move to EBT supports increased
program integrity and efficiency while enhancing the customer
experience and service. I can report that today 48 WIC State,
territorial, and tribal agencies have successfully implemented
EBT Statewide, and the remaining 42 are in planning or
implementation.
Last, we also worked closely with oversight organizations
such as the GAO, who joins us today, and USDA's Office of
Inspector General to identify and address integrity challenges.
We appreciate our partnerships with these agencies, the
opportunities for improvement that they provide to us, and we
actively work with them to improve our programs each and every
day.
In closing, I want to thank the Committee for your
engagement with USDA to support this reauthorization of these
very important programs. I know the painstaking effort of this
reauthorization process. The Department stands ready to support
and provide technical assistance to you as needed as you
complete these deliberations.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lipps can be found on page
42 in the appendix.]
Chairman Roberts. Mr. Lipps, thank you for that very
comprehensive statement.
Our next witness is Ms. Kathryn Larin, Director of
Education, Workforce, and Income Security within the Government
Accountability Office. Ms. Larin is the Director of the
Education, Workforce, and Income Security team at the GAO.
While part of the GAO's Forensic Audit and Investigative
Services team, Ms. Larin oversaw forensic audits and
investigations of fraud, waste, and abuse across a range of
Federal programs. Prior to her time at the GAO, Ms. Larin
served as a senior analyst at the Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities, and she served as an Economist at the U.S.
Department of Education's Planning and Evaluation Service on
Postsecondary Education Issues. Welcome. We look forward to
your testimony.
STATEMENT OF KATHRYN A. LARIN, DIRECTOR, EDUCATION, WORKFORCE,
AND INCOME SECURITY, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE,
WASHINGTON, D.C.
Ms. Larin. Chairman Roberts, Ranking Member Stabenow, and
members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to
discuss our work on program integrity in USDA's child nutrition
programs.
In Fiscal Year 2018, the Federal Government provided about
$30 billion for these programs, including school meals, WIC,
and the Summer Food Service Program, among others. My testimony
today will address two items: actions USDA's Food and Nutrition
Service has taken to improve the integrity of programs in
response to GAO recommendations, and improper payments.
First, regarding USDA actions, we have identified several
opportunities for FNS to improve oversight of the school meals
programs. For example, in 2014, we found evidence that States
were not consistently documenting noncompliance with Federal
regulations, nor were they requiring corrective actions to
address issues they found while monitoring programs. Further,
we found that States needed more guidance on how to monitor the
financial management of school meals programs, an area States
were newly required to review.
In response to our recommendations, FNS has taken steps to
strengthen compliance reviews and corrective action plans and,
after assessing States' information needs, issued guidance to
improve financial oversight.
GAO also did work looking at the process for verifying that
only those children eligible for school meals participate in
the program. In our May 2014 report, we recommended that FNS
take multiple steps to improve the verification process, and
FNS took actions in response to all of our recommendations.
For example, FNS distributed guidance that would make it
easier to identify questionable or ineligible applications so
they could be flagged for further verification.
We also identified ways that FNS could improve the program
integrity and oversight of the WIC Program. Our 2013 review
found that FNS monitoring reports identified concerns about
income eligibility determination policies in a third of the
States reviewed. Yet FNS had not used this information to
target assistance to States.
In response to our recommendation, FNS developed a process
for reviewing and acting on the results of its monitoring
reports.
In addition, in 2014 we found that FNS had provided limited
assistance to States in preventing online infant formula sales,
a practice that is prohibited under program rules. FNS has
taken action to help reduce the likelihood of online sales and
is currently developing guidance on best practices to
disseminate to States later this year.
Finally, our May 2018 report on the Summer Food Service
Program identified additional areas where FNS could improve
program integrity. For example, we found that FNS did not
collect reliable data on program participation and that
estimates were calculated inconsistently from State to State
and from year to year. FNS has since reported plans to address
this recommendation.
Turning now to improper payments, USDA currently reports
improper payments in four child nutrition programs: School
Lunch and Breakfast, WIC, and the Child and Adult Care Food
Program. In Fiscal Year 2018, USDA reported improper payments
of $1.8 billion in these programs. This represents just over 1
percent of the $151 billion in improper payments Federal
agencies reported across the Government that year.
In recent years, annual improper payment rates were highest
in the school meals programs, with rates of about 15 percent
for School Lunch and 24 percent for School Breakfast. Improper
payments in school meals programs remained generally steady
until Fiscal Year 2018 when USDA changed what it considers to
be an improper payment. This change resulted in improper
payment estimates that are substantially lower than those from
prior years. USDA reported that it made this change after
consulting with the Office of Management and Budget.
With regard to other child nutrition programs, following a
2018 Inspector General report on the Summer Food Service
Program, USDA reassessed the program's improper payment risk,
determined it to be high risk, and is moving forward in
developing an estimate for this program.
In conclusion, USDA's child nutrition programs play a
critical role in ensuring that the Nation's children have
access to needed nutrition. USDA has taken several actions to
improve the integrity of these programs, and we continue to
monitor their progress in addressing our recommendations and
reducing improper payments.
This concludes my statement. I am happy to answer any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Larin can be found on page
46 in the appendix.]
Chairman Roberts. Let us start with Mr. Lipps. I am pleased
the Department was able to secure the progress made by schools
to serve more nutrition meals while returning some local
flexibility to school mean planning. Can you talk to what has
changed and what has not changed in the nutrition standards
that were just finalized? Do you anticipate additional changes?
Mr. Lipps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The final rule that we
issued in December provided flexibilities to school to offer 1-
percent flavored milk, to have 50 percent of their whole grain
items be whole grain rich, and delayed the implementation of
the date of Target 2 on sodium. What did not change is the core
requirements of the nutrition standards of the school meal
programs.
What we see as we look at that, when you look at things
like plate waste, is that we have carefully at FNS calculated
the nutritional requirements of those students. If they are not
consuming the foods provided on those plates, they are not
getting the nutrition that is provided to them. So we want to
give the local school operators who look those kids in the eyes
every day some minimal flexibility to make sure that kids are
getting meals that they will eat so that they are consuming
that nutrition.
With regard to future changes, we continue to listen to our
customers who run these programs each and every day, to your
constituents who run and who eat these programs, and we will be
considering those issues as we move forward if more flexibility
is needed or if we are at a place that works for everybody.
Chairman Roberts. Thank you.
For either Mr. Lipps or Ms. Larin--probably to you, Ms.
Larin--I am curious for your thoughts on program integrity. In
your written testimony, you discuss two 2014 GAO reports on
school meals. In particular, can you elaborate for the
Committee how State oversight of local school food authorities
is integral to child nutrition program integrity?
Ms. Larin. Yes. As you said, State oversight is critical to
program integrity, and in our 2014 work, we looked at that
State oversight, and we found a couple of concerns.
One of those concerns was that States were focusing more on
providing technical assistance to school food authorities in
implementing the new changes to the nutrition requirements
rather than focusing on compliance. We made a recommendation to
USDA, and in response they have strengthened their oversight
and focused more on compliance and implementing corrective
actions.
Chairman Roberts. Mr. Lipps, can you discuss the
Department's goals for improving the integrity of States'
administration of the school meal programs through training and
technical assistance, please?
Mr. Lipps. Yes, sir. I do want to say that we appreciate
GAO's partnership on this front in bringing issues to us and
helping us find resolution to those. She is correct that
States' oversight of these programs is extremely important as
we work with States to help schools administer these programs
well.
We work closely with States but also with school districts
on providing guidance and technical assistance on opportunities
to run these programs better. Our staff are present at
conferences in State school districts on a regular occasion. I
spoke at one conference where our staff presented over 30
different sessions providing technical assistance to both State
agencies and schools on how to better run their programs.
We also produce at the national level a lot of helpful,
useful tools for both States and school districts. We have put
our a verification toolkit to help schools better understand
how to verify school meals applications. We developed at FNS an
online school meal application that helps reduce error rates in
those school meals applications. So we have a number of
opportunities to continue to provide that technical assistance
and a wonderful staff that is committed to doing that.
Chairman Roberts. Ms. Larin, your testimony indicates that
of the 14 GAO recommendations, the Department of Agriculture
has addressed 9, taken steps to address 1, and is planning to
address the remaining 4. Can you elaborate on that?
Ms. Larin. Yes. USDA has taken steps to address all of the
recommendations we have made with regard to the school meals
programs. We have one outstanding recommendation in the WIC
Program to prevent online formula sales, and they have taken
some steps to address that. We still have recommendations
outstanding for the Summer Food Service Program. That was work
that we just completed in May 2018, and the Department did
agree with those recommendations, but they are not yet
implemented.
Chairman Roberts. I appreciate that.
Senator Stabenow.
Senator Stabenow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you again
to both of you. These are such important programs, and it is
important that we have accountability and transparency and
oversight. So we appreciate the input of GAO and the fact that
USDA is following through closely, working to make improvements
where it is recognized that there need to be improvements. So
thank you very much for that.
I think it is important to clarify a couple of things as we
talk about improper payments because, Ms. Larin, improper
payments for school meals do not just mean a child who is not
eligible is getting a free meal, correct? It could also be a
child receiving a reduced-price meal who should be getting a
free meal. Isn't that correct, it can go either way? Improper
payments can be too much, too little. Is that correct?
Ms. Larin. That is correct. Improper payments includes both
overpayments and underpayments.
Senator Stabenow. Which is important, I think, for us as we
look at this.
If a family does not respond, even if a child could
actually be eligible to receive a free or reduced-price meal,
is that still considered an error if they do not respond? In
other words, in this case the family is not responding. The
child could be eligible. As I understand it, that has been
viewed as an error. Is that still true?
Ms. Larin. If a child is not even enrolled in the program,
they would not be counted in the improper payments.
Senator Stabenow. If they are enrolled but somehow the
family is not responding on the paperwork, is that viewed as an
error?
Mr. Lipps. Senator, I am not sure specifically what you are
referring to, but I think it may be a case where we are
verifying eligibility of a child and there is questionable
information on the application, a parent will not respond. If
we cannot verify that, I think we are required to count that as
an error.
Senator Stabenow. Count that as an error.
Mr. Lipps. That is correct. There are some where, in fact,
the child would be eligible but we cannot verify that.
Senator Stabenow. Okay. Both to Mr. Lipps and Ms. Larin,
Mr. Lipps, you mentioned the web-based applications as a way to
reduce errors. USDA has regularly noted that direct
certification has also helped with program integrity. I wonder
if you both could talk a little bit more about the
opportunities like these to utilize technology to improve
integrity without jeopardizing meals for children in need.
Mr. Lipps. Sure. Senator, anytime we can match across our
15 programs eligibility standards where folks have already
provided the required information for one program and become
eligible, it makes sense for everybody along the chain, from
the Feds to the States to the recipient, to allow direct
certification of that. It reduces the errors because they do
not have to provide the information multiple times. We do some
of that now. We are testing some of that now, and there are
certainly opportunities to improve that in the future.
Senator Stabenow. All right. Ms. Larin?
Ms. Larin. Yes, when we looked at the verification process,
the recommendations that we made were really around the
applications that were submitted individually by the families.
That is where most of the errors were. Direct certification and
community eligibility is another process that reduces errors in
certification.
Senator Stabenow. Great. Are there technologies that might
also help reduce the burden on schools administering the
programs as well as helping with errors related to meal
counting?
Mr. Lipps. Yes, ma'am. We have a team of folks at FNS that
are continually dedicated to looking at that, and they have
working groups talking to State agencies and schools about
opportunities for improving that. Obviously, the online school
meals app was a big part of that. We have a new online buying
guide for school meal service professionals that we put out.
Technology is large improvement for, as the Chairman mentioned
in his opening statement, the many constraints that school
districts face in trying to run this program.
Senator Stabenow. I think that is very important.
Just in general, big picture, what percentage of schools
were in compliance with school meals nutrition standards in
2018, prior to your final rule?
Mr. Lipps. I do not know that stat exactly, Senator, but it
is the overwhelming majority of schools.
Senator Stabenow. Well, I am proud to say in Michigan it is
99.99 percent.
Mr. Lipps. I think that is reflective of the country.
Senator Stabenow. We are trying to find the one place
where--we do not know where that is.
Mr. Lipps. We will help you.
Senator Stabenow. Yes, so 99.99 percent. So I would say our
schools are working hard and doing a good job.
Mr. Lipps. They are.
Senator Stabenow. Thank you.
Also, Summer EBT, Mr. Lipps, this has been, as I mentioned
in my opening statement, extremely successful in Michigan, in
many places but especially in Flint where it has been helping
to reduce the negative effects of children being exposed to
lead to get good nutrition. I am concerned, though, that the
Secretary is planning to shift funding away from current
States, even if the States are running effective programs to
address summer hunger. This is a real concern of mine.
Can you explain the specific data you hope to acquire in
new locations or with new lead agencies that would justify de-
prioritizing assistance to children that still face hunger in
States like Michigan?
Mr. Lipps. Well, let me start by saying, Senator, I do not
think we are de-prioritizing anybody who faces hunger. That
money that we receive for those summer demonstration projects
is for demonstrations. We have been receiving it for a long
time. There are a number of children who have been fed for a
long time and a number of them who have had no access to that.
We have great data on Summer EBT. You are right, it has been a
successful program. We find that it does reduce particularly
very low food insecurity in children. We think it has shown
great results.
The Secretary and I were interested in testing
demonstrations that show us new things that we can learn from
those programs, which is what we were asked to do in this demo
authority. So, specifically, current States were not excluded,
but we did put out an RFP for the summer to ask States that
want to run the program to show us how they can test new
methodologies over a longer period of time. Because of how this
money is provided in the appropriations process, we have only
been able to test this a summer at a time with data, and we
think running it this way may be useful in seeing what we can
garner for more long-term oversight.
Senator Stabenow. How are you going to make sure, though,
that children are still getting the food they need? Testing is
great. Trying out new things is great. Children not being able
to eat in the summer, not so great. So how are you going to
make sure that, you know, in current places where this has been
successful and is critically needed do not lose out because we
are designing this as a demonstration project to test areas?
Mr. Lipps. You know, the program started as a
demonstration. It has been demonstrating for, I think, going on
7, 8 years now. So I think that is a great conversation that we
hope to all have as we continue with CNRs, is how we work to
make sure that all children that are hungry in the summer have
access to food. We have a number of programs that run. If the
program this summer ends up moving out of areas that it is
currently in, we certainly want to work with those States to do
everything they can to run the other programs that they have
access to for children who have been having access to the
Summer EBT Program.
Senator Stabenow. So maybe we should stop calling them
``demonstration programs'' and just start calling them ``summer
feeding program''?
Mr. Lipps. I think we would be happy to have that
discussion. Unfortunately, that is what the law calls them,
and----
Senator Stabenow. I know, but we write the law, so I'm
asking you--we have the capacity to change that.
Mr. Lipps. We are prepared to sit at the table and work
with you on that, yes, ma'am.
Senator Stabenow. [Presiding.] Okay. Thank you very much.
Senator Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Okay. Thank you, Ranking Member Stabenow.
I do want to start by saying thanks to all for being here.
This is a really important topic for so many of our children
back home in Iowa, and there are a few barriers that inhibit a
child's development that are greater than hunger, and far too
many of our children and families really struggle to meet the
most basic of human needs.
So I hope that we can start this process to reauthorize the
child nutrition programs and come together and provide
flexibility and eliminate inefficiencies so that our schools
and other stakeholders can focus on providing nutritious meals
for those that really need them rather than spending time on so
much paperwork and inspections. It is important, but we really
just need to make sure our children are being fed.
So, Mr. Lipps, I would like to start with you. I have heard
a number of concerns from parents and children and, believe me,
when my school groups come out and I ask them if they have any
questions, this is always an issue that they bring up. The
concerns are about the portion sizes in the School Lunch
Program. Some are worried that there are kids that receive the
same portion size no matter what age they are. So you may have
a first grader and an eighth grader receiving the same portion
size, and in that case you have got either one child is
receiving way too much food or one child is not receiving
nearly enough food.
So is this a concern that you have heard about during your
outreach? If so, what is the USDA doing to address this
concern?
Mr. Lipps. Senator, we do hear that. Interestingly, we hear
the opposite from some of the food service operators that, you
know, our school meal patterns do provide different portion
sizes for the different age groups, and some of the school food
service operators want the flexibility to vary that for their
children.
The Secretary believes that the school food service
operators, as I think you would agree, are the ones on the
ground best able to make those decisions. I think part of that
is we want to make sure that children are able to be served
meals that they can eat so that they are able to consume all
the food on their plate. If they are not, regardless of the
portion size, they are going to continue to be hungry. We
certainly continue to work and listen to schools on that front,
and we will continue to do so as we move forward.
Senator Ernst. Okay. That is really important, and I know
not just our school, there are a number of other schools--my
daughter graduated from high school just a few years back, and
as parents our booster clubs would have to bring in additional
food after school, especially for those that were athletes and
competing in sports because they just did not get enough food
throughout the day through the School Lunch Program.
So there are, you know, mandated portions. There is, of
course, mandated nutritional requirements. We do see a lot of
food waste as well, especially with our younger children. In
your opinion, is there an action or actions that the USDA can
take then to alleviate the amount of food that is thrown out of
schools?
Mr. Lipps. Yes, ma'am, I do. The Secretary's flexibility
that he provided on whole grain, sodium, and fluid milk were a
big step in that direction. I do not think that anybody is
telling us that we need a major change in the nutrition meal
pattern requirements for the school meals, but there are some
flexibilities around the edges that we continue to hear from
schools that we will continue to look at as we move forward to
give them the flexibility to make sure that works. The school
meal service operators everywhere we go are committed to
providing nutritious food to kids, and they want to make sure
that they have food that they will eat with full stomachs and
good nutrition.
Senator Ernst. So can you talk about maybe some of the
recommendations with flexibility? What would a school be able
to do then?
Mr. Lipps. The only three that we can talk about now are
the flexibility on the opportunity to serve 50 percent of their
grains as whole grain rich, the flexibility to serve 1-percent
flavored milk, and the delay of the Target 2 in sodium to
provide them some time and opportunity to introduce those foods
to kids. We do continue to hear more about that, and so we are
looking at that as we move forward.
Senator Ernst. Okay. I appreciate that very much.
I know that the Ranking Member, Ms. Larin, had talked about
improper payments. What is the fastest and easiest way, just
very quickly, for the USDA to correct this? In the 30 seconds
we have remaining.
Ms. Larin. I do not know that there is a fast and easy way.
I mean, they have taken a number of steps to try and reduce
improper payments. To date, the IG reports have not shown a
significant decline. I think that some of those actions have
not fully been implemented and assessed.
Senator Ernst. Okay. Good job. Fifteen seconds. Okay. Yes,
we do need to work on some solutions in that area, but I do
thank you both for your time today. Thank you.
Senator Stabenow. Thank you very much.
Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you, Ranking Member Stabenow and Chair
Roberts. Thanks, both of you, for being with us today and for
your service. I very much appreciate it.
Mr. Lipps, I would like to dive into some issues around
native communities and child nutrition. I am interested in this
because I also serve on the Indian Affairs Committee and the
HELP Committee, so this is kind of a ripe topic.
Some of the data in this area is really quite staggering.
One in four Native Americans is food insecure. In Minnesota, 33
percent of pregnant Native women experienced food insecurity in
the 12 months prior to their baby being born. Childhood
obesity, which is often associated with low incomes and poor
nutrition, is common to many Native families.
In 2016, about 60 percent of Native children under 6 are
enrolled in SNAP, and 23 percent of Native children between the
ages of 2 and 5 in the WIC Program were obese.
So these are children that have the same potential and
should have the same opportunities, whether they are living on
tribal lands or whether they are living in urban indigenous
communities like Little Earth in Minnesota, in Minneapolis. Yet
they have less access to healthy food, and because of their
poverty they, therefore, have less--you know, their health is
paying the price.
I know the Secretary has put great emphasis on focusing on
customer service, and I would like to hear a little bit from
you about what you and the Department are doing to do outreach
and education and consultation in tribal communities.
Mr. Lipps. Sure. Senator, you heard me talk in my opening
statement about listening to our customers, and I am happy to
say that we have had--I have sat through six tribal
consultations since I started this job just over 18 months ago
to listen to the needs of the tribes and how we can serve them
better. Much of that discussion is about the Food Distribution
Program on Indian Reservations, which is very important to the
tribes, but certainly they have access to all of these programs
that we talked about today, and we want to continue to work
with them to make sure that they are increasing the enrollment
of the folks who are eligible for those programs and that we
are serving them well.
I did tour a tribe in Wisconsin who is doing a wonderful
job both with access to programs I do not run on health care
but also to our programs on FDPIR and school lunch and the
nutrition that they are bringing to their school lunch through
farm-to-school programs and other things.
So there is some really good stuff going on in tribes. I
think that we can certainly have a conversation about how we do
better about bringing access to those tribes in, but these
consultations--the FNS staff have regular consultations, and I
think we are all trying to move in the same direction. I am
certainly open to any further ideas that you have on that.
Senator Smith. Well, thank you very much. I appreciate your
attention to that, and my office would love to work with you
more on what we can do to address these deep disparities that
are affecting the lives of these kids who are not going to have
the same opportunities if they--as you said, as both of you
said so well, if you go to school with an empty stomach, then
nothing else is going to work in your life.
Mr. Lipps. Thank you.
Senator Smith. I want to next ask you about something that
is very near and dear to my heart, and, actually, Senator
Stabenow brought this up. I think you said 99 percent of the
school districts--99.9 percent----
Senator Stabenow. 99.99, for the record.
[Laughter.]
Senator Smith. Well, in Minnesota, the number is 93 percent
of school districts are successfully serving healthy meals that
meet the strong nutrition standards that we have set up. What I
have seen firsthand visiting schools is a big determinant of
that is how important it is that schools have the ability to
prepare meals onsite, really healthy meals. This is an area
where we still have a lot of work to do in Minnesota. I think
96 percent of school districts in Minnesota are looking for at
least one--they have one place where they need to improve their
equipment in school.
So I just have a couple of seconds left, but could you talk
a little bit about how the Department sees this opportunity and
what we can do to make sure that we can help, continue to help
schools expand their ability to prepare foods onsite?
Mr. Lipps. Sure. I do not have the numbers on that, but I
know the Department has given out a lot of school meal
equipment grants that you have provided over time to schools to
help with that, also a lot of technical assistance and guidance
on how to use their current equipment to provide those
services. You are certainly right about those things, and we
continue to work with schools and their constrained budgets
about how they move forward with the equipment that they need
to prepare the meals that we are asking them to prepare.
Senator Smith. In Minnesota, my notes tell me it is about
$400,000 that has helped Minnesota schools make this advance.
To the point that you raised about you can serve nutritious
meals but if all that food gets left on the plate because it is
not what kids want to eat because they do not even know what--
they do not have any experience eating healthy food, it is a
big opportunity. It also creates opportunities for farm-to-
school efforts as well, which is another real bonus.
Mr. Lipps. It is a great program.
Senator Smith. Thank you.
Chairman Roberts. [Presiding.] Thank you, Senator Smith.
Senator Casey.
Senator Casey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will start with my questions for you, Mr. Lipps, and I
appreciate your testimony, and Ms. Larin as well.
In your testimony, you described holding roundtable
meetings with the WIC community, and we are happy about that.
Whenever there is an effort to reach out to individuals or
communities affected by the Women, Infants, and Children
Program, I certainly appreciate the work you do on that kind of
roundtable activity.
Given the immense value of the program from a public health
perspective, it is concerning that only 29 percent of eligible
4-year-olds participate in it. That is a 2014 number, but no
matter what year it is, it is a bad number.
In your conversations with stakeholders, were there any
recommendations made that you can share with us or ideas
discussed for how we can ensure that more WIC-eligible children
and mothers participate in the program?
Mr. Lipps. Sure. Thanks for that question, Senator Casey.
It has been interesting in these roundtables. You know, WIC
participation has been declining steadily since--I think it
peaked in 2009, and it has been declining since 2010, and we
have had discussions with the advocate community as well as
internally at USDA, and we have not been able to pinpoint what
the specific issues are with that. There are a number of them--
declining birth rates; some of them are obvious.
One of the biggest concerns is what you raised, that
children age in the program, they tend to drop off, and so
people come on early, but we do not hold on to them. The WIC
data shows that one of our best places for improving nutrition
is in WIC through that food package. We have good data showing
that children respond to that.
You know, there are number of factors. People talk about
the process in WIC. If you have multiple children, your State
may require you to come in for multiple visits. In some places,
it is run a little bit like a doctor's office. You wait in the
waiting room. You wait in the clinical room. Then you go to
your breastfeeding peer counselor, and you wait again. If you
are asking a Mom to do those three things and you want her to
be out working, that is not feasible for them.
So I think there are some customer service opportunities in
the program, making sure that the food package is accessible to
them, but we continue to have discussions with them on that and
try to find the right balance of the flexibility we allow the
States in running the program but ensuring that we have a
Federal policy of making sure that it is accessible to those
folks.
Senator Casey. So maybe streamlining for the customer in a
sense might be part of it.
Mr. Lipps. Yes, sir. I think that is part of what we are
looking at.
Senator Casey. Thank you. I look forward to following up
with you on that.
You also mention in your testimony that ``47 WIC State,
Territory, and Tribal agencies have successfully implemented
EBT Statewide and the remaining 43 are in the planning or
implementation stage.'' Do you anticipate all agencies will
meet the October 1, 2020, deadline for implementing WIC EBT?
Mr. Lipps. The short answer is yes, sir, though there are
some challenges. We do have a late-breaking update to my
printed testimony. It is now 48 States implemented and 42
remaining. Some States have had some significant challenges
with regard to contracting issues and certainly some, like
Puerto Rico, with regard to disasters. So we are doing
everything we can to provide them technical assistance to meet
the 2020 deadline. At this time we think that everybody is on
track to do that, but there are a few that we are watching to
try to help them get there through all means available.
Senator Casey. I appreciate that.
I wanted to ask you more of a Pennsylvania-specific problem
or question in this case. We have got 67 counties; 48 of them
are considered rural in our State. When they are designated
that way, of course, there are consequences to that in terms of
Federal programs. Rural communities, as you know, as well as
anyone knows, often face both significant barriers and
implementation challenges when it comes to the Summer Food
Service Program. Senator Stabenow was talking about that. Part
of that in rural areas is due to transportation issues or the
site or the location of sites where children and families can
go.
Could you focus on some of the efforts that the FNS is
doing to help rural communities improve access to the Summer
Food Service Program?
Mr. Lipps. Sure. Yes, sir, I agree with all those things
that you said and certainly understand the unique challenges of
the rural communities. You know, we continue to test new
opportunities to serve them through Summer EBT and other
programs, and so we will continue to study those and provide
that back to you.
Specifically with regard to the Summer Food Service
Program, we take a number of actions. We have got a partnership
with our rural development agency to help identify sites, and
certainly working with the advocate community, there is a big
push by some of our partners last summer and particularly this
summer about helping to identify sponsors in places where
children can congregate and how we get them to those sites in
the summer. It is not an easy question or one that we are going
to solve soon, but we will continue to do everything we can.
Senator Casey. I appreciate that. It is just a real tragedy
when there is a break in the seam, so to speak, where kids are
not getting the help in the summer. Thanks very much.
Chairman Roberts. Senator Brown.
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Lipps, thank
you, Mr. Deputy Secretary, for being here, and, Ms. Larin,
thank you for being here.
I want to talk about first the importance of the Free and
Reduced Price School Lunch Program. Thank you for your work on
that. In Ohio, we are concerned, as I know we are everywhere in
the country, about the takeup of the number of young people
that are not in summer feeding programs. I will save that for
last. I want to talk mostly about WIC.
Ohio is 42nd in the country in infant mortality, far too
high in maternal mortality also. Twelve percent of babies born
in Ohio were born before the 37th week of pregnancy, yet like
most of the rest of the country, Ohio continues to see a
decline in WIC participation rates. I do not think it can be
explained entirely by somewhat lower birth rates and from a
growing economy. The growth in the economy has not been in Ohio
nearly what it has been in the other parts of the nation but,
nonetheless, the national declines in WIC are concerning.
Talk to us about, first of all, just the role WIC plays in
helping the Nation lower infant mortality rates.
Mr. Lipps. Sure. Senator, I do not have specific statistics
on that, but the WIC program has positive results all the way
around, from pregnant mothers to nutrition for children and for
what we provide the mothers through their time in
breastfeeding. It has been shown to be a very successful and
very supportive program.
Senator Brown. Can you break down--is there a way to break
down effectiveness for WIC programs for infant mortality and
WIC programs for premature births?
Mr. Lipps. I do not know if we have data on that, Senator,
but I will certainly check on that and get back with you.
Senator Brown. Okay. I understand that FNS continues to
study WIC caseload declines. The declines have gone on longer
than they should have without figuring this out and reversing
it.
Talk to me about what steps that you can take to improve
program enrollment without undermining program quality. I know
you have done recent listening sessions. Tell me what will come
of that process.
Mr. Lipps. Sure. Senator, we are continuing to hold those
listening sessions. As you noted, some of the decline in
enrollment is good decline in enrollment. It is improvement in
the economy. Some of it is reduction in the birth rate, so
there are some natural factors in that. What we want to know
is, beyond those, what is causing people not to enroll in the
program or what is causing them to drop off soon after their
children reach the age of 1. We have a continual decrease in
the percentage of participation up to age 4 and 5, and so we
want to work on that.
You know, we have heard issues about accessibility to the
program, how long it takes people to go to the clinic office. A
lot of this is flexibility that we provide the States, and so
we have to continue to look at balance in providing State
flexibility and maybe some national leadership on how we can
better serve those recipients.
Technology solutions I think are available, and, you know,
we hear some concerns about the food package, but we want to be
very careful in that because the WIC food package has been
shown to be very effective in increasing the health of the
children participating in the program.
Senator Brown. Thank you for that, Mr. Lipps.
Is there a problem? It seems--when John and I were talking
to my staff, there seems to be a bit too Rube Goldberg kind of
process to sign up. When you sign up for Medicaid, you sign up
for SNAP, you sign up for WIC, often in different places. Is
there some effort--I mean, the States should for sure do it
better, but is there some effort from the national level to
streamline that so that young pregnant women or young mothers
or young families can do this a little bit more easily?
Mr. Lipps. We are always across certainly our 15 nutrition
assistance programs but certainly with our Federal partners
looked at opportunity for direct certification where, if you
qualify with one with the same limits, you can qualify for
another, and opportunities where States can share that data. It
is complicated with the way the systems and rules are set up,
but we continue to work on that stuff and would certainly be
happy to provide you technical advice on that as we see
opportunities with CNR coming.
Senator Brown. There would be a huge number of people that
would be eligible. Those States that did not do Medicaid
expansion is another question, maybe, but maybe not in some of
these. There would be a huge overlap SNAP, Medicaid, and WIC,
correct?
Mr. Lipps. I think that is true, Senator, yes.
Senator Brown. Okay. Last question. I had mentioned the
Summer Feeding Program. We have in Ohio somewhere on any given
day about 600,000 children in the Free and Reduced Lunch
Program, 700,000 over the course of a year, 600,000 on any
given day. Fewer than 100,000 children are fed in the Summer
Feeding Program for a whole bunch of legitimate and maybe
sometimes less legitimate reasons.
Tell us about the success or potential concerns with non-
congregate feeding pilot projects that have been in place for
the past several years.
Mr. Lipps. Yes, sir. I think anytime you can get food to
children in need in the summer, we call that a success. There
are always a lot of questions around the integrity requirements
in those programs. Those are things our friends at GAO and OIG
talk to us about regularly, and we look at those things. I
think there are opportunities for us to talk about these in the
child nutrition reauthorization process about how we feed those
kids who cannot get to a congregate site. Summer EBT is one of
those options. I think there are others that we can look at.
Some people have concern if you send the food off with the kid,
do they consume it or do they take it home and somebody else
consumes it?
So there are a lot of questions involved in that. We
continue to look at some of them, but we all know that we have
hungry kids in the summer that need to be fed, and we need to
find a path forward on that.
Senator Brown. That is not a terrible thing if they take it
home and feed somebody else.
Mr. Lipps. It is not. As long as we are feeding somebody
hungry.
Senator Brown. Okay. Thanks.
Chairman Roberts. I thank the Senator.
Senator Thune.
Senator Thune. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here this morning.
South Dakota schools put a tremendous amount of effort into
ensuring that the students have the fuel they need to get
through the school day, and for some students school meals are
the most nutritious part of their diet. Child nutrition
programs obviously play a critical role in ensuring that
students have access to nutritious meals, and I look forward to
working with the members of this Committee as we reauthorize
these important programs, hopefully move that legislation this
year.
Mr. Lipps, the Healthy Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010
included an amendment that I added to set aside funding for a
demonstration project to be conducted on rural Native American
reservations. The goal of the project was to test innovative
strategies to address hunger, obesity, and Type 2 diabetes on
reservations. Two tribal demonstration projects were
subsequently conducted--one by the Chickasaw Nation Nutrition
Services and the other by Navajo Nation Division of Health.
Can you speak to the results of these demonstration
projects? Are there ways we can build-upon these projects
through this upcoming child nutrition reauthorization?
Mr. Lipps. Yes, sir, and not unique to some of this other
stuff we have been discussing, Senator, there are a lot of
opportunities to feed kids in summer, a lot of ways to do
that--some challenges with all of them, but certainly some
benefits in all of them. So we continue to look at those.
Specifically with regard to the tribal demonstrations that
we ran per your amendment, we did have some operational
challenges with one of those, which limited the ability for us
to get data that we could produce in a steady top manner, but
we were successful in getting food out to children in all of
these programs. We did learn some good things about some of the
programs and their ability to increase consumption of fruits
and vegetables and other healthy foods to those kids in the
summer.
We have reports on those that I would be happy to share
with you. We have had success across the board and want to
continue to have discussion with you all about the best way to
move forward on feeding more kids in the summer.
Senator Thune. Well, I would love to see the reports on
that and welcome the input as we try and build on that in this
current legislation.
Again, for you, Mr. Lipps, as you know, many of the
children who rely on child nutrition programs also rely on
SNAP. The data has suggested that there is a correlation
between the consumption of SNAP benefits and academic
performance. Research has found that student performance tapers
the farther you get from the date of the SNAP benefit transfer.
Do you have any thoughts on whether granting States the
flexibility to modify their SNAP disbursement schedules perhaps
to allow 1 month's allotment of SNAP to be distributed in two
or three installments each month might boost student
performance
Mr. Lipps. I think we would be interested in seeing data on
that situation, Senator. The SNAP statute prohibits split
issuance of benefits throughout the month, but we do have
demonstration authority that would allow us to test that. We
had a State that attempted to do that previously, and due to
systems issues that they had on other issues, they did not move
forward on that. Split issuance is a complicated process, but
we would surely be open to a State who wanted to test that and
see if they could resolve some of the issues that you brought
up.
Senator Thune. Would you see if that--would that enhance
the benefit of other child nutrition programs, do you think?
Mr. Lipps. I think anytime you have folks running out of
food early in the month, it can help pull those along so that
they are having access to food not only when they are at school
or at a CACFP site, but when they get home that they have food
as well. So there is certainly some opportunity to see what the
results of that would be.
Senator Thune. Okay. USDA has been working to reduce
regulatory burdens in child nutrition programs. Could you
comment on the Department's efforts to identify duplicative
regulatory burdens?
Mr. Lipps. Yes, sir. We have done a lot of work on
streamlining operations, particularly in summer food service
programs, CACFP and those type of programs. We continue to
enlist customers on that and are looking at more opportunities
on that as we move forward. All of these programs start with
paperwork requirements that are important to the integrity of
the program. As we run them, we find opportunities to
streamline that, and the agency staff are very committed to
talking to our operators about how we can serve them on that
front and continue to do so. As you know, the Secretary is very
committed to a deregulatory agenda.
Senator Thune. All right. Thank you.
Ms. Larin, school nutrition directors in my State have
raised concerns with the added cost and burden associated with
USDA's change from the previous 5-year administrative review
cycle to a 3-year administrative review cycle for school food
authorities. I appreciated USDA's announcement in February that
the Department would allow State agencies to request waivers
from the 3-year review requirement. How would returning to a 5-
year administrative review cycle for schools consistently in
compliance affect program integrity?
Ms. Larin. You know, the cycle time is not something that
we have looked at in our work. We have looked at the
administrative review process and, when that was initially
announced, identified some concerns with the implementation. I
think FNS has taken some steps to provide additional guidance
and support to make those administrative reviews more
effective.
Senator Thune. Okay. My time has expired. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. Thank you, Senator Thune.
Senator Fischer.
Senator Fischer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lipps, after speaking with individuals in Nebraska, it
has become clear that issues remain in the Competitive Food
Sales Program. One repeated concern is that, despite the
program being in effect for several years, some districts and
States still lack clarity on who is responsible for overseeing
compliance at the local level. I do not think State departments
want to be the food police at the local level. Frankly, neither
do school superintendents.
My second concern is enforcement standards. It is my
understanding that States are unclear on how they can enforce
these rules. So while this is a confusing program, taking up a
lot of time, it stifles some streams of discretionary funding
for schools, and there is really no way to ensure people
comply.
What guidance has FNS sent to the States and SFAs on this?
What does FNS intend to do to address these issues in the
Competitive Food Sales Program?
Mr. Lipps. Thank you, Senator. That is an important point
that I do hear when I am out and about on the competitive foods
issue. It is difficult. I assure you that I do not want to be
the food police either. We do think that there is important
balance when we are talking about this program. We want to make
sure that our school lunches have a foundation in nutrition. As
you know, the Secretary is committed to providing flexibility
on that to make sure that school food service operators have
the ability to serve that their kids will eat at their campus.
We want to make sure there is balance in that with the other
food that is available on campus, and that is really where
competition food comes in.
So there is a balance in that, as there is with everything.
I am not sure that we are there yet based on what we continue
to hear. The agency has done a lot of technical assistance
presentations and guidance on that front, both the State
agencies and schools, and we are committed to continuing to do
that as we move forward.
Senator Fischer. You say we are not there yet. How are we
going to get there? Is it just through presentations to
schools, or do you have a different idea on how to make the
program really clear?
Mr. Lipps. We are continuing--you know, the Secretary said
when he put out his flexibility standards on whole grain,
sodium, and milk, that he was going to continue to listen and
look at opportunities if we need regulatory changes moving
forward. So that is part of what we are doing now as we
continue to look at folks to see if there are regulatory
changes that need to be made to make this work, if there is an
opportunity for better balance and ensuring that kids are not
leaving school lunch to go buy competitive foods elsewhere on
campus, but that they are having nutritional standards, but
that we are not making the campus or the State be the food
police. So we are committed to that balance. I cannot assure
you that we have anything coming on that front yet, but we will
continue to look at it.
Senator Fischer. Do you have food service personnel giving
you good ideas on how to address some of these issues?
Mr. Lipps. They do. The Secretary and I have both held
roundtables on this front, on all of the issues, and
competitive foods does come up. Some folks have asked for more
flexibility about what they can serve in competitive food based
on what they serve in the food line, and there are complicated
details in that. Certainly across that front, nobody is really
asking that they be able to serve Snickers bars on the
competitive food line. You know and I know that that is not the
issue. So we are looking at flexibilities on the margins that
might help them on that front.
Senator Fischer. When you listen to food service people,
what are their thoughts on the changes that have been made. Are
kids eating lunches? You know, I visit schools all the time
across the State of Nebraska. I am curious on what you are
hearing.
Mr. Lipps. Schools are very positive about the
flexibilities provided in the final rule. As you know, Congress
has provided much of those flexibilities in appropriations acts
for quite some time, so it is not a major change. It is just
comfort and long-term planning for them. As you know, schools
have to buy a long way out to plan their menus in the way that
we require them to do. So they are glad to have that finality
and flexibility in that. I do think it helps folks. As we talk
about the nutrition standards are no good, the calorie--we put
a calorie limit in, and the kids do not eat half the food on
their plate, then they are getting half of the maximum calories
that we provide them, and that is a problem. As you know,
Senator, the same is true particularly with milk and the
nutrients that it provides. So we are going to continue to
listen and see if further flexibility is needed on that front.
Senator Fischer. We are pleased that students are drinking
milk, and we are pleased they are eating beef. We have a number
of ranchers in communities across the State of Nebraska that
are providing that to local school district.
Also, Mr. Lipps, when speaking to individuals in my State
who are currently using CEP, they seem to believe that it is to
their benefit and that there has been a slight reduction in
administrative costs. Some districts are wary about whether it
would alter their State aid formula in the State of Nebraska,
the aid they receive from the State of Nebraska.
Is this a nationwide concern? I know this program was a
topic of debate during the last reauthorization process, so I
guess I am just wondering why are schools not adopting the
program, and what does the agency see as pros and cons?
Mr. Lipps. Sure. I have not heard that specific State aid
issue. I will talk to my folks, and we will get you additional
information on that. Certainly as with any of the flexibilities
in administrative issues, there are benefits and drawbacks on
that front. CEP is a great opportunity at reducing
administrative burden and ensuring that all kids in need have
access to those programs. I think it is always important to
mention that schools cost-share in the CEP, so when a school
becomes a CEP school, we are not paying the full share for all
of those students as there are some in who are not low-income
to receive those benefits.
We will continue to work on that as we move forward. CEP is
an ongoing discussion about the right path forward on that
front.
Senator Fischer. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. We thank you, Senator Fischer. The
distinguished Senator from Illinois, Senator Durbin.
Senator Durbin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It is a
pleasure to be here. Thank you to the witnesses.
For more than 20 years, the State of Illinois has operated
a unique program that provides affordable assisted living to
low-income seniors and persons with disabilities. These
supportive living facilities create a healthy environment for
seniors and those with disabilities who are on Medicaid. There
are roughly 150 of these senior living facilities in Illinois.
About 8,000 people take advantage of them every working day.
To serve these seniors and residents with disabilities, the
facilities use their residents' SNAP benefits to serve meals.
In other words, they pick up their food stamps, buy some
macaroni and cheese, play bingo, and have a great day.
For 20 years, the United States Department of Agriculture
has approved this model, certifying these facilities to
administer the SNAP benefits for the residents so that those
who qualify for nutrition assistance can have a good warm meal
with their friends.
Now all of a sudden, the U.S. Department of Agriculture
thinks there is a problem, maybe even a scandal, and these
facilities are out of compliance. Never mind that the USDA
recertified these facilities as recently as 2016 and reported
no problems.
I worked with Senator Duckworth, my colleague from
Illinois, Ranking Member Stabenow, and Chairman Roberts. We
were able to stop the U.S. Department of Agriculture from
administrative overreach for 18 months in the farm bill. We
have looked at the rules and statutory definition of ``food''
under SNAP, and I think the U.S. Department of Agriculture has
found the wrong scandal. In fact, I think there is no scandal.
To put it simply, you are missing the point. People are just
trying to feed 8,000 needy people who can get together for
lunch in a supportive facility.
So I am going to ask for some commitments from you, which I
think are reasonable and I hope you can answer with yes or no,
if it is appropriate. After the expiration of the farm bill's
18-month freeze on any SNAP terminations for these facilities,
will you commit that the USDA will work with the residents, the
facilities, the Illinois Department of Human Services, Senator
Duckworth, and myself to provide adequate notification prior to
any de-authorization?
Mr. Lipps. Yes, sir.
Senator Durbin. Is there no question that these 8,000
disabled and elderly people are eligible for SNAP? No matter
what happens at the end of 18 months, will you ensure the
continuity of SNAP benefits for these 8,000 seniors?
Mr. Lipps. Yes, sir.
Senator Durbin. That is good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. Thank you to our first panel, and I
appreciate your testimony. We really appreciate your expertise
and your commitment. Well done to both of you. I would like to
welcome our second panel of witnesses before the Committee.
Our first witness is Mr. Josh Mathiasmeier. He has been the
director of nutritional Services for Kansas City, Kansas,
Public Schools since 2014. Prior to this role, he was a project
director for the Kansas Department of Education, Child
Nutrition, and Wellness team. He is a fellow graduate of Kansas
State University, home of the ever optimistic and fighting
Wildcats, and he has degrees in nutrition, kinesiology, and
dietetics. He is a registered dietician.
Welcome, Mr. Mathiasmeier. I am sorry I messed that up.
Welcome, Josh, and I look forward to your testimony.
STATEMENT OF JOSHUA MATHIASMEIER, DIRECTOR OF NUTRITIONAL
SERVICES, KANSAS CITY, KANSAS PUBLIC SCHOOLS, KANSAS CITY,
KANSAS
Mr. Mathiasmeier. Good morning, Chairman Roberts, Ranking
Member Stabenow, and Committee members. Thank you for inviting
me to speak today and for your interest in making sure students
have access to healthy meals impacting students' success. I am
honored and privileged to represent Kansas City, Kansas, Public
Schools, the State of Kansas, and all food service
professionals who are some of the most passionate and
hardworking in this country.
Child nutrition programs provide a strong safety net for
our children by ensuring their nutrition needs are met while
also providing nutrition education. As a part of our core
principles, we strive to provide our students with high-quality
food and excellent customer service.
In all sections of business and industry, the 21st century
student requires innovative approaches to encourage healthy
choices. Through the use of innovative meal programs, we are
able to increase the quality and variety of our offerings while
appealing to the unique needs of today's students.
We utilize innovative approaches in our School Breakfast
Program by offering Grab and Go and Breakfast in the Classroom.
By hosting breakfast meal service in the classroom or near
building entrances, we are able to increase access to healthy
meals and incorporate the breakfast meal into the school day.
We also know that hunger does not stop after the school day
or at the end of the school year. This is why we offer after-
school snack, supper, and summer meals to our students. The
snack and supper meal is incorporated into the after-school
event or activity and must include an educational or enrichment
component. We bridge the gap during the summer by offering
meals at sites such as pools, schools, libraries, community
centers, parks, urban farms, community colleges, farmers'
markets, and community housing complexes. By bringing the meals
to where children already are, we remove barriers of access to
healthy meals.
Since we operate so many different child nutrition
programs, we must adhere to all USDA regulations for each
program. While many of these regulations are the same, there
are several differences between programs which makes it
challenging to streamline for efficiency. This also causes a
great deal of confusion to operators who administer multiple
programs. We encourage USDA to review these differences between
programs and create consistency in child nutrition programs.
As a part of operating child nutrition programs, we receive
regular accountability and compliance reviews. We fully
understand the need for the compliance and accountability of
any federally funded program. Compliance and oversight ensure
that each child has access to healthy meals impacting students'
success.
We are overwhelmed with the amount of administrative time
and effort it takes to prepare for and compliance child
nutrition program reviews by the State agency. In addition to
State agency reviews, we are required to complete onsite
monitoring reviews for each program. The reviews completed by
the State agency and operators at the local level often
overlap, with visits being completed multiple times at the same
site for different child nutrition programs. We ask USDA to
simplify and streamline both the review process by the State
agency and the onsite monitoring reviews by program operators.
We strive to meet the individual needs of our customers
with their unique background and demographics. The customers we
serve in Kansas City are unlike any group of customers in
surrounding school districts. It is important for us to remain
focused on the needs of our customers through local control of
food, equipment, supplies, and resources. Through local
control, we are able to stay nimble in meeting the constantly
changing needs of our customers. We encourage USDA to continue
giving local control for the many decisions that impact our
customer's unique needs.
Schools are a leader in culture change, instilling healthy
habits for a lifetime. We have a passion for making sure
students have access to healthy, safe, and high-quality meals.
The child nutrition reauthorization act, known as the Healthy
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010, provided historic changes in
child nutrition programs and gives students healthier meal
options. Implementation has resulted in increased consumption
of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains.
We encourage USDA to ensure we can efficiently and
effectively serve students these meals because they are
critical to their lifelong success.
Thank you, Chairman Roberts and Committee members, for your
interest in ensuring our children have access to healthy meals,
and I am happy to answer any questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mathiasmeier can be found on
page 67 in the appendix.]
Chairman Roberts. Thank you, sir. Thank you for being on
time.
Mr. Halligan, you have already been introduced by our
distinguished Leader. Why don't you just proceed.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. HALLIGAN, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
GOD'S PANTRY FOOD BANK, LEXINGTON, KENTUCKY
Mr. Halligan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
invitation to attend today's hearing. As you know, I am Mike
Halligan, CEO for God's Pantry Food Bank in Lexington,
Kentucky. Today I am honored to testify on behalf of more than
an estimated quarter of a million food-insecure Kentuckians,
including nearly 72,000 hungry children who reside in central
and eastern Kentucky.
My remarks will address the critical role Federal after-
school and summer feeding programs play in addressing childhood
hunger. That said, I in no way intend to diminish the
importance or the significant impact of many other nutritious
food and meal programs that assist families with children in
daycare and school or pregnant women, infants, and toddlers.
Let us begin by acknowledging, as we have this morning,
that it is never a child's fault that they are hungry. Congress
needs to make policy changes under a two-part strategy to more
effectively reach children during the summer, after school, and
on weekends.
First, we need to strengthen the site-based model by
streamlining Federal programs to expand the number of sites
that are available to children. To do this, we recommend
community providers be able to operate one program year-round
through the Summer Food Service Program, and that area
eligibility requirements used by at-risk sites be changed from
50 percent to 40 percent, like other Federal aid programs.
Second, we need to allow the use of alternate program
models to fill gaps where children cannot otherwise access a
meal, modifying, not replacing, the congregate feeding
requirement and utilizing an efficient summer grocery card. One
complex challenge involves duplicate and inconsistent rules and
regulations. God's Pantry Food Bank utilizes two Federal child
nutrition programs: the Summer Food Service Program and the
Child and Adult Care Food Program under the after-school
provision. Simply put, two categories: summer regulations and
school-year regulations. Often, we are feeding the same
children in the same location, so one would think we would
operate under the same guidelines. The rules for one do not
always apply to the other. The paperwork is different. The
nutrition requirements are different. The reimbursement rates
are different. The training is different. Needless to say, it
gets very confusing. Why not have a program with one set of
rules and regulations to complement the National School Lunch
Program for both summer and after-school meals?
A public library serves as a summer site in one Kentucky
county. Children eat onsite. The library then packs additional
lunches into a mobile bookmobile and drives to a low-income
housing area. At this second site, there are no picnic tables
or park benches. So on a hot, summer day or, heaven forbid,
during a thunderstorm, the children must stand or sit on the
ground in the vicinity of the mobile unit to ensure the meal is
consumed on premise in front of supervising staff.
There is a child with a physical disability who lives in
the apartment building. Unfortunately, that child is not
eligible for a Summer Food Service Program meal. The librarian
instead has to pack a separate, non-reimbursed meal for the
child, and the child's sibling takes that separate meal to him
because he cannot leave his apartment to congregate!
If regulations were modified, the child would receive a
reimbursed meal; the other children would sit in the shade of
their own porch; and the bookmobile would have the time to
travel to other locations to deliver additional meals. This
two-part strategy will effectively reach more children who need
meal assistance after school, in the summer, and on weekends.
Providing opportunity for all of our Nation's children
requires investing resources to increase access, particularly
during times when children are out of school. Simply making a
small, incremental change to programs is not enough. Many of
these recommendations have been successfully applied in
numerous demonstration projects. The time has come to apply
these learnings across our beloved Nation.
I encourage the Committee to strengthen child nutrition
programs through reauthorization, helping to end hunger in this
country.
I will close with a final thought that is forever etched in
my mind. I was at an after-school kids' cafe program at a local
Boys and Girls Club. A student, who I will simply call ``K,''
approached and handed me a small framed drawing of a slice of
buttered toast. I smiled, saying, ``Thank you.'' The reply was,
``No. Thank you. Because of the food you help me get, I am not
as hungry and I do better in school.'' Leave it to the mind of
a child to help one clearly understand the need.
It is humbling to testify today on behalf of ``K'' and here
is the picture. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Halligan can be found on
page 70 in the appendix.]
Chairman Roberts. Thank you, Mr. Halligan. Thank you for
your pertinent suggestions and advice. All of your advice is--
all of your statements will be made part of the record. I want
to assure you of that. Now, that is a piece of toast, as I
understand it?
Mr. Halligan. Yes, sir. It is a piece of buttered toast.
Chairman Roberts. Buttered toast.
Mr. Halligan. ``K'' was 6 years old.
Chairman Roberts. What is that in the middle of the toast?
Mr. Halligan. That is the slab of butter.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Roberts. I thought it was a mushroom.
Mr. Halligan. It took me a while to figure out what it was,
too. Like I said, leave it to the mind of a child to help one
clearly understand what we need to do.
Chairman Roberts. Right. We are a little pressed for time
in that we have votes at 11:45, so let us proceed.
Our next witness, Lauren Waits, has more than 20 years of
experience with maternal and child health issues in Atlanta,
Georgia. Ms. Waits is the current director of government
affairs for the Atlanta Community Food Bank, where she focuses
on SNAP and WIC issues. She formerly conducted policy research
for the Georgia Health Policy Center at Georgia State
University and is a graduate of the Harvard School of Public
Health. Welcome, Ms. Waits.
STATEMENT OF LAUREN WAITS, DIRECTOR OF GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS,
ATLANTA COMMUNITY FOOD BANK, ATLANTA, GEORGIA
Ms. Waits. Chairman Roberts, Ranking Member Stabenow, and
members of the Committee, thank you for this chance to tell you
about the work we are doing in Georgia to increase enrollment
and participation in the WIC Program. I represent the Atlanta
Community Food Bank, which provides more than 61 million meals
a year through 600 partner agencies to over 755,000 in metro
Atlanta and northwest Georgia.
I also represent the Georgia WIC Working Group, a
partnership between government, philanthropic, business, and
nonprofit stakeholders working together to increase WIC
enrollment and participation. Georgia was one of the first
States to offer universal pre-K, and our then-Governor, Sonny
Perdue, created the first State-level Department of Early Care
and Learning. Georgia makes significant investments in early
childhood programs, and we have a thriving quality rated child
care system.
Nonetheless, about one in five Georgia children do not
always have enough to eat. Our food bank supports a range of
community partnerships with schools, after-school, and summer
meal providers because we want children to make full use of the
healthy meals available through Federal nutrition programs. We
could not ignore the fact that WIC participation has been
declining in Georgia as it has across the country.
With the support of the WIC Working Group and with funding
from our donors, the Atlanta Community Food Bank hired an
independent market research firm to conduct a series of focus
groups with families who were eligible but not enrolled in the
Georgia WIC Program in October 2017.
The focus group discussions explored many aspects of
contemporary family life and ideas about WIC. We found that
even nonparticipating families have positive perceptions of
WIC, and they were most familiar with the fact that WIC helps
pay for infant formula and milk. Not all are aware of
additional food benefits like fresh fruits and vegetables, nor
did all families realize that WIC provides nutrition education.
The elements make the program more attractive for families who
are unfamiliar with it.
Mothers, fathers, and grandparents all confirmed that food
insecurity is a real and familiar threat in their lives. Most
of the families had a story about a time when they did not know
how they were going to pay for the food they needed, and some
said that WIC played a crucial part in preventing them from
facing that crisis.
Families discuss some of the reasons they are not currently
enrolled in WIC. Both in the WIC clinic and at the grocery
store, participants need to make good use of their time. If a
new mother is taking time off work and forgoing pay, as has
been mentioned, to bring her baby to the clinic, she literally
cannot afford to wait too long there. Voucher delays in the
checkout line or difficulty identifying WIC-eligible foods
throughout the store can also make parents decide the benefit
might not be worth the effort. However, these families are
online, usually through smartphones, and they are actively
seeking information to help them raise healthy kids. They are
very comfortable using technology to enroll in all sorts of
activities, and they would be excited about digital WIC apps
that help them to get certified, receive nutrition, and fulfill
other program requirements. Some States do already have these
technologies in place. Georgia does not yet.
We are aware of several WIC policy recommendations that
national advocates have suggested. Our experience in Georgia
strongly supports them.
No. 1, please keep WIC accessible to as many low-income
mothers and children as possible. WIC is a powerful factor in
helping the women we serve have safer pregnancies, have fewer
premature births and infant deaths, and it is supporting
positive health outcomes for infants and children, especially
lower obesity rates, and improves school performance. It
prevents food insecurity. Groups like ours can help to support
outreach and enrollment in WIC, but we need you to make sure
its broad availability continues.
No. 2, we support extending certification periods and
lifting the age of WIC coverage. Georgia families told us it is
hard to keep their kids certified while juggling work and other
family demands. We ask that you allow families to maintain
their connection to WIC for longer periods and reduce
unnecessary certification barriers. We also support extending
WIC coverage to older children, for example, up to age 6, so
that children who may not yet be enrolled in school continue to
have access to nutritious foods.
No. 3, we ask that the new legislation include measures to
promote cross-enrollment between WIC and other programs that
benefit kids like SNAP and Medicaid. The Georgia WIC Working
Group has pushed for comparison of Medicaid and WIC
participation rates, and new technology systems allow us to
evaluate successes more quickly and easily than ever before.
Performance metrics must be a requirement in order for them to
be a priority.
On a personal note, I would just like to share that I am an
adoptive parent whose child was nourished by her birth mother
and the WIC program until we could feed her ourselves. I am
grateful for the existence of WIC, and I witness its benefits
to my vibrant, healthy daughter every day.
Thank you for your work on all these important programs. I
would be happy to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Waits can be found on page
81 in the appendix.]
Chairman Roberts. We thank you very much.
Our next witness, Kati Wagner, is the current vice
president of the National Child and Adult Care Food Program
Sponsors Association, which is based in Round Rock, Texas. She
has served on their board of directors since 2012 as both
secretary and treasurer. Ms. Wagner has been the president of
the Wildwood CACFP in Centennial, Colorado, since 2009.
Welcome. We look forward to your testimony.
STATEMENT OF KATI WAGNER, VICE PRESIDENT, NATIONAL CACFP
SPONSORS ASSOCIATION, ROUND ROCK, TEXAS
Ms. Wagner. Good morning. Chairman Roberts, Ranking Member
Stabenow, and Committee members, thank you very much for
allowing me to testify today for the very first time.
My name is Kati Wagner, and I sere as the vice president
and policy chair for the National Child and Adult Care Food
Program Sponsors Association, or NCA. We are a national
association whose mission it is to support the hundreds of
thousands of people who make up the USDA Child and Adult Care
Food Program community, the CACFP, which includes sponsoring
organizations, family child care homes and centers, Head Start,
after-school at-risk sites, and adult daycare facilities, as
well as State agencies, anti-hunger advocates, and industry
supporters.
As president of the sponsoring agency for the CACFP, I
personally work with each of those groups in Colorado and with
family child care homes in Wyoming. Today it is my honor to
share an overview of the CACFP, often referred to as ``the food
program.''
The CACFP is part of the Richard B. Russell National School
Lunch Act. Though smaller than the School Lunch Program,
current appropriations serve about 4.5 million children per day
and 2 billion meals per year. CACFP provides funding to child
care facilities (homes and centers), after-school programs,
homeless shelters, and adult daycare facilities as
reimbursement for serving healthy foods to those in their care.
Funding not only improves nutrition for the children and older
adults when parents or caregivers are working; it helps small
businesses offset the higher cost of serving healthier food,
while parents are allowed to work and have access to quality
child care. This program is one of the best examples of a
public-private partnership, improving children's lives and
supporting working families while boosting local economies.
CACFP is a multifaceted approach to feeding food-insecure
children through various settings. One avenue of participation
is with a sponsoring organization. This is the only way that
licensed family child care providers can participate in the
food program. Family home sponsoring organizations are
nongovernmental, nonprofit organizations which are responsible
for maintaining program integrity by making frequent onsite
visits to the child care home, offering training, support, and
oversight.
As a sponsor, my organization visits the child care
provider's home at least three times a year to verify children
are in care and that the meals being served meet with USDA meal
pattern requirements.
With the remainder of my time, I would like to tell you
about a family child care provider enrolled in the CACFP from
Cortez, Colorado. Many of the resources that I will be
referencing will be found in my written testimony.
Meet Mickey. Mickey's children arrive between 7 and 8
o'clock every morning. Their day starts with a healthy
breakfast of oatmeal, strawberries, and a glass of milk. Her
kitchen walls are covered with USDA Team Nutrition posters
showcasing fun, healthy nutrition ideas, USDA's MyPlate poster,
and NCA's motivational posters, as well as her children's art
work. After breakfast, the children have circle time playing
and learning about colors and shapes until their morning snack
of carrot sticks and watermelon slices. Next, they go outside,
even in the Colorado winters, for physical activity time
playing games they have learned from the NCA Program Calendar
until it is time for lunch.
So today at Mickey's, they are having baked chicken breast,
broccoli trees, apple slices, a whole grain-rich roll, and a
glass of milk. Mickey's parents do not pick up their children
until 6 or 7 p.m. so she provides an afternoon snack of orange
wedges and graham crackers as well dinner, which includes whole
grain-rich spaghetti, tomato sauce, tossed spinach salad,
garlic bread, and milk. Mickey is only reimbursed for two meals
and one snack through the CACFP each day, but she provides all
of the meals to the children in her care because eight out of
ten people in her area are food insecure. The last time I was
in her home, she was explaining to me how grateful she is for
the support she receives by participating in the CACFP under a
sponsoring organization. The program allows her to serve more
nutritious food, to keep enrollment fees down. On Monday
mornings, Mickey serves two to three times the amount of food
for breakfast she normally would because the children come in
so hungry.
Across the country millions of children are being served by
providers or small business owners just like Mickey. We have
included more stories about providers in our written testimony.
This Committee has an important opportunity in 2019 to improve
the health of our Nation's children by passing a strong child
nutrition reauthorization that protects and strengthens all
child nutrition programs. These successful, cost-effective
Federal nutrition programs play a critical role in helping
children in low-income families achieve access to child care
and educational and enrichment activities while improving
overall nutrition, health, development, and academic
achievement.
We are very excited that reauthorization is back on your
table. It has the ability to change what is on the table for
4.5 million children each day. As the national association for
providers, meal sponsors, and front-line users of the CACFP, we
are eager to share suggestions that we believe would improve
the CACFP. Most of the program improvements we are suggesting
do not represent any increase in cost to the program but would
create efficiencies and reduce barriers to participation.
Thank you for your support of the CACFP and our Nation's
most vulnerable populations, and I will be happy to answer any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wagner can be found on page
91 in the appendix.]
Chairman Roberts. We thank you.
Senator Stabenow.
Senator Stabenow. Well, thank you to all of you for your
really important testimony, and last but not least, we have Dr.
Lanre Falusi. Welcome. She is a pediatrician and associate
medical director at the Child Health Advocacy Institute, part
of Children's National Health System here in Washington, DC.
She is also a past president of the American Academy of
Pediatrics D.C. Chapter. She attended medical school at the
University of Virginia, and I have to tell you I wish Michigan
State had been the one playing you on Monday night.
[Laughter.]
Senator Stabenow. I was looking forward to that game, but
congratulations.
She completed her residency and chief residency at
Children's National. We want to thank you for being here, and
we look forward to your testimony.
STATEMENT OF OLANREWAJU (LANRE) FALUSI, M.D., PEDIATRICIAN,
CHILDREN'S NATIONAL HEALTH SYSTEM, AND PAST PRESIDENT, AMERICAN
ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS D.C. CHAPTER, WASHINGTON D.C.
Dr. Falusi. Chairman Roberts, Ranking Member Stabenow, and
members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify here today. I am Dr. Lanre Falusi, as you heard, a
pediatrician at Children's National Health System here in D.C.
and past president of the D.C. Chapter of the American Academy
of Pediatrics, or AAP. On behalf of the AAP and our 67,000
members, thank you for holding today's hearing.
As a practicing pediatrician, I see firsthand the health
effects of food insecurity and malnutrition in my patients. I
also see the positive impact that Federal child nutrition
programs have had on reducing food insecurity and promoting
access to healthy, nutritious foods in my patients. These are
programs such as the National School Lunch Program and School
Breakfast Program, the Child and Adult Care Food Program, the
Summer Food Service Program, and, of course, WIC.
In fact, I credit WIC for the health of my patient, who I
will call ``David,'' whose developmental delays at 3 years of
age made it very difficult for him to chew solid foods. His
family was also experiencing food insecurity. David was really
struggling, underweight, and with poor developmental skills
when I first met him. We got him connected to regular visits at
WIC, which was our clinic, and provided him with a special
high-calorie milk and balanced diet with fresh fruits and
vegetables, which took an enormous stress off of his mother.
She could now be sure that her son is not going hungry, and he
is able to focus on learning fine motor and cognitive skills.
David is now thriving and has reached a healthy weight. His
success and so many others like him highlights the importance
of connecting families who are experiencing food insecurity
with key Federal programs so that children can reach their
highest potential.
Maternal prenatal nutrition and the child's nutrition in
the first 2 years of life are crucial factors in a child's
neurological development and lifelong mental health. Child and
adult health risks, including obesity, hypertension, and
diabetes, may be programmed by nutritional status during this
critical period.
Research has documented the adverse effects of food
insecurity on the health, growth, and development and even
educational outcomes of children from infancy through
adolescence. Among school-aged children, food insecurity is
associated with lower math and reading scores, hyperactivity,
and absenteeism and tardiness at school. Children from food-
insecure households have poorer overall health and more
hospitalizations than do children who live in food-secure
households.
When my patients screen positive for food insecurity, I
refer them to Federal child nutrition programs, and I counsel
families on healthy food choices. However, for many of my
patients, fruits and vegetables, whole grains, and low-sodium
foods are unaffordable, unattainable, or they lack the ability
to prepare them. In fact, for some of my patients, the only
meals they get each day are from the Federal school nutrition
programs.
That is why it is critical that we set students up for
success by building on the programs made under the Healthy
Hunger-Free Kids Act, to improve the nutritional quality of
school meals, and to ensure snack foods and beverages sold in
schools are healthy and nutritious as well.
Stigma, administrative burden, and increasingly fear serve
as barriers to children's participation in Federal nutrition
programs. The Community Eligibility Provision, or CEP, is a
vitally important for high-poverty schools to ensure that all
of their students have access to healthy school meals while
eliminating the traditional school meal application process. I
applaud this Committee for creating CEP, and I urge you to
maintain and protect this option for schools.
One of the most effective investments Congress can make
during childhood is to support and reduce barriers to accessing
WIC. Children who receive WIC have improved birth outcomes,
increased rates of immunization, and better access to health
care through a medical home. WIC also plays an important role
in promoting breastfeeding through the successful breastfeeding
peer counseling program.
I am concerned, however, that many of my patients who start
out on WIC as infants do not remain connected to the program.
Giving States the option to eliminate recertification at age 1
would ease the administrative burden to participation.
Similarly, extending WIC eligibility to age 6 would address the
age gap for children who have not yet started kindergarten.
Children need optimal nutrition year-round. Countless
children go without access to food during out-of-school or
child care time, especially in the summer months. We must do
more to reach more children with nutritious meals and snacks in
all of these settings.
Good nutrition in pregnancy and childhood is a foundation
for lifelong health. Just like we vaccinate to protect against
illness, so too can we provide pregnant women and children with
nutritional assistance and breastfeeding support to promote
healthy development and protect against food insecurity and
chronic disease.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify here today.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lanre Falusi can be found on
page 124 in the appendix.]
Chairman Roberts. Thank you very much.
I am now going to recognize Senator Casey with the
admonition that we are voting at 11:45 and that there may be
somewhat of a time concern here. So the Senator is recognized.
Senator Casey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is
unprecedented. This has never happened before that I was
recognized this early, and I am grateful for that, so I am
going to keep within my time.
Doctor, I want to start with you. There has been much
discussion in Pennsylvania about the ability of schools to
serve whole milk to students. My question for you is: What does
the science tell us about the appropriate levels of whole milk
consumption?
Dr. Falusi. Thank you for the question. As a pediatrician,
I recommend to my patients that they drink water or low-fat or
fat-free milk. We know that milk has many benefits from
protein, calcium, and vitamin D. We also know, though, that
lower fat and lower sugar in diets are healthier for children.
So what we would admonish from the American Academy of
Pediatrics is that the standards for school nutrition programs,
including the type of milk, should really be based on the
science, and the science being that lower fat and lower sugar
are what we should be advocating for children. We do encourage
the USDA to utilize nutrition experts and to look at a number
of studies for those guidelines.
Senator Casey. Thank you.
I will move to Ms. Wagner. The last time this Committee
considered reauthorization of the child nutrition programs, I
introduced the Access to Healthy Food for Young Children Act.
This legislation proposed a number of improvements to the Child
and Adult Care Food Program, including reducing the area
eligibility test and allowing for a third meal service. I
intend to once again push for those improvements to the
program.
Could you provide an example of low-to no-cost
modifications to the program that could both increase
participation as well as improve outcomes?
Ms. Wagner. Yes, thank you for asking the question. One of
our top priorities after we surveyed all of our members of the
association was that we limit add-ons by the State agency in
the USDA regional offices. We work very well with the USDA
national office, but we have found that the regional offices
and the State agencies continue to add on additional
regulations, and this is creating a huge barrier to
participation. So that was actually our No. 2 priority.
Senator Casey. That is helpful to help us make the case in
this process. What we are trying to do with the legislation is
to make both more child care providers who serve low-income
children eligible for higher Tier 1 reimbursement and also help
many more children in need receive the healthy meals and snacks
that the program provides. So we are grateful for your
leadership and also grateful for the example you gave us.
Mr. Chairman, I will just conclude with one statement. I
know I have got more time, but in the interest of the vote and
everything else, John Kennedy in his inaugural address said a
lot of great things. We always quote him. One thing that he
said that I think binds public officials together, no matter
what party, is the line where he said, ``Here on Earth, God's
work must truly be our own.'' I appreciate the panel's work to
bring reminders to us about what is God's work. So thanks very
much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Very quickly, I
want to apologize for not being here during the vast majority
of the meeting. I had a markup on Environment and Public Works.
They needed me for a quorum. We had all of the generals that
control the Reserves and the National Guard. I just left the
hearing with Attorney General Barr. So a lot is going on all at
the same time.
On the other hand, I would say that this hearing is as
important as any, and I applaud the Chairman and Ranking Member
for having it. I want to thank the panel. I also want to thank
all of you that are so interested in this. This is going to
take all of us working together to get done. It is so, so very
important. It is something that we can get done this Congress,
and we do not have anybody being better leaders than these two
as far as pushing things forward. They have got a great track
record in a very bipartisan way of getting things done.
So I look forward to working with all of you, and like I
said, this is something that we can and will get done this
Congress.
Thank you.
Chairman Roberts. Well, I truly appreciate your statement,
Senator Boozman.
Senator Stabenow, and the vote has started, by the way.
Senator Stabenow. Thank you very much. I have questions for
everyone, and because of the vote, I will submit most of these
for the record and ask for your comments.
Thank you to all of you. Each of you are doing incredibly
important work, and we just need to do everything we can to
support you in that, and we will.
Just a couple of questions that I have, one for Mr.
Mathiasmeier. Thank you for the work that you are doing in
Kansas City. It is very exciting, when I was listening to you
speak of all the ways you are doing outreach for children and
schools. You mentioned the importance of the Community
Eligibility Provision. If community eligibility were eliminated
or if how schools can qualify was restricted, can you describe
what this would do to your students and the administration of
the program?
Mr. Mathiasmeier. Sure. So if the Community Eligibility
Provision was abolished or not available anymore, we would have
less access--or children would have less access to meals. I can
guarantee you that less of them would participate. There would
be more barriers between kids that really need our programs and
their ability to consume our meals. So I would be very
concerned about the access that kids have to healthy meals.
Senator Stabenow. Thank you. I share that as much as well.
Dr. Falusi, thank you again for being here. Your testimony
describes how collocating WIC clinics with your office improves
the client's experiences and makes sure they are connected to
health care service in addition to good nutrition. Based on
your experience, what else can we do to reduce barriers and
improve the WIC program and the experience for moms and babies?
Dr. Falusi. Thank you for that question. So, absolutely,
being able to walk that family out of the exam room and down
the hallway to the WIC clinic has been crucial for us in
ensuring that those families really have access to healthy
nutrition.
Other things as we have heard today, maintaining the
Community Eligibility Provision so that schools and families do
not have to have onerous paperwork every year, additionally
maintaining the adjunctive eligibility with Medicaid and WIC is
crucial toward reducing the administrative burdens and ensuring
that families do not have to spend their precious time,
particularly our low-income families who have limited time with
work, to really go through the paperwork just to maintain their
access to healthy foods. We would advocate for those programs.
Senator Stabenow. Thank you very much.
Senator Stabenow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The show of the
ultimate trust I have for the Chairman, I am going to be
leaving now to go to the vote and leaving him in charge.
[Laughter.]
Senator Stabenow. So, you know, make sure he is okay here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your leadership, and thank you to
all of you.
Chairman Roberts. Well, thank you for that trust. I
appreciate that very much.
I want to emphasize that all statements that have been made
by you--and thank you so much for your statements. All will be
in the Committee record. All of the statements will help us in
the Committee move through the process of reauthorization. It
is a tough path, especially given the circumstances today with
legislation in both Houses. I am optimistic we can do that. All
statements will be available to the Department of Agriculture
for their study and also for response. So simply because I am
asking you one question, do not even--just do not worry. Your
statements are part of the record, and we really appreciate
them.
To the panel, each of you, we have 105 counties in Kansas,
so I am saying about all of them except 5 are pretty much
rural. Out west, it is all rural. Can each of you provide an
example of potential program improvement such as flexibility
that would allow you to better serve or provide access to
people in our rural areas? We will start with you, Josh.
Mr. Mathiasmeier. That is a great question, Chairman. I
think the Summer Food Service Program congregate meals
requirement is something that has a huge impact on rural
Kansas, but also in the Kansas City area, we have families that
live a block, a mile, 2 miles away from a summer food program
and they just cannot get there. So the congregate meals is
definitely something that could be looked at.
Chairman Roberts. Mr. Halligan, you touched on that as
well.
Mr. Halligan. I did. You know, I think relaxing--again, not
eliminating, relaxing the congregate meeting requirement or
congregate feeding requirement certainly allows us to access
more individuals where they live. It is about bringing the food
to people rather than bringing the people to food.
The second thing I would add is the notion of a summer
grocery card. I was born and raised in Iowa, and the
transportation distances simply to get to a grocery store let
alone a site are pretty dramatic. My wife would plan--her
family would plan their weekend around a grocery shopping trip.
So I think an EBT for summer feeding for children is a very
powerful tool that will help rural families in particular.
Chairman Roberts. Thank you.
Ms. Waits?
Ms. Waits. For WIC, extending the certification period for
young children so that families do not have to go on such a
frequent basis to the WIC clinic, there are other ways to
fulfill their nutrition education requirements, but keeping
those rural families on WIC for a longer period of time will
allow them to make better use, more extended use of the
benefit.
Chairman Roberts. Thank you.
Ms. Wagner?
Ms. Wagner. Yes, sir. So currently the at-risk after-school
program can only run during the school year, and then Summer
Feeding kicks in. I think a great way to increase participation
is to consider allowing both programs to go year-round. In some
areas of the country, we have an incredibly strong at-risk
program and a very small, if any, Summer Feeding Program. So
these children just go the summer without eating. Then the same
thing, we do not have at-risk after-school programs in all
areas of the country where summer food is very, very strong. So
that might be a way to increase participation by allowing one
or the other--or both to go year-round and then people can
choose whether it be at-risk or summer food.
Chairman Roberts. I appreciate that very much. Thank you.
Chairman Roberts. Dr. Falusi?
Dr. Falusi. I would echo what all of my panelists have
said. In addition, with WIC, along with increasing the
certification beyond 1 year, also increasing the age up to age
6 will increase the eligibility for kids and access. We find
that there are children who reach the maximum age of 5 for WIC,
but have not yet started kindergarten, and will have up to a
year of poor nutrition. As we know, early nutrition in those
years is critical to their ongoing educational outcomes.
Chairman Roberts. We thank you all. That will conclude our
hearing today. Thank you to each of our witnesses for taking
time to share your views on these important programs and what
to consider in child nutrition reauthorization. The testimoneys
provided today, as I have Stated, are extremely valuable for
the Committee to hear firsthand, and we all appreciate that.
To my fellow members, we ask that any additional questions
you may have for the record be submitted to the Committee clerk
5 business days from today, or 5 p.m. next Wednesday, April
17th.
The Committee is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:58 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
APRIL 10, 2019
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]