- EXAMINING THE IMPACTS OF DISEASES ON WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT
[Senate Hearing 116-191]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-191
EXAMINING THE IMPACTS OF DISEASES
ON WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AND
MANAGEMENT
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON
ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
OCTOBER 16, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
40-418 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming, Chairman
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware,
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
Ranking Member
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JONI ERNST, Iowa
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
Richard M. Russell, Majority Staff Director
Mary Frances Repko, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
OCTOBER 16, 2019
OPENING STATEMENTS
Barrasso, Hon. John, U.S. Senator from the State of Wyoming......
1
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware..
3
WITNESSES
Guertin, Stephen D., Deputy Director for Program Management and
Policy, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.........................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
9
Responses to additional questions from:
Senator Barrasso.........................................
15
Senator Carper...........................................
17
Senator Markey...........................................
21
Cook, Walter E., Clinical Associate Professor, Veterinary
Pathobiology, Texas A&M University.............................
22
Prepared statement...........................................
24
Responses to additional questions from:
Senator Barrasso.........................................
31
Senator Carper...........................................
33
Niederriter, Holly, Environmental Scientist IV and Non-Game
Mammal Biologist, Delaware Division of Fish and Wildlife,
Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control......
35
Prepared statement...........................................
38
Responses to additional questions from Senator Carper........
45
EXAMINING THE IMPACTS OF DISEASES ON WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AND
MANAGEMENT
----------
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 16, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Environment and Public Works,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m. in
room 406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Barrasso
(Chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Barrasso, Carper, Braun, Rounds,
Sullivan, Boozman, Ernst, Cardin, and Gillibrand.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN BARRASSO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING
Senator Barrasso. Good morning. I call this hearing to
order.
Today, this committee will examine the impacts of disease
on our wildlife health, human health, and on the economy. We
will explore what Government can do to combat the growing
problem that we are facing.
Successful wildlife conservation and management depends on
keeping wildlife populations healthy. Unlike in captive
animals, disease in wildlife is often difficult to prevent, to
detect, and to control. In many cases, disease hosted in
infected wildlife can be transmitted to other wildlife,
domesticated animals, and even to humans.
Diseases that spread from wildlife to humans pose an
imminent threat in public health. Eastern equine encephalitis,
also known as the Triple E, is a virus that can cause human
brain infections, neurological problems, and even death. Triple
E is naturally hosted in birds and can be transmitted to people
through the bite of an infected mosquito.
In 2019, 31 cases of Triple E infections have been reported
to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. That is an
alarming 300 percent increase over the previous 10 year
average. Triple E has already claimed 11 lives across the
United States this year alone.
West Nile virus is hosted in birds, transmitted to people
through the bite of an infected mosquito. An average of 2,500
people are infected with West Nile virus annually, including
roughly 40 people in my home State of Wyoming.
Lyme disease is hosted in birds and mammals like deer and
mice. It is transmitted to people through the bite of an
infected tick. An average of 33,000 people annually are
reported to be infected with Lyme disease.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, scientists estimate that more than six out of every
ten known infectious diseases in people are spread from
animals. Three out of every four new or emerging infectious
diseases in people are spread from animals. Every year, tens of
thousands of Americans will get sick from harmful germs spread
between animals and people.
Disease can also spread from wildlife to other wildlife,
and to domesticated animals, eradicating populations, eroding
economic value, and creating new threatened and endangered
species. Earlier this year, the Atlantic magazine ran an
article entitled The Worst Disease Ever Recorded. It was about
a particularly deadly fungus known as Bd. Bd has led to the
extinction of 90 different amphibian species, and the
catastrophic population decline of over 124 other amphibian
species.
White-nose syndrome has killed an estimated 7 million bats
in the United States. Bats play an important role in
ecosystems, including through insect control. Largely because
of white-nose syndrome, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has
listed the northern long-eared bat as a threatened species
under the Endangered Species Act.
In Wyoming, the three diseases that pose the biggest threat
to wildlife are chronic wasting disease, or CWD; pneumonia
among bighorn sheep; and brucellosis. Chronic wasting disease
affects deer, elk, and moose in our State, causing the
degradation of the animal's brain, loss of bodily control, and
death. It not only impacts Wyoming's management of these
species, but also the operation of everything from landfills to
feed grounds. Hunters have been advised not to eat meat from
animals that they harvest if they test positive for chronic
wasting disease.
Chronic wasting disease has been found in 277 counties in
24 States.
Brucellosis afflicts primarily Rocky Mountain elk and bison
in the northwestern part of Wyoming. From a management
perspective, transmission of brucellosis between elk or bison
and domestic cattle is a serious concern. The bacterial disease
is known to cause severe complications with the pregnancies of
infected cows, resulting in economic losses for ranchers.
Also of concern is pneumonia, which has devastated
Wyoming's herds of bighorn sheep.
Many entities are responsible for managing wildlife
disease. States are the primary manager of wildlife within
their respective borders, and usually they play the most
important role in fighting wildlife disease.
Agencies throughout the Federal Government also manage
wildlife disease. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is the
primary national wildlife management agency. But it is not
alone. Other agencies within the Department of the Interior,
along with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
the Department of Agriculture, and the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, all have important roles.
With so many Federal and State players involved,
coordination is clearly a key ingredient to improving the
response to, and the management of, wildlife-borne disease. So
I look forward to hearing from our distinguished panel today on
how the Federal Government can improve the effectiveness of its
response to wildlife disease.
I would now like to turn to the Ranking Member, Senator
Carper, for his opening remarks.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS R. CARPER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Thanks so much for
bringing us together today.
I had a chance to talk with each of our witnesses before we
began the hearing, and I would say to our Deputy Director,
thank you for all your service. He served, I think 40 years,
did you say 40 years of service to the people of this country?
And a number of those years as a Marine. So I can say, the Navy
salutes the Marine Corps, and thank you for your service.
Different uniforms, same team. There we go.
He is also an Aggie, right. You are not an Aggie from
Texas, right?
Mr. Guertin. No, sir, Norwich University in Vermont.
Senator Carper. There you go. All right.
Dr. Cook, great to see you. Thank you for joining us today.
And Holly, I will get to give a little introduction of you
here in a few minutes. We appreciate your presence and your
testimony.
Over the past couple of decades, wildlife diseases have
spread rapidly across the United States. We feel it in Delaware
and throughout DelMarVa. These diseases oftentimes have far
reaching impacts on our ecosystems, human health, and the
economy, and they present significant challenges for wildlife
managers.
In Delaware, we have seen the devastating effects that
disease can have on our wildlife, that includes amphibians, and
on birds, and on bats. Since its discovery in New York in 2007,
white-nose syndrome, which the Chairman has alluded to, has
killed more than 6 million bats and spread to, I am told, 33
States.
In Delaware, white-nose syndrome has wiped out entire
populations of State-endangered little brown bats, which
provide an important ecosystem service to our farmers, and for
a little State, we have a lot of them. The service provided by
those bats is pest control. In fact, one study estimated that
the economic value of bats to agriculture tops $3.7 billion
annually, and that is a conservative estimate. That is about
half of the value of the agricultural economy in our State, in
years I recall.
Our country is also grappling with the wildlife diseases
that mosquitos and ticks transmit to humans and to wildlife.
West Nile virus, eastern equine encephalitis--did you call it
Triple E? Triple E, and Lyme are all diseases that these pesky
insects transmit to wildlife, to livestock, and to humans, with
sometimes devastating impacts on our economy and on human
health.
Because these diseases cross State and jurisdictional
boundaries, addressing wildlife disease is a challenge that
requires cooperation and collaboration--two of my favorite C
words, cooperation and collaboration--between many parties in
order to get us to consensus. We look forward to hearing from
our expert witnesses about examples of partnerships between
Federal agencies, States, tribes, and other parties to address
wildlife diseases, such as the White-Nose Syndrome Response
Team.
I also am interested to hear more today about how our
Nation's wildlife scientists and managers, at both the State
and Federal level, are working together to address the spread
of wildlife disease. I would encourage our witnesses to
identify areas of opportunity for expanded research and
innovative management actions.
In considering solutions to prevent the further spread of
wildlife disease, however, we would be remiss to overlook the
fundamental drivers of this problem, including climate change
and habitat loss. We know that temperature, rainfall, and
humidity affect the abundance and spread of diseases, and we
are seeing these impacts firsthand in the First State.
With warmer and wetter weather, new mosquito species, such
as the Asian tiger mosquito, are taking residence in the First
State.
Mosquito season is also growing longer, I am told. In
Wilmington, where my wife and I live, our mosquito season now
averages about 142 days long, and it was only about in the
1980s, about 30 years ago, that season was 117 days long. So as
a result, we have seen an increase in cases of mosquito-borne
diseases among wildlife, among livestock, and Delawareans.
What's more, change in human land use is causing declines
in biodiversity, making species more vulnerable to emerging
diseases by causing habitat loss, degradation, and
fragmentation. So when we talk about wildlife disease, we must
also consider how our Nation's extinction crisis is impacting
its spread.
I would also note just briefly that this wide range of
challenges magnifies the need for strong leadership at the
agencies charged with managing wildlife. We thank you, Mr.
Guertin, for providing that leadership today.
During our committee's business meeting just a couple of
weeks ago, I expressed concern about the Administration's
nominee to lead the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, due in part
to her reluctance to fully disclose information about her
previous employment and experience at the Department of
Interior to this committee. Unfortunately, those concerns
remain largely unaddressed today.
I would just end with this: by working together and taking
a science based, holistic approach, I believe we can develop
smart solutions that address both the root causes and the
symptoms of wildlife diseases.
Again, Mr. Chairman, thanks for bringing us together.
We look forward to hearing from all of you.
Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Well, thank you very much, Senator
Carper.
Before we proceed to hear from our witnesses, I would like
to introduce Dr. Walter Cook, who currently serves as the
Clinical Associate Professor of Veterinary Pathobiology at
Texas A&M University, and a Veterinary Corps officer in the
U.S. Army Reserves. Dr. Cook's distinguished career includes at
least 20 years of service in Wyoming addressing the threat of
wildlife disease, and we are very grateful for that service.
His experience in Wyoming includes brucellosis coordinator
at the University of Wyoming's College of Agriculture, State
Veterinarian for the Wyoming Livestock Board, Wildlife
Veterinarian for the Wyoming Game and Fish Department, Regional
Veterinary Coordinator for the Wyoming Department of Health,
and the large animal veterinarian at Tri-State Large Animal
Hospital in Cheyenne, Wyoming.
He has served as an adjunct assistant professor in the
University of Wyoming's Veterinary Science Department and
Lecturer at Laramie County Community College. Additionally, for
7 years, he served as an instructor for the National Center for
Biological Research and Training at Louisiana State University.
Dr. Cook's success should come as no surprise, given he
received his Ph.D. in wildlife epidemiology from the University
of Wyoming in 1999.
Dr. Cook, it is a privilege to welcome you as a witness
today before this committee. We want to thank you for traveling
to Washington.
Before turning to the witnesses, I know, Senator Carper,
you would also like to make an introduction.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
Dr. Cook, I didn't realize you were Army. So a special
privilege to welcome to you.
Mr. Chairman, I am grateful for the opportunity to
introduce one of our witnesses, Holly Niederriter. Holly has
worked for the State of Delaware for nearly 20 years. I think
she told me she has lived in five States. But she chose to live
for 20 years in a State whose tree is named after her, the
holly tree. We have a special fondness for her as a result.
Throughout her time at Delaware's Department of Natural
Resources and Environmental Control--well, sitting right behind
me is our former secretary of that department, right behind me,
Christophe Tulou, Christophe, raise your hand. Christophe was
Secretary of the Department, and when he was going out the
door, Holly walked in the other door and joined our State in
that department.
Holly has worked with a wide array of species, I am told,
including bats, beach nesting birds--we have several of those--
ospreys, turtles, snakes, salamanders, and frogs. She currently
oversees Delaware's bat program and Delaware's implementation
of the Delmarva fox squirrel conservation plan, which has been
a real success.
Holly has worked with other States and regional efforts as
well as with the Fish and Wildlife Service, which would include
Maryland, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and one more.
I am trying to think of the States you have either worked
in or lived in.
Ms. Niederriter. Maryland, New York; did you say New York?
Senator Carper. I did not.
Ms. Niederriter. And New York.
Senator Carper. OK, thanks. Well, we especially thank you
for Delaware, the First State, for making us your last stop. We
hope it is your last stop for a long time.
Thanks, Holly, and thanks for being with us today.
Again, we are delighted that you are all here. Welcome, one
and all.
Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Senator Carper.
We welcome all.
We will hear from three witnesses today. The first will be
Dr. Stephen Guertin, who is the Deputy Director of the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service at the Department of Interior. Then
Dr. Walter E. Cook, Clinical Associate Professor of Veterinary
Pathobiology, Texas A&M. And then Holly Niederriter, Wildlife
Biologist, Delaware Department of Natural Resources and
Environmental Control.
I would like to remind the three of you that your full
written testimony will be made part of the official record of
the hearing today. But we please ask you to keep your
statements to 5 minutes so that we will have time for
questions. We look forward to hearing your testimony.
Mr. Guertin.
STATEMENT OF STEPHEN D. GUERTIN, DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR PROGRAM
MANAGEMENT AND POLICY, U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
Mr. Guertin. Good morning, Chairman Barrasso, Ranking
Member Carper, and members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to discuss wildlife disease and the challenges it
poses to wildlife conservation and management.
Wildlife disease is a complex and dynamic issue that
presents an enormous challenge to the Fish and Wildlife Service
in our work to conserve wildlife for current and future
generations of Americans. My written testimony catalogs the
large number of diseases that affect wildlife and present
serious management challenges to the Service and our partners.
My written testimony also describes in greater detail our
management response to these challenges. These include diseases
like chronic wasting disease in deer, elk, and moose; white-
nose syndrome in hibernating bats; and others. I will speak
more about those in a moment.
In the last 50 years, there has been a steady increase in
wildlife mortality caused by infectious diseases. The effect of
disease on wildlife not only includes the death of individuals,
but the weakening of resilience to other environmental
stressors, and ultimately can mean the collapse of entire
populations. When combined with other stressors, diseases can
also necessitate increased species protections.
How does the Service address such a daunting challenge? We
can't do it alone, and I cannot emphasize enough that our most
important partners in this effort to address wildlife disease
are our colleagues in the State fish and wildlife agencies.
Partnering with States is key for the Service to be able to
address these multi-jurisdictional challenges, and our seamless
relationship with the Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies
is a great example of this partnership and our shared goal of
combating wildlife disease.
The impacts of wildlife disease on species are also a
threat to the economy. Pollinator species like bats and bees
are invaluable to agriculture. Wildlife associated recreation
like hunting, angling, and wildlife watching generated $170
billion in total expenditures in 2016, the most recent data.
Wildlife diseases also impact the domestic animals that
serve as food resources and as our companions. In addition, the
majority of emerging animal diseases that are transmissible to
humans originate in wildlife species.
To address this dynamic nature of wildlife disease, the
Service houses several nationwide programs that plan for and
help respond to wildlife diseases, including our Wildlife
Health Office, Aquatic Animal Health Program, and our White-
Nose Syndrome Program.
I would now like to talk more about our efforts to address
two serious and prominent disease threats: white-nose syndrome
and chronic wasting disease. White-nose syndrome, or WNS, is a
fungal disease affecting hibernating bats that is estimated to
have killed more than 6 million bats in the U.S. and Canada
alone. The fungus responsible for this disease has now spread
to 38 U.S. States and 7 Canadian provinces. Twelve hibernating
bat species, including two endangered and one threatened
species, have been confirmed with WNS in the United States.
Through annual appropriations language, Congress designated
the Service as the lead agency to manage the national response
to WNS, working with Federal, State, tribal, and international
partners. Since 2008, the Service has been coordinating the
response to this disease and leading the implementation of a
national multi-agency response plan. To date, we have awarded
over $35 million to researchers and State agencies to contain
the spread of WNS and develop tools to increase the survival of
affected bat species.
In the past decade, the WNS response community has made
extraordinary progress to understand the disease and to develop
tools to study and reduce the devastating effects on bats in
North America.
Chronic wasting disease is a contagious, fatal disease that
is becoming more prevalent in wild North American cervid
populations, such as deer, elk, and moose. Unfortunately, there
is no known treatment or cure for CWD. Therefore, prevention of
the disease and limiting its spread is essential.
To date, there have been no reported cases of CWD
interaction or infection in people, but research on this
subject is ongoing. Currently, 48 national wildlife refuges, 24
waterfowl production areas, and 8 fish hatcheries are located
in counties already affected by CWD. We are working to ensure
that activities on Service managed lands and the larger DOI
portfolio are focused on preventing the further spread of CWD
and minimizing the impacts on already affected populations.
A high level of collaboration between Federal and State
agencies, tribes, NGOs, and academia is needed to address the
growing threat of CWD. States are the ultimate leaders for CWD,
but the Department can contribute significantly by supporting
the States and taking prudent actions on lands managed by the
Department. We have a number of initiatives, including those
led by our Wildlife Health Office.
In conclusion, the many challenges posed by wildlife
diseases are diverse in their nature and inevitably present
surprises. We will continue to work closely with our partners
at home and abroad to address these challenges, because
wildlife diseases do not respect political boundaries and
threaten every corner of the country.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator Carper, for your
leadership in convening this hearing. We look forward to
answering your questions as best we can.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guertin follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Thanks for that very thoughtful
testimony. We are very grateful.
Dr. Cook.
STATEMENT OF WALTER E. COOK, CLINICAL ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR,
VETERINARY PATHOBIOLOGY, TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY
Mr. Cook. Good morning, Chairman Barrasso, Ranking Member
Carper, members of the committee. Thank you for the opportunity
to provide my perspective on disease challenges to wildlife
management and conservation.
Today, I will highlight some of the lessons I have learned
over the last 25 years dealing with wildlife diseases, and many
of them have been mentioned already.
Chronic wasting disease is a prion disease that affects the
cervid or deer family. Although related to bovine spongiform
encephalopathy, it is a distinct disease. Prions are infectious
proteins that convert normal proteins found in the brain into
their abnormal prion form. Over time, microscopic holes appear,
and changes in behavior and body condition develop, and
ultimately result in death.
CWD can be transmitted to other cervids, directly via
saliva, urine, or feces, or indirectly when the environment
gets contaminated. Since this disease was first recognized 50
year ago, it has been reported in 24 States, 2 Canadian
provinces, and several other countries.
Chronic wasting disease has caused declines in some
populations in Colorado and Wyoming, but not in others. There
is no evidence that CWD is a human health threat, or that it
can be naturally transmitted to livestock, but concerns remain.
The public remains confused and concerned about chronic
wasting disease. There is a lack of understanding about the
potential impacts of the disease. There is a feeling among some
interest groups that regulations are overly stringent. The fact
that different States manage CWD differently also adds to this
confusion. Finally, there is a multitude of different messages
concerning CWD's impact to humans and animals.
Bighorn sheep respiratory disease complex was also
previously mentioned by the Chairman. Bighorn sheep are
extremely susceptible to respiratory pathogens. Huge outbreaks
have occurred, in some cases eradicating entire populations. In
a typical scenario there is a die off that affects large
proportions of the population, then subsequently, that
population fails to rebound because young animals fail to get
recruited into the population, even though lambs are being
born.
While clearly not absolute, there is an association with
domestic sheep having close contact with bighorns prior to an
outbreak. This has caused a great deal of contention between
domestic sheep producers and wildlife managers and enthusiasts.
Wyoming resolved this conflict via the Wyoming statewide
Bighorn/Domestic Sheep Interaction Working Group, which
included representatives of State and Federal wildlife and
livestock agencies, producers groups, wildlife non-governmental
organizations, and enthusiasts. By working from a set of common
ground rules and common goals, the group became very effective.
White-nose syndrome of bats is a fungus that was first
detected in New York, and the disease remains most common in
the northeast and mid-Atlantic States. It kills by invading the
skin of hibernating bats and leads to emaciation, which causes
the bats to wake from hibernation early in the year and
subsequently succumb to starvation, cold exposure, or both.
The fungus for white-nose grows well in cold, dark
environments, the type of environments that bats choose to
hibernate. As mentioned, it has wiped out over 90 percent of
the common little brown bat colonies in the northeast, and has
led to the northern long-eared bat becoming listed as a
threatened species. And there is concern that it may threaten
many other species with extinction.
And as also mentioned, bats are important economically for
agriculture. The value that they may contribute ranges from $22
billion to $53 billion per year to agriculture across the U.S.
Chytrid fungus of amphibian is the most important disease
to wildlife populations. Estimates are that chytrid may have
already led to the extinction of 100 species, and may threaten
populations of 200 more. When susceptible species are infected,
chytrid causes reddening and thickening of the skin, thus
preventing its normal function, which also disrupts water and
electrolyte balance, leading to death.
The chytrid fungus is sensitive. It prefers moist
environments, and will not survive below freezing or above 29
degrees Celsius.
Anthrax, the one disease that has not been previously
mentioned, is caused by a bacteria and can be a major cause of
livestock and wildlife mortality worldwide. Animals typically
ingest anthrax spores on vegetation or soil. In the
bloodstream, these replicate as vegetative cells and release
toxins that rapidly kill the animal. When the tissues or blood
from the carcass is exposed to air, the vegetative cells return
to the spore form, and these spores are extremely hardy. They
can literally survive for hundreds of years.
Endemic areas in the U.S., which include parts of Texas,
Montana, and the Dakotas, normally only experience an
occasional death. But occasionally, when conditions are right,
huge outbreaks can occur. Such was the case in Texas this past
summer. It is estimated that 10,000 animals may have died of
anthrax, with an economic impact of over $15 million.
There is a safe and effective vaccine available to
livestock. However, it is impractical to capture and restrain
thousands of wild animals every year to vaccinate them. This is
why researchers at Texas A&M University are working on an oral
vaccine that can be fed to wildlife.
In conclusion, I would like to state how important it is
that funding be made available to address wildlife diseases. I
am particularly concerned with the lack of Federal funds
available for research aimed at real world management dilemmas.
And with that, I thank you for inviting me here today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cook follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Dr. Cook. We are
delighted that you would accept the invitation to be with us
and share your knowledge. Thank you.
We will get to questions in a bit. But first, Ms.
Niederriter.
STATEMENT OF HOLLY NIEDERRITER, ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENTIST IV AND
NON-GAME MAMMAL BIOLOGIST, DELAWARE DIVISION OF FISH AND
WILDLIFE, DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL
CONTROL
Ms. Niederriter. Good morning, and thank you for this
opportunity to discuss this very important issue of wildlife
disease and its impact on wildlife conservation and management.
The information that I will present today will reflect my
experience with bats, amphibians, and reptiles and the diseases
they encounter, and is not intended to diminish the importance
of any of the other wildlife diseases mentioned here today or
those not mentioned. Certainly, diseases such as chronic
wasting disease that affect deer, elk, and similar species,
rabies, avian influenza, which has the potential to
substantially impact the billion dollar poultry industry,
mosquito-borne diseases, such as malaria, West Nile and Zika
viruses, and a host of other diseases are of concern and can
benefit from actions taken by this committee today and others.
However, I will only address the issues with which I am most
familiar.
Although disease is a normal part of life, and the battle
between pathogen and host has been going on since the beginning
of time, the rapid transport of pathogens over vast distances
is a relatively new phenomenon, at least for the species I am
responsible for. As technology has promoted human travel as
well as international commerce, to include pets, foods, and
wildlife, pathogens have hitchhiked along and been accidentally
introduced into wildlife populations. Wildlife exposed to new
pathogens lack the immunity necessary to fend off disease, and
the results can be catastrophic, as was seen and is still seen
with white-nose syndrome in bats.
Examples include white-nose syndrome in bats, which has
killed millions of bats at this point; chytrid fungus, which
has been mentioned today also. There has also been widespread
declines in amphibians from chytrid fungus, and ranavirus has
been impacting frogs, salamanders, and turtles and is one of
those emerging diseases.
Recently, snake fungal disease has been documented on many
snake species in the United States, and a new species of
chytrid fungus has resulted in die offs of salamanders in
Europe. The impact of an emerging disease on wildlife managers
at the State level has profound impacts on our projects. The
need to immediately address diseases often derails other
important objectives, and funds are diverted from more
proactive projects.
In Delaware, the introduction of white-nose syndrome
diverted over half the time of one of the biologists, which was
a substantial operational impact in a State as small as
Delaware. The effects of wildlife diseases extend to other
species, habitats, human health, agricultural health, and even
economic health. As mentioned before, bats consume insects that
feed on crops and can save farmers billions of dollars in
pesticide application costs.
And that really does not include the environmental and
pesticide development costs of the increased need for
pesticides to sustain productive agriculture. White-nose
syndrome has been mentioned several times already, but it is
worthy of those mentions. It has decimated bat populations. As
has been mentioned before, it has killed millions of bats, and
it continues to spread throughout North America.
I have a map here. The disease itself has been documented
in 33 States and 7 Canadian provinces, and the fungus that
causes it, Pseudogymnoascus destructans, has been reported in
five additional States, including North Dakota and California
this year.
Northern long-eared bats, now federally listed as
threatened due to white-nose syndrome, were once one of the
most abundant bat species in the United States. Losing them
would be analogous to the American robin and northern cardinal
suddenly disappearing from people's back yards and feeders.
The white-nose syndrome response has been unique in that
the United States Fish and Wildlife Service was appointed the
lead agency to manage the national response. They have played a
key role in planning, coordinating partners, funding research,
and monitoring efforts by State agencies, universities, and
others. Major progress has been made as a result, and many
tools for combating white-nose syndrome are being tested.
None of this would have been possible without a central
Federal lead and consistent funding. However, none of this
funding is dedicated, as it is appropriated yearly, which puts
many of the proposed solutions at risk of not reaching their
full potential.
The northeast region has a strong, collaborative network of
Federal and State biologists, supported through regional taxa
groups such as Northeast Partners in Amphibian and Reptile
Conservation, Northeast Bat Working Group, and the Northeast
Wildlife Disease Cooperative. Delaware is involved with all of
those groups and has participated in many of these projects.
One of those projects was led by Maryland's herpetologist,
Scott Smith. And the goal was to determine the extent of
ranavirus in a five State area. Ranavirus is a deadly virus
that affects frogs, turtles, and salamanders, and it can kill
all the tadpoles present in a given pond in a matter of days.
The results of this project were alarming, with over 25
percent of the breeding ponds tested in five States positive
for ranavirus, and 40 percent of the ponds in Delaware tested
positive. All of the States had ponds that experienced full die
offs for all the tadpoles in the pond that year.
Despite the results of this and other studies, continued
sampling and research in our region has been limited. Although
there are many organizations and people dedicated to protecting
wildlife of all kinds, and there are many effective disease
response teams targeting specific diseases, the United States
lacks a central organizing group that can quickly coordinate
and mobilize in the event of another catastrophic wildlife
disease.
Diseases transcend political boundaries, and the issue
would benefit from a dedicated, fully funded, federally based
wildlife disease task team to assist States when novel
pathogens are encountered, and with ongoing research and
surveillance efforts for existing and imminent diseases.
Additionally, expanding and strengthening Federal laws to
prevent the introduction of foreign wildlife could greatly
reduce the chances of new diseases being introduced.
I want to thank you again for the opportunity to testify
today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Niederriter follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much to all three of you.
We are now going to proceed with questions, if we may.
I would like to start with Dr. Cook.
Are there lessons that State and Federal wildlife managers
can learn from the many years of brucellosis trials when
creating a cohesive plan for trying to do what we are trying to
do now, with fighting chronic wasting disease, lessons from the
one that may apply to the other?
Mr. Cook. Yes, thank you, Chairman Barrasso, for that
thoughtful question. I worked on the brucellosis issue for a
number of years. It is a frustrating disease, with economic
impacts and wildlife impacts as well.
There was a group known as the Greater Yellowstone
Interagency Brucellosis Committee which was very successful for
a number of years. That group consisted of stakeholders from
the Federal Government, both wildlife agencies and agriculture
agencies, as well as their State counterparts, and livestock
interest organizations, wildlife interest organizations. They
worked collaboratively, to borrow the phrase from Ranking
Member Carper, they worked cooperatively and collaboratively to
achieve some really good successes.
So I think that that kind of shows you, as a role model,
the way that one of these committees can work. By including all
the stakeholders, by having common ground and common interests,
and respecting one another, and working in good faith, they
were able to accomplish a number of things.
We also had some funding that was available through that.
One of the things that we saw that has occurred with
brucellosis more recently is that as funding has declined, some
of the interest, particularly at the Federal level, has
subsequently also declined. So that GYABC group has basically
ceased to exist.
In its place, at the State level, in Wyoming at least,
there is a Governor's brucellosis task force, but just
consisting of the State interest groups and stakeholders,
trying to accomplish more or less the same thing.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much.
Mr. Guertin, fighting wildlife disease your whole life, you
have been a long time, dedicated public servant, sometimes
necessitates measures that impact the environment.
Specifically, spraying for mosquitos to reduce risks to public
health of mosquito-borne disease. We have seen that, certainly,
in Wyoming. Mitigating environmental impacts is important; so
is protecting the public health.
So how does the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service balance
protecting the environment, also protecting humans from
wildlife diseases and the insects that then transmit them?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Service, first
and foremost, works with all of our partners on the landscape
to develop a shared vision and a shared, overarching response
to get at the root cause of the disease outbreak, and then
apply the appropriate treatment as necessary.
There have been cases where the Service, with our partners,
has had to use pesticides and other strong tools. With the
recent screwworm outbreak in the Florida Keys, for example,
like any other partner on the landscape, we have to go through
the necessary NEPA requirements, as well as obtain permits. But
we worked together to apply the best treatment where necessary
and move on.
Senator Barrasso. Dr. Cook, what are some of the biggest
obstacles in getting relevant stakeholders, including the
Federal Government, State government, and local governments on
the same page when potential pandemics like chronic wasting
disease threaten wildlife populations? How do we get everybody
working together?
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Chairman. It is my belief that the
Federal agencies need to facilitate more and regulate less.
They can serve very valuable functions in bringing some of
these interest groups together and show some leadership. But
again, we need to have all the different interest groups there
to give their perspectives. And we need to appreciate and
respect the fact that these different interest groups come at
these diseases with different values and different concerns,
even different beliefs.
So they all need to be represented, we need to choose those
leaders that we have representing those interest groups wisely,
so that we have respected leaders but also ones that we can
depend on to facilitate that communication back to their
constituency groups.
Senator Barrasso. Mr. Guertin, what challenges do you face,
U.S. Fish and Wildlife, on the National Wildlife Refuge System,
when wildlife diseases encroachment becomes an issue?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, we have to
work with all of our partners on the larger landscape to get to
the root cause of these. These diseases and these vectors do
not recognize the political or planning framework that is in
place out there. So we approach them at a larger scale.
We work with all the other partners on the landscape to set
priorities, and then we develop either a response plan or a
treatment plan. And we have demonstrated that with our efforts
to work with the States on chronic wasting disease, under the
leadership of the States, working on white-nose syndrome, and
some of these outbreaks like fever tick in Texas, or screwworm
down in Florida. Shared vision, shared resources, common
objective.
Senator Barrasso. I appreciate all of your comments.
Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Thanks again.
I have a question for all of our witnesses, and I will
start, if I could, Holly, with you.
As we know, climate change is a major impact in the
emergence and spread of wildlife diseases globally.
Temperature, rainfall, humidity, and other environmental
factors all directly influence the incidence, the spread, and
severity of wildlife diseases.
Would you elaborate just a bit, each of you, on your
understanding of how climate change affects the incidence or
spread of wildlife diseases, and provide maybe an example or
two, just very briefly, please?
Holly.
Ms. Niederriter. Thank you. Climate change has the impact
to really exacerbate the problem of wildlife disease. Changing
temperatures can expand the ranges for pathogens and parasites,
it can expand them northward. I can give you specific examples
in a minute. One of them already stressed by other factors are
more susceptible to disease, so in cases where the temperature,
or there are increased storm events or anything like that, will
stress those animals even further, making them also more
susceptible to diseases.
Also for animals that are highly mobile, timing and
availability of resources can be impacted. There was a study of
winter bird counts taken over the past 40 years, and it showed
that 22--nearly 20 percent of the species recorded shifted
their migration route 100 miles north. When they do that, if
their resources don't shift with them, they can get there and
not have enough food or not have enough water or not have
enough habitat. And that is another avenue for, again, being
stressed and having disease take over.
Then there are those species with restricted ranges, like a
lot of the species I have worked with, with amphibians and
reptiles in particular, which use specific ponds in woodlands
and other habitat types. If the drought that is associated with
climate change can impact those ponds by either making them
smaller and less available, so there are a lot of species that
are going to die out right away, and the ones that are left are
going to be forced into smaller ponds, and more individuals in
a smaller space is a great way for pathogens to be passed among
individuals.
Senator Carper. I'm going to ask you to give just a very
few examples and give your fellow witnesses a chance.
OK, thank you very much. For the record, we will want the
examples, please.
Dr. Cook, same question, please. Would you elaborate on
your understanding of how climate change affects the incidence
or spread of wildlife diseases, and maybe provide an example or
two? Just very briefly.
Mr. Cook. Yes, thank you, Ranking Member Carper, and
Chairman Barrasso.
I will start off by saying I am not a climatologist. This
is not my area of expertise. But let me say that the diseases
that I talked about, at least, are all infectious diseases.
They are caused by an agent. And that is regardless of climate
change, that won't change.
We may see, as was previously mentioned, a change in the
distribution of disease. So for example, with the chytrid
fungus, we know that that fungus has an ideal temperature
requirement. So as climate change occurs, you may see areas
that previously didn't have that correct temperature now
consequently do, so we may see the chytrid spreading into those
areas that hadn't been previously impacted.
Conversely, though, you may see that as other areas get too
warm for the chytrid fungus, it may die out from other areas.
Those are things I really can't predict, but that is a
possibility.
As somebody else mentioned, the role of stress, and when I
think about the bighorn sheep pneumonia issues, I don't think
that climate change will directly increase or decrease the
spread or the transmission of that disease. But what could
happen, bighorn sheep live in fragile environments,
environments that don't necessarily have adequate nutrition all
the time. And climate change could stress those environments
even more to where there is less nutrition available, and
clearly, an animal that has less nutrition is going to be less
capable of fighting off any kind of infectious agents.
Senator Carper. All right, thanks, Dr. Cook.
Mr. Guertin, same question, please.
Mr. Guertin. Thank you, Senator. As a land management
agency, we look a lot at our operations, we look at lot at our
land management planning. We are evaluating a lot of stressors
on the landscape, fire, drought, disease, invasive species, and
climatic changes that we are observing out there. Our job is to
see how the species and our response to those challenges and
then design resilient landscapes for the future and design
proactive management strategies to safeguard these natural
resources.
Senator Carper. All right, thanks. My hope is we will have
a chance to ask maybe one other question of you in the second
round. We will see.
Thank you very much.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Braun.
Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have been a manager
of timberland for a long time, and didn't appreciate invasive
species until we are now contending with it in probably a way
that doesn't have the significance and seriousness behind it,
because it isn't dealing with a live animal or a human being.
But what I have seen in the last 15 years from the emerald
ash bore almost completely wiping out the ash population,
hoping that there is going to be some resistance there, and
there might be. But basically the end result has been, we have
lost all of our ash trees. I look at the most venomous of all
the invasives, Japanese stiltgrass, that looks like a regular
weed growing in the woods. Most people have no idea that it
will suffocate all regeneration.
So there is no doubt about it, and I am sure climate is
involved. It is mostly the fact that we are such an
interconnected world that the isolation that kept us from
having all these issues, that is gone. So we don't know what
the solutions are going to be for our forests. Basically no
idea, other than it is geometrically exploding across that
context.
Chronic wasting disease, which to me is one of the things
that, due to the nature of the disease, of course, we want to
be absolutely certain and know if that can ever hop from a deer
to a human being. So far, looks like maybe not.
But I want to focus in on it, because as an owner of timber
ground, that is one of our biggest sources of income, leasing
hunting rights to mostly deer hunters. I know it is on the
doorstep of Indiana.
I will start with you, Mr. Guertin, then we will go across
the panel. How serious is it, in the sense of, have we had any
tools that have worked, and what can we do through conservation
groups, hunting groups, to get the word out that it is
potentially going to be a deal breaker for deer hunters?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Senator.
Unfortunately, at this point, there is no cure or treatment
available. We are focused primarily on halting the spread of
the disease and containing it where found. We have very
aggressive strategies in place, in partnership with our States
who are the lead on this. We work very closely with the outdoor
recreation industry, with the hunting community, to get the
word out. There are a number of protocols that have been
established, including test tools and things like that.
But our real strategy is one of containment and eradication
if need be.
Senator Braun. We tried that on the emerald ash bore, and
sooner or later it just cascaded into all forests.
Dr. Cook, can you explain to us here, when you do have it,
does it completely wipe out a deer herd? Do some survive it?
Has there been any indication of any type of immunity from
within the herd?
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Senator Braun, Chairman Barrasso. That
is actually an excellent question.
As far as we know, all cervids, all deer species are
susceptible to chronic wasting disease. We haven't found a
subtype that is immune. There are some genotypes, animals with
certain genetic makeup, that have a degree of resistance, in
that it takes them longer to develop disease. Once they have
the disease, they live longer with it, but they ultimately do
die of it. There isn't a true resistant form out there that we
have identified at this point, anyway.
One of the things that is really concerning about chronic
wasting disease is that when it gets into the environment, once
the environment becomes contaminated, it is basically there
forever. At least we haven't discovered any ways to clean up
the environment. So that is one of the things that is really
concerning about it.
What is interesting to me is that, as I have mentioned, we
have noticed some populations that are clearly impacted where
the population levels are going down because of chronic wasting
disease. Yet there are other populations where that has not
occurred. And we don't know why that is. I think one of the
keys to really understanding this disease is understanding why
it seems to increase in prevalence in certain environments and
not so much in others. Because that would be our first step in
trying to predict where it is going to go, and maybe getting a
handle on trying to control it.
Senator Braun. What is a host, when it survives in the
ground or whatever, is it just there? Or does it have to--is it
parasitic on something to where it would then reinfect a
revived deer herd?
Mr. Cook. Excellent question, Senator Braun. The prion
basically exists on its own. So we know the prions are shed in
saliva, urine, and feces. They also accumulate in the brain and
spinal cord of an animal. So when an animal dies of CWD, as
that animal disintegrates, deteriorates over time, those prions
are released as that body decomposes and then contaminate the
soil. They exist in the soil, essentially perpetually.
Senator Braun. Wow. Thank you.
And real quickly, Holly, is there any connection between
chronic wasting disease and climate change, that you are aware
of?
Ms. Niederriter. The chronic wasting disease is not a
disease that I know much of anything about. I am also not a
climatologist, but I don't know of any particular connection
for that one.
Senator Braun. Thank you.
Ms. Niederriter. Some other deer diseases, though.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you and
Senator Carper for holding this hearing today.
This really is a big deal for our State and so many States
throughout the country. In fact, I think we have 700,000
hunters and anglers in Arkansas that create 25,000 jobs,
billion dollars in income, which again, much of that money is
put back into conservation. So it is something that is not only
good for the economy, but it is great for trying to protect the
species that we are talking about.
Mr. Guertin, in regard to that, a billion dollars is very
important to the State. I guess what I would like to do is for
you to comment on the economic impact that you see.
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Senator. We are
seeing a lot of concern in the outdoor recreation economy, in
the sport hunting community in particular. People make policy
choices, whether they want to invest in a big hunt, buy arms,
equipment, hotels, et cetera.
We are doing a lot of proactive work with the State fish
and game agencies and others to make sure people know it is
still safe to hunt. There are some questions with CDC and
others about whether this will be transmitted to humans or not.
And many people wait to get their carcass tested. But for us,
it will be a lot of education, outreach, and keeping alive the
American tradition of sport hunting through the support we can
offer.
Senator Boozman. Very good. I think in Arkansas we have had
619 positive cases. Some of the things that the Arkansas game
and fish has done is come up with innovative ways, the drop
boxes, so that you can test elk and deer. Last year, I believe
they tested 1,400 samples. This season they plan to install at
least one drop box in every county.
Are there things like that that your agency is doing that
you have come up with, some innovative ideas to address the
problem?
Mr. Guertin. Senator, a lot of the testing is under the
auspices of the State fish and game agencies. They are
deploying some very innovative solutions, they get some test
kit responses very quickly, while people wait, whether or not
they can have that animal processed there.
The Fish and Wildlife Service provides a lot of technical
capacity and funding through various grant programs that
support those State efforts. And we will continue to do
everything we can to support our colleagues in the State fish
and game agencies and the larger hunting community to get quick
results back.
Senator Boozman. I mentioned conservation, which is so, so,
very important. According to a recent study by the Association
of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, an estimated 58.8 percent, or
$3.3 billion of conservation funds to State wildlife agencies
came from hunting and fishing related activities, either
directly through sale of licenses, tags, stamps, or indirectly
through Federal excise taxes on hunting, recreational shooting,
and angling equipment.
Again, talk to us a little bit about the synergy between
those two, regarding conservation, which is so, so, very
important.
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Senator. The U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service is proud to stand shoulder to
shoulder with our colleagues in the State fish and game
agencies. We work with them under the umbrella organization of
the Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies to align our
priorities, to align our capacity. We all are here to serve the
American people and make sure we have sustainable populations
of wildlife for generations to come.
Key to that is, of course, the outdoor recreation industry.
Another key driver for us is the larger conservation mission.
So the Service provides a lot of grant funding and capacity, as
do the States, to share the common objective of conservation to
benefit the generations to come.
Senator Boozman. And also, Senator Barrasso, I want to
thank you that we are a co-sponsor of your bill concerning
chronic wasting. I know that what that does is make it such
that when completed, the study would give the State wildlife
agencies and wildlife experts better information to conduct
targeted research on how the disease is transmitted, and
determine which areas are most at risk, and develop consistent
advice for hunters to prevent further spread.
That to me--and certainly as a physician, you are certainly
aware of the importance of getting good information out there.
Two, going to the cause. So again, give yourself a pat. We
appreciate it.
Senator Barrasso. I am just grateful for your partnership
in this, and your cooperation, and being willing to lend your
name and support to this bill. Thank you for all your help.
Senator Boozman. Well, thank you all, and again, thank you
all for your hard work in fighting these things. The way that
you can help us is as you think of things that we can be better
supportive, in the areas that you are working on, be sure, and
let us know. The nice thing about this is it is not a
Republican or Democrat thing. It is something that the entire
country is interested in, and we are interested in doing. Like
I said, that is how you can support us and help us. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thanks, Senator Boozman.
Senator Carper, you had an additional question.
Senator Carper. I do. I understand Senator Gillibrand is
close by, and if she walks in, I will just yield back to her
and then pick up my time after she is finished.
Very briefly, from each of you, give us one piece of
advice--we think you all agree that you would really like to--
in the Navy we call it like a foot stomping kind of deal, maybe
in the Marines and Army as well, our instructors in our
training, if they had something they really wanted us to
remember for the test, they'd stomp their feet. And that was
something we should write down.
But in terms of advice you think you all agree on, what
would be something you think you would really want us to take
home?
Do you want to go first, Mr. Guertin?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you, Senator. The key, unifying theme
for all of us is the collaborative nature, the partnership
nature, the all hands on deck nature of the response. The Fish
and Wildlife Service is one entity among many. We are proud to
partner with the States, academia, the NGOs, the other Federal
agencies, to develop a common mission, and all of us deploy our
resources as a priority against getting ahead of these wildlife
diseases, so we can ensure wildlife and fisheries resources for
the continuing benefit of the American people.
Senator Carper. All right, thank you.
Same question, Dr. Cook.
Mr. Cook. Yes, thank you, Ranking Member Carper. Coming
from a university perspective, I have to put in a plug for more
funding for research, of course. But I think this is another
good example of the cooperation and collaboration, the idea of
a task force that is overseeing this to provide direction.
As I mentioned, one of my concerns is that a lot of
wildlife disease research that is ongoing is very esoteric and
not very practical. By having a working group that is
overseeing this, that has stakeholders, that provides some
direction on where that research ought to go, they can make
sure that that research that is being conducted has management
implications, will actually help wildlife managers in making
their decisions on how to manage not just chronic wasting
disease, but others as well.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
Holly, same question, very briefly, please.
Ms. Niederriter. My answer is pretty much the same as
theirs. That collaborative effort is what is really needed, and
having a central--one central entity that can oversee all of
that. That helps keep repetition from happening, it really
helps focus on specific, the most important aspects of it. In
the case of white-nose syndrome, and in the case of Bsal, which
is a salamander disease that is happening, there is a central
group of people who came up with a specific plan, with really
good guidelines for how to move forward. I think that really
does help the States, it helps us focus on those things.
But funding really does have to be a part of it as well,
especially to States.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
I reserve the balance of my time and yield to Senator
Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking
Member, for the hearing.
Lyme disease is a serious problem in New York and across
the country. The Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies estimated
that more than 400,000 people are diagnosed with Lyme disease
in the United States each year. And this number is increasing
rapidly due to a number of factors, including climate change.
According to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
New York is one of the top States in the country for reported
cases of Lyme disease. Lyme disease is transmitted to humans by
deer ticks, and can have debilitating and life long health
effects.
Mr. Guertin, what can Fish and Wildlife Service do to help
States and localities address the prevalence of Lyme disease?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Senator.
The Fish and Wildlife Service can provide a lot of
technical assistance. We can provide grant funding to our
colleagues in the State fish and game agencies. A lot of the
management authority for whitetail deer is vested with our
colleagues in the State fish and game agencies. So in this
space, we are more of a technical assistance provider and can
help in a larger outreach and education and eradication
campaign, coordination, so to speak.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you.
Ms. Niederriter, can you talk about the impacts that
climate change is having on the habitat and range of deer ticks
and what effect that could have on the spread of Lyme disease
in the United States?
Ms. Niederriter. I don't really know the answer to that
specifically. But I would expect, and it certainly has been the
case with some tick species and some animals that are being
impacted by them, that as the climate warms, and it gets warmer
in places that weren't warm before, more ticks--ticks are
active when it is warm out. And they thrive in warmer climates,
so they are most likely to be a worse problem, based on what we
know about climate change and ticks.
Senator Gillibrand. Would you do some research for me and
submit a letter to the committee with a fuller answer on that
question?
Ms. Niederriter. Yes.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you.
Are there any additional resources that States need to
address the factors that contribute to the spread of Lyme
disease, in your opinion?
Ms. Niederriter. Would you repeat the question?
Senator Gillibrand. Are there additional resources that
States need to address the factors that contribute to the
spread of Lyme disease?
Ms. Niederriter. I am sure that they could use more funding
to look at that. I know in Delaware, we recently hired a
biologist who is focusing mostly on ticks. So that is a huge
help, and I am not sure where the funding came from for that.
But if each State had that, and there was like a central
overseer to help collaborate all that information, that would
be helpful.
Senator Gillibrand. Interesting.
I want to move now to salamander disease. Ms. Niederriter,
in your testimony, you mentioned Bsal, a fungal disease that is
currently devastating salamanders in Europe. Fortunately, this
disease has not yet made it to the United States.
A few weeks ago, I received a letter from a 5 year old
constituent of mine named Earl, who wrote to ask that I help
salamanders, his favorite animal. Here is the letter; I ask
unanimous consent to submit the letter and his parents' letter
into the record.
Senator Barrasso. From a 5 year old, absolutely, there is
no objection.
[The referenced information was not received at time of
print.]
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you.
So I would like to ask you what we can do to help prevent
the spread of Bsal to the United States. As I am sure you are
aware, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service established the North
American Bsal Task Force in 2015. Acting on recommendations
from the task force, the Fish and Wildlife Service banned the
importation of 201 different species of salamander.
However, recent reports in scientific literature show that
many species of frogs, toads, and newts may carry Bsal without
any signs of infection. Should the work of the task force be
restarted to consider further restrictions on imported
amphibians?
Ms. Niederriter. To answer that very shortly, yes. I do
think that that would be a helpful thing to do for sure. And
additional research into how the disease can be transmitted
between those different species. I know there is research going
on right now looking at specific species that are likely to
carry it and to have it. But restricting the disease from
getting in is priority one right now.
Senator Gillibrand. What can we as the committee do to
ensure that the task force takes a more active posture in
surveillance and response to Bsal?
Ms. Niederriter. I am not sure how the committees really
work and at what level they can work. But I would think that
reaching out to the individual States and to the task force
would be helpful.
Senator Gillibrand. OK. And would additional resources for
the partners in amphibian and reptile conservation, or the
regional State wildlife grants, be an option for preventing
Bsal introduction?
Ms. Niederriter. Can you repeat that question? I'm sorry.
Senator Gillibrand. More money, would that be helpful?
Ms. Niederriter. Yes, absolutely. Always.
[Laughter.]
Senator Barrasso. All three members have testified to that
effect already.
Senator Gillibrand. That is always a good idea.
Mr. Guertin, some of the current--this is now moving to
honeybees--oh, I am out of time.
Mr. Guertin, I would like to submit two questions for the
record for you on the colony collapse disorder and other things
affecting our honeybees.
Mr. Guertin. We would be glad to respond for the record.
Thank you, Senator.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. And Dr. Cook, as an academician, also
requested additional funding.
Senator Gillibrand. Excellent. More experts.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Thanks very much.
We are expected to know, as Senators, a little bit about
almost everything. I like to say, a mile wide and an inch deep.
Some issues, some areas we are expected to know more.
For those of us on this committee, we focus on a lot of
environmental issues, and a lot of infrastructure,
transportation and infrastructure issues. The Chairman is going
to from here to the Foreign Relations Committee. So he is
expected to know a whole lot more about that, and more in
depth.
I know in your job, I suspect in your job, Mr. Guertin, you
are expected to have a whole lot of information about a lot of
stuff in the area of your jurisdiction. What I would just ask
from each of you, how important would you say--and we will
start with you, Holly--how important would you say is a
director's expertise in wildlife management and wildlife laws
in addressing wildlife disease and other complex wildlife
challenges? How important is that?
Ms. Niederriter. How important is their----
Senator Carper. How important is a director's expertise in
wildlife management and wildlife laws in addressing wildlife
disease and other complex wildlife challenges? How important is
it?
Ms. Niederriter. I think it is very important, because
understanding them is really the first step in how to address
any of the issues that occur.
Senator Carper. All right, thank you.
Dr. Cook, any thoughts?
Mr. Cook. Yes, I would agree, thank you, Senator Carper,
for the question. I would agree that it is important. I think
they have to have the 30,000 foot view. We can't expect them to
be completely up to date on all the intricate details, but
certainly to understand the broad implications of disease
management. I would consider that to be important, yes, sir.
Senator Carper. All right.
Mr. Guertin, any thoughts?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Senator. In the
Federal agencies, for the executive level positions, we are
also looking at the executive core qualifications, leading
change, leading people, these executive functioning skills,
leadership communications, project management, as well as the
technical credentials of the leadership cadre.
Senator Carper. Thanks.
One last question, if I could, Mr. Guertin, dealing with
threatened and endangered species. While wildlife disease
presents a serious threat to all species, it can be
particularly dangerous for threatened and endangered species,
as you know. These species are especially vulnerable to
disease, because they have small population sizes, lower
genetic diversity, and they are already stressed by factors
like habitat loss, invasive species, and pollution.
To what extent is disease a barrier to the Service's
implementation of the Endangered Species Act, and how does
disease factor into the Service's ability to recover threatened
and endangered species?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Senator. When the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service makes an evaluation, a listing
determination of any species, we base it solely on the best
available scientific information, and we use what is called a
five factor analysis. We evaluate five prevailing conditions.
They include present or perceived destruction of habitat, it
includes disease or predation, it involves over-utilization for
commercial or other purposes, it involves the status of
existing regulatory mechanisms, and then any other man made
factors that would affect its survival.
So disease is one of the big five that we use to make any
potential determination for Federal protection under the
Endangered Species Act.
Senator Carper. OK, thank you.
Thank you all.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Cardin.
Senator Cardin. Let me thank all of you for your service,
and for your being here today.
I just want to make a point about how we need to deal with
our environment as it relates to the spread of diseases. When
you look at the success that we had on the Eastern Shore of
Maryland, on the DelMarVa Peninsula fox squirrel, which was
listed as an endangered species, it is now off, it was habitat
loss that was the major culprit for the endangerment of that
species.
So as we are looking at challenges today, and I look at my
own State, look at the Chesapeake Bay watershed, the
restoration of wetlands is critically important for many, many
reasons. One reason is that it protects our species. Climate
change has made it more challenging, because we are now facing
different challenges than we did before.
So what type of strategy can we deploy to sensitize our
efforts in these areas, recognizing that the health of the
species are very much at stake? How can we do a better job in
education, and in practical ways that we can help restore
habitat to protect species?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Senator. The Fish
and Wildlife Service, first and foremost, wants to develop a
shared vision with all the stakeholders on the landscape we
operate in, starting with our colleagues in the local fish and
wildlife agency, as well as other primary landowners who have
management authority in that area.
We then try to work to develop a common vision for
conservation, working landscapes. We then try to bring the
tools we can to bear, there are a variety of things, there is
our Partners for Fish and Wildlife program, that does a lot of
work with private landowners on habitat restoration for
priority and trust species.
We can provide a lot of technical assistance, fish passage
and other things. And then the Secretary of Interior has a
number of conservation programs, including the North American
Waterfowl Conservation Fund, the LWCF and others. We can
prioritize conservation easement overlays, in some cases, fee
title. A variety of tools to deploy in a chosen project area,
so to speak, to focus on a larger conservation outcome while
balancing that with other uses of the land.
Senator Cardin. One thing I would point out is that we
found the success of the Chesapeake Bay program was because the
public understands it. They get it, they understand that what
they do, how they handle the runoff, how they handle their
farming practices, how we handle development, how we handle
treatment of waste, all have a major impact on the quality of
the Chesapeake Bay.
I am not sure we have done the same degree of educating the
public as protection of species in this regard. Can we be more
effective in the way that we engage the public as the
importance of these programs in regard to the health of
species?
Mr. Guertin. Certainly, Senator. The Chesapeake Bay and all
the partners there are really a beacon for conservation for the
rest of the country, all the work that the State of Maryland,
Delaware, Virginia have done, the Federal partners, unifying
around a lot of larger objectives, balancing recreational and
commercial fishing, balancing against invasive species control,
such as nutria eradication, and then using the necklace of
wildlife refuges and other lands.
And the big partnership with private landowners and people
have rallied around some of the big species, striped bass,
waterfowl, and others, as iconic to represent the needs of that
area. We can certainly replicate that type of success story in
other parts of the country to demonstrate the value of a
balanced approach to species conservation while Americans make
a living on the same landscape.
Senator Cardin. I will look forward to working with you on
that. I am out frequently with your people in the community. It
is great, I just don't see us concentrating as much, I think,
on this area as we should. So I think we should look for
opportunities to enhance these areas.
Mr. Guertin. Thank you, Senator. We would welcome the
opportunity to work further with you and develop that common
vision and move forward to implement with our State partners.
Senator Cardin. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Cardin.
Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman, I have no letters from 5 year
olds, but I do have a unanimous consent request to enter into
the record additional written testimony from stakeholders
impacted by the spread of wildlife disease. And just as a P.S.,
the value of agriculture in our State's economy is about $8
billion a year, $8 billion, which is a lot of money for a
little State.
And people say to me, why do we care about the brown bat,
why should it be that important. And I say, agriculture is our
No. 1 industry, tourism close, No. 2. It is important we have
those bats, because they are eating mosquitos and a lot of
other things that help us as tourists and make Delaware more
attractive, and help our farmers be more successful and
profitable. Thank you.
[The referenced information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Carper.
I want to thank all the witnesses, thank you for being
here, thank you for your exquisite testimony. It was very well
received. We appreciate your time answering the questions.
There are no more questions for the panel today, but
members may submit questions for the record. The hearing record
will therefore stay open for 2 weeks.
We hope that if you receive questions, and I know you have
been given a homework assignment by one of the members, if you
would please get that in within the amount of time.
I want to thank the witnesses for your time and your
testimony.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:20 a.m., the hearing was concluded.]