- RESOURCES NEEDED TO PROTECT AND SECURE THE HOMELAND
[Senate Hearing 116-189]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-189
RESOURCES NEEDED TO PROTECT AND SECURE THE HOMELAND
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MAY 23, 2019
__________
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-698 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin, Chairman
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
RICK SCOTT, Florida
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Gabrielle D'Adamo Singer, Staff Director
Michael J. Lueptow, Chief Counsel for Homeland Security
Michelle D. Woods, Senior Policy Advisor
Christopher S. Boness, Professional Staff Member
David M. Weinberg, Minority Staff Director
Alexa E. Noruk, Minority Director of Homeland Security
Michelle M. Benecke, Minority Senior Counsel
Samuel Rodarte Jr., Minority Professional Staff Member
Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
Thomas J. Spino, Hearing Clerk
C O N T E N T S
------
Opening statements:
Page
Senator Johnson..............................................
1
Senator Peters...............................................
2
Senator Portman..............................................
8
Senator Hassan...............................................
11
Senator Paul.................................................
13
Senator Carper...............................................
16
Senator Hawley...............................................
18
Senator Scott................................................
21
Senator Romney...............................................
23
Senator Lankford.............................................
25
Senator Rosen................................................
28
Senator Sinema...............................................
30
Prepared statements:
Senator Johnson..............................................
43
Senator Peters...............................................
44
WITNESSES
Thursday, May 23, 2019
Hon. Kevin K. McAleenan, Acting Secretary, U.S. Department of
Homeland Security
Testimony....................................................
2
Prepared statement...........................................
47
APPENDIX
Minors, Families, Asylum chart...................................
54
Statements submitted for the Record:
Church World Service.........................................
55
National Treasury Employees Union............................
56
Responses to post-hearing questions for the Record:
Mr. McAleenan................................................
67
RESOURCES NEEDED TO PROTECT AND SECURE THE HOMELAND
----------
THURSDAY, MAY 23, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:16 a.m., in
room SD-342, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Ron Johnson,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Johnson, Portman, Paul, Lankford, Romney,
Scott, Hawley, Peters, Carper, Hassan, Harris, Sinema, and
Rosen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JOHNSON\1\
Chairman Johnson. Good morning. This hearing will come to
order.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Johnson appears in the
Appendix on page 43.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The hearing title is ``Resources Needed to Protect and
Secure the Homeland.'' We will review the budget of the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS). We have the Acting
Secretary of Homeland Security, the Honorable Kevin McAleenan,
here to testify. I want to, first of all, appreciate and thank
you for your long service to this country, and in particular at
this moment where we are grappling with so many issues: the
aftermath of an unprecedented level of disasters with
hurricanes and fires in California, hurricanes obviously in the
gulf coast, the disaster that is occurring at the border right
now. And if we could just quick put up our chart.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The chart referenced by Senator Johnson appears in the Appendix
on page 54.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not only do we have it on the chart, but we had an event in
Oshkosh over the weekend that required a giveaway, so I quick
produced out of my factory some cups with that exact same
chart. But what it shows is how out of control this problem is.
In the first 7 months of this year, we have over 300,000--the
total is actually 312,000 individuals coming over the border
illegally and being apprehended either as an unaccompanied
alien children (UAC) or as part of a family unit. I know these
are not for public release yet, so they are initial numbers.
But in the first 3 weeks of May, another 65,000 unaccompanied
children but, again, primarily people coming in as family units
and were apprehended at the border, in between the ports of
entry (POEs), and over 97,000 total apprehensions. So we are on
a path of breaking again, from I guess it was March, 103,000, I
believe it was April, 109,000 or 106,000, and now we will be
beyond that in May.
So this is a growing problem. It needs to be taken
seriously, and it is what you and the men and women that you
lead are grappling with. God bless you for doing it. I mean
that in all sincerity. I know because I have been to the
border. We are going to be going to the border with the Ranking
Member and a couple other Senators later today. We know what
you are having to deal with, and it is an impossible task.
So, again, I just appreciate your dedication, your
willingness to serve, and with that, I will turn it over to the
Ranking Member.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PETERS
Senator Peters. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Acting
Secretary McAleenan, we appreciate you being here today.
I am going to defer on any of my opening comments. I know
our time is limited. We have members that have a meeting coming
up, and I know you are on a hard stop as well. I know Members
of this Committee want to ask questions, so I will ask
unanimous consent (UC) to put my opening statement in the
record.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Peters appears in the
Appendix on page 44.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Johnson. Without objection. I will ask the same
request.
Senator Peters. That sounds good.
I will turn it over to you.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Secretary, it is the tradition of
this Committee to swear in witnesses, so if you will stand and
raise your right hand. Do you swear that the testimony you will
give before this Committee will be the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth, so help you, God?
Mr. McAleenan. I do.
Chairman Johnson. Please be seated.
The Hon. Kevin McAleenan is the Acting Secretary for the
Department of Homeland Security. He has been serving in this
position since April 2019. Prior to this appointment, Mr.
McAleenan had a distinguished career at U.S. Customs and Border
Protection (CBP) where he recently served as Commissioner of
CBP since January 2017. In 2015, Mr. McAleenan received the
Presidential Rank Award, the Nation's highest civil service
award. He holds a bachelor degree from Amherst College and a
J.D. from the University of Chicago Law School. Mr. McAleenan.
TESTIMONY OF THE HON. KEVIN K. MCALEENAN,\2\ ACTING SECRETARY,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ranking Member Peters, and distinguished Members of the
Committee, Senator Portman. I appreciate the opportunity to
appear before you today. It is a sincere honor to serve as
Acting Secretary and to represent the dedicated men and women
of the Department of Homeland Security. I really do believe
that DHS has the most compelling mission in government: to
safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. As
Acting Secretary, I intend to work with this Committee--and I
have been in the last 6 weeks--and serve as an advocate for the
Department to ensure our people have the resources and
authorities they need to carry out their critical missions on
behalf of the American people.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The prepared statement of Mr. McAlennan appears in the Appendix
on page 47.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As we are highlighting the President's 2020 budget, I do
want to point out a few of the key areas where there are
critical investments across DHS and the multi-missions that we
carry out. I want to ensure this Committee that we are not
going to lose any momentum on our multiple missions from
cybersecurity to disaster response as we see what is happening
this morning with the floods in Oklahoma, the tornado that
touched down in Missouri. We are going to stay on top of all of
these mission sets, and I do want to highlight some of the
investments there. And then, of course, I will speak to the
border security crisis, which this Committee is very focused on
and understands very well.
The President's budget requests funding for critical
missions across the Department. For our Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), the budget requests $1.3
billion to assess evolving cybersecurity risks, protect Federal
Government information systems and critical infrastructure. The
budget also supports the launch of Project 2020, a new
initiative designed to get all States to a baseline level of
election infrastructure and cybersecurity, well before the
national elections of 2020.
The budget supports additional transportation security
officers to enhance security effectiveness and stay ahead of
increasing costs and growing traffic at airports nationwide.
The $3.3 billion for Transportation Security Administration
(TSA) also includes funding for an additional 700 screeners and
350 computed tomography (CT) units.
For the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), this
budget provides a significant increase in the Disaster Relief
Fund (DRF), begins implementation of new requirements in the
Disaster Recovery Reform Act, and funds critical operational
positions identified in the 2017 hurricane season after-action
report. And for the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), this budget
continues efforts to fund the Offshore Patrol Cutter and
advances the Polar Security Cutter program.
But with regard to border security and immigration
enforcement, as you are well aware, we are in the midst of an
ongoing security and humanitarian crisis at the Southwest
Border. I think your chart puts that in stark context, stark
relief, Mr. Chairman. Almost 110,000 migrants attempted to
cross without legal status last month, the most in over a
decade, and over 65 percent, as you highlight, were families
and unaccompanied children. That means over 40,000 children
entered our immigration system in a single month.
The President's budget will help address this for 2020.
First it requests $523 million for the humanitarian crisis.
This money will allow us to provide better care for those we
come into contact with through apprehension, custody,
detention, and removal.
Second, to address the border security aspects of the
crisis, it requests $5 billion in funding for the construction
of approximately 200 miles of a new border wall system, a
proven deterrent requested by our front-line agents, and it
also calls for 750 Border Patrol agents, 273 CBP officers, and
over 660 U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) front-
line and support personnel.
The budget request will make much-needed upgrades to
sensors, command-and-control systems, and aircraft to help our
men and women combat criminals who are profiting from human
suffering.
While our 2020 budget will help address this crisis, we
will need additional funding much sooner. Given the scale of
what we are facing, we will exhaust our resources before the
end of this fiscal year (FY), which is why the Administration
sent a supplemental funding request to the Congress over 3
weeks ago. In addition to the $3 billion in that request for
the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to care for
unaccompanied children, the request includes $1.1 billion for
the Department of Homeland Security and would provide $391
million for humanitarian assistance, including temporary
migrant processing facilities at the Southwest Border, $530
million for border operations, to include our surge personnel
expenses and increased transportation and detention costs, and
$178 million for operations and support costs including pay and
retention incentives for our operational personnel as well as
upgrading our information technology (IT) systems.
The supplemental request is critical, but unless Congress
addresses the pull factors--namely, our vulnerable legal
framework for immigration--children will continue to be put at
risk during a dangerous journey to our border. Without these
authorities and resources, the situation will remain untenable,
and while DHS will continue to do all it can to manage this
crisis in an operationally effective, humane, safe, and secure
manner, every day that Congress does not act puts more lives at
risk and increases the burden on the system.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, I have been doing this
for a long time. This is the third time I have been in a
leadership role during a migration surge at the border of
families and children, both in 2014 and 2016, at the end of the
last Administration. We have more than doubled those two crises
combined in the first 7 months of this year, and we are still
in the middle of that effort.
We are doing everything we can to address it, as you will
see, as you go down to the border again today. On the medical
front, we had about 10 people providing medical care at our top
central processing center as of a year ago. We now have 50 in
that center alone. There is 24/7 coverage in all of our highest
traffic sectors, and we are expanding. We have U.S. Coast Guard
medical teams on the ground. We have Health and Human Services
Public Health Service Commission Corps on the ground with us
working to protect especially children that come into our
custody.
We have expanded our facilities. We have already put up a
thousand spaces of soft-sided facilities in two locations. We
are going to have 10,000 by the end of next month to address
this growing crisis. We have gotten tremendous support from the
Department of Defense (DOD), the National Guard, from our State
and local partners, and we are working closely with
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and charities to try to
help those in need. But none of that is going to be enough. We
are still seeing too much tragedy, and this week and this month
have been no exception. Forty percent of our agents are off the
line doing processing, transportation, care, hospital watch,
and feeding and cleaning of migrants in our custody. This leads
to significant border security risks that I do not think we can
tolerate given the drug epidemic and the dangers to our
communities across the country.
My second week in this job, I went to see the 9/11 Memorial
Museum to get reinspired at the origin of the Department of
Homeland Security, and it was a good reminder that Homeland
Security, when we started, was nonpartisan. It was a
nonpartisan mission that all Americans supported. I know this
Committee works in that spirit. Through your prior hearings to
become expert on this
and help inform the American people, for your efforts to go to
the border--and I know you are going again--this is a unique
approach this Committee is taking to actually grapple with the
problem based on a shared set of facts and solve it. I want to
work with you and the Ranking Member and both parties. Our
front-line agents and officers need it, and they deserve that
support from this Committee. The children being put at risk do
as well, and the security of our border and the future of our
region depend on it.
So I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today,
and I look forward to the dialogue this morning.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I am happy to defer my questioning to you or to Senator
Portman, just to keep things moving. Did you want to ask your
questions now?
Senator Peters. Yes, that would be great.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Go ahead, Senator Peters.
Senator Peters. Well, thank you, Commissioner McAleenan,
for your comments. I know you mentioned in your opening
comments the challenges, the medical challenges in particular,
that you are having along the border.
But last evening, it was reported that a young girl from El
Salvador died last year while in custody, but her death was
undisclosed publicly until last night, which made her now the
sixth migrant child to die after crossing the Southern Border
in less than a year.
We all agree that we must absolutely secure our borders,
but the death of children--and I know you agree with this. The
death of children in custody is simply unacceptable. But first
we must identify what went wrong and ensure that this does not
happen again. So some brief questions.
Yes or no, does every child in CBP custody have access to a
pediatrician?
Mr. McAleenan. No.
Senator Peters. Does the CBP have clear protocols regarding
the transfer of children to a hospital when presenting acute
symptoms, especially when we look at the aggressive nature of
this current flu outbreak that we are seeing along the border?
Mr. McAleenan. Yes, and as Commissioner, I directed that
all children coming into our custody be screened by a certified
medical professional, and that is what we have undertaken steps
to accomplish, both with our extension of our contract to get
medical professionals into our facilities as well as partnering
with the U.S. Coast Guard and the Public Health Service
Commission Corps, and that effort is extensive and ongoing,
with 65 people being brought to the hospital every day, watched
and supported by agents and officers.
So this is a massive effort going on the border to protect
children, and I know we have saved dozens and dozens of lives
over the past several months.
Senator Peters. Although there have been cases--in fact, we
had a recent case of a 16-year-old that passed away who was not
taken to the hospital. So there are obviously gaps that have to
be filled.
Mr. McAleenan. He was both screened and offered medical
care, and we are going to look forward to the findings of the
Inspector General (IG) to see if we can do better. One of the
key areas there, though, I have to highlight is the fact that
HHS does not have enough funding for bed space for teenage
males, and that is the main arriving unaccompanied child right
now. So we are not able to move teenage males as expeditiously
as we should be to the better situation for care within Health
and Human Services, and we need that support from Congress in
the supplemental.
Senator Peters. I have asked many of your colleagues in
prior DHS leadership and I will ask you again today: How long
is too long to detain a child?
Mr. McAleenan. So detention for a child is for the safety
of the child. That is the only reason to do it. We do not
believe that children should be detained in Border Patrol
stations very long at all. We would like to move them as
swiftly as possible to Health and Human Services, to a more
appropriate setting for unaccompanied children, where they can
be placed with an appropriate sponsor through HHS' processes.
And I think that is the best approach. I would like to get that
to 24 hours to 40 hours and try to comply at all times with the
standard in the Trafficking Victims Reauthorization Protection
Act (TVRPA), which is 72 hours.
Senator Peters. So I get the sense you are saying any time
is really too long to detain a child, so you try to expedite--
--
Mr. McAleenan. An unaccompanied child. A child arriving
with a parent, I do believe we should be able to have them in
an appropriate setting with access to education, recreational
space, medical care, and a courtroom where we can finish an
immigration proceeding upon arrival at the border as opposed
to----
Senator Peters. As quickly as possible.
Mr. McAleenan [continuing]. Not finishing that. As quickly
as possible, yes. There is no desire to detain children in any
capacity for very long at all.
Senator Peters. It has been reported that DHS is requiring
FEMA, CISA, TSA, and other components to contribute staff to
various border security missions. Securing our Northern and
Southern Borders must be our top priority. We have a Northern
Border in this country as well, two borders, and I am concerned
about the patient impact on readiness in my State of Michigan
as well as other Northern Border States.
So my time is short, but could you give me quickly a brief
synopsis of the specific duties that these folks are being
asked to do on the Southern Border--FEMA, CISA, TSA?
Mr. McAleenan. So as in any crisis, we do call on
volunteers from across DHS to respond. Last year--or 2017,
during the crises of Hurricane Harvey, Hurricane Irma,
Hurricane Maria, we had up to 2,000 people deployed from across
the Department at any given time. Right now we have about 250
volunteers that are deployed, and what I have asked all of our
leaders to do is make a risk assessment and carefully decide
who is available to come support this crisis. But they are
doing all kinds of duties, from attorneys to commercial
driver's license holders that are helping transport migrants,
to folks just simply helping with food service and care of
people in our custody.
So it is a variety of missions, and we are very fortunate
to have volunteers that are willing to help out in a crisis.
Senator Peters. Obviously, a shortage of personnel is an
issue for you, and even before the recent increase in migrant
traffic at the Southern Border, it was clear that CBP was not
adequately staffed to secure our borders and facilitate the
other mission, which is to move legitimate trade and travel at
our ports of entry. The CBP workload staffing model developed
under your leadership as the CBP commissioner identifies a
shortfall of thousands of CBP officials. Again, this is even
prior to the current situation. To help address this gap in
personnel, Senator Cornyn and I have introduced some bipartisan
legislation, also Senator Portman has joined as well, to give
clear authority and direction to hire much-needed CBP officers
to the levels that were identified in the model that you put
together. I am especially concerned about critical personnel
being moved from Michigan to the Southern Border while Michigan
continues to remain two of the three busiest border crossings
in the Nation.
So, Acting Secretary, will you commit to working with
Congress to advance this legislation and close the hiring gaps
that we currently have with CBP officers?
Mr. McAleenan. I will, Senator, and appreciate greatly your
support to additional hiring of CBP officers. It is one of the
most critical occupations both for our security and
facilitating trade and travel. We have netted 2,000 CBP
officers over the last 5 years with Congress' support, and this
year we are expecting to net over 1,200 additional CBP
officers. Our hiring is very successful for CBP officers now
based on a number of changes we have made with support from
Congress, but I do think a model-based staffing strategy that
accommodates the growing traffic, growing security threats, is
an appropriate way to plan for the future, and I appreciate the
legislative efforts to support that.
Senator Peters. Great. Well, I appreciate your support in
getting this legislation passed and signed into law to support
your efforts.
Mr. Chairman, I have a little remaining time, but I will
defer that so we make sure everybody has a chance to ask
questions. We will stick to our strict 7-minute timeline.
Chairman Johnson. Absolutely. I am going to use my 7
minutes in little clips.
We were talking a little bit about the hiring rate. Is it
true that we have a greater hiring than attrition rate right
now?
Mr. McAleenan. For CBP officers, it significantly exceeds
attrition. For our Border Patrol agents, it is much closer,
unfortunately, to attrition, although we are making progress
recovering from the shutdown period.
Chairman Johnson. That is good news. I am highly concerned
with the current crisis, particularly until when you do not
have the resources and you are requiring all these volunteers,
that Border Patrol officers will start quitting. I am highly
concerned about the attrition rate. Have you seen any uptick at
all on that in the recent crisis?
Mr. McAleenan. So our attrition is higher than I would like
for Border Patrol agents. My first decision as Acting Secretary
was to extend a 5-percent retention incentive to our agents who
I think deserve it and are working incredibly hard at the
journeyman level. So we need to continue to look at all ways to
maintain our tremendous professional workforce, and I do think
they need to see a light at the end of the tunnel from this
kind of crisis. And working with Congress to solve it
legislatively I think is our best approach to do that.
Chairman Johnson. Again, I want to urge all my colleagues
here to support the emergency supplemental. It is just critical
that you get that funding, and not just for HHS but the $1.1
billion that DHS is requesting in that as well. Senator
Portman.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PORTMAN
Senator Portman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, we appreciate you coming back again, and you
are here at a time where there is, without question, a crisis
at the border. It is humanitarian. It is a drug crisis. It is
an immigration crisis.
Just to put some numbers around it, if you could help us
just so people can understand what is going on, my sense is
there are now over 100,000 people coming to the border. My
sense is there is about a 75-percent increase compared to last
year in the number of children who are showing up at the border
and about a 400-percent increase in the number of families
coming to the border, so not only higher numbers but more
families with children. Is that accurate?
Mr. McAleenan. That is exactly correct.
Senator Portman. So it is overwhelming. And we appreciate
your service and the service of the men and women of CBP and
the Border Patrol who are trying to deal with this issue, many
of whom are being pulled off their normal jobs, as I understand
it, to deal with the humanitarian crisis. Is that accurate?
Mr. McAleenan. That is very true. I mean, the processing
and care of families and children is much more intensive, and
to have 40 percent of our Border Patrol agents engaged just in
that function, not on the line, not addressing the border
security parts of their mission, is a crisis by any measure. I
know you have been committed, Senator, to countering the drug
epidemic in our country, especially the synthetic opioid
concerns. I am very concerned we are missing drugs right now on
that border due to this crisis.
Senator Portman. What we are seeing on the drug front is
pretty scary because we have finally some progress on the
opioid front. For the first time in 8 years, we have seen some
decrease in overdose deaths. But what is happening in my State
of Ohio and around the country is you see a lot more crystal
meth coming in from Mexico. It is pure, it is powerful, it is
inexpensive. Frankly, there are not any more meth labs in
places like Ohio. Why? Because it is so darn inexpensive and so
powerful to just buy the stuff from the cartels coming up from
Mexico. So you have heroin, fentanyl, cocaine, but now pure
crystal meth.
On that, since you raise it, what is the single most
important thing that we could do today to stop the crystal meth
from coming across the border?
Mr. McAleenan. So the fiscal year 2019 budget does a
tremendous amount for us in this regard, and we are going to
deploy those resources. Nonintrusive inspection technology for
the Southern Border is going to be able to dramatically
increase the percentage of vehicles that we scan. It is going
to be the single best tool we have to stop the increase of
crystal meth.
Senator Portman. So it is new technology that we have
funded to be able to see if there is a truck coming through,
for instance, a noninvasive technology to be able, in essence
to see whether there are drugs there and then to be able to
apprehend.
Mr. McAleenan. Right. The two additional points I would
make, though, is the investments in the border wall and the
system around that--the cameras, the lighting, the roads that
allow us to gain access--that will help us address the
increasing incidence of hard narcotics coming between ports of
entry. And then, third, resolving this crisis, our agents can
be back focused on the border security aspects of their
mission.
Senator Portman. Not pulled off for the humanitarian----
Mr. McAleenan. Those are the three things I would
highlight.
Senator Portman. Let us talk about push and pull factors
for a second because ultimately what we are trying to do here
in this Committee is to help you to be able to address this
issue.
On the push side, we talk a lot about the Northern Triangle
countries being countries where there is a lot of poverty and a
lot of corruption and reasons for people to want to leave. So
we have talked about how to get aid and have it be more
effectively deployed in those countries. I think there is a
general consensus among at least Members of this Committee that
we should do a better job, and can. However, we are still going
to have huge wage differentials. There are still going to be
issues in El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala that cannot be
addressed simply by aid packages.
So what are the pull factors? It seems to me the most
important one right now, given this, again, 400-percent
increase in families, 75-percent increase in kids, over 100,000
people a month now coming over that border, is there something
going on with the asylum system because they are coming over to
seek asylum. They are coming to your officers. They are not
trying to avoid law enforcement. In fact, the wall probably is
not helpful in this regard in the sense that they are not
trying to climb over a wall. They are coming forward and saying
that they would like to get asylum.
Tell us what happens, if you could, to these families when
they approach one of your officers and ask for asylum. Are
these individuals being processed? Are they being detained? Are
they being allowed to go into the community? What is happening
today?
Mr. McAleenan. So you are absolutely right, Senator, on the
pull factors, and I would actually use your Committee's chart
on this point because you see in fiscal year 2015 there, Flores
reinterpreted. That has been the essential driver, frankly, for
the increased family units, is the fact that family units can
no longer be detained together in an appropriate setting during
a fair and expeditious proceeding to determine whether they
have a valid asylum claim or other immigration rights, or----
Senator Portman. Flores said that those family members with
their children there are limited to 20 days, and that is in an
emergency. Otherwise, they have to be released into the
community. Is that accurate?
Mr. McAleenan. That is correct. And that certainty and that
knowledge--that they will be allowed to stay in the United
States indefinitely, pending a court proceeding that could be
years away, depending on what jurisdiction they are in--is a
huge draw. The smugglers have capitalized on that. They are
advertising that fact. We hear that routinely from our
interviews of families. We see that in the media.
Senator Portman. What percent of those families who come up
to the border and, again, approach your officers and ask for
asylum are being released into the community within days?
Mr. McAleenan. One hundred percent.
Senator Portman. One hundred percent?
Mr. McAleenan. Yes, and they are not necessarily asking for
asylum. They do not have to. They can go into an immigration
proceeding and not have to present that case for potentially
years.
Senator Portman. When they go into the community, you say
it can take a while. It is over 2 years in Ohio, you should
know, before we can have a court hearing.
Mr. McAleenan. Right.
Senator Portman. It is over a 2-year period. What is the
average around the country, do you know?
Mr. McAleenan. The average is around 2 years, and in some
jurisdictions it is even longer.
Senator Portman. Two years before the immigration hearing
takes place.
Mr. McAleenan. Right.
Senator Portman. And during that time period, can those
individuals work?
Mr. McAleenan. Yes, by and large, although we are looking
at tightening the rules so that there is not an opportunity to
take advantage of the system.
Senator Portman. So they have a work permit. My
understanding is they do not get the work permit immediately,
but after a certain period of time. Is it 6 weeks?
Mr. McAleenan. Right now it is in the 30 to 90-day range,
that is correct.
Senator Portman. And those individuals then are going to
work. So if you were a trafficker, what you are telling people
is, one, if you come to the border and seek asylum or even if
you were coming to the border and seeking an immigration
hearing, you will be released into the community for a couple
of years, at least, before your hearing, and you will have the
ability to work. And with the wage differential being able to
make 10 times as much or sometimes as much as 20 times as much
in the United States, do you think that is a factor?
Mr. McAleenan. I think not only is it a factor; that is
directly how smugglers are advertising the opportunity to come
to the United States right now.
Senator Portman. So ultimately it comes down to the jobs.
Mr. McAleenan. Right.
Senator Portman. We want to talk more about E-Verify at
some point because we do not have the system to determine who
is legal and who is not in our country, and we need to increase
the mandatory use of E-Verify. Thank you, Mr. Commissioner, now
Mr. Secretary.
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator Portman.
Again, there is a great deal of interest in this hearing.
We will have a lot of attendance, so we allowed 7 minutes, but
we are going to keep people right at 7 minutes, so, Senator
Hassan.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HASSAN
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair and Ranking
Member Peters. And thank you, Acting Secretary McAleenan, for
being here to discuss all these important topics.
Mr. Secretary, as I am sure you are aware, convicted
American Taliban fighter John Walker Lindh is reportedly being
released from Federal prison today. Last week, Senator Shelby
and I sent a letter to the Bureau of Prisons expressing concern
over the anticipated release of John Walker Lindh as well as
108 other terrorist offenders scheduled to be released in the
next 5 years. One of our concerns is the lack of adequate
process to notify Federal, State, and local officials when a
terrorist offender will be released.
Mr. McAleenan, do DHS Fusion Centers receive information
from the Bureau of Prisons or probation and pretrial services
regarding the release of a terrorist offender? And what is your
process for sharing this information with local authorities?
Mr. McAleenan. That is a good question, Senator. I will
look into that and get back to you on that.
Senator Hassan. OK.
So moving forward, can I count on you to work with relevant
agencies to develop a strategy to ensure that all necessary
Federal, State, and local officials have the information that
they need to keep communities safe when these individuals are
released?
Mr. McAleenan. Yes.
Senator Hassan. Thank you.
Later today I am headed to the Southern Border with
Chairman Johnson and Ranking Member Peters and Senator Hawley
to assess the situation on the ground. I took a similar trip
last year to talk to port officers and ICE detention officers.
I was impressed by my visits to El Paso and McAllen, Texas,
where I saw the robust screening effort conducted by CBP of
incoming traffic from Mexico, and we have talked a little bit
just now about some of the technology that helps officers kind
of immediately look--see what is different in a car that on the
surface looks like a typical car.
However, stopping the drug cartels is not solely a matter
of securing traffic coming into the United States. We have to
attack the cartels' business model. That means stopping the
flow of both drug money and weapons that travel southbound into
Mexico from the United States.
Unfortunately, as I saw on my trip last year, our current
southbound screening effort is inadequate. We were told we need
expanded facilities, more personnel, and updated technology in
order to try to strengthen our ability to stop the flow of guns
and money back into the cartels' hands.
So, Mr. McAleenan, I will ask you the same question that I
asked Secretary Nielsen last year. Are you satisfied with the
current state of southbound inspections?
Mr. McAleenan. No. I agree strongly with you that we can do
more, and part of the nonintrusive inspection equipment that we
are going to be purchasing with the fiscal year 2019 funding
will go to outbound lanes. But to your point, we have been
doing outbound alongside our Border Patrol agents and CBP
officers jointly. We do not have agents available to do
outbound right now. They are doing the inbound humanitarian
mission.
Senator Hassan. Right.
Mr. McAleenan. So we also can improve our efforts in
coordination with the Government of Mexico. So I think there is
a lot to do in that area, and we can get stronger.
Senator Hassan. OK. Given the numbers and the humanitarian
crisis that we are seeing now, I am taking it that you would
not say we have made real progress on this issue since last
year, on southbound----
Mr. McAleenan. The one area we are making progress is in
acquiring the systems that will help us screen more vehicles
going southbound, and more canine teams.
Senator Hassan. OK.
Mr. McAleenan. And in our overall hiring of CBP officers,
that will strengthen our base on the Southwest Border. But, no,
with our agents now redeployed on humanitarian missions, with a
new government coming in and establishing new relationships on
the investigative side, I think we can do a lot more this year.
Senator Hassan. OK. And so one of the other things I heard
last year was that it may take some work and planning with
local authorities on both the north and south side of the
border to configure things in a way that allows those
inspections to take place without interfering with local
traffic and the like. Is that something that you guys have been
addressing?
Mr. McAleenan. Absolutely. Every port of entry has plans
for how to do outbound inspections given their unique flow of
traffic, given the unique configuration of the footprints of
ports of entry, which, again, have been there for a long time
and were designed at a much lower volume of flow both north-and
southbound. So, yes, we have plans locally for increased
outbound efforts.
Senator Hassan. Well, I would look forward to working with
you on that, and I will take this as a commitment to continue
to work on that, because I really think until we get to the
southbound flow, we are not going to break up these business
models.
Mr. McAleenan. An important aspect of the mission, I agree.
Senator Hassan. OK. Mr. McAleenan, back in March I
requested from Secretary Nielsen the case files for the
reported 245 child separations that had occurred since a
Federal judge ruled that these separations must end.
Understanding the need for privacy and confidentiality, I would
have accepted redacted names and addresses.
A week after my request, a representative from CBP followed
up to say that you as Commissioner of CBP could brief me on
this matter but not until 7 weeks after my initial request. We
responded with dates and times that worked but heard nothing
back from your office until just 2 days ago, 10 weeks after my
request when your office replied to say that you could not
provide specific information on these 245 cases.
I will also note that just this week reports surfaced that,
as we have talked about, 16-year-old Carlos Vasquez has died in
Federal custody at the border, the fifth child to die, and just
last night, as Senator Peters pointed out, we learned about a
sixth child's death after apprehension by border agents.
This is incredibly disturbing and raises more serious
questions about the treatment of children at the border. I know
you care about it, but we obviously have to be able to
implement real plans here to prevent these kinds of tragedies
from happening.
Can you provide any update on the cases of these 245
separated children for us or about what CBP is doing to provide
more accountability for the treatment of children at the
border?
Mr. McAleenan. So, first of all, I will go back and look at
your oversight request and make sure we are responding
appropriately and timely.
Senator Hassan. Thank you.
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you for raising it. I was not aware
that we had been delayed in that response.
Second, I just want to emphasize that any separation that
is occurring now is occurring for the benefit of the safety of
the child. This is in compliance with the court order in Ms. L.
It is in compliance with the Executive Order from the President
from June 20 of last year. So we are seeing that, even though
we have 1,500 to 2,500, some days over 3,000 families,
separation is only occurring one to three times a day. So it is
extraordinarily rare and under very controlled circumstances.
Senator Hassan. I thank you for that answer, and because I
am running out of time, I want to be respectful of the time
here. But I want to say that if this is not all necessarily on
you and your agents, but this Administration has given a
variety of stories about family separation since they even
officially began. So you can understand that from an oversight
point of view, in order to protect children, we need this
information and we need to engage with you to ensure what your
intentions are, what you are saying to me now is actually what
is happening.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Paul.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PAUL
Senator Paul. Thank you for your testimony. I think it is
important that we know who comes to our country, who is
visiting on student visas, if we have intelligence that they
are here with bad intention we do not let them in, if they are
not going to school they are sent back home. But we have a
problem that seems to be recurring with one of our
universities. Campbellsville University has been around for 113
years. I have been there many times. It is a great college. It
is a real college with a great reputation in our State. They
have had three students recently come in on student visas that
either had their visas taken away or were turned back. I do not
think it is because there was any kind of actionable
intelligence or that the kids did anything wrong or that the
university did anything wrong. But the Border Patrol agents are
simply saying it is a fake university, which, one, is very
insulting to our university and to our State, but I think it is
not just the border agent problem. It must be some kind of
central list. Wouldn't you think they have to type into a list
for a student visa and say what universities are on that list?
The university is on the list of approved students. The only
anomaly may be that it is an online course. Some of the
students were coming into other airports, so they are coming
into Los Angeles and they do part of the course in Kentucky and
part of it online. But it is approved by ICE; it is approved by
the government. But the problem is your officers--either it is
not typed into the system correctly or whatever, but then they
are insulting these students, turning them back, and insulting
the university also.
We sent a letter to you 63 days ago, and I think there has
been some response and I think some attempt to resolve this.
But 10 days ago, another student was turned back.
Look, I am all for safety and I am all for not letting
people come in here who are problems. But it does not sound
like there was an individual problem here. There is more a
systemic problem that you just do not have your list right or
your agents do not have access to the list.
Do you know how it works? Does an agent type in a list to
come up with a university when a student comes in from abroad?
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you, Senator. I do know how the
student visa program works. It is managed by ICE. You have to
have, first of all, a certified program, certified university,
and then the individual student visa holder has to be confirmed
to be part of that certified program.
Senator Paul. I think all that is true, and they are still
coming up and insulting our university and saying it is fake,
and we have no evidence and no one has presented any evidence
that they are not on the appropriate list.
Mr. McAleenan. Sure. I am not familiar with the individual
case, but we will certainly look into it. I am glad you have
gotten some response toward resolving it, but we will take a
look.
Senator Paul. We need more, and the sooner the better,
because it is a big deal for someone to fly halfway around the
world to go to school here and be, one, insulted, the
university is insulted, and to then--we need some resolution.
If you would try to help us with getting resolution, will you
have somebody call us within a week or so and try to work
through this so we do not have a recurrence?
Mr. McAleenan. We will follow up.
Senator Paul. OK. The other issue I have is one we had with
the last nominee for ICE. We were not too fond of him because
of one his statements. One of his statements was that a cell
phone is just like a shipping container, and not only do we
object to that, we object strenuously to that. We are insulted
by the comment. Do you think a cell phone is the same as a
shipping container?
Mr. McAleenan. So all goods that cross the border are
subject to examination, but actually we have a specific policy
for cell phones. It is different. They have a different level
of data that they can contain, and that is why we have
restrictive approaches to whether we can inspect it and how we
inspect it.
Senator Paul. Alright. We want you to be even more
restrictive. We want the law changed. So Senator Wyden and I
actually have a bill to require a warrant for U.S. citizens
coming back home, because we think there is a great danger that
if you have brown skin, a different accent, or a funny last
name that does not look so-called American that you are going
to get--all of a sudden they are going to say, ``Give us your
cell phone.'' And, if you have evidence someone is calling a
terrorist, if you have someone that they are part of a
terrorist cell, by all means stop them, keep them, do whatever
it takes. But just random American citizens coming home being
asked for their password to the cell phone we think is very
intrusive without any kind of--other than, ``We just think they
looked suspicious.'' That is not enough. And so we are still
troubled by the reports we hear on this, and we are going to
keep pushing the issue. But it is very important for us to
convey to you that we do not think a cell phone is a shipping
container. You do have the right to go through luggage and
shipping containers at the border. You do not really have a
right to look at my Google searches and to look at everything I
have stored on my phone, pictures, etc., and download that to a
computer.
When you are taking phones and you are getting passwords,
are you downloading content from the phone to a database?
Mr. McAleenan. So there are a couple different types of
searches: a basic search where you would just look at the
surface content of the cell phone, and then a more in-depth
search of a phone or any contents--it would require reasonable
suspicion, supervisory approval, and several additional
safeguards.
Senator, I know your concerns are sincere and well informed
on this issue. I do want to emphasize, though, that we have
oversight over the selection for secondary and the selection
for secondary that includes inspection of a cell phone device.
And any indication that would be done on the basis of race,
religion, or anything else would be unacceptable. And it is
overseen not only by CBP's Office of Professional
Responsibility but by our Civil Rights and Civil Liberties
Office.
Senator Paul. You can see how the danger occurs, though,
because a lot of it is ambiguous when you go to what is
suspicion. So you can see how there is a real danger and for
people coming back to be targeted based on it, even if it is
not spoken that there is a danger that there is a bias in the
way this is happening. And so the regulations you have on the
phone, on what you do to go to a phone search, are those
printed and open and available to us?
Mr. McAleenan. Yes, we publish the policy online. I
personally worked on the update and the more stringent
requirements in the policy.
Senator Paul. OK. I know you deal from your perspective.
From our perspective there are many of us who think there
should be a legal requirement for a judicial search, that this
is not the same as looking at the luggage. And so just at least
realize that there are some of us that are very concerned about
the invasiveness of this search. Thanks.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Carper.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CARPER
Senator Carper. Thanks. And thanks very much for visiting
with us yesterday, Mr. Secretary, and sharing your thoughts and
ideas with us.
I am going to ask you to use most of my 7 minutes to just
sketch for us an outline that includes push and pull factors,
includes Alliance for Prosperity, includes in-country asylum,
includes changes in the way we process people at the border,
immigration judges and so forth. Just take my 7 minutes and
just put together a thoughtful, compassionate, smart, cost-
effective plan. I think the smartest thing we could do would be
actually do comprehensive immigration reform, and God willing,
someday we will get back and do that. That is probably the
ultimate answer. But just take the next 6\1/2\ minutes to do
that for me, please.
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you, Senator, for that opportunity,
and I think at the start of the hearing, the Chairman's opening
statement, some of our discussions on the Flores case and the
increased arrival of families and children over the last
several years, I think we talked a lot about the pull factors,
and the direct response to the fact that families can no longer
be held, together, through an appropriate and fair proceeding
and have essentially a guarantee of release and indefinite stay
in the United States. That is a tremendous challenge. It has
been exploited by smugglers who are advertising that
opportunity, and that is what is causing the significant surge
that we see this year.
Unaccompanied children as well, even if they do not have a
valid asylum claim from Central America, are also not able to
be repatriated under the Trafficking Victims Protection
Reauthorization Act. Those are the two key factors we are
facing.
And then the third, on the pull factor side, is the asylum
gap, the fact that the credible fear standard is a possibility
of proving an asylum case. That means that 87 to 92 percent of
those who have that initial credible fear screening are passing
it, but they do not actually see a judge for an asylum process
for 2 to 5 years later. And when they go through an asylum
process, we are only seeing 10 to 15 percent granted asylum.
So those are the three areas that are huge vulnerabilities
in our legal framework that we have asked Congress to tighten
down, and we sent language to the Hill multiple times. There is
some good legislative work going on right now in the Judiciary
Committee with Chairman Graham's bill, but we need to partner
on that. That would address the pull factors quickly and
immediately. The President highlighted Senator Graham's bill as
an immediate approach to the crisis in his Rose Garden remarks
on a broader approach to immigration reform last week.
On the push factors, they are significant and challenging.
I have been to Central America three times in the last year. I
will be going on Monday to meet with my minister counterparts
in Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador in Guatemala City. I
will be going back to the Western Highlands in Guatemala, which
is really the source of most of the migration that we are
seeing from Guatemala. About 40 percent of the total arriving
at the border right now is from a specific region of Guatemala.
I am going to one department where over 3.5 percent of that
population has come to the United States in 7 months, and that
is because they are facing poverty and economic opportunity
gaps. The average age in Guatemala is 19. The people entering
the job market are almost 200,000 a year while they are only
creating 40,000 jobs.
So there is a huge economic driver and a huge opportunity
gap. Senator Portman highlighted the wage differential as well.
If you can make 15 to 20 times what you can make at home in a
booming economy in the United States. and you have a guaranteed
ability to stay indefinitely, that is a massive draw and
incentive.
The second thing is there has been drought in this region
for the last 5 years. That has affected the subsistence farming
in the Western Highlands and the rural areas of Guatemala and
Honduras as well. This is their crop cycle: corn, beans, and
potatoes every year. The beans are not producing. That is their
source of protein. That is a big issue. It is one that United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the United States
Agency for International Development (USAID) have tried to help
with, preparing crops that are drought-resistant. But that has
been a massive impact. And then the global coffee price has
cratered. That affected the employment in Guatemala as well. So
there are big economic drivers.
On the security side, the situation is actually improving
in all three countries. The murder rate has gone down
significantly, 40 to 70 percent, depending on each country and
in municipal areas. The strategy in El Salvador for a
consolidated whole-of-government effort at the municipal level
is working. They are reducing violence and creating additional
economic opportunity. But there is so much more to be done. The
governance issues, the corruption issues, definitely cause and
produce push factors that are part of this crisis.
So we need a strategy that effectively tackles both. We
need help from Congress to address the pull factors. We need
more security investments that we are making to increase our
capacity on the U.S. border. We need to partner with Mexico to
tackle the transnational criminal organizations (TCO) that are
exploiting vulnerable migrants. And we need to engage the
governments of Central America, working with accountable
partners on targeted programs that make an impact on our
national interest.
So we have a lot to do, but I think we have a coherent
strategy, we have a plan, but we need Congress to support to
implement it, both on the resources and the authority side.
Senator Carper. What role do Ambassadors play in those
three countries?
Mr. McAleenan. I think our professional diplomats, led by
two great Ambassadors and Charge d'Affaires Heide Fulton in
Honduras are leading staffs that are well informed about the
situations in those three countries. There are professional
diplomats in USAID that are really driving some of the program
successes that we are seeing, especially in El Salvador. I had
the benefit of going to see them at work and see how hard they
are working in partnership. And I do think we have a great
dedicated diplomatic corps that is trying to advocate for
change and improvements in conditions in all three countries.
Senator Carper. I would just say to my colleagues, there
has not been a U.S. Ambassador in Honduras for over 2 years.
That is shameful, and we have to be smarter than that. And the
role that they play, the role that Jean Manes played,
Ambassador to El Salvador following the election of a guy named
Bukele, the new President-elect for El Salvador, and helping
him prepare to assume office and put together his team, a
hugely helpful, a hugely constructive role. In fact, we have
been almost 2\1/2\ years without an ambassador in Honduras. It
is just something that we ought to just raise our voices and
say we can do better than this.
Real quick, tell us two or three areas where we can help
you in terms of filling vacancies around you where you have a
lot of acting people in place.
Mr. McAleenan. So we have several nominees in front of the
Committee. I think getting an Inspector General for oversight
is critical, and he has advanced through the Committee. Thank
you for that.
We have a FEMA nominee, and we are heading into hurricane
season next week. I would very much appreciate if we could
schedule a hearing and move a tremendous nominee, Jeff Byard,
through the process. Our Chief Financial Officer (CFO),
obviously another critical role. So there are some nominees
that we have sent up to the Senate and more hopefully that we
will be able to produce in short order. But, having the right
leaders in the right positions is very important to maintaining
our momentum.
Senator Carper. Good. Thanks so much.
Chairman Johnson. So now that I have a few more Senators, I
do want to draw your attention again to the cup where we have
put our chart on so hopefully people will not crumple it up and
throw it away. But the point I wanted to make is just in the
first 3 weeks of May, 65,000 additional people have been added
to that bar. My guess is this bar will show close to 400,000 in
the first 8 months compared to 120,000 in all of the year 2014.
So 400,000 is probably where we will end up for the month of
May. So this is a growing crisis, and we have to support the
Secretary. We have to pass that emergency spending bill.
Senator Hawley.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HAWLEY
Senator Hawley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to start by talking about the disaster, the
tornadoes that touched down in my State last night causing very
significant damage. We have lost, I am afraid, three lives in
southwest Missouri, also causing very significant damage in the
middle of the State. We are still assessing the extent of the
damage, and I will be seeing it for myself very soon.
I understand FEMA dispatched a search and rescue team.
Thank you for that. I am wondering if you can speak to what
more FEMA might be prepared to do to help.
Mr. McAleenan. Yes, I reached out to our Acting
Administrator Pete Gaynor this morning on these issues. FEMA is
on top of it, and he noted the search and rescue team, very
concerned, and please let me acknowledge the loss of life. FEMA
will be there. We will respond in support of your State and
local authorities to address any damage from the storm.
Senator Hawley. Great. Thank you very much. I look forward
to working with you on that.
As you know, we are also in the midst of a major flood
event in the State of Missouri, and Missourians are tough.
There is nobody tougher. But we are going to need Federal
assistance to help rebuild those communities, those farms, and
those towns, and I look forward to working with you on that as
well.
Let me ask you about another major problem in my State,
which is the epidemic of drugs flowing into the State. I
noticed in your written testimony that the words ``illegal
drugs'' appear just once, which I was a little bit surprised
by, so let me give you a chance to elaborate here. The drugs
coming across the Southern Border are making their way, I know,
into cities across the country, but Missouri is very hard hit,
and we have an epidemic of meth, our law enforcement agents
will tell you. Most Missourians probably do not realize that
the meth that is flooding into Missouri now is not produced in
the State anymore. It comes across that Southern Border.
Talk to us about the drug crisis that we are facing at the
border and that is affecting my State and I suspect all of the
States of those of us sitting here.
Mr. McAleenan. Yes, the drug crisis is both acute and
devastating. We had a colloquy with Senator Portman about both
opioids and the increasing meth. If you talked with sheriffs
and State and local police over the last 2 years west of the
Mississippi, they would have been talking about meth, not the
opioid or synthetic opioid crisis. Now you are seeing meth
expand east of the Mississippi as well. This is devastating,
and it is our responsibility at DHS to do better with this
challenge.
As you noted, 90-plus percent of both heroin and meth are
coming from Mexico now. Mexican cartels have made it into a
super-lab science, and we are working with the Mexican
authorities to try to take out some of these labs in key areas
that we have helped them identify. But we need to do more at
that immediate border as well. The investment from fiscal year
2019 in increased nonintrusive inspection technology are going
to be a game changer for us. Right now, about 85 percent of our
seizures come from X-rays of personally owned vehicles. We are
only getting to 2 percent of those cars right now. With the
investments we got last year, we are going to be able to get up
to 40 percent, and that is going to completely change our
dynamic in terms of risk-assessed targeted inspections.
For commercial vehicles, we are at 17 percent. We are going
to be able to take that up over 70 percent in a matter of 2\1/
2\ years. That is going to be a very different target for the
smugglers to try to get through. We are also increasing our
canine teams, which are the second highest referral rate for
our drug seizures.
I do want to emphasize, though, that between the ports,
investments are also critical. The border barrier, the wall
system, with lights, cameras, sensors on top of that----
Senator Hawley. Tell us why that is so important?
Mr. McAleenan. Because we are seeing increasingly smugglers
using between ports methods to bring in hard narcotics. That
was not a significant phenomenon 5 years ago. It is growing
now, and it is a huge challenge. In Rio Grande Valley (RGV),
where we have the epicenter of the humanitarian crisis that we
are talking about, last month we made a seizure of 750 pounds
of cocaine in one seizure. They felt confident enough to bring
that many drugs across, and we had one Border Patrol agent who
laid in the brush for a week straight because he was worried
about that stretch of border. He knew that they were using
families to divert resources, so he laid in that stretch of
brush and caught that load. I called him and talked to him
about how dedicated he was to sit there for a shift and a half,
7 days in a row, before he finally got that load. We know what
is happening. We know they are using families to divert our
resources and bring drugs behind them, and the border wall
changes that dynamic.
Senator Hawley. What other resources do our agents need to
combat this drug-smuggling epidemic?
Mr. McAleenan. So we need better aviation surveillance. We
have asked for surveillance sensors in the 2020 budget that
will help our aviation platforms target crossings. We need the
innovative towers that we are putting in place. We have
received support from Congress 3 years in a row for innovative,
cost-effective programs on emerging technologies that are going
to expand our surveillance capability. We need to finish our
fixed tower deployment. That surveillance technology and the
ability of our agents to respond effectively in a mobile way is
a huge factor in our success.
Senator Hawley. Can I just ask you, how is the growing
crisis, the asylum crisis and the illegal immigration crisis
that we are seeing, that the Chairman has been talking about
earlier today, how is that affecting your ability to combat the
drug-smuggling crisis as well?
Mr. McAleenan. So the first time I publicly referred to
this as a ``border security and humanitarian crisis'' was last
June when we had one-fourth of the traffic we have now. So the
humanitarian crisis is drawing away our Border Patrol agents.
Forty percent of their time now is spent on transportation,
processing, care, hospital watch, medical, food preparation for
migrants. They are not on the line where we need them.
In parts of El Paso Sector, we are depleted 60 or 70
percent from what we would like to be in our forward
deployments on the line. That dynamic has to change. We need
our agents back doing what the American people want them to do,
protecting them on the border.
Senator Hawley. Well, is it fair to say that this Congress'
inability to deal with the immigration and asylum crisis is
helping fuel the drug epidemic crisis?
Mr. McAleenan. They are directly related.
Senator Hawley. Let me ask you this: How frequently is
Border Patrol apprehending members of transnational criminal
gangs like MS-13?
Mr. McAleenan. So last year we apprehended 17,000 people
with criminal records. We are going to exceed that
significantly this year. We had 808 gang members in 2018. We
have more so far coming this year. So there is a population--it
is not just families and children. They are the bulk of who is
crossing now. They present unique challenges. But we are
talking about 35 percent of that traffic are people trying to
evade capture, and hidden within that 35 percent are criminals,
gang members, and drug smugglers. So we have to address this
comprehensively.
Senator Hawley. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Scott.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SCOTT
Senator Scott. First of all, thank you. Thanks for what you
do.
I was just down in Panama and met with some DHS
representatives to talk about narcotrafficking and the violence
that is part of it, and I met with the Drug Enforcement Agency
(DEA), DOD, and they were talking about if they had some
additional resources, the countries just north of there were a
lot of the narcotrafficking is coming out of, they could do a
lot, and they thought that would have a positive impact on
dealing with what is happening on our border.
What do you need and what can we do, what can Congress do
to be more helpful in that arena?
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you, Senator, and thanks for visiting
with our people. I think one of DHS' strengths is our ability
to support and work with foreign partners to make an impact on
our security as far away from our border as possible and really
building their capacity, sharing information, and trying to
make an impact together. I think Panama is one of our best
examples of that. Both the ICE and Homeland Security
Investigations (HSI) presence as well as the CBP, the U.S.
Coast Guard, partnerships with Panama, I think are really a
good example for the entire hemisphere, and we have made a lot
of progress in the last 5 to 7 years specifically with the
Government of Panama.
You talk about the trafficking challenges in that region.
The Andes are the highest cocaine-producing rate. We still see
lots of cocaine coming to our border. Actually, the numbers
have been increasing the last 3 years. Addressing that at the
source with U.S. Coast Guard on the water, with maritime
patrol, aircraft in the air, is really our best defense. And
those interdictions are often driven by good intelligence
sharing, by investigative efforts with HSI, DEA, and our
intelligence community (IC) partners working with the Colombian
Government, Panamanian Government, and others to try to get
those interdictions before they get out on the open water and
land somewhere in Central America or Mexico and end up trying
to come across our land border.
So those partnerships forward-deployed are critical. The
investments in the Coast Guard fleet I would highlight are
absolutely essential to helping us sustain a presence on the
water there in the source and transit zones. And then our P-3
fleet for CBP, our unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) fleet, the
Guardians that are the maritime patrol version of our predator
drones--those are called ``MQ-9s''--those are critical assets,
and we appreciate Congress' continued support for that.
Senator Scott. They also talked about the fact that the--I
guess it must have been from--they are coming further south,
from South America. They are getting out further into the
Pacific and then coming in, and there was possibly a need for
additional--I do not know if it is DOD or Coast Guard assets.
Can you talk about that?
Mr. McAleenan. Yes, so we are seeing routes going around
the Galapagos and then coming north. From Baja California, we
are seeing routes going out west of Catalina and coming up to
the middle of California. So open ocean, maritime patrol
capability, whether it is emergency technologies with micro
satellites, whether it is unmanned maritime drones, we need to
look at opportunities to innovate in this space because we are
seeing incredible efforts by cartels to avoid our current
patrol efforts. So not only investments in what we are already
doing conventionally, but we need to look out over the horizon
and see what else kind of--what technologies we need to get
better at this challenge. I agree with both.
Senator Scott. The Comptroller General was just in, I guess
this week, talking about they reviewed how agencies contract,
and they were talking about FEMA to a certain extent. It seems
like I had every plague there was when I was Governor of
Florida. I had health and hurricanes and everything. What
opportunities do you have, whether it is through FEMA or
through anything else DHS is doing that you can save money,
that you could allocate more dollars to issues we are dealing
with on the border?
Mr. McAleenan. So that is actually a good question. At CBP,
it was an area we worked very diligently on. Our procurement
and acquisition staff, we reorganized them 2 years ago, and
they have been very effective at getting good value for
government, lowering our protest rate, ensuring we are using
small and disadvantaged businesses. I think that is actually
the story DHS-wide. We have a tremendous Chief Procurement
Officer in Soraya Correa who oversees this effort. I looked at
the FEMA numbers. We are looking at thousands of contracts that
FEMA has issued in response to storms in your State and others
that have been devastating over the past several years, and
only four or five of them have had issues where they needed to
be canceled.
I think the record is actually pretty good. I know there
has been some high-profile concerns, but that is something I
will look at as Acting Secretary and make sure we are getting
best value, saving money for the American taxpayer, and
applying it to our mission priorities.
Senator Scott. From my standpoint, first off, FEMA has been
a great partner. They really did a great job in everything you
could imagine. They really were a really good partner. But I
think there is a lot of money to be saved with, in one contract
in particular, how you they do debris, which is not done--I
think FEMA pays for it, but it is done through the Corps at the
prices that the Corps contracted for the same company was
multiples of what that same company would do business in
Florida for. It was not a little bit. It went from $7 to $8 a
cubic yard to $72. So, I mean, it was a lot of money. So
anything that we can do that can be helpful to you to save
money there, that you might have money allocated to things that
are a bigger problem, I would like to work with you on.
Mr. McAleenan. We will commit to that.
Senator Scott. Thank you.
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you, Senator.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Romney.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ROMNEY
Senator Romney. Thank you. Very much appreciate your
testimony today and this opportunity to talk about your budget
as well as policies relating to our border.
Just a comment at the outset, which is it is hard for me to
understand why border security has become such a partisan
issue, and I think that there are people who have politicized
it, much to the peril of those who are doing so. I do
understand that there are political issues associated with how
we have to deal with our Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals
(DACA) individuals, how we have to deal with the 11 or 12
million or so people who have come here illegally in the past
and have been here for some period of time and raised their
families here. People are concerned about whether we are going
to have a system of legal immigration based upon joining
families back together, family reunification versus a merit-
based system. These all have, I think, understandable political
back-and-forth. But securing the border and keeping people from
flooding over the border illegally is something which I would
think one could take out of the realm of politics. And I think
those that are making this a political issue perhaps--and I
just think it is a real loser, by the way, from a political
standpoint, in part because without a completed wall, without
the technology that we can avail ourselves of, we are going to
see more and more drugs come into the country with people dying
as a result of those drugs coming in. We are going to have a
flood of children coming that get separated from parents and go
off into foster settings in many cases--unaccompanied children,
that is. It is just a series of horrible potential outcomes or
horrible reality that is occurring. I hope we are able to deal
with the loopholes and gaps in our legal system that has caused
to a great degree this extraordinary crisis to occur.
But with that said, let me turn to a question I would just
like to ask you. You have spoken about the importance of the
wall, using better technology to interdict, our Coast Guard as
well, in the open seas, closing the loopholes. And you
mentioned that a number of people in Central America and
Mexico, for that matter, look across the border and say, all
right, I can get $15 an hour up there, and I am getting $1 an
hour down here, and they are going to find a way--one way or
the other, they are going to find a way to get here because of
that enormous economic advantage in doing so.
Some of us feel that we really should mandate a requirement
that businesses use E-Verify, and that if a business does not
use E-Verify and if they are found to have hired someone who is
not here legally, the business should be heavily sanctioned and
fined, penalties, whatever, for not having used the E-Verify
system.
Do you believe that mandating E-Verify use with penalties
would help and reduce the magnet, if you will, that brings
people who just want to come here for economic opportunity?
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you, Senator. Just specifically on
your E-Verify question, we support comprehensive use of E-
Verify. Every employer should avail themselves of this
opportunity. We just finished a development project to make it
available for any employer, all 50 States, who wants to sign
on. It is a robust IT system, and it provides quick responses
on people's lawful status in the United States. That employment
magnet that you referenced, Senator, the booming U.S. economy,
I should have included that in my response to Senator Carper as
one of the huge pull factors. It is the opportunity we have
right now in the United States, and
E-Verify is a tool to help make sure that that is done in a
lawful manner.
If I could add just one other point to your opening, I did
close my oral statement with a request and an ask and an
acknowledgment of this Committee's ability to work in a
bipartisan way, in a problem-solving way, and how welcome that
is. I started after 9/11. Having border security be a
politicized issue is new, and I do not think it is acceptable
to the American people, so I applaud your call for taking that
out of the dynamic and let us look at the problem and let us
grapple with it and try to come up with shared solutions, so
thank you.
Senator Romney. Thank you. And now to a couple of topics
that relate to the numbers, as this is a budget discussion as
well or primarily. An enormous increase in the budget request
for FEMA, looking at the President's request in 2019 and 2020,
and then comparing that with what was enacted in 2018, it is up
some 40-plus percent. Why is there such a substantial increase
there?
Mr. McAleenan. I think the bulk of that is to get the
Disaster Recovery Fund to the level it needs to be to both
address the past storms in 2017 and 2018 but have it prepared
for the future, and it is a scalable drawdown. It does not have
to stay obligated if we do not need to use it.
Senator Romney. In a similar vein, there is an enormous
increase in ICE, from $7.5 million enacted in 2018 to $9.3
million requested in 2020. Why the substantial increase there?
Mr. McAleenan. Sure. I think there are two main issues.
One, we need a lot more professionals at ICE. We have asked for
1,660 additional Homeland Security Investigation agents, ICE
Enforcement Removal Officers, and support personnel and
attorneys. Right now, our Enforcement of Removal Operations
(ERO) are sized for 34,000 people in custody, but they are
holding 51,000. That means it takes longer to get each case
processed, to get removals occurring, and they do not have the
strength to do all of their missions at the same time. They are
also fully involved in the border crisis. We have hundreds of
agents surged to the border dealing with child-smuggling
issues. They have come up in the first 3 weeks of that
operation with 160 prosecutions for adults who are smuggling
children across and posing as family units. We need more
capability to do that work. So that is first, is the personnel.
And, second, on the ICE side, it is just investing in our
systems, our attorneys to get through the court proceedings and
a broad variety of requirements we have and really just fund
the bed space, the increased detention requirements from an
increased flow across the border.
Senator Romney. You indicated also, in response to another
question from one of my colleagues, the important role that the
Coast Guard is playing in interdicting drug trafficking that is
bringing ships in some cases north of Catalina Island, and yet
the Coast Guard budget request is down pretty substantially
from what was spent in 2018. Why the reduction in spending or
funding for the Coast Guard?
Mr. McAleenan. I think the main difference there--and I
have talked to Commandant Schultz about whether he is getting
the resources he needs to keep his capital investments moving
forward. I think the big difference is a one-time initial
startup cost for buying the ice breaker for the Arctic. That is
not required in the 2020 budget. We are going to sustain that
program, but we do not need that first investment. I think that
is the big difference in the 2019 and 2020 budgets.
Senator Romney. Thank you. My time is up.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Lankford.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR LANKFORD
Senator Lankford. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much.
We have a lot to cover, as you have seen, and we have gone
through quite a bit. Let me go back to a couple of issues that
we have already started to address a little bit. One is on the
drug interdiction issues, and what I want to do is be able to
walk through the drug interdiction and what we are seeing
coming from Mexico versus coming from China. One is obviously
coming by mail more, and sometimes the Chinese are sending it
to Mexico, then Mexico is actually bringing it north from
there. So help us understand what you see is the difference
between the amount of drugs coming into the United States from
Mexico and the amount of drugs coming in through China.
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you, Senator. There are two main
vectors, frankly, for synthetics, especially synthetic opioids,
fentanyl, carfentanil, and analogs. So in this massive flood of
e-commerce, this tremendous growth of mail shipments coming
from China, express consignment coming from China, we are
seeing hard narcotics, vials of fentanyl, 25 grams that we are
trying to detect in this flood of packages, and it is very
potent. The drug seizures we are making in the mail environment
are 90 percent pure on average, so a very small amount could
actually be pressed into pills at a very high level in terms of
making profit and producing doses in the United States.
On the Mexican side, we are seeing prepackaged fentanyl
doses often in pill presses that it is more at the 10-percent
purity level. So it is a much lower level, but it is produced
ready to use as opposed to needing further processing in the
United States. I think the bulk of our volume seizures are
still on the Southwest Border for all drugs, but including our
synthetic opioids. We do see precursors coming from China and
other countries being synthesized by cartels in Mexico and then
smuggled across our border in increasing amounts as well. They
tend to seek to seize the market share on any new opportunity
to smuggle drugs into the United States. So that is what we
have seen with fentanyl as well.
Senator Lankford. So what is the cooperation like right now
with the Mexican Government since the bulk of the drugs coming
into the United States are coming across our Southwest Border?
Mr. McAleenan. So we have established connections with the
new leaders of our counterpart agencies, from Attorney General
of Mexico (PGR) that does the investigations to the Federal
police, which is transitioning into a national guard status.
Right now they just had a very overwhelming vote in support of
transition to a national guard. That is going to be a 5-year
process. We know what it is like to merge and change as a
department. We did that in 2003 extensively. That is a
distraction, so that is something that we want to work with our
partners to make sure we remain focused on the threats. We have
good relationships with their head of security, Secretary
Durazo, and we are going to stay focused on this issue and try
to maintain our efforts.
We have seen targeted takeouts of meth labs based on
intelligence and information sharing from U.S. law enforcement.
So I think that is a positive sign.
Senator Lankford. That is a positive sign. Talk to me about
the effectiveness or non-effectiveness of new fencing. You have
replaced some of the fencing in San Diego and some of that
area.
Mr. McAleenan. Right.
Senator Lankford. You have had enough time to be able to
evaluate it. How is that working compared to old fencing?
Mr. McAleenan. Yes, a complete difference, and I am glad
you asked that question because there has been a lot of
reporting that suggests this is not a new capability; this is
just replacement; this is not helpful; this was not important
border wall. It could not be further from the truth. Those were
our top requirements. We had this dilapidated wall. This was
the first wall built because it was needed the most in San
Diego and in El Centro Sector, for instance. Now having a 30-
foot wall in El Centro Sector where there is a mall within 40
yards of the border has completely changed that dynamic. The
traffic has dropped off the table in that area, and we are able
to deploy and use our agents more efficiently in other parts of
the sector.
Senator Lankford. So do you have a good idea of side by
side what the movement of individuals or drugs used to be
through that same area and what it is now with the new fencing?
Mr. McAleenan. We do. I can get you that data. The
percentage drop has been dramatic.
Senator Lankford. That would be great. We would love to be
able to see that, because obviously there has been a lot of
pushback to say this is just replacement so it makes no
difference. The numbers that I have seen on a preliminary basis
show a pretty significant difference between that new fencing
and between the older fencing that was not very effective at
all.
Let me shift gears a little bit. My State has been like
several States. We have had a tremendous amount of water come
on us. The flooding in my State has been pretty dramatic and
continues to increase, and we have storms predicted in the next
4 days in a row again. So this is an area that I am tracking
very closely, working with the Corps of Engineers and with
others that are there. FEMA has been on the ground. We
appreciate FEMA's engagement there, and we will continue to be
able to work with you on that.
What do you need at this point that you do not have already
for disaster relief, whether that be in my State of Oklahoma,
whether it be in Missouri, whether it was a tornado last night
in Jefferson City, whether that be in Florida, Puerto Rico, or
in California?
Mr. McAleenan. I think we have the resources and the
support we need to support Oklahoma in this recovery. I talked
to the Governor 2 weeks ago about the flooding and the
potential for increased flooding as the rains continue and the
river stays very high. We are very worried about it, and what I
heard was the partnership between the State and locals and FEMA
has been tremendous on this, that they are getting what they
need at the State level. But I absolutely want to continue the
communication, would love to hear from your office if there are
opportunities to improve that.
Senator Lankford. Thank you. We will continue to walk
through that. FEMA's cooperation has been excellent, and we
appreciate that continued engagement there.
I need to ask you just a couple other quick things. One is
on the Coast Guard process. You and I have talked briefly
before that, as far as interdiction on the water, the Coast
Guard process for interdictions in Customs and Border Patrol
have two different structures to do interdiction. The Coast
Guard process is much longer than Customs and Border Patrol,
and I have always wondered within DHS, while we have two
entities, both on the water, one has one process, one has
another, and the Coast Guard process is a much longer process.
I would like for you just to be able to take a look again and
to be able to help our Coast Guard folks do a faster
interdiction as the Customs and Border Patrol does currently as
well.
There is also some non-lethal resources that Customs and
Border Patrol have when they are on the water that the Coast
Guard does not have access to, and it would be helpful to be
able to help both those entities on the water to be able to get
that level of engagement in interdiction faster.
Let me shift a little bit to cybersecurity. What DHS did in
the 2018 election was pretty remarkable and your engagement and
lean-in. A lot of threats, a lot of lessons learned from 2016,
very different DHS engagement in 2018. I know you are staying
engaged, but I need to ask you about that. How is the
engagement for election security? And knowing that every
Federal agency looks to you to be able to help them with
cybersecurity for that entity, how is that going as far as
resource-wise?
Mr. McAleenan. Yes, so this is something I have been
working on multiple times a week in my 6 weeks as Acting, but
it is also an area where I have high confidence in Chris Krebs
and the leadership of our CISA team. I think they have a great
strategy to capitalize on the successes and momentum from 2018
for the 2020 election. ``Protect 2020'' we are calling it. They
want to get to all 8,800 jurisdictions in the country, not just
all 50 States but all the jurisdictions that are overseeing
elections, and make sure that they have the right systems in
place that, if they want scanning or penetration testing, we
can do that in advance and help them prepare. And really, I
think the relationships and the communication is robust. We
have built a lot of trust from 2016 to 2018 in our partnerships
with State and locals. So I feel very good about the election
security strategy.
In terms of the interagency on the Federal network side, we
do have good buy-in on our protections at the edge of the
gateway, the EINSTEIN system and others. We do need to continue
to work on that. Talking with the CISA team, their top three
priorities are getting better at what they already do--Federal
networks, election security, and soft targets; and then, of
course, working supply chain issues where we see components
being brought into the supply chains that could have
vulnerabilities; and obviously industrial control systems. That
is a huge challenge for cyber. It could have the biggest
impact, everything from power to pipelines. So we are going to
stay on top of it across those areas.
Senator Lankford. Please do. Kevin, thanks for all your
work on this.
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you.
Senator Portman [presiding.] Senator Rosen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ROSEN
Senator Rosen. Thank you. I want to thank you for bringing
this important hearing here today, and I want to thank you for
your service for so many years. It is really important, and
your knowledge is great, and your compassion as well.
I want to ask a couple of questions on family separation. A
couple weeks ago, my colleague Congressman Carbajal and I sent
a letter about misleading information we received last year
when we visited the border. I have not yet received a response
from your Department, but maybe you could provide me with some
answers.
Recent news reports indicate that DHS and HHS officials
exchanged emails on June 23, 2018, acknowledging that the
Departments did not have the necessary information to reunite
migrant children with their families. In those email exchanges,
DHS and HHS admitted, and I am going to quote here, ``In short,
no, we do not have any linkages from parents to children. We
have a list of parent alien numbers, but no way to link them to
children.''
On that same day, DHS issued a fact sheet claiming the
Department knew the location of all the children in custody,
that the Department had a process in place for the families to
know the location for the children, and had a central database
you could access and update.
So just 2 days after that, Congressman Carbajal and I on
June 25 traveled to the border to tour Tornillo, the
unaccompanied minor facility. We were falsely told by
leadership in those DHS and HHS facilities that the Departments
had the necessary information to reunite the families.
So my question I am hoping to ask you, Acting Secretary,
taking a step back, how could you or how would you explain the
discrepancy between the private emails exchanged between the
government officials and the fact sheet published to the public
the same day?
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you for the question, Senator. I will
do my best to explain it here and then make sure that we have
an appropriate and robust response to your inquiry.
So there are five different components involved primarily
in dealing with immigration, three agencies within DHS, Health
and Human Services Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR), and
the Department of Justice Executive Office for Immigration
Review
(DOJ EOIR). All five manage different IT systems. Let us just
start with that. That is a challenge.
On April 19, 2018, CBP, at the request of HHS, implemented
an adjustment to its system to be able to capture parent-child
relationships more explicitly in our data at the border.
Now, that is a CBP system. It is not necessarily available
directly to all HHS personnel as of June 2018. So when you are
seeing an email like that--and I would want--I am giving you a
broad answer.
Senator Rosen. Right.
Mr. McAleenan. I am not answering what the individuals who
are sending that email are thinking or talking to specifically,
but my interpretation of that is that having to go to a list of
parent alien numbers means that they have to go to a different
system. They cannot automatically see the linkages between the
parent and child in the two different systems.
Senator Rosen. You think it was a lack of communication
interagency?
Mr. McAleenan. A lack of system integration interagency. I
think the communication was very good, and I want to comment on
the reunification in a second. But, first, we are going to fix
this. It is one of my priorities as Acting Secretary to have a
unified immigration portal that allows that data to connect and
be integrated across agencies. That is doable. We did it for 47
departments and agencies for trade data when I was the Deputy
Commissioner of CBP in the automated commercial environment
called the ``single window.'' We can improve this process and
certainly help ensure relationships are captured between people
arriving at the border. So that is a priority.
The reason I know, that I can say with confidence, that the
data was captured and the intent of what was said publicly
about our systems was borne out, is the reunifications actually
happened pretty rapidly, and the reunifications were broadly
successful by HHS working with ICE and CBP data.
Senator Rosen. So let me follow up on that. Of the children
that are still separated from their families--and we know there
are still quite a few--in your estimation how many cases still
lack the information necessary for reunification? And could you
provide that information to us?
Mr. McAleenan. So that is being provided by Health and
Human Services in, I think, biweekly filings to the Ms. L
court, the exact status of that, and I would refer you for an
official answer to that data and to HHS. My understanding is
that every single child has an identified parent relationship
at this point.
Senator Rosen. OK. We will refer out to that.
I have another couple things. In my estimation, of course,
your Department has a lot of work to do to regain the public
trust, including mine, and so as you lead the Department
forward, will you personally commit to all of us to truthfully
respond to the Committee that your Department will not mislead
us again in the way we were misled last year when I visited the
border, no matter what the severity of issues are at hand?
Mr. McAleenan. So law enforcement depends on public trust.
That is a fundamental requirement to carry out our mission and
carry out our jobs. I will ensure that, as long as I am Acting,
we are going to do our level best to explain what is happening
to Congress and to the American people on all aspects of our
mission.
Senator Rosen. Thank you. I have one last question quickly
on family separation, and the training that you are providing
for the DHS officers to determine or not whether families are
falling into the criteria of needing to be separated, what you
are going to do going forward. You said you have a lack of bed
space, lack of detention space. What are your plans going
forward to train your officers to take care with these families
when they are going through this?
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you for the question. So a case where
a child and a parent are separated now is extraordinarily rare.
It is done for the safety of the child, if there is a serious
criminal violation, an indication that the parent presents a
risk to that child, if there is a communicable disease issue
for either the parent or the child or they need to go to
emergency care. It is happening one to three times a day out of
up to 3,000 families arriving. I just want to be very clear it
is a very rare situation, and it has defined criteria that we
have, by policy, mandated for our personnel in the field in
accordance with the Ms. L court order and the President's
Executive Order from June 20 of last year. So it is
extraordinarily rare.
In terms of the process for doing that, I think there is an
opportunity with our Civil Rights and Civil Liberties Office to
look across our Department and see if we can ensure that we are
doing it consistently for CBP or ICE, for instance, and that we
are taking all steps to consider the care of the child, the
mental concerns a child might have in that scenario, and
explain it effectively. I think there is an opportunity there I
would like to work on.
Senator Rosen. Thank you.
Senator Portman. Senator Sinema.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SINEMA
Senator Sinema. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Our Nation faces a crisis along the Southern Border, and I
am working with local leaders in Arizona, my colleagues in
Congress, and the Administration to stop the flow of migrants
to the Southern Border and ensure the fair and humane treatment
of migrants who do come. This situation on the ground with our
communities, NGO's, and our border workforce is not
sustainable, so we must work together to find bipartisan and
common-sense solutions.
Acting Secretary, I am glad you are here today. I look
forward to our discussion.
The lack of transportation resources to manage the flow of
migrants is a serious problem in Arizona. We need help
transporting migrants between interception, detention
facilities, and ICE and getting migrants to NGO's to facilitate
further transportation.
Could you review DHS' capability to provide additional
transportation resources in Arizona, including resources from
outside CBP or ICE, and get back to me on what the
possibilities are?
Mr. McAleenan. I can do that.
Senator Sinema. Great. This is going well, Chairman.
When searching for solutions to a crisis, it is always
important to think outside the box, and I hope that you are
encouraging your organization to tackle the challenges with the
migrant crisis in this manner.
I think the transportation issue calls for some outside-
the-box thinking. It is in DHS' best interest to work with the
NGO groups on how best to manage migrant transportation after
they leave DHS custody. But I have heard from some constituents
about ideas such as working with sponsors to fund charter bus
routes to ease the pressure on crowded Greyhound routes. Such
ideas have merit, but will probably need DHS assistance and
cooperation to be effective.
Could you also take a creative look at what other support
DHS could provide to these NGO's on the transportation front
and work with us on the ground in Arizona on those
possibilities?
Mr. McAleenan. Yes, we will do that, Senator. I think
innovation and partnership are going to be critical as we are
managing this crisis. They have been to date with State and
local authorities in Arizona and elsewhere.
I will just highlight one quick example of that innovation
and creativity. Our Acting Commissioner John Sanders at CBP has
been instrumental in bringing together faith-based
organizations and NGO's with resources away from the border
that want to or are able to help the NGO's at the border that
are doing so much work in your State, in El Paso, in South
Texas with Sister Norma Pimentel's organization, and really
that has brought in lots of additional resources and funding
that is supporting the border entities. I think we can do the
same kind of thing on transportation, not only engaging our
Greyhound partners to increase routes, but also look at other
creative solutions. In addition to applying the funding we are
getting from Congress, we are buying buses for CBP, we are
borrowing commercial driver's license (CDL) drivers from the
Department of Defense, and we have asked for more
transportation funding in the supplemental.
Senator Sinema. Great. I believe we need to treat all
migrants who come to our country fairly and humanely. We also
need to determine who is eligible for asylum and who comes to
our country as an economic migrant. And the key part of that
effort, of course, is the determination of credible fear. Do
you feel that the Department has sufficient authority to allow
immigration and asylum officers to ask enough questions of
migrants to get at the truth of any credible fear claims?
Mr. McAleenan. I think there are two elements to that.
Resources is part of it, being able to take the time at the
front end to assess the situation. And we are seeing that,
unfortunately, with family units right now the volume is so
high, our Border Patrol agents are not able to spend adequate
time with each family to do their interviews to assess the
family relationship or if there are any concerns of smuggling
or trafficking. I know that because we have deployed HSI agents
from ICE to both El Paso and RGV over the last 3 weeks. Out of
516 interviews, they found 160 cases of fraud. Granted, these
were targeted cases based on risk, based on visuals and prior
interviews by Border Patrol. But that is an incredibly high
percentage, and they are prosecuting the adults involved. But I
am very worried that resource-wise we do not have enough, to
your point, to detect that fraud and protect the safety of
children that could be trafficked or smuggled by adults right
now given the flood, the crush.
The other aspect of credible fear, though, is the standard.
There is clearly too big a gap between the front-end bar on
credible fear, a possibility of proving an asylum case, and the
ultimate determination by a judge. To have 85 to 90 percent
pass that first bar but only 10 to 15 percent pass the asylum
bar, with a 2 to 5-year gap between those two findings, that is
obviously a gap in the framework that is allowing and inciting
additional traffic to our border. So I think we need to address
not only the resources side but the standard.
Senator Sinema. What would you suggest that Congress do to
help close that gap between the initial interview and the
determination in front of a judge?
Mr. McAleenan. We have provided language to the Senate
Judiciary Committee that would apply a different standard on
the front end of the credible fear that we think would still
allow valid asylum cases to go forward, but reduce that huge
gap between the credible fear findings and the asylum findings.
Senator Sinema. Do you believe that you have the current
authority to expand the questions asked at the beginning when
folks are intercepted to create a, for lack of a better word,
stronger record or longer record to help prepare for
litigation? Is that something you have the current authority to
do, or do you need Congress' action to ask more questions?
Mr. McAleenan. We do have the authority, and we are
actually implementing a more standardized approach to those
initial questions. My concern is the resources right now and
the ability for agents to spend the time they need to do that
questioning effectively.
Senator Sinema. So if you had sufficient resources and
person-power, you could ask more questions at the front end
that would help better prepare a case for presentation in front
of a judge to either make the claim or to show that there is
not evidence for adequate asylum status?
Mr. McAleenan. Right, or presentation to an asylum officer
as well.
Senator Sinema. Great. CBP has indicated that it has
reassigned over 700 officers from ports of entry and airports
around the Nation, including some from the Tucson area in
Arizona. We also know that there is an effort to transfer TSA
officers from airports to assist the Border Patrol. I have some
concerns about these decisions and their impact on security.
Could you tell me a little bit more about where officers were
reassigned from and to so we can better understand the strategy
that you are using to move officers?
Mr. McAleenan. Sure. I was Commissioner at CBP when we
started the deployment of CBP officers to support our Border
Patrol agents, and it was simply to increase our ability to
safely care for families and children in our custody, and that
was the more immediate need than addressing wait times of
commercial traffic, for instance, which is critical to our
commerce, as you know well. The Nogales-Mariposa port of entry
is one of the most important arteries for trade with Mexico
across the whole border. But we had a more important and acute
need to take care of children. So that is how we made that
determination.
We have now balanced the sourcing of our CBP officers to
include Northern Border locations, airports and seaports from
around the country, and not just our Southern Border field
offices. So that is the strategy we are applying there, and
certainly we are eager to get those officers back doing their
primary mission if we can help mitigate this crisis.
In terms of TSA or other components of DHS that we have
asked to surge volunteers to help at the border, this is what
we do in a crisis, what we do in response to a natural
disaster, for instance. Very clearly, we are not going to allow
an increase of risk in our aviation security system, not going
to allow that. We do not even have any transportation security
officers (TSOs) deployed at this time as volunteers. We have
our Federal air marshals who are part of Visible Intermodal
Prevention and Response (VIPR) teams who are mobile to begin
with that are helping on the border, and we are taking office
management staff and other capabilities as volunteers. We are
looking for attorneys, we are looking for CDL drivers, but not
TSOs yet. TSOs might be required in the future, but, again, we
had 2,000 people deployed as volunteers for Hurricane Harvey.
We only have 250 or so right now for this crisis.
So it is going to be managed carefully. We are not going to
increase risk in other mission areas. But we might increase
wait times here or there, and we have had that effect at the
ports of entry on the border, and that is a concern.
Senator Sinema. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Senator Sinema.
So, Mr. McAleenan, you have done a terrific job, in my
view, of answering questions and showing your vast amount of
experience in this area, and we need you right now, and so we
thank you for being here. We understand you are willing to stay
until 11:10. We have had the first round for everybody. We are
going to have a second round. It will be a lightning round. We
are going to try 4 minutes here, and I appreciate the fact that
my colleague Senator Peters has allowed Senator Lankford and me
to go, and also, Senator Hassan, thank you, because we have to
leave just before 11. And so if you are willing to stay, we
will get to everybody's second round. Thank you, Senator
Lankford.
Senator Lankford. Kevin, thanks again for the work. I need
to also thank you for the new advisory committee that you put
in place for houses of worship. After the attacks in
Pittsburgh, after the attacks in Texas, after the attacks that
we have seen in multiple places, that is a very helpful thing,
so thanks for engaging us. Anything in particular we need to
know about that that we can help and assist in what your work
is?
Mr. McAleenan. So we are very concerned about the increased
attacks on houses of worship of all faiths, both here in the
United States and globally. The recommendation, frankly, of the
Committee on Homeland Security, Chairman Thompson and Ranking
Member Rogers, I looked at it, talked with our team, and we
have asked the Homeland Security Advisory Council who has
provided just outstanding advice. This is a bipartisan group of
experts, former leaders, State and local leaders, and they have
given us great advice across all kinds of missions.
Senator Lankford. Right.
Mr. McAleenan. And I think asking them to take on this
challenge and look at how we engage faith-based organizations,
houses of worship on their security, on their preparedness, on
concerns in their communities, regardless of the motivation or
ideology behind the violence, we want to get in front of that
and prevent it, and obviously partner with the Federal Bureau
of Investigation (FBI) to address it if it does occur.
So I am looking forward to their recommendations. They took
on the task. Judge Webster, a hero of the United States, is
still working to help secure the country well into his 90s. He
received the task, and they are going to follow up on it
aggressively. So thank you.
Senator Lankford. No, thank you for stepping up. That is a
great need. Whether it is in Charlotte, Pittsburgh, California,
or Texas, we have seen violence in houses of worship, and to be
able to have some attention there is exceptionally helpful.
I want to bring up a conversation you and I can have at a
later time about the use of E-Verify and also I-9. For
employers that use E-Verify, they also have to use I-9. They
are really using two different systems. They are going two
different directions. It is redundant paperwork. We have to
figure out a way to be able to have our systems have one set,
whether it is I-9 or E-Verify, but one way to be able to do
this for the sake of our employers, to be able to verify legal
status.
I do need to ask, because you and I have talked before,
about what I think the term was is ``recycled children'' coming
across the border, the same child coming across claiming
multiple families. Are you still seeing that area or are you
still seeing adults that are claiming to be a child at 17 but
they are really 19, 20, or 21? And how is that going in
determination?
Mr. McAleenan. We are seeing both. Having the same child
smuggled twice by different adults is not as prevalent yet, but
we have identified three significant cases where this was an
intentional strategy, bringing children in, then flying them
back to Central America, and having another adult take them to
the border and fake a family relationship. So that is
unacceptable. We obviously see juveniles well--we see 20-year-
olds and those well into their 20s pretending to be juveniles.
We have 3,500 cases of fraud, either in family relationship or
an adult claiming unaccompanied child status so far this year.
What we are determining, though, with this HSI deployment
is that the problem might be bigger than we thought it was
based on the initial findings from their 3 weeks on the ground.
We also have a rapid Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) pilot that is
ongoing to determine--help us determine family relationships.
On the first day of that pilot, we had 12 adults come forward
and say, ``It is not my child.'' The first day of the pilot in
one location.
So that is a major concern, and so we need to expand our
capability to identify those relationships, to attack the
fraud, and then the technology support for our agents and
officers to do that.
Senator Lankford. And find out whose child that is that has
just been smuggled and removed.
Mr. McAleenan. Right.
Senator Lankford. Thank you very much.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Senator Lankford.
You all just talked for a moment about this issue of
attacks on houses of worship, and I wanted to follow up with
you on that, if I could. In the wake of the terrible tragedies
in Pittsburgh and San Diego with regard to the synagogues and
houses of worship in places like Texas and Charleston, you at
DHS have been supportive of what is called the ``Nonprofit
Security Grant program.'' However, it is not authorized. We do
it as a carveout in the appropriations bill. This is funding
that goes not just for the advice and expertise--and I
appreciate the fact that the advisory committee is now getting
going because we need to provide best practices to these
groups--but it also provides grant funding to be able to ensure
that you have safer facilities. Whether it is a synagogue or a
church or community center or school, unfortunately it is
needed.
So Senator Peters, who is here with me today, and I have
just introduced legislation. It is $75 million a year
authorization, the Nonprofit Security Grant program. Again, it
is something that has been supported but not authorized.
One, we would love you to support that legislation so that
we can have some certainty going forward and begin to really
build this program to the point that it can provide better
protection.
But, second, in terms of where the money goes, there is a
Government Accountability Office (GAO) report that just came
out recently that said that your risk assessment they are using
does not take into account all the diverse threats that are out
there today.
So two questions. One, would you support our authorization
legislation? Second, based on this recent GAO report, are you
reevaluating the risk assessment formula to make account of
these diverse threats?
Mr. McAleenan. Thanks for the question, Senator. First of
all, I will look at the nonprofit groups and the authorizing
language. I would be happy to look at that and get back to you
shortly. That is something I would like the Homeland Security
Advisory Council to advise us on, what support do we need to
provide as the Federal Government in this sector going forward.
So I would be happy to work with you on that.
In terms of the risk assessment, I am not familiar with
that GAO recommendation, but I know our departmental processes
to assess and respond to the GAO recommendations are extensive,
and we will certainly take that on.
Senator Portman. This was a 2018 report, so I think it now
is probably something that your folks have taken a look at and
analyzed. So if you could get back to us in a couple of weeks
with your response, that would be terrific.
Again, sadly, we have this continued threat out there, and
we need to do more.
With regard to fentanyl, we talked earlier about what is
going on on the border, the crystal meth coming over affecting
my State of Ohio and so many other States, as well as cocaine
and heroin. Some of the fentanyl comes from Mexico as well.
Most of it is coming from China. But the major threat we still
face in this country is directly from China coming into the
United States through our own U.S. Mail system. That is why we
passed the Synthetics Trafficking and Overdose Prevention
(STOP) Act here last year in Congress. We are now trying to
implement it.
The post office is behind. They were supposed to have 100
percent of packages coming from China be able to be screened by
having this advance electronic data. Unfortunately, it is only
76 percent as of January. They are supposed to meet a target of
70 percent of all packages from around the world.
Unfortunately, they were only at 57 percent.
This affects you directly because your Customs and Border
Protection people do not have the ability to be able to get the
information to screen these packages, pull off the vulnerable
packages without this advance electronic data.
So my question to you today is: What are you doing to
ensure compliance with the STOP Act? Are you coordinating with
the U.S. Postal Service (USPS) to try to get these percentages
up to the requirement under the STOP Act? And what more can we
do to ensure that all aspects of this law are being complied
with?
Mr. McAleenan. Sure. Thank you, Senator, and thank you for
your ongoing support of DHS in this area and really holding us
and the Postal Service accountable for getting better in the
mail environment. I think that is critical.
Seventy-six percent is not where we need it to be for China
given the threat. It was less than 10 percent 2 years ago, and
I do think that the support and pressure from the STOP Act and
others have helped us get better with the Postal Service.
I can tell you this is a priority diplomatically all the
way up to the Presidential level, engaging personally with
President Xi on this issue, our Ambassador, the State
Department--they are all engaged on China taking harsher
measures on fentanyl, illicit fentanyl production and shipment
out of China. That is going to continue to be a diplomatic
priority and one that I certainly favor from a DHS perspective.
I do want to just point out, though, that we have gotten a
lot better with that 76 percent. We are getting more and more
seizures that have been targeted based on information, and we
are able to work with the Postal Inspection Service and HSI to
go and take down that pill press domestically. We have had half
a dozen cases of significance in that regard just in the last 6
months. That is something I want to make sure we get better at,
and we are going to keep pressing.
I can tell you the Postmaster General Megan Brennan, who I
have met with a dozen times in the last year, is very focused
on this mission and working hard to try to increase those
percentages, but we have got to get better.
Senator Portman. Well, I appreciate your personal
commitment to it and your meetings with me over the years,
really, and meeting with her as well. I just want you to keep
the pressure on them because this is still the deadliest
substance affecting us, killing more people than any other
drug.
Mr. McAleenan. No question.
Senator Portman. Senator Peters.
Senator Peters [presiding.] Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. McAleenan, recent news articles and litigation have
highlighted the issue of government watchlists, especially in
relation to intrusive and lengthy secondary screenings when
traveling. Michigan, as you know, has a very rich history of
welcoming diverse communities from around the world, and they
are an integral part of the life of our State. But,
unfortunately, many are also frequently subject to disruptions,
which sometimes can last an hour or more, whenever they travel.
So my question to you, sir, is: Is the Department studying
ways to streamline screenings, especially for American citizens
who are forced to undergo long secondary screenings?
Mr. McAleenan. We are, and I can tell you I am familiar
with some of the issues with routine border crossings in
Detroit, for instance, in your State. The watchlist serves a
very important purpose for identifying risk, and a border
crossing event is an important opportunity to see if there is a
security threat. When that becomes routine, when that becomes
an issue with a daily crosser who is a U.S. citizen, even if
there is valid security concerns, that is something we
generally would modify.
So after an appropriate number of inspections, appropriate
coordination with any investigative agency, we will reduce or
not have that watchlist record fire on primary. So we are
changing that. It is something we monitor carefully.
The other challenge we have is very similar names, date of
birth issues. So somebody having a secondary examination who is
not actually the subject of the watchlist record, we have put
in place a primary lookout override function that allows us to
not hit on that other traveler the next time. So that is
something that we can always put in place. An individual who
has concerns should ask for a supervisor, express those
concerns, and we can address them.
Senator Peters. What is the Department doing to ensure that
the staff is conducting secondary screenings that are sensitive
to many of the cultural as well as religious considerations of
folks who are being screened?
Mr. McAleenan. Right. We spend a lot of time on the
training, and our policies are very clear on this. There is no
room for bias or discrimination in our secondary procedures, in
our approaches to interviewing those who are crossing our
border. If there are concerns, we want to hear a complaint that
we can follow up on at the supervisory level or with our Office
of Professional Responsibility if it is a misconduct issue.
For all of our personnel that are involved in
counterterrorism response and expertise--we call them our
``Tactical Terrorism Response Teams''--at ports of entry, they
go through a higher level of training that involves sensitivity
issues with questioning, with certain populations and religious
concerns as well. So that is a commitment I have. I helped
design that training way back in the Office of Anti-Terrorism
era when I was the first Director at U.S. Customs Service and
then CBP. It is a commitment that we have improved over the
years, and I do think we are doing that quite well. It is
something we have partnered with the Civil Rights and Civil
Liberties Office on, and I commit to ensuring that we continue
that effort.
Senator Peters. Well, I appreciate that commitment, and we
have spoken about this issue several times. And as you know, I
am still hearing an awful lot of complaints, lots of concerns.
Mr. McAleenan. Right.
Senator Peters. So I would certainly hope that we can
continue to work together to find out exactly where those gaps
are and how we can fill those gaps. So I appreciate your
commitment.
Mr. McAleenan. If I could just add, Senator, if you could
get individual permission from your constituents to share those
complaints, we are able to follow up and identify if there is a
challenge or a pattern or training opportunity.
Senator Peters. Great. We will do that.
I want to build my last question here on Senator Portman's
questions relating to attacks on houses of worship and the work
that I am doing with him on a grant program. But my question
is: On May 8, Chairman Johnson and I sent you, FBI Director
Wray, and Attorney General Barr requests for information about
your Department's use of Federal resources to detect and to
prevent domestic terrorism. We wrote you during a time of some
disturbing increases in white supremacist violence, including
the murder of white nationalists and neo-Nazis in
Charlottesville, the Tree of Life synagogue attack in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Emanuel AME Church in Charleston, Oak
Creek, Wisconsin, and many, many more attacks that I know you
are very well aware of.
Are you concerned about this rise of white supremacist
violence? And does the DHS have the flexibility in your
authorities to respond to this evolving threat?
Mr. McAleenan. So, first, we are very concerned about it,
and this is going to be a priority of our Targeted Violence and
Terrorist Prevention Office, which we have just created and
broadened their mandate in the last 6 weeks at DHS. White
supremacists, extremist violence is a huge issue and one that
we need a whole-of-community effort for. It has been the
ideology that has motivated a number of those faith-based
attacks that we have been talking about and are going to be a
focus of our Homeland Security Advisory Council review.
For DHS, our mission is prevention on this front,
intelligence sharing with State and locals, and then support to
Joint Terrorism Task Force (JTTF) investigations by the FBI.
The FBI is obviously the lead investigative component, but we
are going to maintain that commitment. Threats evolve. This is
an evolving and increasingly concerning threat.
Senator Peters. Well, we requested a response yesterday
from your office. I understand this morning we have received
some information, but I need your commitment that we will have
your full cooperation as both Chairman Johnson and I look at
this issue. So I appreciate that. Do I have your commitment?
Mr. McAleenan. You do.
Senator Peters. With that, Senator Hassan.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you, Ranking Member Peters.
And, again, Mr. Acting Secretary, thank you for spending a long
morning with us.
Mr. McAleenan. Sure.
Senator Hassan. We appreciate it very much.
I have two questions. They are both follow ups really in a
way to others. Senator Portman talked about our ongoing battle
about opioids generally but fentanyl in particular. Last
Congress, we passed and the President signed into law the
International Narcotics Trafficking Emergency Response by
Detecting Incoming Contraband with Technology (INTERDICT) Act,
which provides more technology for border agents to detect
fentanyl at the border. When I was at the border last year, I
heard that agents still did not have access to this equipment.
Former Secretary Nielsen stated that it was unacceptable when
she testified before this Committee last May.
Can you provide an update to the Committee on the status of
implementing the INTERDICT Act?
Mr. McAleenan. I believe we have implemented the INTERDICT
Act at the highest-traffic locations for concerns for fentanyl
or synthetic opioids, and we have dramatically increased our
testing capability across the board. That does not mean we have
it everywhere we need it or in every port of entry. The
investments in fiscal year 2019, which we are currently
procuring and deploying, will help augment that, but,
absolutely, we will look at our laydown to make sure it is
comprehensive and supports this critical mission area.
Senator Hassan. So have all the fiscal year 2019 funds been
spent?
Mr. McAleenan. Not yet.
Senator Hassan. Not yet.
Mr. McAleenan. No, they are currently in the planning and
deployment phase.
Senator Hassan. And are all the machines that you have
operational at this time?
Mr. McAleenan. Any new machines that were purchased under
the INTERDICT Act, unless there is a maintenance issue, yes,
they are operational.
Senator Hassan. OK. What still needs to be done? Just
expanding them to other sites?
Mr. McAleenan. Correct.
Senator Hassan. OK.
Mr. McAleenan. We deploy on a risk-based, prioritized
basis, and so that will be the mail facilities, express
consignment, the major Southwest Border ports of entry, and
then we try to get to the rest of the key areas.
Senator Hassan. OK. And so do you have the funding that you
need to do that?
Mr. McAleenan. I believe so. I will report back to you if
we are missing resources.
Senator Hassan. Alright. Please do. We would love to stay
up to date on that with you.
I also wanted to follow up on the issue of domestic
terrorism. I greatly appreciate the attention of DHS and my
colleagues on fighting domestic terrorism against houses of
worship and faith-based groups. As Senator Peters just
mentioned, like him, Senator Grassley and I have also sent your
agency a letter expressing concern over the rise of domestic
terrorism and requesting more information on what DHS is doing
to prevent and mitigate this threat to ensure public safety.
I want to ask you just a series of questions to get a
better sense of the resources that the Department has dedicated
to combating domestic terrorism, and since we have limited
time, let us see if we can do a lightning round.
I take it that you agree that domestic non-foreign
terrorist organization-inspired terrorism is on the rise, as
stated in this Administration's National Strategy for
Counterterrorism.
Mr. McAleenan. Yes.
Senator Hassan. Given the emphasis of domestic terrorism in
this National Strategy, does DHS have a 2019 strategy
specifically addressing the rise in domestic terrorism threats?
Mr. McAleenan. So we are working on a formal strategy, but
we do have that as a priority operational effort already.
Senator Hassan. And as you work on that formal strategy,
once you get it done, I take it you will share it with the
Committee.
Mr. McAleenan. Yes.
Senator Hassan. On a related note, what percentage of the
Department's budget is specifically dedicated to addressing
domestic terrorism? And how does that amount compare to
previous years?
Mr. McAleenan. I do not have that information here, but we
can get back to you on that.
Senator Hassan. Thank you. I would love it if you would get
back to us on that.
How many intelligence analysts at DHS headquarters tasked
with the primary responsibility of covering domestic terrorism
are there?
Mr. McAleenan. I will get back to you on that as well. But
what I can tell you is that under Under Secretary Glawe, he has
forward-deployed a number of the intel analysts to work
directly embedded with State and locals around the country, not
only in our Fusion Centers but in key sheriffs' and police
departments around the country, and that is one of their focus
areas.
Senator Hassan. I will ask a similar update about how many
policy and program staff you have exclusively focusing on
domestic terrorism.
Mr. McAleenan. OK.
Senator Hassan. I share the concern that it is on the rise
here. I have been concerned that resources that once were
devoted to domestic terrorism have been taken and used other
places, and it is one thing to say we care about it and are
committed to it, which I believe and I understand it is another
thing to have the resources, personnel, and focus to do it. So
I will look forward to that update from you, and thank you.
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you.
Senator Peters. Thank you, Senator Hassan.
We have 3 minutes remaining in the hearing. Senator Rosen,
they are yours.
Senator Rosen. All right. Well, let us see how fast I can
talk.
I want to talk about Temporary Protected Status (TPS) just
a tiny bit. There have been serious allegations of improper
political interference in the decisionmaking process
surrounding the termination of TPS for people from El Salvador,
Nicaragua, and several other countries. Thousands of them live
in Nevada. So as you know, the Immigration and Nationality Act
provides for TPS status in cases where the Secretary of DHS
finds that civil unrest, violence, natural disasters, or any
other temporary conditions preventing foreign nationals from
returning safely home to their countries or where their home
countries cannot absorb them.
A Federal judge has recently written in deciding to
terminate TPS status of Haiti, El Salvador, Nicaragua, and
Sudan, they changed the criteria applied by the prior
Administrations and did so without any explanation or
justification in violation of the Administrative Procedure Act.
I am going to go quickly. I have two questions.
I know that these decisions are currently the subject of
litigation, but since you have taken over the Department, have
you looked into the decisionmaking process for TPS status
determination? And will you commit to cooperating with the
Inspector General with that investigation looking into improper
political influence in the decisionmaking process for changing
this criteria?
Mr. McAleenan. So understanding the importance of TPS
decisionmaking, I have in my first 6 weeks asked when our next
decision is coming up. But I have been informed about the
ongoing litigation, and it is something we will do carefully,
applying the standards appropriately, if and when the next TPS
decision is presented.
Senator Rosen. Thousands of people in my State are
depending on a fair decision on this, so I look forward to
working with you. Thank you for staying extra.
Mr. McAleenan. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Peters. Thank you, Acting Secretary McAleenan. We
appreciate you being here today. We appreciate your testimony,
and I will look forward to working with you in the months and
years ahead.
The hearing record will remain open for 15 days, until June
7 at 5 p.m., for the submission of statements and questions for
the record. And with that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:11 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]