- AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
[Senate Hearing 116-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
----------
THURSDAY, APRIL 11, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 10:02 a.m., in room SD-192, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. John Hoeven (chairman) presiding.
Present: Senators Hoeven, Collins, Moran, Hyde-Smith,
Merkley, Tester, Udall, and Baldwin.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE SONNY PERDUE, SECRETARY
ACCOMPANIED BY:
DR. ROBERT JOHANSSON, CHIEF ECONOMIST
MRS. ERICA NAVARRO, BUDGET OFFICER
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JOHN HOEVEN
Senator Hoeven. We'll call the hearing to order. I'd like
to thank our Agriculture Secretary for being here this morning,
Secretary Perdue. We appreciate very much you being here before
the Committee.
Also, Dr. Robert Johansson, thank you as well. We
appreciate you being here to testify.
And, Ms. Erica Navarro, thank you very much for you joining
us as well.
Today the purpose of today's hearing is to discuss the
Department of Agriculture's fiscal year 2020 budget request.
And I hope that today's discussion will clarify the
administration's support for rural America and production
agriculture. The proposed reductions would directly impact
small rural communities many of us call home. Agriculture
production is the cornerstone of our local rural economies, and
weakening the farm safety net leaves farmers and ranchers
vulnerable to low commodity prices and unforeseen weather
conditions, and, of course, right now they're facing both.
Farmers and ranchers in our State and across the ag Belt
rely on the Department's tools and resources to stay in
business during these tumultuous times in farm country. Cuts to
ag research hurt our country's ability to compete
internationally and meet the demands of growing global
population. Ag remains one of America's net export industries
due to open trade, and we must continue to explore foreign
market access for our producers, and expand trade.
While I support many proposals included in the President's
budget, such as increased funding for our military and defense,
the burden of balancing the budget cannot be placed on the
backs of farmers, rural communities, and food aid recipients.
In our fiscal year 2019 ag appropriations bill, this
subcommittee made great strides towards modernizing
infrastructure in rural America, increasing funding for ag
research programs, and enhancing pest and disease prevention
and response efforts.
I look forward to hearing an update on the Department's
plans for implementation of these priorities. I believe we
should be investing in the future of agriculture in rural
America. As Chairman, I look forward to working with Senator
Merkley and the other members of the subcommittee to identify
those priorities and make the most effective and efficient
decisions on behalf of American taxpayers.
I look forward to discussing these issues today with you,
Mr. Secretary, and your team. I also want to thank you for your
commitment and your advocacy on behalf of our farmers and
ranchers. Growing up in agriculture, I know that you not only
know about farming and ranching, you've lived it your whole
life, and so I have appreciated your commitment and your
responsiveness.
Our producers face challenges right now whether it's in
trade, whether it's the flooding like we've talked about, low
commodity prices, a whole range of issues. The whole purpose of
our farm program is to be countercyclical to save money in good
times, which we want to do, recognize the budget deficit, and
make sure that we're there for them when they need us. I look
forward to working not only with this Committee, but with you.
I appreciate very much our working relationship, and I look
forward to working with you and your team to draft the best
budget we can for our farmers and ranchers and be as responsive
as we can. In that regard, again I appreciate your willingness
to be responsive and work with us on this budget.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator John Hoeven
This hearing will come to order. Good morning. The purpose of
today's hearing is to discuss the Department of Agriculture's fiscal
year 2020 budget request. Thank you to Secretary Perdue for being here
today, along with Dr. Johannsson and Ms. Navarro. Welcome.
I hope today's discussion will clarify the Administration's support
for rural America and production agriculture. The proposed reductions
would directly impact the small rural communities many of us call home.
Production agriculture is the cornerstone of local rural economies, and
weakening the farm safety net leaves farmers and ranchers vulnerable to
low commodity prices and unforeseen weather conditions. Farmers and
ranchers in North Dakota rely on the Department's tools and resources
to stay in business during these tumultuous times in farm country.
Cuts to agricultural research undermine our country's ability to
compete internationally and meet the demands of a growing global
population. Agriculture remains one of America's net export industries
due to open trade and we must continue to explore foreign market access
for our producers.
While I support many proposals included in the President's budget,
such as increased funding for our military and defense, the burden of
balancing the Federal budget cannot be placed on the backs of farmers,
rural communities, and food aid recipients.
In our fiscal year 2019 appropriations bill, this Subcommittee made
great strides towards modernizing infrastructure in rural America,
increasing funding for agricultural research programs, and enhancing
pest and disease prevention and response efforts. I look forward to
hearing an update on the Department's plans for implementation of these
priorities.
I believe we should be investing in the future of agriculture and
rural America. As Chairman, I look forward to working with Senator
Merkley and other members of the Subcommittee to identify those
priorities and make the most effective and efficient decisions on
behalf of American taxpayers.
I look forward to discussing these issues and others with you
today, Mr. Secretary. I would now like to turn to our Ranking Member,
Senator Merkley, for his opening statement.
Senator Hoeven. With that, I will turn to Vice Chairman
Senator Merkley.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR JEFF MERKLEY
Senator Merkley. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And, Secretary Perdue, welcome. Good to have you here.
Dr. Johansson, Mrs. Navarro, we appreciate you coming to
discuss the President's budget proposal for the Department of
Agriculture.
And, Mr. Secretary, I've very much enjoyed working with
you. I didn't particularly enjoy reading this, the budget,
though. And it has a lot in it that's significant to the
agricultural economy, to Oregon's agricultural economy, to
rural America in general, and I'll be interested in hearing
your thoughts and comments.
We are currently debating in Congress much needed disaster
assistance, which is relevant to much of our agricultural
community across the country. I am pleased that right now the
bill includes help to Oregon's wine grape growers who very much
had their grapes affected by the forest fires because of the
smoke contamination. I hope we'll be able to get this disaster
bill passed quickly and get these funds out.
The budget looks very similar to the budget from last year.
With the recent passage of fiscal year 2019 omnibus, Congress
differed, changed much of what was proposed, yet the
Administration once again proposes to eliminate or reduce the
funding for many of the agencies at USDA.
Net spending for USDA is cut by more than $4 billion.
That's a 22-percent cut, while the rural economy, rural Ag
economy, continues to struggle. So I'm afraid this budget, if
enacted the way it was, would do more harm than good. The
budget decimates Rural Development. I go around my State, 36
counties every year, and I hold an open town hall. By the end
of this year, I'll hit about 400 town halls since I was
elected.
And the circumstances of economic development in rural
Oregon are like much of the country; they're facing a lot of
challenges as our country changes. And so to see vital housing
loan and grant programs, and Rural Business Service
eliminated--that concerns me a lot. Research funding cut by 16
percent. The Farm Service Agency by 18 percent. Important
nutrition programs eliminated. And elimination of the Food for
Peace and McGovern-Dole. And almost no agency is spared. USDA
does important work that impacts every single life in America,
and this budget doesn't reflect that important mission.
I also have concerns about the proposal to move two vital
research agencies, the Economic Research Service and the
National Institute for Food and Ag, NIFA, outside the capital
region.
I'm also particularly concerned about the SNAP rule. I
joined a bipartisan group of 47 Senators who asked you to
withdraw this, and maybe we can have more conversation about
that.
I believe a budget is a reflection of the Administration's
priorities, and I'm concerned that our farmers and ranchers in
rural communities are not the priority I'd like them to be. So
I'm hopeful we can discuss these issues and work on this
committee, as we did a year ago, to make sure that vital
programs much needed across America receive the funding that
they need to operate effectively.
Thank you so much.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you, Senator Merkley.
Are there other opening statements?
[No response.]
Senator Hoeven. Okay. Then we will proceed.
Mr. Secretary, again thank you for being here, and we
welcome your opening statement.
SUMMARY STATEMENT HON. SONNY PERDUE
Secretary Perdue. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
Ranking Member Senator Merkley, and distinguished members of
the Committee. It's again an appreciated privilege to visit
with you and talk about appropriations.
Some of the comparisons of the enacted budget, which was
just recently passed, occurred after the administration put its
budget together. So I think it would help all of us, and I know
you all would like to as well, get right back to a regular
order of top-line numbers and other type of budget
authorizations, and then the authorizing committee and others.
So to some degree, we have handcuffed ourselves in some of
these comparisons. But I certainly appreciate many of the
comments that you've made and certainly concur with many of
them, and I think together we will get a budget out that will
benefit rural America and our Agricultural economy, and that's
our goal as we go.
So we appreciate the efforts here, and I hope you recognize
that we're doing our best to be responsive to you in many ways
as the people's elected representatives here. Obviously, our
founders created a natural tension between the appropriators
and then lawmakers as well as the executive branch, and we
really welcome that and the candid discussion of how we
implement the laws that you've passed, including the Farm Bill,
as well as the appropriations that you deem that are most
needed and most effective.
We are striving, as was said before, in USDA to become the
most effective and the most efficient and the most customer-
focused agency in the Federal Government in dealing with your
constituents, and I hope that you have noticed that difference,
and if we fall short, then we hope that you will identify those
for us.
You mentioned the disaster bill. Obviously, that's a
concern, and hopefully we can reconcile our differences very
quickly about that. You have some producers, really all over
the country now, who are from the fire-ravaged areas of the
West that Senator Merkley discussed to the hurricanes of
Florida, Georgia, and the Carolinas, to the floods of the
Midwest, that all are in desperate need.
The farm safety net you all have created through the Farm
Bill and through appropriations in the past is a safety net,
but it does not contemplate utter destruction and disasters
such as we've seen in these types of situations. So I
appreciate very much your recognition of that.
Obviously, trade is utmost on all of our minds, certainly
from a farmer/producer perspective. From this perspective, we
are blessed in this Nation to have absolute food security,
contributing to national security, but that makes us dependent
on exports and agriculture being one of our export surplus
sectors in our economy. The trade disruptions of 2018 have been
very problematic for producers, and while the President
authorized and we implemented a market facilitation program
that helped producers in some places, every producer out there
would rather have a good, fair trading environment than any
kind of aid in that regard.
We don't anticipate any of that early--this year, any more
help. Hopefully, with the talks continuing between China and
the U.S., we can hopefully consummate a very good trade deal in
the near future. Obviously, Ambassador Lighthizer is also
engaged in Japan. So the trade issues continue to be paramount
as we continue to break down those barriers, seek export
opportunities.
Obviously, our Under Secretary for Foreign Ag Service, Ted
McKinney, is really circling the globe looking for new markets.
We've become actually too dependent on one large customer, so
we're looking throughout Indochina, India, and other places
there that we may sell our products as well.
Certainly, infrastructure is important in Ag. You all
understand that, broadband particularly being almost the
utility of the 21st century, and we appreciate the funding that
you've given there. We want to do a proof of concept that will
make you proud over this $600 million that you all appropriated
last year as well as the $550 this year. These applications
will begin being received here just in a couple of weeks. And
there's been a lot of interest from all across the country over
broadband connectivity. It has influence certainly in precision
agriculture as well as many other areas.
Regarding the budget, I look forward to your questions, and
we'll address those as they come up probably more profitably
than generally. We're working very hard on Farm Bill
implementation as well. And I look forward to discussing.
Obviously, the Administration has a constitutional
responsibility to present a budget that's fiscally responsible
and no longer puts off tough decisions. And while at USDA we
want to be able to support our ag in rural communities, we're
willing to do our part and whatever it takes.
So thank you for the opportunity to be with you this
morning. I look forward to your questions. And I hope that you
will find that we are doing our best to live up to our motto in
USDA of do right and feed everyone.
Thank you, sir.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Sonny Perdue
Mr. Chairman and distinguished Members of this Subcommittee, it is
a privilege to appear before you today to provide an overview of the
Department's proposed budget for fiscal year 2020. Joining me today are
Robert Johansson, the USDA's Chief Economist, and Erica Navarro, USDA's
Budget Officer.
When I appeared before you a year ago, I laid out my vision for
making USDA the best managed department in the Federal government.
Since then, USDA made great strides toward becoming the most effective,
most efficient, and most customer-focused department in the Federal
government. USDA has worked to create rural economic opportunities and
improve the quality of life for rural Americans. Rural Development
invested in new and improved high-speed e-Connectivity and electricity
for 7 million residents and improved water and wastewater
infrastructure for nearly 3 million rural customers. USDA also launched
an initiative to provide comprehensive and timely support to veterans
interested in opportunities in agriculture, agribusiness, and in rural
America.
USDA played a significant role in helping rural communities and
agricultural producers recover from hurricane-related damage and
wildfires. USDA assistance has included providing children affected by
Hurricane Florence access to free meals, helping Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) recipients replace food lost due to power
outages, helped businesses and utilities by considering requests to
defer principal and/or interest payments, and provided emergency farm
loans to impacted operations.
In 2018, the Department worked with Federal partners to deliver new
and improved trade deals like the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement
and a re-negotiated United States-Korea Free Trade Agreement and
provided trade assistance to farmers due to unjustified trade
retaliation. Efforts to break down barriers and pursue export
opportunities resulted in new or expanded market access for numerous
U.S. farm products in 2018. USDA sponsored six agricultural trade
missions in 2018, enabling more than 200 U.S. companies and
organizations to engage in 3,000 one-on-one meetings with foreign
buyers, generating more than $140 million in projected 12-month sales.
Similarly, USDA organized exporter participation in 19 trade shows
around the globe, where more than 900 U.S. companies introduced 4,500
new products to potential customers and reported $296 million in on-
site sales and $2 billion in projected 12- month sales.
Since we last met, USDA worked with local school officials to
explore reforms that will make school meals more appealing by giving
control back to local school food professionals who know the children
best. Based on the input received, the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS)
finalized a rule to allow for more flexibilities for schools to offer
nutritious and satisfying meals to children, reduce food waste, and
ease operational burdens for the National School Lunch Program and
School Breakfast Program. With a focus on the Administration's priority
of moving SNAP participants to self-sufficiency through work, FNS
proposed another rule to improve and strengthen our efforts in moving
able-bodied adults without dependents participants to work.
We refocused USDA to be more customer-oriented, merging where it
made sense to maximize efficiencies, while modernizing and optimizing
Information Technology (IT) to improve delivery of services. USDA stood
up the Farm Production and Conservation (FPAC) mission area. We also
launched the FPAC Business Center in 2018 to eliminate redundant
administrative support functions. USDA successfully merged the
Agricultural Marketing Service, the Grain Inspection, Packers and
Stockyards Administration, and the Farm Service Agency's (FSA)
Commodity Operations programs to better meet the needs of farmers,
ranchers, producers, and consumers while improving customer service and
maximizing efficiencies. We continued efforts to optimize and
consolidate Enterprise Data Centers by closing 21 in 2018 which
together with prior closures is expected to achieve $21.5 million in
cost savings/avoidance by 2021. We also decreased the number of
cybersecurity critical vulnerabilities per endpoint by 62 percent and
the number of high-risk vulnerabilities by 73 percent in 2018,
decreasing USDA's weaknesses in software or hardware that can be
exploited by a hacker. After reviewing the motor fleet, we were able to
identify over 4,200 underutilized fleet vehicles (over 10 percent of
the USDA fleet) that are being targeted for disposal, which is
estimated to reduce USDA costs by $26 million in fiscal year 2019 and
beyond.
2020 president's budget
The President's Budget recognizes the overriding need to reduce the
Federal deficit, and USDA shares in the responsibility of controlling
Federal spending. There are proposals in the budget for USDA that will
produce real savings in both mandatory and discretionary spending. The
Budget includes proposals to cut programs that achieved their goals or
do not work, eliminate wasteful or duplicative spending, streamline
government operations, and limit spending to achieve deficit reduction
goals. The President's 2020 Budget lays out a vision for a Federal
government that is efficient, effective, and accountable.
USDA's total budget authority request pending before this
Subcommittee, proposes a total of $143.2 billion in 2020, compared to
$137 billion in 2019, primarily due to an anticipated decrease in SNAP
participation and crop insurance payments. The discretionary
appropriation request for this Subcommittee is $15.7 billion, which is
lower than the $20.2 billion under the annualized continuing resolution
for 2019.
For 2020, we will continue to prioritize customer service every day
for our customers--the American taxpayers. We will strive to conduct
the people's business efficiently, effectively, and with the utmost
integrity. We will promote the ability of America's agricultural sector
to produce and sell the food and fiber that feeds and clothes the world
and to reap the earned reward of their labor. By promoting American
agricultural products, we will work to remove obstacles and give
farmers, ranchers, foresters, and producers every opportunity to
prosper and thrive.
Through our programs and working closely with our customers, we
will facilitate rural prosperity through the expansion of rural
business opportunities and improved infrastructure. We will also work
to preserve the land. USDA will continue to ensure that all Americans
have access to a safe and secure food supply.
become the best managed department in the federal government
For fiscal year 2020, the President's Budget supports new and
continuing investments in IT modernization by USDA to improve customer
service and streamline and modernize rural and farm program and service
delivery. In addition, the Budget continues support for the business
functions of the FPAC Mission Area by streamlining service delivery
between FSA, the Natural Resources Conservation Service, and Risk
Management Agency to improve efficiency, effectiveness, and
accountability. To maximize the effectiveness of these customer-focused
improvements, the Department must modernize its own back-office
technology capabilities. The Budget includes an increase of $31.5
million to begin the transition to a modernized enterprise network in
fiscal year 2020.
In the National Capital Region (NCR), the Department is starting
the OneNeighborhood initiative to better utilize office space in the
Washington, DC Headquarters Complex. The Budget requests $266 million
for the initiative to increase the occupancy capacity through life and
health safety upgrades; space reconfigurations; and the replacement of
outdated building systems. The efforts will allow the Department to
reduce its lease costs in the NCR that amount to approximately $40
million annually.
In August, USDA announced we would realign the Economic Research
Service (ERS) under the Office of the Chief Economist and would
relocate both ERS and the National Institute of Food and Agriculture
(NIFA) outside of the NCR. Those changes will imrove customer service,
strengthen offices and programs, and save taxpayer dollars. USDA
received 136 expressions of interest submissions from 35 states. The
firm Ernst & Young was retained to evaluate and conduct the site
selection process. On March 12, we announced 68 expressions of interest
remain under consideration. We recognize there are outstanding
questions regarding this decision and are committed to an open process
as we move forward together to address concerns. The President's 2020
Budget includes an estimate of the funds necessary to move these
agencies outside the NCR, but final costs will be dependent on the
location selected.
create conditions so agricultural operations can prosper, fulfilling
their mission to feed, fuel, and clothe the world
Over the past year, USDA responded to conditions that tested the
resilience of American farmers with initiatives to create economic
conditions in which they can prosper. With the help of crop insurance,
natural disaster assistance programs, and short-term trade mitigation
programs, many producers are managing the stresses of these difficult
times and are indicating increased optimism, particularly with
expectations that trade partnerships will strengthen in the near
future. As we implement the 2018 Farm Bill we will work toward
achieving the primary goal of farm programs: to help farmers and
ranchers manage risks and continue producing food, fiber, and fuel in
good years as well as bad. The Budget estimates net CCC expenditures of
$6.5 billion which includes all the commodity programs, CRP and CCC
funded trade programs. This compares to the estimated $20.9 billion net
CCC expenditures that we anticipate in fiscal year 2019, which includes
disaster and trade mitigation assistance in addition to the other
programs.
In addition to mandatory funding provided by the 2018 Farm Bill,
the President's Budget provides resources to help agricultural
operations prosper, fulfilling their mission to feed, fuel, and clothe
the world. Funding is requested to support the estimated $7.7 billion
demand for farm loans that provide access to credit to about 48,800
producers, 80 percent of whom are beginning farmers and ranchers,
veterans, and socially disadvantaged producers. It provides nearly $1
billion for the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service to promote
the health of animal and plant resources and facilitate their movement
in the global marketplace, as well as the welfare of certain animals.
For agricultural research and extension activities, the Budget includes
a total of $2.9 billion, including $500 million for competitive grants
through the Agriculture and Food Research Initiative. The Budget
includes a total of $66 million to take ownership of and operational
responsibility for the National Bio and Agro-Defense Facility (NBAF),
in addition to funding to transition and expand the Agricultural
Research Service and the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
research and diagnostic programs at NBAF.
expand foreign markets and promote u.s. products around the world
USDA is committed to helping U.S. farmers and ranchers identify and
access new export markets and expanding trade opportunities. With
around 20 percent of farm income derived from exports, it is critical
that USDA work with the American food and agriculture community to
ensure farmers, ranchers, and food manufacturers and workers can fairly
compete against anyone in overseas markets. To support this mission,
the Budget includes $503 million to reduce trade barriers that
disadvantage U.S. agricultural exports and to open new markets for U.S.
farm products. Within this amount, funding is also requested to
preserve or expand trade valued between $6 billion to $8 billion
through resolution of foreign market access issues. To facilitate
exports to buyers in countries that may not have access to adequate
commercial credit, the Budget includes a program level of $5.5 billion
for CCC Export Guarantee Programs to provide guarantees.
facilitate rural prosperity and economic development
American prosperity and well-being are intrinsically tied to rural
America's ability to thrive in the new global economy; to build and
attract an educated workforce and expand its population base; and to
use its diverse and abundant natural resources to provide food, fiber,
forest products, energy, and recreation. Through the Task Force on
Agriculture and Rural Prosperity, the Department has identified actions
to improve the quality of life and expand economic development in rural
communities. Many of these actions are supported through investments
made in USDA lending activities to rural utilities and communities and
to strengthen investments in housing programs.
The President's 2020 Budget for USDA includes investments to
increase prosperity in rural America that are in addition to the
Administration's $200 billion infrastructure proposal. For USDA, the
Budget proposes over $2.9 billion in budget authority to support $38.3
billion in Federal funds to stimulate public-private partnerships
needed to build rural infrastructure including broadband, community
facilities, safe and affordable housing, health services and
facilities, and provide capacity-building to help underserved
communities become thriving communities. This includes $690 million in
loans that enhance telecommunications infrastructure and $200 million
to support loans and grants to support high-speed broadband series to
communities with populations under 20,000. The Budget supports $5.5
billion in loans for rural electric improvements, benefiting rural
residents through the expanded use of smart grid technologies. The
Budget also includes $1.7 billion to improve water and wastewater
services for 11.5 million rural residents and $3.1 billion to provide
access to improved community facilities for over 5 million rural
residents. The budget provides $24 billion to lenders in providing
160,000 low- to moderate-income households the opportunity to own their
primary residence through the single-family housing guaranteed loan
program. The budget also includes $1.4 billion to fully fund multi-
family rental assistance grants for about 281,000 contracts.
provide all americans access to a safe, nutritious, and secure food
supply
A plentiful supply of safe and nutritious food is essential to the
healthy development of every child in America and to the well-being and
productivity of every family. USDA works to help prevent foodborne
illness and protect public health as well as aid access to safe,
nutritious, and balanced meals and promote a healthy diet. The Budget
includes mandatory funds to support estimated participation levels for
SNAP and Child Nutrition programs, and discretionary funds to serve all
expected participants level in the Special Supplemental Nutrition
Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC). It also includes the
funding needed to meet our responsibility for providing inspection
services to the Nation's meat, poultry, and processed egg product
establishments.
program reforms
The 2020 President's Budget includes legislative proposals to
reform programs to better target Federal dollars, while contributing to
deficit reduction efforts. This includes several legislative proposals
that we also included in the fiscal year 2019 Budget to better target
commodity conservation assistance, and crop insurance that would
generate savings of $47.8 billion over 10 years compared to current
baseline spending. In addition, the Budget proposes to delink the
Section 32 program from customs receipts, and replace the receipt
funding with direct mandatory appropriation direct from the Treasury.
Our proposal funds all of the current Section 32 nutrition programs and
provides stable funding for surplus commodity donations the Budget's
proposals will ensure stable historical levels of funding for all the
nutrition programs that have traditionally benefited from these
activities while also increasing transparency, improving operational
efficiency, generating savings of $5.1 billion over 10 years.
The Budget also supports a foundational principle that those who
need assistance have access to wholesome and healthy foods. The Budget
includes an approach to nutrition assistance that combines the use of
traditional SNAP Electronic Benefit Transfer cards with a USDA Harvest
Box that contains 100-percent American grown products. States would
have the ability to provide choice to their recipients, including
innovative approaches for the inclusion of fresh products. In addition,
the Budget focuses on innovative administrative reforms on outcome-
based employment strategies. The Budget also includes proposals to
reserve benefits for those most in need, promote efficiency in State
operations, and strengthen program integrity. Specifically, the
proposals for SNAP have the potential to reduce waste, fraud, and abuse
by limiting opportunities for benefits to be misused or trafficked.
Combined, these reforms to nutrition assistance programs maintain the
Administration's commitment to ensuring Americans in need of assistance
have access to a nutritious diet while reducing the cost to taxpayers
by approximately $216 billion over 10 years.
disaster relief
As I mentioned earlier, farmers and ranchers were battered last
year by a series of monumental storms, robbing them of their
livelihoods and inflicting damage well beyond the financial risks they
normally assume in their operations. These are the men and women who
dedicate their lives to feeding, fueling, and clothing this nation, and
we cannot turn our backs on them when they need assistance. In 2017,
Congress provided supplemental assistance for producers who experienced
losses not covered by existing forms of relief. USDA stands ready to
quickly implement assistance, bolstered by lessons learned, for similar
losses in 2018 should Congress decide once again to act.
conclusion
In the face of a growing national debt, the President has offered a
fiscally responsible budget that no longer puts off the tough decisions
to future generations. The budget will support a robust economy that
created 200,000 jobs in January, with unemployment at 3.8 percent in
February. Recent estimates predict Gross Domestic Product will grow at
a rate of about 12.5 percent. Nonetheless, according to the US
Treasury, the National debt has grown to more than $22 trillion as of
March 15, 2019. The Trump Administration has proposed a budget that is
fiscally responsible and no longer puts off the tough decisions to
future generations. At USDA, we will do our part to reduce government
spending.
I would be happy to answer any questions at this time.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Do any of your
associates have any opening comments before we proceed to
questions?
[No response.]
TRADE AGREEMENTS
Senator Hoeven. Okay. Then we'll go to 5 minute rounds of
questions. Let's start on trade. Give us your latest estimate
of where we are with getting the United States-Mexico-Canada
Agreement (USMCA) to the floor to try to get that ratified. I
believe that we need to get ratified as soon as we can to
continue our ability to export and trade with Canada, Mexico,
China, Japan, EU, and any others.
Where are we in terms of getting something? I know you
maybe can't say precisely, but give us as much information as
you can. This is of incredible interest and concern to our
farmers because of their need to export, but also additional
sales, too. We are now in year two of the market stabilization
payment. We need some of these sales. While we're negotiating,
what about additional sales? So, if you could, give us whatever
information you can in that regard.
Secretary Perdue. Absolutely. Let's begin with USMCA. While
no trade agreement is perfect, I believe if you go chapter by
chapter, verse by verse, of this agreement, I do believe from
labor, environment, and certainly agriculture, it's an
improvement over our NAFTA 1.0, and I think if people are
objective in looking at that, then they would recognize that
and hopefully do that. The (ITC) International Trade Commission
report I think is due out imminently, and that will allow you
all to begin to consider it seriously. I would hope that we
could do that sooner rather than later. I think that's a
statement to the world that we are serious about our trade
negotiations. So hopefully we can do that.
Obviously, there is one sector probably in seasonal fruit
and produce where we were not able to get what we wanted. It
was on the table. Ambassador Lighthizer fought hard for that,
but ultimately that, in the spirit of negotiation, had to be
eliminated.
Certainly, the China negotiations are very hopeful. I'm
cautiously optimistic with China. It's never over until it's
over, but I think the news this morning was that Secretary
Mnuchin feels that they have an enforcement protocol, which has
always been a problem in the past, to enforce any agreements on
both sides that are made. But the numbers for agriculture are
very hopeful and optimistic. If we can consummate a deal with
China, it will be extremely good for U.S. agriculture I think,
as well as the U.S. economy dealing with those issues over
cybertheft and illegal transfer of intellectual property. So
that's a good deal.
Ambassador Lighthizer also is engaged in Japan,
understanding that the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP)
implementation will continue to disadvantage our farmers very
quickly, and he understands that, has a good understanding of
that, and is working hard to get an Ag agreement that is
certainly equal or better than TPP was initially.
So those are the issues. While I indicate those are the
three that are most public, but, again, Ambassador, Under
Secretary Ted McKinney is going around the world, to Malaysia,
Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam, India, those
kinds of places, as well as China, in order to find other
customers. The market access portion of the money, the
facilitation program that you gave last year working with
collaborators and all industry sectors, I think 57 different
industry sectors, will help us gain market access and build
markets for the future, as we did in China.
Senator Hoeven. Any sense of timing? I know you're in
negotiations, so on the one hand, you have to be careful in
what you say about timing, but on the other hand, I know I
don't have to tell you the concern our farmers have right now
with prices and moving product. The timing matters. Do you have
any sense of timing on the agreements?
Secretary Perdue. Well, that is a challenge. Obviously,
over timing, you want to make sure you get it right, but I'm
frankly impressed with how quickly the China discussions are
moving. The Vice Premier has been to the U.S. at least on three
different occasions here since Christmas, and I've sat in the
meetings in the Oval Office, and they seem to be very sincere.
I am of the belief that both President Trump and President Xi
of China really want a resolution to these trade discussions.
And I'm hopeful that we can see that sooner rather than later.
These are complex agreements, as you know, but much work has
been done and much agreement.
One of the things we're excited about at the U.S.
Department of Agriculture is that many of the non-tariff issues
having to do with protocols and inspections seem to be covered,
and some of the non-tariff barriers have been just as difficult
as the tariff barriers, and that will enable them to accomplish
the kind of purchases that they put on the table.
Senator Hoeven. Well, I would ask that if it does
continue--I mean, if we get a deal sooner, fantastic. If it
continues to go longer, I would ask that you continue to
advocate for purchases as a sign of good faith while
negotiations are going on, because our farmers are on the
frontlines.
Secretary Perdue. Right.
Senator Hoeven. With that, I will turn to Ranking Member
Merkley.
HEMP PRODUCTION
Senator Merkley. Thank you so much.
I want to start out with the hemp production program. This
was a project that Senator McConnell, Senator Rand, Senator
Wyden, and myself worked very hard to have hemp become a
significant agricultural crop in America. It is now a situation
where there are 615 registered hemp growers in Oregon, and I
know there's a lot in Kentucky as well, and others across the
Nation. Both the fiber and the CBD oil has made this of great
interest to people. And yet we don't have rules, and it looks
like it's not going to have rules until we have the 2020 crop
year. This is a pretty exciting new opportunity for farmers
across America. Any way we can speed that up?
Secretary Perdue. I'd love to, Senator, but probably
unlikely. As you know, the dairy sector, we are prioritizing
our dairy farmers in implementing the Farm Bill. This is
obviously a new issue. It requires a lot of complexities
because of its uniqueness in its product and similarities and
things that many States and the Federal Government considers
illegal. So we have to do this in a more strictly regulated
environment than maybe a commodity crop that's not like that.
Senator Merkley. So I've had the chance to go out to a hemp
farm in Oregon. I don't think it's as complex as you're
thinking. We both have the marijuana side, very different plant
from the hemp. I'd like to invite you to join me out in Oregon
for a little tour of our hemp industry. And we have these
exciting little local places where we have very rural areas
where they're setting up oil press operations, a variety of
different technologies involved. But they're like all excited
because there's a little production facility in very rural
parts of the State that rarely get anything new in. And so I'd
like to share some of that enthusiasm with you, and maybe you
could appoint three or four people to really just drive this
through and get it done.
Secretary Perdue. I'd welcome that actually. We need to
know more about the industry as a whole. I probably know less
about that than I do most of the crops, and certainly I would
welcome that. There's no lack of enthusiasm for sure for the
CBD oil and others, and I'm interested in really what the fiber
utilization is, because what are all those industrial uses?
Because as productive as the American producer is, I am fearful
that we can crash this market before it gets off the ground.
RURAL HOUSING
Senator Merkley. Yeah. It's very possible. The fiber has
been so established in Canada for a very long time. It's going
to take longer to be able to move the fiber operations and be
competitive there, but the oil, it's competitive right away.
And so I wanted to turn to housing, rural housing. Your
budget eliminates the Single Farm Direct Mortgage Program, the
Repair Loan Program, all the grant programs. And I have all
these rural communities that say, you know, the challenge is
when we have an employer who wants to come, there's not
housing, and yet when we have people who want to build housing,
they're afraid to build it until an employer wants to come.
Secretary Perdue. Right.
Senator Merkley. And so these programs are pretty
important, and I'd like to encourage you to back restoring
them.
Secretary Perdue. Well, I can't disagree with you at all. I
think many rural areas have a chicken-and-egg situation there
that you've described. And I think the administration's thought
on this was that this process would be consolidated in HUD
rather than the Rural Housing Service. But we understand the
impact and the effect that rural housing has contributed to
rural America.
BROADBAND
Senator Merkley. I wanted to turn to broadband. Thank you,
by the way. Thank you for your support of rural housing.
Turning to broadband, we pushed very hard to greatly amplify
the funding elevenfold from $60 million to $600 million,
another half a million dollars next year. So we're at half a
billion dollars. So now we have a lot of funds, but the program
to actually get the broadband grants out to communities has
been slower than we hoped.
And the rules are pretty complicated. I'm encouraging
everybody to apply even if they think they don't fit the rules
because what I'm hearing is very few communities will fit
exactly with what's been laid out. But this is such a big need.
So many rural economies just--they're like, ``We can't keep
people here,'' or, ``We can't draw people here if we don't have
good broadband.''
So I just want to encourage the fastest possible, most
generous rollout. If people's scores are low because they don't
meet the programs exactly, but they bother to apply, I'm
telling people to apply anyway; there are going to be funds
left, and maybe you'll honor those grants that don't fit every
single aspect.
Secretary Perdue. I very much appreciate you all
appropriating another $550 million on top of the $600. We're
really on the cusp of receiving the applications now, but the
portal has been open since December. We work with technical
experts. These are complex applications there, and the way you
all design the rules for unserved areas, it didn't happen as
quickly as I'd like for it to happen either, but I think we
wanted to get it right.
We wanted to prove the concept that USDA can really
facilitate these types of broadband transformations. We've got
$200 million in outright grants. That will be the first thing
that goes in April 23rd. We've got $200 million coming in May
over the loan-grant combinations. And then $200 million coming
in June in the loan applications.
So there's been tremendous interest. I share your
enthusiasm. I think this is probably the moonshot
transformation that we could do if we could connect rural
America in the 21st century data usage.
Senator Merkley. Thank you.
Senator Hoeven. Senator Moran.
ERS-NIFA RELOCATION
Senator Moran. Chairman, Thank you.
Secretary Perdue, welcome.
I want to start my time to applaud your efforts, your
efforts to relocate NIFA and ERS outside of Washington, D.C. I
believe that government offices that are located closer to
people, the people they serve, is a positive thing. And I
reject the argument of some that something outside the national
capital diminishes its value to farmers and to the country.
Kansas City, the city that splits the border between
Senator Blunt and I, has 5,000 USDA employees today, and to say
that their value to the country is something less than an
employee within the Department in Washington, D.C. is offensive
to me. And so there are good people doing good work across the
country. And I'm happy to see you pursue this.
I would ask you if you want to provide an update on this
topic, where we are. Funds in this budget affect this decision
and the things that you and we can do to make sure that those
employees that relocate to those locations have all the staff
and training and necessary components to fulfill their jobs.
Secretary Perdue. Well, thank you very much for your
support, Senator. I really have been a little surprised with
the naysayers on this. I would love to understand more about
their issues. About 90 percent of USDA employees are outside
the National Capital Region. You mentioned Kansas City. We've
got a great firm there. Minnesota, New Orleans, and many other
places across the country are doing a great job, Ames, Iowa.
And we've had 139 expressions of interest. That's been
winnowed down to a middle list. We hope to have sort of the
finalists within probably a 3-week time period where we'll
begin actual negotiations, which will allow us to provide a
cost-benefit analysis, a real benefit analysis, for you all, as
the appropriators, to determine. My goal is to treat this as an
economic development project much like it was always used
against me when I was Governor. Six or seven hundred Federal
jobs is a pretty good aplomb for economic development. So we
expect to get some good proposals here, and we'll go back to
those few finalists here and ask for their last and best offer
in that regard. If I can't bring a deal to you that I think
makes sense, then I wouldn't expect you all to approve it, but
I think we'll find some real interest out there that begins to
help in the reasons that we began to think about this as far as
quality of life and people recruiting some of these young Ph.D.
with families outside where they can live a better quality of
life.
U.S. MEXICO-CANADA AGREEMENT
Senator Moran. Mr. Secretary, please consider me an ally in
that effort. Also, please consider me an ally. I've offered to
the White House and to the USTR, to the Trade Ambassador, to
provide whatever leadership I can in support of USMCA's
approval by Congress, and I would make the same offer to you.
Please put me to work. It is a trade agreement that is of
significance. I would make the pitch one more time that we
should not withdraw from NAFTA until USMCA is approved. And I
would ask, assuming that you agree with me, that you would
convey that to the administration.
Secretary Perdue. We have, and we'll continue to advocate
very strongly for that position.
FLOODING IN THE MIDWEST
Senator Moran. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I recently toured flood damage in Kansas with our FSA State
Director. The floods that occurred, at least initially, in
Nebraska have worked their way down to the northeast corner of
Kansas. I'm watching the weather this weekend, in which South
Dakota is to get 18 to 24 inches of snow. We know that the last
flood we had in Kansas of this magnitude occurred in July. This
one is occurring in March. There's a lot of rain, spring rains,
and a lot of snowfall, snowmelt, yet to come.
I would ask you just one specific question at the moment
about this topic. Could you provide me, either today or in the
near future, the most up-to-date estimate of the Emergency
Conservation Program (ECP) budget shortfall? And would you and
the Department support funds being appropriated to cover the
backlog?
Secretary Perdue. The answer to the second question is
absolutely we'll support that.
The first question is we don't know yet. The assessments
take a while with the flood waters receding, and as you
indicated, potentially even more coming with snow and snowmelt
coming down, it could be greater. So we don't have good
assessments of that. Currently, we're working with our State
partners both in the State and our Federal FSA and NRCS
officers across there. If there's a shortfall in that, the good
thing about it on the Livestock Indemnity Program, you all
lifted the cap on that, so that's helpful to many, many people
that will lose a good amount of livestock in those areas, and
we're prepared to support that. But if there are shortfalls, we
will certainly advise you of what we assess the damage to be
and ask for what's needed.
Senator Moran. This may be, Mr. Secretary, we think will be
the most important program for farmers and ranchers damaged in
Kansas, will be ECP, and there's already backlog in that
effort. And we've always funded ECP and filled the shortfall.
We're trying to do so in the emergency appropriation bill, and
we could use your help in accomplishing that.
Secretary Perdue. Well, I hope we can also get the disaster
bill out, which would backfill that ECP need, and the watershed
issues, and correcting those streambanks, and, you know, the
flooding. And I've never seen the ice associated with the
flooding the way it apparently happened here with huge ice
blocks that can just carve and really destroy streambeds.
Senator Moran. I agree. I've never seen anything like it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Hoeven. Senator Tester.
TRADE AGREEMENT
Senator Tester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I could go into a climate change discussion right now, but
we'll hold off on that and we'll stick with Ag.
Look, we're on the cusp of planting season in Montana.
Thank you for being here, Mr. Secretary. We're on the cusp of
planting season. I'm in that business, as you know. You're in
that business, you know. The fact is that show me a crop we can
plant right now that's worth anything. It's really hard. And
I'm going to tell you, though I appreciate the trade mitigation
famous for our agriculture, the more we do those kind of
things, the more taxpayers' ears go up and go, ``Well, you know
what the farmers are getting. Why are equipment dealers getting
it?''; ``Equipment dealers are getting it. How come the gas
distributor isn't getting it?''
So we've got a problem, and I think we've got a problem not
only in Montana, but across this country. I can give you quotes
from folks who were in agriculture. Lyle Benjamin, who is
president of the Montana Grain Growers Association, which is
one of the largest grain association in the State, says it's
going to be hard to break even this year. When you can't break
even, you go broke.
Rural America is under attack, you know that. We're losing
people right and left. We lost them in the '80s. I think we're
on the cusp of losing a whole bunch again. Bankers tell me
you've got about 18 months. Well, we're just about at 18
months. TPP has gone into effect without us. I just heard
Montana farmers are planting 310,000 fewer acres of wheat,
which is great, but what are we going to plant? Are you going
to plant pulse crops? They're not worth anything. I'll get into
hemp in a minute.
But the fact is there is so much uncertainty going on right
now, and with the tariffs in both directions, John Deere
announced an increase in their equipment costs, fuel prices are
trending up. This is a recipe for disaster in rural America,
and it is manmade.
We stepped out of TPP. One of Montana's biggest customers
was Japan. We no longer have the trade advantages that places
like Australia do now with Japan. We don't have any trade
advantages. In fact, they have the trade advantages. You know
the story, you've heard it. If you haven't--I know you have.
Okay.
The question is--and I know the chairman talked about this
a little bit with China--is there bilateral trade talks going
on right now with Japan?
Secretary Perdue. There are--and you know, Senator, that
I'm not the negotiator in that regard.
Senator Tester. And when do you anticipate an agreement
with Japan?
Secretary Perdue. We have a U.S. Trade Representative, and
I think the question would be better delivered to him. I do
know of his interest. I do know his understanding of the
disadvantage American producers will have regarding TPP.
Senator Tester. Yeah.
Secretary Perdue. But I'm hoping it will be sooner rather
than later.
Senator Tester. Well, I'm here to tell you that I know that
some folks in production agriculture want to see the guys go
broke because the smaller ones will go first and they think
they can buy them out. But I'm telling you, from a rural
America perspective, a rural Montana perspective, this is not a
good thing. From a food security perspective, this is not a
good thing. You've got less producers, you've got more
evacuation from rural America, you've got schools closing down,
you've got hospitals closing down, you've got a mess, and it's
a mess that's caused by us, not like in Kansas with the floods,
it's caused by us.
And so I hope the guy who is negotiating is listening
because time is of the essence here, and if you can help push
him, and I know you're a good man, I hope you do. We've got to
have trade. I mean, we eat a lot of food domestically, but if
we don't have foreign markets, we are hosed, and so it is
really important.
Now I want to talk about hemp. One of those crops that we
might have been able to raise in Montana, and, by the way, we
still could raise this season, is hemp. I can go into the
agronomic effects of hemp, but you know that monoculture is
something that doesn't work too well. So if you can put another
crop in the rotation, break up wheat and disease cycles, it's a
good thing. Hemp is one of those crops.
Secretary Perdue. Sure.
HEMP PRODUCTION
Senator Tester. Just like pulse crops were a few years ago
in Montana where we raised nothing but winter wheat and barley,
now we can raise pulse crops. It's a good thing. It's a good
thing for the communities. It's a good thing for business.
I get that this might be a complicated thing, but doesn't
the law allow you to accept State plans?
Secretary Perdue. Senator, the 2014 Farm Bill allowed for
that. They will still be able to continue under the 2014--
Senator Tester. DEA won't let them because the 2018 Farm
Bill supersedes that.
Secretary Perdue. Who won't let them?
Senator Tester. DEA.
Secretary Perdue. Oh.
Senator Tester. So right now, when they could have used the
pilot program from a few years back.
Secretary Perdue. I have not heard that.
Senator Tester. You correct me if I'm wrong, correct me if
I'm wrong, but I think I'm right, they could plant it, but when
the new Farm Bill got signed, it superseded the previous one,
and now they can't set or seed until the USDA acts. And what
I'm asking you to do is you have the capacity to adopt those
State plans. Do it. And then people in Montana can start
raising the stuff, we can start developing markets for
pressing, we can develop markets for the roughage. We can wear
clothes that will never wear out. And, by the way, I've got a
hemp hat I've been trying to wear out for 20 years that I got
out of Canada. You can't wear the stuff out.
And so I implore you, especially with all the trade stuff
that's going on, please, please look at your options and look
from the perspective of not why. ``How can we not do it?'' but,
``Dammit, we've got to do it.''
Secretary Perdue. I'm a ``do it'' person, Senator. I know
that.
Senator Tester. You wouldn't be successful in business if
you weren't.
Secretary Perdue. And with all due respect, if we had a
Farm Bill by September the 30th, I think you'd have some rules
here as well.
Senator Tester. I get that, but you do have the option of
accepting those State plans.
Secretary Perdue. That is our policy currently, that we're
accepting the plans under the 2014 Farm Bill until we can fine-
tune these regulations in the 2018 Farm Bill.
Senator Tester. So what you're saying.
Secretary Perdue. This DEA is news to me.
Senator Tester. So what you're saying is, that farmers in
Montana can plant hemp based on--
Secretary Perdue. Based on the rules that the State was
operating under the 2014 Farm Bill.
Senator Tester. I will get back to you on that because
right now the farmers are telling me they can't get seed out of
Canada. They could under the 2014 bill.
Secretary Perdue. If that's the case, we'll look at it as
well, and I look forward to talking with your office about
that.
[The information follows:]
Hemp seeds can be imported into the United States from Canada if
accompanied by either: 1) a phytosanitary certification from Canada's
national plant protection organization to verify the origin of the seed
and confirm that no plant pests are detected; or 2) a Federal Seed
Analysis Certificate for hemp seeds grown in Canada. It is important to
point out that these requirements are distinct from Drug Enforcement
Administration's (DEA) requirements. In the coming days, we plan to
publish an announcement that the DEA no longer has authority to require
hemp seed permits for import purposes. Hopefully, this will resolve any
confusion that remains in the marketplace.
Senator Tester. Thank you. Have a great Easter.
Secretary Perdue. Thank you.
Senator Hoeven. Senator Collins.
SENIOR FOOD BOX PROGRAM
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Perdue. Good morning.
Senator Collins. I want to bring up with you today the
Senior Food Box Program. This is a program that's vital to
lower income seniors in the State of Maine, and Maine happens
to be the oldest State in the Nation by median age. It's also a
State with a lot of low-income older Americans.
Just to give you an idea of the reach of this program,
there is a food bank called the Good Shepherd Food Bank in
Auburn, Maine, which alone distributes approximately 9,000
supplemental food boxes each month to partner agencies across
the State, which, in turn, distribute them to seniors, and
that's just one, albeit the largest of our food banks.
Unfortunately, this program, which really makes a difference to
the nutritional well-being of our seniors, was eliminated in
the Administration's budget. What is the justification for
eliminating the Senior Food Box Program?
Secretary Perdue. That's a good question obviously,
Senator. I'm a big fan of the food box, in fact, that was the
beginning of the origin of our Harvest Box idea for SNAP, and I
think it's worked very well. While the budget doesn't reflect
that, I can't give you a justification for that. I think I'm a
big fan of that. I know that a lot of seniors depend on that,
and our food banks have done a great job in doing that.
PEST MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS
Senator Collins. Thank you. And I appreciate that answer,
and I hope that's something where we can work together and
secure the funding, which is not that significant, but, boy,
it's significant to a lot of our rural seniors.
Mr. Secretary, I'm also concerned about the proposed
elimination of funding for USDA programs that help farmers
protect crops from pests and diseases. And I have to say this
strikes me as a penny-wise but pound-foolish cut. The proposed
budget would zero out the funding for the Integrated Pest
Management Program as well as the Minor Crops Pest Management
Program, two initiatives that have been very helpful to Maine
growers over the decades.
Initiated in the 1970s as a potato-specific USDA pilot
program, the University of Maine's Cooperative Extension's
Integrated Pest Management Program is an integral part of my
State's agricultural industry. What began as a small potato
pest management pilot program has blossomed into a
sophisticated multidisciplinary hub helping Maine farmers
control pests and disease, diseases on a wide range of crops,
including potatoes, apples, blueberries, cranberries,
strawberries, and sweet corn.
And this program has also helped to prevent harmful
infestations that would decimate entire crops. And I want to
give you an example. In the late 1990s, there was a new strain
of late blight that was found in Maine that could not be easily
controlled with fungicides as previous strains had been. And it
was the Integrated Pest Management Program that isolated this
harmful new strain, developed a specific remedy for it, and it
saved potato growers from losing their crops and extraordinary
revenue losses. In fact, without the work that was done by this
program, the entire existence of the Maine potato industry
would have been in serious jeopardy.
So, Mr. Secretary, my point is that I think it makes a lot
more sense to invest up front in these programs, these research
and pest management programs, that keep our crops healthy than
to have to pay out enormous sums in disaster payments of when
farmers lose--or crop insurance when farmers lose their entire
crop.
So again I would ask for you to work with me and the
committee to see if we can restore the funding for a program
that I know personally, coming from potato--the potato land in
Aroostook County in northern Maine has made a real difference.
Secretary Perdue. I would welcome that, Senator. You've
articulated extremely well the benefits of integrated pest
management. Having a career in agribusiness, we've utilized
that program all along. I would submit to you it's also been
part of the growth of the organic industry as we learn to do
things without crop protection chemicals in a different and new
way. So I couldn't agree with you more.
Senator Collins. Thank you. It has indeed been a key boost
to the organic farms that we have in Maine. And that's the
fastest growing part of our agricultural sector in the State of
Maine. So thank you very much.
Senator Hoeven. Senator Udall.
POLYFLUORALKYL SUBSTANCES (PFAS) CONTAMINATION
Senator Udall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And great to see you here, Mr. Secretary. Always a pleasure
to have you up here on the Hill.
Mr. Secretary, Senator Collins and I recently sent you a
letter asking for your assistance for farmers who have been
devastated by PFAS contamination.
Secretary Perdue. Right.
Senator Udall. You are familiar with that, I think. In New
Mexico, the source of this contamination is a U.S. Air Force
base using firefighting foam. In Maine, I think it's a
different source, but the impacts are the same. Tens of
thousands of gallons of contaminated milk have been dumped,
workers and livestock exposed through drinking water, and
farmers facing bankruptcy. One farmer has 4,000 cows that are
contaminated by this, and he can do nothing with them, nobody
will take them.
So I want to thank you because the USDA has been very
helpful. But we need more help identifying programs and
funding. In particular, I'm hoping you can work with us to
ensure programs like the Dairy Indemnity Program and the
Livestock Indemnity Program are used to their fullest extent
for assistance here. Can we get your commitment on that?
Secretary Perdue. We have, sir. As you noted, we have been
working with a producer, the large producer, in New Mexico as
well and trying to understand the standards certainly from the
meat perspective, getting standards there of what's acceptable
and what's not in that way. But I think we, as the Government,
have responsibility, particularly if it's an iatrogenic type of
issue such as we see in New Mexico. Maine may be different, but
we've got the same solutions that need to be addressed in Maine
as well.
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY INCENTIVES PROGRAM (EQIP)
Senator Udall. Yeah. And then turning to the EQIP program,
which you're very familiar with, I've fought for years to make
sure acequias and land grants are eligible for EQIP. The 2014
Farm Bill included important authority for this Department to
enter into alternative agreements with acequias. Acequias are
these irrigation, old-time Spanish irrigation, ditches in
northern New Mexico that have been there for 400 years, and
part of that is related to land grants.
In the most recent 2018 Farm Bill, we built on this success
and cut some of the red tape. Now land grants and acequias can
apply directly to NRCS for Federal dollars. This is a big deal.
Hundreds of land grants and acequias can now directly access
Federal dollars for work on their communal lands and their
infrastructure.
Mr. Secretary, I appreciate new laws require new rules, but
I do not want to lose the momentum while we await final EQIP
rules. One idea is to allow acequias and land grants to enter
into pilot project agreements. What will your Department do to
ensure continuity of funding to acequias and land grants while
you finalize the EQIP rules?
Secretary Perdue. Well, as you know, the EQIP program has
been one of the more popular conservation programs you all have
generously funded, and although you generously fund it, it's
always been oversubscribed as well. So this is going to create
more demand and may create more need for funds in the EQIP
program. But we're working feverishly on all these conservation
issues to implement the Farm Bill as you all wrote it.
There are various issues and, by the way, I need to
mention, Mr. Chairman, you may want to look at the funding for
the implementation of the Farm Bill. That seemed to be fairly
slight this year compared with the new changes. You got new
software, you got new training, you got different things like
that that we're trying to work to get it right because the EQIP
program, having been oversubscribed with this new influx of
customers who certainly are well prepared to apply and do that,
we look forward to the collaboration, but there will be some
challenges going forward.
Senator Udall. Good. And, as you know, local input drives
better decisionmaking, so we hope that the NRCS will hold local
listening sessions in New Mexico while you develop the EQIP
rules.
Secretary Perdue. We certainly would welcome that.
BROADBAND
Senator Udall. And you mentioned broadband. One part of the
whole broadband issue is in rural broadband providers,
including tribally owned broadband providers. There's one in
New Mexico called MATI--M-A-T-I in caps--and they would very
much like to be a part of this program. So I hope that you can
provide us an update on the refinancing of our U.S. loans, and
will they be available to companies such as tribally owned
entities in my State?
Secretary Perdue. We certainly expect them to. If they need
particular technical help in applying, then we would also offer
that.
Senator Udall. Great. Well, thank you very much.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I appreciate working with Senator Collins on this PFAS
issue. It's a national issue. It's one that is growing because
the contamination, I believe, is on about 123 Air Force bases
flowing into communities, and it's one that we really need to
get ahold of.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Hoeven. Senator Baldwin.
DAIRY PRODUCTION AND TRADE
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Perdue, Wisconsin's dairy industry is in crisis
right now. Our farmers have faced low prices for far too long.
They are seeing their export markets blocked and lost to
competitors these days. Threats to close the southern border
would actually dramatically deepen this crisis and this pain.
In the past two years, Wisconsin has lost more than 1,300
dairy farms. That's roughly equivalent to 15 percent of our
dairy farms. Farmers need stable markets. They need a way to
sell their product at a fair price. And they should not be
caught in the middle of trade wars with no end in sight.
Mexico is by far our biggest dairy export market, and it
buys about a third of the cheese that we export. I'd add to
that that in Wisconsin, 90 percent of the milk goes into
cheese. So access to the Mexican market is really, really
important to Wisconsin farmers. And I'll tell you, even with
passing comments about closing down ports of entry has got
Wisconsin farmers and cheesemakers extremely concerned.
This comes on top of Mexico's retaliatory tariffs against
cheese and the uncertainty of trade renegotiations. So,
Secretary Perdue, Wisconsin's dairy farmers have been waiting
patiently to see these trade issues resolved, but it has cost
them dearly, and we're going to see more farms lost if this
doesn't turn around and soon.
So I want to hear from you what steps you are taking with
your colleagues in the Administration to resolve these trade
issues and keep our borders open for trade.
Secretary Perdue. Sure. Let's start with the good news.
What you all did in the 2018 Farm Bill regarding dairy is just
transformational. There's no doubt that the dairy sector in
your State and others probably were under more duress than any
other sector there. We've heard some interest in getting the
hemp rules out earlier. We focused on dairy because they are
the people that have been in business, they continue to go out
of business, and we're trying to expedite the implementation of
the Farm Bill in the dairy sector quickly.
Just in a couple of weeks they will start getting the
refunds over the premiums they paid on the Margin Protection
Program. That will come along. The applications for the new
program in June, we expect to have the retroactive payments
from January 1st over the new Farm Bill provision. It will be a
real benefit to your dairy farmers in Wisconsin, certainly
those with herds less than 250,300 cows.
Regarding the trade issue, there is no doubt one of the
problems we've gotten into in the milk prices over the country
is that our producers have produced too much, we are
overproduced. While farms have gone out of business, not many
cow losses are there. We have many of the same, but cow losses,
they've gotten bigger and more efficient in that regard.
Certainly, we have advocated to the Administration. I don't
see any threat right now to close the border. We've advocated,
I think as well as others, how detrimental this would be to
U.S. commerce as well.
Regarding the USMCA, you make the case for an expeditious
approval of USMCA, not just because of Mexico, but the
additional access to the Canadian market if we get through that
as well, which your producers, as you know, this Class 7 milk
were harmed greatly in the Class 7, which has been eliminated.
Senator Baldwin. Yes. I'm going to cut you off there just
because I have a couple of other questions. But I do want to
just follow up on this one to say both Mexico and Canada have
said that they will not finalize the USMCA until the U.S.
removes the 232 steel and aluminum tariffs. What do you see as
a path forward on that?
Secretary Perdue. We are advocating to the President that
he can accomplish his goals in revitalizing the steel industry
and aluminum industry in the U.S. through a quota system as
combined with a tariff when they exceed that quota, and
hopefully he will come to see that that is an effective tool to
continue to support our domestic steel industry as well.
We've advocated for the removal of the 232 retaliatory
tariffs ever since the agreement was signed. In practice, I'm
hoping we can see that reconciliation prior to the vote of in
all three nations.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I've run out of time. Are you going to
contemplate a second round of questions?
Senator Hoeven. I am.
Senator Baldwin. Excellent.
Senator Hoeven. Which will start right now.
[Laughter.]
FARM BILL FUNDING
Senator Hoeven. Mr. Secretary, relative to funding for Farm
Bill implementation, that is something that we'll look at. I'm
on both the Agriculture Committee and Ag Appropriations, and
there should have been more in the Farm bill for
implementation. There was in the 2014 Farm Bill, so the
shortfall is something we're going to have to address in
appropriations.
Secretary Perdue. It's a significant reduction----
Senator Hoeven. Yeah. And that's fine. We'll work on it
here, and we'll be talking about what you think you need.
Secretary Perdue. Okay.
CELL-BASED MEAT
Senator Hoeven. But, yeah, it's something we have to do.
Can you update us on cell-based meat? We had Scott Gottlieb in
before he left, and he kind of gave us his perspective. Please
give us yours.
Secretary Perdue. Well, obviously, some people have thought
the USDA is against any kind of alternative protein. While we
support our cattle industry, they've supported us for many
years and with great wholesome products to feed a world of 10
billion people in the short term.
We're looking at all opportunities. I think the MOU that's
signed between USDA and FDA gets the right jurisdiction over
them doing the laboratory work. When once that protein grows to
the place of being harvested, that's when USDA comes in with
the same kind of quality assessments it has on our live cattle,
and the branding and the labeling and all of that, that's when
USDA will become involved.
So I think we have a good point of handoff between FDA and
USDA on the cell-based meat. Thank you for your help.
Senator Hoeven. Very important. From our cattle producers'
standpoint, it is very important that you're in charge of
labeling so the consumer knows when they're getting ranch-
raised beef and other products.
Secretary Perdue. And our goal is for the consumer to be
informed, understanding where that product came from, and they
can make the choice. If they find no quality distinction, then
the choice is up to them, but we don't want to treat a new
innovative product any different or more favorably than our
traditional products.
Senator Hoeven. You will appreciate the next question on my
list because the Farm Bill included $15 million for
implementation. How do you plan to allocate those resources,
and will they be sufficient to meet the Department's needs? But
you've already answered that.
Secretary Perdue. Yes.
BROADBAND
Senator Hoeven. And we knew the answer, but obviously have
that same concern.
Thank you for your comments on broadband. That was
something I was going to bring up as well. Anything else you
want to bring upon broadband? We obviously have made that a
funding priority, and now the rollout is very important.
Secretary Perdue. Well, if you all have particular
constituents in your State that find it difficult to negotiate,
we would welcome to help them. There's a lot of information on
the web, and it's been communicated really since even during
the shutdown. We work with different groups and interest groups
to help them complete. We're looking forward to these
applications that will come in and early appropriations for the
dollars so they can get started. This absolutely is, I think, a
transformational moonshot that I believe has the ability to
connect rural and urban America in a way that we haven't seen
before.
FUNDING FOR FARM SERVICE AGENCY (FSA) LOANS
Senator Hoeven. Yeah, I think so. I think there's a lot of
excitement out there about the program, so we're looking
forward to it.
Will a proposed FSA loan level sufficiently meet producer
demand? You know, we raised the FSA direct loans and also the
guaranteed loans--I actually tried to raise it higher. I mean,
the costs of agriculture production have gone up so much.
Secretary Perdue. There's no doubt about it. And I think
your recognition in the Farm Bill of raising limits will help.
We'll see. I can't answer directly. Obviously, based on a
stress that we've talked about in the Ag community, Senator
Tester talked about, there's a lot of demand out there. There
are people that are going to look to the FSA for their lending
this year that may not have in the past.
Senator Hoeven. The capital requirements are just so high
now. A small farmer is still deploying millions of dollars in
capital.
Secretary Perdue. And that's why you see the economy of
scale getting larger and larger, and farms growing larger and
larger. But we'll have the census information out this
afternoon. It will be a great data point for you all to look at
some of these issues as well.
FOOD AID
Senator Hoeven. The food aid programs are important. We're
cutting the budget, but this Committee obviously is committed
to them. Your thoughts on food aid?
Secretary Perdue. Again, this is something the
administration has again chosen to do. They want to make sure
that it's done well. You all in Congress have had a different
opinion, and I don't know that I can disagree with that
regarding how it's utilized. I visited with Governor David
Beasley the other day with the World Food Program and talking
about how we can be more effective in USDA and working with
them in that regard. Certainly, the administration in the
number of budgets, that's where much of the reduction comes
from in the USDA budget, and we acknowledge that.
DISASTER AID
Senator Hoeven. To me, it's a win-win in that we provide a
certain amount of foreign aid in a way that is helpful to our
farmers. It just seems like a win-win in that respect.
Thank you for the flexibility you provided on the Livestock
Indemnity Program in a very timely way. Your flexibility was
very helpful with what the cattle producers are going through
right now.
Are there any other issues that you want to make sure are
recorded that I haven't brought up?
Secretary Perdue. No. Again, I think the disaster is a real
key. I mean, we've got situations we're not going to be able to
cover with the safety net that's provided in the 2018 Farm
Bill, and I think you all know that. It's just a matter of the
need is great, and for those people who are affected, it's
devastating when you're in that period or place where things
have been devastated. So hopefully we can get that to resolve
very quickly.
Senator Hoeven. Well, we need to, and that's why your
flexibility and responsiveness is really helpful in addressing
what's going on out there right now with flooding and other
disasters, so we appreciate that.
Senator Merkley.
Senator Merkley. Thank you. I am going to mention several
programs very rapidly. I'll have to follow up with your team.
Secretary Perdue. All right.
SNAP RULE
Senator Merkley. Rural Energy Savings Program, which
enables rural co-ops to do on bills, loans for energy saving
for both businesses and households, means a lot of rural
construction jobs. It's just starting to get into rhythm.
Fourteen co-ops across the country have adopted, others are in
the pipeline. It's rural construction jobs in places that don't
have them, and that's important.
African swine fever, a lot of concern about the imported
meat possibly contaminating American hog production. A million
swine have died in China. I just want to follow up on what
we're doing to try to prevent that from contaminating our
industry.
Livestock Forage Disaster Program has been very important
for many of our ranchers following our forest fires out in
Oregon. I know there are other different impacts across the
country--tornadoes, hurricanes, and so forth--but I'd hate to
see that program go away.
On January 1, 2020, the labeling law is going to go in for
bioengineered food products, but it has a number of problems. A
QRC code, which is a block computer code, is going to have a
label, ``Scan here for more food information.'' Nobody has any
idea that it has to do with getting information on
bioengineered, plus nobody in the supermarket is going to stop
and scan those codes, and they're not even going to be informed
why they would do so.
The bioengineered sugar and oil is exempted from being
considered bioengineered. I know my colleague from Michigan was
assured that that would not happen, but that's exactly what we
thought would happen from the language that was inserted. It's
exactly what is happening.
So it's really a misleading of Congress and the American
people. We can do a lot better on giving fair information and a
pathway to get the details. I realize not everything can be put
on the package.
I'm very concerned about the clean water supply and
wastewater treatment. Small communities have to meet new
standards, but it's really expensive to do for a small number
of people. And so there is a calculation of the subsidy rate
that has expanded in ways that are very surprising. I'd like to
have my team sit down and understand better how the subsidy
could have risen from .17 percent to almost 5 percent over 2
years, which means because of that calculation, far fewer
grants and loans can be put out to these small communities. And
I can tell you that is a big problem for them being able to
have growth or industry in these rural communities.
And then I wanted to turn to SNAP. And Oregon uses the
waiver, and I've got a list here of the counties that are--
received the waiver. We have 36 counties, 22 of which got the
waiver. This is over the 3 months in a 12-month period. They're
all very rural counties. I mean, this is striking at the heart
of rural Oregon where you don't have the same jobs you have in
an urban area. You have transportation difficulties that you
don't have elsewhere, were as we get more mechanized in the Ag
sector, a lot of the jobs are disappearing off our ranches and
farms, so that's affecting them. We don't have rural housing
construction, which we just talked about.
We don't have--so I think the States should be left
empowered to make this decision, but this proposed rule, you're
not--you're striking my poorest, most rural counties with this
rule. I think let the State make the decision. Leave the States
empowered, and I just--on this piece, I do want to take my last
minute and see if you have thoughts about it.
Secretary Perdue. Certainly. We still give the States some
authority to do that. They still can determine--let me just
give you the guidance here. State agencies are responsible for
assessing an individual's fitness to work on able-bodied issues
methodically and comprehensively. The individual doesn't need
to be receiving disability and benefits.
We believe, again, from education and training, our goal is
to help these people to sustain permanently, not indefinitely,
on a food assistance program, which we think is more helpful.
You can have 20 hours a week volunteer and others. If your
local communities are higher unemployment there, still the
waiver applies to them over that as well as the State having 12
percent set aside for no reasons at all. So we think the
flexibility that States are given, if used properly, is in
keeping with the Farm Bill from a perspective of 1996 over the
work requirements.
Senator Merkley. Well, I'll tell you the average lifetime
in America is 12 months. So that's over a lifetime, a working
lifetime, of 480 months. That's a pretty small factor. And,
again, these are my most rural, my most difficult places to
find jobs, that are going to be affected by these changes. And
we've often been a State that's among the hungriest in the
Nation, not something we like, but this will make our situation
in rural Oregon a lot worse.
Secretary Perdue. We look forward to addressing all these
other issues that you've addressed, and we want to converse
with your staff and answer your concerns over these issues as
well.
Senator Hoeven. Senator Moran.
NATIONAL BIO-AGRO SCIENCE LABORATORY
Senator Moran. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Secretary, thank you.
Let me go back to something the chairman said, talking
about food aid, and I just would highlight unfortunately there
are four famines ongoing around the world today. I want to
particularly talk about McGovern-Dole, or as we say in Kansas,
Dole-McGovern, Food Program. Every year that this program has
been zeroed out, which is every year in the last three, the
explanation is unaddressed oversight and performance monitoring
challenges. Mr. Secretary, if those--I say this with a smile,
but if those really exist, fix the problems, don't zero out the
account. And this is an important program to our country, its
farmers, but, most importantly, it helps lots of young people
be fed around the globe, and I would encourage the Department's
support.
In fact, I visited with you and with others about--I
remember showing you a pile of grain in front of an elevator
from two harvests ago that hasn't been marketed yet. And then
we learn and know that there are people who die every day
because they don't have food, and we ought to do a better job
of connecting the two.
In a more specific issue, I know that a month ago the
effort began to hire a new director at the National Bio-Agro
Science Laboratory. This position, I hope you would share my
view, is absolutely critical to the future of this project. And
I'm curious as to where we stand on the recruiting effort. I
hope it was more than just an announcement that you're hiring.
I hope that you've been out encouraging individuals to apply,
people with certain kind of characteristics, backgrounds, and
intellect. Tell me where we are in that regard, please.
Secretary Perdue. We're not as far along as I would like.
Our recruitment efforts have not been as aggressive as I would
like, and we've had discussions recently about that, about
fulfilling that. It's a beautiful facility, coming along well.
We appreciate the transfer of the appropriations from DHS to
here, but it can't run without the right people, and I know
that I share your concern about that.
Senator Moran. If you don't know at the moment, would you
let me or my staff know how many positions beyond the director
are posted and remain open?
Secretary Perdue. We will do that.
[The information follows:]
Forty-four positions at NBAF have been posted to date, including
those positions which will be filled using veterans hiring authority.
Of those positions, 21 offers have been extended. We are committed to
hiring the remaining positions as quickly as possible to ensure a
smooth transition of NBAF ownership between DHS and USDA, and a
transition from Plum Island to NBAF.
MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES IN RURAL AMERICA
Senator Moran. Thank you very much.
Then let me visit just a couple more issues. In the last
Farm Bill, we were successful in including legislation called
FARMERS FIRST. This deals with suicides among producers. The
committee provided, this committee provided, $2 million in
fiscal year 2019 for the network. Can you speak to the
importance of rural mental health services to fill in the gaps
in what is currently available to those farmers and ranchers?
I'm looking for an update on the Farm and Ranch Stress
Assistance Network.
Secretary Perdue. Well, certainly, as the anxiety, as the
stress, develops in the farm sector based on low prices, we see
more and more of that. We also see opioid addictions as well,
leading to opioid addictions or suicides or deaths by overdose.
So this is an important effort, and rural development is
heading this up, and it's always sad to hear things in places
where you're unsuccessful, but we understand the need to have a
network out there with call lines and helps, and hopefully we
can continue to do that.
Senator Moran. Please make this a priority along with all
the other many other priorities that you have at the
Department.
Secretary Perdue. Sure.
DEALER STATUTORY TRUST
Senator Moran. The 2018 Farm Bill directed USDA to do a
feasibility study on Dealer Statutory Trust within a year. Do
you anticipate that USDA will be able to provide that study to
Congress at that time?
Secretary Perdue. I do, certainly within a year. That gives
us plenty of time to understand how the Dealer Trust applies to
other types of similar situations we have with livestock and
others to do that. I think we'll have plenty of time to have a
good proposal for you going forward.
Senator Moran. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Hoeven. Senator Hyde-Smith.
CROP INSURANCE
Senator Hyde-Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you so much for the support that you
have given the American agriculture through your leadership at
the Department in a very tough time. I have been so very
impressed with you, and I greatly appreciate your efforts
coming from a producer.
You know, as we're currently seeing the changes in the
South and the Midwest of the severe flooding posing serious
threats to the overall health and productivity of the
agriculture industry, in recent years, Mississippi farmers,
particularly those who farm the fertile lands within close
proximity to the Mississippi River, have been subject to more
frequent and severe flooding, such as my friends the Gedons
[ph], who have farmed close to the Mississippi River for 150
years. Some have even lost an entire crop 2, even 3, years in a
row now. This has made it difficult for them to find affordable
crop insurance policy that provides them the level of
protection that they need.
A provision, Section 11122, included in the Crop Insurance
Title for the 2018 Farm Bill, directs the Department of
Agriculture's Risk Management Agency to develop a less cost-
prohibitive policy for producers in areas such as this. The
provision directs RMA to consider premium rate adjustments,
automatic yield exclusions, for consecutive year losses, and
flexibility of final plant dates, and prevent plant
regulations.
Should this subcommittee provide the adequate funding in
the fiscal year 2020 agriculture appropriations bill, would you
commit to ensuring that the Risk Management Agency works with
these farmers impacted by flooding to ensure they have adequate
and affordable crop insurance options?
Secretary Perdue. Senator, this is an issue that I would
love to have further discussions with you on. The premise of
the crop insurance is statutorily sound or statistically sound,
and we don't need to violate that principle. Obviously, where
houses have flood insurance, we may want to look at it from a
crop flood insurance provision to have something like national
flood insurance that way. I would like to look at the
provisions that you've quoted in a better way to commit that
what we can do from these growers that does not violate the
statistically sound premise of crop insurance where those
people may go into areas where it is more subject to flooding
on an ongoing basis and just plant because of the backstop of
crop insurance. We don't want to encourage that, but we may
need to look at something like a national flood insurance
premium, which may be what you're describing there, but I don't
have the details from that today, but I'd love to discuss that
with you further.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Thank you very much, because this is a
serious concern, and these are very good farmers that, you
know, do it for the right reasons.
Thank you.
Senator Hoeven. Mr. Secretary, Senator Baldwin is on her
way back. She did have a few more questions for you. I know you
have to be out of here at 11:30, but we'll have you out then or
prior. And the Ag Census is coming out.
Crop insurance. I never talk to our producers without them
saying their number one risk management tool is crop insurance.
And now, more than ever, it's very important that there are no
cuts to crop insurance because they need that protection right
now. They need that help now more than ever. So just address
that for me for a minute, will you?
Secretary Perdue. Well, again, I hear the very same thing,
that this has been the best type of partnership, safety net,
between the Federal Government and the risk management
strategies that farmers themselves use. So I think I couldn't
agree more that crop insurance is vital for the safety net to
continue. And we look forward to addressing that with you.
Senator Hoeven. It's very important, and as you work with
RMA, that there are no cuts or reductions in what our farmers
can do under that crop insurance because, like I say, right now
it really is a critically important tool for them given the
challenges that we've been talking about.
Secretary Perdue. Acknowledged.
DEALER STATUTORY TRUST
Senator Hoeven. I also want to touch back on the Dealer
Statutory Trust. I'm glad that Senator Moran brought that up. A
number of our auction barns have talked to me about that as
well. Do you have any preliminary thoughts on that issue? Have
you heard from the auction houses and the concerns they have?
Secretary Perdue. We have heard from that, obviously,
mostly from producers in that area as well, and from Senator
Moran's office as well, about this, and we're looking to create
a trust product that could be utilized and funded by the
commerce that goes on in that way. But it's a guard for
unscrupulous or difficult financial situations that people find
themselves in. But certainly when that becomes viral, many
producers selling into an entity that is not able to pay them,
out of no fault of their own, then it becomes difficult. So I
think a trust type of product is well needed, and we look
forward to producing--recommending what we think will work.
Senator Hoeven. Well, is there any pushback that you're
aware of? I mean, all I've heard is that auction houses have
come in and said there are cases where they're not getting
paid. They're paying the seller, but then because there's a
lien on the animals, they're not getting paid, and so they're
just left holding the bag. So that's particularly what I wanted
to address. Is there a pushback against it?
Secretary Perdue. I think the financial sector may have
some concerns over the security issue there that we'll know
more as we get into it, but I don't----
Senator Hoeven. So the reason for the 1-year study is to
analyze the security issues?
Secretary Perdue. Right.
FPAC BUSINESS CENTER
Senator Hoeven. How about you talk a little bit about
progress on your Business Center and how that's going as far as
the standup.
Secretary Perdue. Well, we've been very pleased with the
consolidation that occurs there. It gives a more consistent
approach to problem solving within USDA, both in FPAC and other
ways. It's a consolidation of those back-office operations,
such as HR and IT and procurement and those types of things
that make sense. We want to leave the decisionmaking on the
ground, out in the field, for those people that have to deal
with that, but on the back-office operations, that's what we're
trying to consolidate and make it more consistent rules and
with the business center concept.
Senator Hoeven. Are you comfortable in terms of where you
are with the budget and the funding you have that you're
getting that done and have the resources to do it?
Secretary Perdue. I think so. We're going to take what you
all give us and do the very best we can. That's just what we
do, but I think at this point, I don't have any serious
complaints about that.
DISASTER SUPPLEMENTAL
Senator Hoeven. As far as the disaster supplemental, are
there aspects that you are particularly concerned that get
addressed or that are in the process that you want to bring up
as we try to get a package done?
Secretary Perdue. Well----
Senator Hoeven. And also, to the extent we don't have it
done, are there areas where you can help until that funding
gets out there?
Secretary Perdue. Now, to answer your last question, sadly,
no. We are deploying every emergency disaster provision that
you give us in the Farm Bill there, but some of this utter
destruction is not contemplated. That's not a safety net. A
safety net is a help that is normal in times. When you have
utter destruction as you had in the floods or in hurricanes,
tornadoes, or wildfires, the Farm Bill doesn't contemplate
that.
We've got the situation in northern Florida and southern
Georgia really over timber and pine trees. We faced it in 2017
with citrus. We had never done that before. But we created the
Wildfires and Hurricanes Indemnity Program with a block grant
that I thought has gotten extreme compliments over the way it
was administered. We're going to have to look at some things
that have never been done before.
Some of these people--trees, for instance, are not
considered necessarily a crop, but they are, just with a longer
growing cycle. This was other people's livelihood. Mississippi
and Arkansas, Alabama, the Carolinas, Georgia, pine trees were
what was paying putting the kids through college.
So I think, again, the discretion you all gave us in 2017,
we would love to repeat that with the 2018 and 2019 disasters,
but really getting it done and getting it appropriated is a
real issue. I don't have that many problems with what you put
in it, but it needs to be done sooner rather than later.
Senator Hoeven. All right.
I turn to Senator Moran. Any other questions that you have?
Senator Moran. No, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Hoeven. All right.
Well, we're checking just to see if--oh, here she is.
Perfect timing.
Your timing is just right, Senator. We just finished up.
Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. All right. Catch my breath here. Let's
see. All right.
Senator Hoeven. Are you saying that he leaves you
breathless? Is that it?
DAIRY PROGRAMS
Senator Baldwin. I am saying that--Dr. Francis Collins left
me breathless in our other subcommittee.
Last year, we provided funding for Dairy Business
Innovation in this subcommittee and through the appropriations
bill, and the Farm Bill really built on those efforts by
including the text of the bipartisan Dairy Business Innovation
Act, which I introduced with Senator Collins. Can you please
provide an update on the implementation of these provisions?
Secretary Perdue. I'll have to get back with you on that,
Senator. I'm not intimately familiar with the innovation.
Obviously, the diary sector needs as much innovation as it can
with their two stresses, obviously, milk prices, trade, as well
as labor, and all those innovations that can help are needed.
But I will get back with you over those specific issues of what
we've done and what we are doing with those recommendations.
[The information follows:]
The 2018 Farm Bill directed AMS to establish not less than three
regionally located dairy product and business innovation initiatives.
The 2019 Agriculture Appropriation provided $1.5 million for this
program. In mid-April 2019, AMS plans to announce the availability of
this funding. The application deadline will be mid-June and grants are
expected to be awarded by the end of September.
Senator Baldwin. Well, certainly, when they can add value
to the product on the farm or at the processing stage with new
innovation, it is one of those tools that help our dairy
farmers withstand these challenging times. So I hope we can get
these funds out and working as soon as possible.
To the same sense of urgency, the new Dairy Margin Coverage
Program for the Farm Bill would be paying farmers right now
because margins are so low. Farmers are making business
decisions as we see spring come for this year's crops, and
they're doing so without the information that they would
usually have available to really get to understand the new
Dairy Margin Coverage Program. When can farmers expect to have
a decision tool to use to evaluate their choices for this
program? And when can they expect to receive payments? I know
you've commented on that already, but the decision tool sort of
comes first.
Secretary Perdue. Sure. We think the refund from the prior
premiums will be out in a couple of weeks, April 23rd possibly.
The decision tool should be forthcoming right after that. But I
can tell you dairy farmers right now, they're really not going
to need a tool but they're going to like it, and they will want
to sign up for it. They obviously need to know the levels, and
we understand it's more difficult than that.
But the decisionmaking tool hopefully will be in May, early
May, in that way so they can make those plans. And the signup--
certainly they can sign up, but the payments going, that will
be retroactive to January 1st depending on what choice they
made, should be done in the probably second week or third week
of June.
Senator Baldwin. All right. Thank you.
Senator Hoeven. Mr. Secretary, thank you again for being
here today. Thank you to Dr. Johansson and Ms. Navarro as well.
We appreciate having you here.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
For members of the Committee, if there are additional
questions, we'd ask that they be in within a week, and response
within 4 weeks thereafter.
Questions Submitted by Senator John Hoeven
veterinarians
Question. Federal veterinarians play a critical role in ensuring
the safety of the U.S. food supply. That's why this Committee provided
FSIS with dedicated funding to address the persistent vacancy rate of
public health veterinarians within the Agency in the fiscal year 2018
omnibus.
How is FSIS using the funding provided by Congress to address the
public health veterinary workforce needs?
Answer. FSIS is appreciative of the additional funds provided in
the fiscal year 2018 Consolidated Appropriations Act to recruit public
health veterinarians (PHVs). To recruit and retain PHVs, the agency
offers a combination of recruitment bonuses and student loan repayment
incentives. Examples include:
--Recruiting incentives such as paid relocation to their first duty
station, and a $20,000 sign on bonus paid over 4 years ($5,000/
year) incentive that applies to all newly hired PHVs regardless
of the location of the vacancy.
--$500 towards continuing education reimbursement offered to the FSIS
in-plant veterinarians.
--Student Loan Repayment Program, which entails $10,000/year for up
to 3 years (up to a total of $30,000).
--Adel A. Malak Scholarship Program:
--Up to 20 students per year.
--Up to $15,000 per year towards tuition, books, lab fees for
each year in the program in return for a work commitment to
FSIS.
Question. FSIS also created a Veterinary Recruiting and Outreach
Coordinator (VROC) position. The VROC participates in national
veterinary conferences where FSIS has a recruiting booth to discuss
career opportunities with FSIS and benefits.
The VROC is contacting and visiting every American Veterinary
Medical Association (AVMA) accredited veterinary school. During these
visits, the VROC meets with staff/faculty from academic affairs to
discuss a partnership between the school and FSIS whereby FSIS
participates in lectures associated with food safety topics. The VROC
also meets with students to discuss FSIS and career opportunities in
the agency. The VROC participates in veterinary school career/job
fairs. The VROC reaches out to each job candidate within a week of
submitting an application to provide information about the agency,
answer questions, and help the candidate identify the best position for
them based on their interests.
The VROC is a program administrator for the American Association of
Veterinary State Boards (AAVSB) Registry of Approved Continuing
Education (RACE) accreditation. Each month, the VROC finds a speaker/
topic for a PHV seminar that is delivered via WebEx. Veterinarians in
the field can attend the interactive seminar. The seminars are approved
by RACE for continuing education credits that veterinarians can use
towards maintaining their veterinary licenses. Seminars are available
to all veterinarians and it ensures that FSIS fulfills its commitment
of maintaining an engaged and educated veterinary workforce.
Have these efforts been successful in addressing recruitment and
retention concerns and reducing the overall vacancy rate for public
health veterinarians?
Answer. FSIS has been working to increase the retention rate and
recruit more PHVs. As described in the response to the first question,
we have undertaken a number of initiatives to help us reach our goals.
Thus far, we have seen fluctuating rates, which is to be expected as we
implement new recruiting and retention measures. We will continue to
move forward with our initiatives and evaluate their effectiveness over
time.
Additionally, in exit interviews with FSIS public health
veterinarians, work-life balance is frequently cited as a reason for
leaving FSIS and pursing employment with other Federal agencies.
Because FSIS is appropriated for the standard 40 hours worked per week
by inspection personnel, any FSIS coverage provided to establishments
outside of those hours are billed as reimbursable overtime. To bill as
reimbursable overtime, per statute, the same FSIS veterinarian or
inspector has to be working and be in overtime status. While some may
welcome the overtime, others may not always want to work additional
hours for various personal reasons. FSIS has submitted a statutory
change in its fiscal year 2020 budget request to provide flexibility to
bill establishments for overtime regardless of the personnel providing
the coverage. FSIS anticipate this will help with recruitment and
retention of PHVs.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Tom Udall
acequias and community land grants
Question. In the 2018 Farm Bill, acequias (community ditches) and
community land grants in New Mexico were recognized as eligible for
certain conservation programs such as EQIP. This is a major step
forward in improving access in New Mexico's historic and traditional
agricultural communities. Farmers and ranchers from these communities
have indicated that the most efficient pathway to implementation of
this language is to have a guidance document from NRCS that allows
state and local offices to proceed with applications. I appreciated
your assurances, Mr. Secretary, that you will ``certainly welcome''
listening sessions as you begin to develop guidance for the provisions
Congress passed in the 2018 Farm Bill.
Please specify how you intend to solicit input from local
communities in general and land grants and acequias in particular.
Answer. Shortly after the 2018 Farm Bill was enacted, USDA hosted a
listening session to provide the public, partners, and other
stakeholders the opportunity to comment on the new Farm Bill
provisions. The Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) received
35 comments specific to water conservation and irrigation efficiency
practices including comments related to acequias, land grants, and
other water management entities. NRCS is considering these comments in
the development of the Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP)
interim rule. The EQIP interim rule is expected to be published in the
Federal Register later this Fall.
NRCS will provide a 60-day public comment period after the EQIP
interim rule is published in the Federal Register and is specifically
seeking comments on the new provisions related to EQIP contracts with
water management entities. NRCS will use available media and conduct a
robust outreach campaign to ensure the public is aware of the
opportunity to comment on the new provisions.
NRCS will also conduct a grassroots outreach campaign utilizing the
local working group process and the State Technical Committees to
ensure that water management entities including acequias and land
grants are aware of the opportunity to apply for assistance and that
the funding is targeted in a way that provides the greatest amount of
producer and environmental benefit.
prioritizing hiring staff through the conservation technical assistance
program
Question. In response to my question regarding Acequias being
eligible for the EQIP program, you noted concern that Congress didn't
provide necessary funds to implement the conservation measures in the
2018 Farm Bill and therefore there may be `some challenges going
forward.' However, Congress has generously provided funds for NRCS
through the Conservation Technical Assistance program which your fiscal
year 2020 Budget requested a significant cut to. Additionally, before
the Senate Agriculture Committee last April, Ranking Members Debbie
Stabenow directly asked you whether you would hire staff to the full
levels provided in Congressional Appropriations bills in order to
quickly implement the farm bill. Your response stated that you were
reviewing staffing plans to accomplish the necessary customers service
but you wouldn't commit to spending the dollars provided. These two
statements seem counter to each other as NRCS continues to be severely
understaffed across the country.
Can you explain to me how NRCS is prioritizing hiring staff using
funds provided to the agency through the CTA program and why the agency
is choosing to not hire staff to the level provided in our
appropriations bills if you feel Congress did not provide enough funds
to implement the 2018 Farm Bill?
Answer. We recognize there are staffing shortages in areas around
the country and are taking action to address the needs.
In February 2018, we initiated the Optimally Productive Office
(OPO) Study. From this study an analytical tool was built to provide
the Farm Production and Conservation (FPAC) leadership with data to
determine where to place staff and locate offices to efficiently and
effectively serve customers. The tool has helped to inform critical
hiring decisions since late fiscal year 2018. It does not look at
programs individually to assess need but rather it takes a
comprehensive approach in evaluating each office and each programs'
activity within an office in a consolidated assessment. The study uses
data to help us objectively identify several important things to help
better balance customer service and costs, including:
--Current, anticipated, and unmet customer demand;
--Optimal USDA geographic footprint based on customer locations;
--Employee productivity in delivering services and programs;
--Field office staffing capacity; and
--How to improve productivity and service to customers.
We have made significant progress with hiring. As of September 28,
2019, 8,694 NRCS positions are on board with another 1,290 hiring
actions currently pending.
In order to accelerate the hiring process:
We have deployed the ``HR Tracker'' tool to ensure we are as
transparent and accountable to our hiring managers as possible. This
automated system has streamlined workflows from the hiring manager,
supervisor, hiring specialist, and personnel security specialist. It
also surfaces process bottlenecks that are addressed to speed the
hiring process. For example, standardized position descriptions were
created for more than 150 FPAC positions which has cut classification
time 50 percent.
During the first quarter of fiscal year 2020, we are scheduled to
deploy robotic processes to reduce the burden on our hiring specialists
who currently work in multiple systems to manage positions, announce
vacancies, and onboard employees. The time saved from this robotic
processing will enable our hiring specialists to provide better service
for the Mission Area.
We are also working to more effectively link our Human Resources
Division (HRD) with our Homeland Security Division (HSD) to provide a
seamless workflow from the moment HRD begins working with hiring
manager to develop their hiring plans to developing the vacancy
announcement to selecting the best candidates to the background checks
required before an applicant may begin work.
racial and gender discrimination
Question. What policies and procedures are in place at the USDA to
ensure that the racial and gender discrimination that led to the
Pigford, Garcia, Keepseagle, and Love is not systemically occurring
within the agency?
Answer. USDA is committed to ensuring that the civil rights of its
customers, partners, and employees are recognized and protected in the
delivery of our programs and services. As described in the Secretary's
Civil Rights Policy Statement, the Department strives each day to do
right by all people equally regardless of race, religion, gender,
national origin or any other characteristic. There is a zero tolerance
for any form of discrimination. This standard is across the board in
all agencies, offices, programs, every employee and to applicants of
federally assisted programs and services.
Question. Specific examples of these policies and procedures
include the development of Civil Rights Impact Analyses for
organizational changes and regulatory actions; compliance reviews of
agency-level civil rights activities; regular reporting of participant
data to and oversight by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Civil Rights; and timely investigation and handling of complaints of
discrimination to ensure that issues are addressed quickly to ensure
that the rights of program participants and employees are preserved.
All USDA employees complete EEO training in compliance with the NoFEAR
Act. In addition, each agency conducts supplemental training on EEO and
civil rights matters addressing the unique needs of each agency.
How is USDA communicating to socially disadvantaged farmers that
civil rights are an important priority to the agency?
Answer. The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
(OASCR) provides guidance to departmental offices and mission areas for
conducting effective outreach to minority groups. The OASCR meets
monthly with mission area civil rights directors to discuss removing
barriers to program access and advance Secretary Perdue's vision of Do
Right and Feed Everyone by ensuring farm programs serve all Americans
efficiently, effectively and with integrity. In addition, the OASCR is
collaborating with mission areas to align external fam program
activities to specific civil rights priorities. For example, in July
2019 the OASCR partnered with mission areas to conduct a program
highlighting American Indian influences on American agriculture. In
response to program complaint trends, the OASCR implemented a meet and
greet strategy to conduct outreach with USDA State Directors in Alabama
and Georgia. The OASCR recently completed a joint review of Farm
Service Agency (FSA) programs in Oklahoma and additional reviews are
planned in fiscal year 2020.
USDA organizations actively work to demonstrate to socially
disadvantaged producers the importance of civil rights. For example,
the Office of Partnerships and Public Engagement (OPPE), through the
Outreach and Assistance for Socially Disadvantaged Farmers and Ranchers
and Veteran Farmers and Ranchers Program provides grant funding to
organizations that assist farmers and ranchers own and operate
successful farms. In addition, OPPE also maintains the Socially
Disadvantaged Farmers and Ranchers Program Policy Research Center in
partnership with Alcorn State University to identify opportunities to
improve program delivery for socially disadvantaged producers.
Another example is found in the FSA as it targets a portion of all
its guaranteed loans and its direct operating and direct farm ownership
loans to historically underserved farmers and ranchers, including
socially disadvantaged producers. Through the use of Socially
Disadvantaged Applicant funding, FSA is able to support the needs of
individuals who have historically been underserved.
non-insured crop assistance program
Question.How are updates to the Non-Insured Crop Assistance Program
(NAP) going to be implemented so that risk management coverage options
are available for beginning and socially disadvantaged farmers and
ranchers and how will that coverage be coordinated between Farm Service
Agency and Risk Management Agency?
Answer. The 2018 Farm Bill continued the Noninsured Crop Disaster
Assistance Program (NAP) service-fee waiver and fifty-percent premium
reduction provisions afforded beginning and socially disadvantaged
farmers under the 2014 Farm Bill and extends those provisions to
veterans. FSA has updated policy in handbook guidance making the
provision effective for 2019. FSA is capturing all 2018 Farm Bill
statutory changes for NAP and is in the process of publishing those
changes in a final rule. The buy-up coverage levels, which were
extended with the 2018 Farm Bill, are already in place and available to
all producers, including beginning and SDA farmers. In terms of sharing
information on beginning farmers, SDA, and veterans with RMA, the
Agencies are working together to develop an efficient process for
sharing this information.
land access and farmland ownership
Question. The 2018 Farm Bill includes a data initiative on Land
Access and Farmland Ownership to track ownership, tenure, barriers to
entry, and viability of beginning and socially disadvantaged farmers.
How will this new initiative be implemented, how will the data be
used to inform agency decisionmaking, and how will data be made
accessible to the public?
Answer. Data from the Tenure, Ownership and Transition of
Agricultural Land (TOTAL) project is the only comprehensive source of
information on agricultural land owners in the United States. This data
helps USDA understand how costs and benefits of land based issues are
distributed across farmers and non-farmers as well as spatially (rural
and non-rural; in-state and out-of-state). This information is also
critical for understanding the characteristics of farmland owners/
sellers and developing policies and programs that address ways to
enhance producer access to agricultural land, land and farm housing
affordability, and security of tenure.
The National Agriculture Statistics Service (NASS) last released
TOTAL information on August 31, 2015. Section 12607 of the Agricultural
Improvement Act of 2018 authorized NASS to collect this information not
less frequently than once every 3 years while also authorizing the
appropriation of $3,000,000 for each fiscal year 2019 through 2023. At
this time, NASS does not have funding to carry out the activities
related to the TOTAL data collection. NASS plans to conduct TOTAL as
part of the Census program in 2024 if discretionary appropriations are
not received before that date.
Data from this project would be made available through the NASS
Agricultural Statistics Board release procedures in a similar process
to the 2015 release. That information is publically available on the
NASS website at the following location: https://www.nass.usda.gov/
Publications/AgCensus/2012/Online_Resources/TOTAL/index.php. In
addition, the Economic Research Service (ERS) will use data from the
2017 Census of Agriculture summary information to characterize the
share and geographic distribution of beginning and socially
disadvantaged farmers and ranchers. The report will be made publicly
available via the ERS website once it has been drafted, reviewed, and
cleared.
women, infants, and children (wic)
Question. For WIC, the President's Budget recommends a decrease of
over $26 million in the Nutrition Services & Administration grant that
is unrelated to projected participant decline. The NSA grant funds core
WIC public health services, including nutrition education,
breastfeeding support, and health screenings--all essential and highly
acclaimed WIC success missions--as well as program management.
Moreover, NSA grants are forced to absorb many EBT costs that the
grants were never designed to absorb and have stymied WIC pay scales
that are inadequate to sustain dedicated nutrition professionals.
What justification can you offer for this decrease in funding?
What are the monthly operational costs for WIC?
Would you agree that, on its own, the current WIC contingency fund
is insufficient to support program operations for at least a month in
the face of unforeseen economic or funding challenges?
Answer. As a discretionary grant program with two-year funds, the
WIC Program relies on appropriated funding as well as recovered unspent
funds from the prior fiscal year to allocate food and NSA grants to
State agencies. Declining participation has resulted in higher levels
of prior year unspent food funds. When the recovered unspent food funds
are run through the WIC funding formula, they are split between food
and Nutrition Services Administration (NSA), resulting in additional
NSA funds for the current fiscal year above the appropriated funding
level. Due to the lower than anticipated food costs in fiscal year
2019, there will be sufficient unspent funds available in fiscal year
2020 to cover a $26 million decrease in NSA funding as a result of a
lower appropriation.
In fiscal year 2018, the latest full year for which information is
available, the WIC Program spent about $5.43 billion, which is about
$450 million per month.
The WIC Contingency fund is currently funded at $150 million. With
average monthly program costs in excess of $400 million, the current
$150 million in WIC contingency reserves would not fully support
program operations for 1 month on its own.
wic-breastfeeding peer counselors
Question. We know that breastfeeding is the best form of infant
feeding and WIC has done an exceptional job of increasing breastfeeding
rates with the help of trusted breastfeeding Peer Counselors.
Nevertheless, the Breastfeeding Peer Counselor set-aside has not
received an increase in nearly a decade and in fact is budgeted at $30
million less than the authorized level.
Are current funding levels sufficient to ensure that there is a
peer counselor in every clinic?
Answer. The current fiscal year 2019 funding level of $60 million
provides for peer counselors in about 70 percent of WIC local agencies.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Patrick J. Leahy
dairy producers
Question. The 2018 Farm Bill made significant improvements to the
dairy safety net. Once implemented, these changes will provide
immediate relief and support for our dairy producers. Putting these
changes into the field must be an urgent priority of the USDA. I am
pleased by your past remarks that you share this priority, and intend
to begin enrollments for the new Dairy Margin Coverage by June 17. I
urge you to meet this timeline. It's also important for producers to
have access to information as they make coverage decisions,
particularly now that the Farm Bill allows them to use multiple risk
management options.
What is the timeline for updating USDA's calculator tool for dairy
producers, and will it integrate dairy safety net programs within both
FSA and RMA to allow producers to compare different programs or combine
them?
Answer. The DMC Dairy Decision Tool was recently updated and now
reflects the DMC dairy margin estimates for the 2020 calendar year.
Currently, the Farms Service Agency (FSA) is in discussion with Dr.
Mark Stephenson of the University of Wisconsin regarding whether the
Risk Management Agency (RMA) programs (LGM-Dairy and Dairy-RP) can be
incorporated into the decision tool format.
organic dairy producers/origin of livestock
Question. The organic sector requires a distinct label that is
trusted, verified, and enforced. That is the whole point of the law.
Yet I continue to hear troubling reports of inconsistencies in the
enforcement and interpretation of regulations related to organic dairy
production. When I wrote the Organic Foods Production Act for the 1990
Farm Bill, organic dairy herds in the tens of thousands of animals did
not exist. They now do, making equal enforcement even more important.
In 2015, USDA proposed a rule governing the manner in which dairy
animals are transitioned to organic, in order to control a loophole
that was being abused. However, in 2018, USDA removed that rule from
the Unified Regulatory Agenda.
The proposed rule on transition of organic dairy animals appears to
have broad support among the organic community, except from those who
continue to benefit from this loophole. Why has USDA not issued a final
rule on ``Origin of Livestock'' and by what date will you commit to
doing so?
Answer. USDA plans to reopen the comment period for the Origin of
Livestock proposed Rule. The comment period will be for 60 days. All
comments from 2015 and 2019 will be considered as the department
prepares a final rule, expected in Spring 2020.
Question. Since the 2015 proposed rule and the original comment
period, the organic dairy industry has seen significant changes. AMS
estimated the U.S. organic dairy industry had about 1,850 organic farms
milking about 200,000 cows in 2015. There are now more than 2,500
organic dairy farms milking 267,500 cows, or a 38 percent and 34
percent increase, respectively according to USDA data. USDA has
concerns about proceeding with a final rule without an opportunity for
everyone impacted to provide public comment. Anyone interested may
submit new comments or updates to comments made in the first comment
period.
What other actions have you taken to improve enforcement in the
organic dairy sector and bring possible violators into compliance?
Answer. The National Organic Program (NOP) 2018 Dairy Compliance
Project significantly increased the number of unannounced audits of
organic dairies around the country. This enforcement project continued
in 2019, with additional auditors and an increase in the number of
unannounced audits. NOP utilizes a risk-based approach to allocating
enforcement resources. The more complex the operation, the higher the
likelihood it will be subject to increased surveillance. Federal
auditors have found that most dairies currently meet organic
requirements. The 2019 Dairy Compliance Project is still in progress.
When supported by evidence, NOP has issued adverse actions to both
certifiers and dairies. When non-compliances are found to be
unintentional or minor, the goal is to bring the certifier or operation
back into full compliance as quickly as possible. More serious matters,
intentional violations or fraud may be escalated to other law
enforcement agencies and may result in significant financial penalties
and/or imprisonment. Generally, until all appeals are exhausted, or an
entity voluntarily surrenders its certification, NOP is not legally
able to comment on whether or not an investigation is underway.
To date, three certifiers have received notices of non-compliance
and one dairy has received an adverse action. NOP has also entered into
a settlement agreement with the Texas Department of Agriculture related
in part to dairy compliance issues. These numbers may increase as fall-
season audits and certifier investigation requests are completed this
Fall. The NOP will continue to take direct action whenever supported by
the evidence. Many certifiers also issue notices of noncompliance or
take adverse actions against dairies based on their independent
findings. In the public/private partner model, not all notices issued
by certifiers and resolved by operations are reported to NOP unless
there is need for further adverse action.
Additional actions will be included in the NOP Monthly Enforcement
Report to Congress.
NOP has also developed new training available free to certifiers
and operations to improve consistency in the interpretation of the
organic regulations. A learning module specific to Dairy Compliance is
expected to launch in October.
farm to school
Question. Unfortunately, inadequate staffing at USDA is a problem
that is impacting the effectiveness of multiple programs. For example,
the USDA Office of Community Food Systems has recently had a number of
staffing transitions--both in its national and regional offices--
impacting the ability of the office to administer the Farm to School
Grant program. In order to address this problem within the Office of
Community Food Systems, this Committee dedicated $500,000 additional
dollars so you could hire people. Yet, citing staffing constraints, I
understand USDA plans to only release a portion of the additional Farm
to School funds in the next grant cycle. When Congress appropriates
funds, we expect agencies to release them.
What is being done to ensure the vacant positions at USDA are
filled?
What are your plans to ensure these available funds are spent in a
timely fashion, in order to achieve the intended goals of the program?
If the USDA lacks the capacity to administer these funds, will you
block grant them to States with Farm to School Programs?
I have a Farm to School reauthorization bill that I plan to
reintroduce soon that would increase the maximum grant award. Would
this change help you get grant funding deployed more efficiently?
Answer. I am happy to report that a new director for the Office of
Community Food Systems joined the Agency in August 2019. One of her top
priorities is working to fill the remaining vacancies on the team, most
of which are expected to be filled this fall.
Since fiscal year 2013, USDA has awarded over $39.9 million through
the Farm to School Grant Program, funding 560 projects across the 50
States, District of Columbia, Virgin Islands, Guam and Puerto Rico,
reaching almost 18.5 million students in 39,000 schools. The additional
Farm to School Grant funding provided by Congress in 2018 and 2019
essentially doubled the size of the annual program. Given the timing of
appropriations, we were able to incorporate the additional funding
beginning with the fiscal year 2019 grant cycle. In July 2019, USDA
awarded $9.4 million in grant funds to 126 schools, school districts,
state and local agencies, non-profit organizations, Indian tribal
organizations, and agricultural producers. We will soon request
applications for fiscal year 2020 grants and anticipate awarding
approximately $10 million.
The President's fiscal year 2020 Budget also includes a proposal to
permanently change the maximum amount a Farm to School grant recipient
may receive from $100,000 to $500,000. We believe that raising the
grant cap would allow States to better integrate Farm to School and
enable local grantees to conduct higher impact work that is more likely
to last beyond the end of the grant term. Raising the cap would also
allow USDA to streamline grant administration and provide better
customer service to each grantee.
hemp seed
Question. As you know, many farmers are eager to add hemp to their
crop rotations now that the 2018 Farm Bill has legalized its
cultivation and production. I understand there are many challenges for
USDA to establish rules and guidelines for a new crop. In the meantime,
producers have been instructed to operate under the pilot framework
established in the 2014 Farm Bill. Many producers, however, are unable
to import seed from Canada as they have done in previous years because,
based on the 2018 Farm Bill, the DEA has ceased issuing import permits
for the 2019 growing season.
In the short-term, will you commit to working across agencies to
ensure producers are able to import the hemp seed they need for the
2019 growing season?
Answer. USDA is working across agencies to clarify the requirements
for producers to import hemp seed. USDA will issue a statement to
clarify the requirements and the information will be posted on the USDA
website.
The passage of the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 (2018 Farm
Bill, Section 10113) removed hemp and hemp seeds from the Drug
Enforcement Administration's (DEA) schedule of Controlled Substances.
USDA regulates the importation of all seeds for planting to ensure
safe agricultural trade. Under this authority, USDA provided an
alternative way for the safe importation of hemp seeds into the U.S.
Hemp seeds can be imported into the U.S. from Canada if accompanied
by either:
--a phytosanitary certification from Canada's national plant
protection organization to verify the origin of the seed and
confirm that no plant pests are detected; or
--a Federal Seed Analysis Certificate (SAC, PPQ Form 925) for hemp
seeds grown in Canada.
Hemp seeds may be imported into the U.S. from countries other than
Canada if accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate from the exporting
country's national plant protection organization to verify the origin
of the seed and confirm that no plant pests are detected.
Hemp seed shipments may be inspected upon arrival at the first port
of entry by Customs and Border Protection (CBP) to ensure USDA
regulations are met, including certification and freedom from plant
pests.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Secretary Perdue. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really
appreciate the partnership that we enjoy, and I look forward to
answering your questions and other questions and doing what you
have instructed us to do in the Farm Bill. Thank you.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you. We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:25 a.m., Thursday, April 11, the
subcommittee was recessed, to recessed, to reconvene subject to
the call of the Chair.]