- EXAMINING THREATS TO WORKERS WITH PREEXISTING CONDITIONS
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
EXAMINING THREATS TO WORKERS
WITH PREEXISTING CONDITIONS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION
AND LABOR
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, FEBRUARY 6, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-1
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and Labor
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: https://edlabor.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-267 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).E-mail,
[email protected]
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR
ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia, Chairman
Susan A. Davis, California
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina,
Raul M. Grijalva, Arizona
Ranking Member
Joe Courtney, Connecticut
David P. Roe, Tennessee
Marcia L. Fudge, Ohio
Glenn Thompson, Pennsylvania
Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tim Walberg, Michigan
Northern Mariana Islands
Brett Guthrie, Kentucky
Frederica S. Wilson, Florida
Bradley Byrne, Alabama
Suzanne Bonamici, Oregon
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Mark Takano, California
Elise M. Stefanik, New York
Alma S. Adams, North Carolina
Rick W. Allen, Georgia
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Francis Rooney, Florida
Donald Norcross, New Jersey
Lloyd Smucker, Pennsylvania
Pramila Jayapal, Washington
Jim Banks, Indiana
Joseph D. Morelle, New York
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Susan Wild, Pennsylvania
James Comer, Kentucky
Josh Harder, California
Ben Cline, Virginia
Lucy McBath, Georgia
Russ Fulcher, Idaho
Kim Schrier, Washington
Van Taylor, Texas
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Steve Watkins, Kansas
Jahana Hayes, Connecticut
Ron Wright, Texas
Donna E. Shalala, Florida
Daniel Meuser, Pennsylvania
Andy Levin, Michigan*
William R. Timmons, IV, South
Ilhan Omar, Minnesota
Carolina
David J. Trone, Maryland
Dusty Johnson, South Dakota
Haley M. Stevens, Michigan
Susie Lee, Nevada
Lori Trahan, Massachusetts
Joaquin Castro, Texas
* Vice-Chair
Veronique Pluviose, Staff Director
Brandon Renz, Minority Staff Director
------
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on February 6, 2019.................................
1
Statement of Members:
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', Chairman, Committee on
Education and Labor........................................
1
Prepared statement of....................................
4
Foxx, Hon. Virginia, Ranking Member, Committee on Education
and Labor..................................................
5
Prepared statement of....................................
7
Statement of Witnesses:
Corlette, Ms. Sabrina, Research Professor, Center on Health
Insurance Reforms, Georgetown University Health Policy
Institute..................................................
9
Prepared statement of....................................
11
Gupta, Dr. Rahul, Senior Vice President and Chief Medical and
Health Officer, March of Dimes.............................
42
Prepared statement of....................................
44
Riedy, Mr. Chad, Resident, Alexandria, VA....................
23
Prepared statement of....................................
25
Turner, Ms. Grace-Marie, President, Galen Institute..........
30
Prepared statement of....................................
32
Additional Submissions:
Adams, Hon. Alma S., a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina:
Article: House Health Bill Would Lead To Less Coverage,
Higher Patient Costs...................................
108
Prepared statement from MomsRising.......................
110
Article: National Disability Rights Network Opposes
American Health Care Act...............................
112
Jayapal, Hon. Pramila, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington:
Prepared statement from Asian and Pacific Islander
American Health Forum (APIAHF).........................
113
Underwood, Hon. Lauren, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois:
Article: Final Rule on Short-term Insurance plans will
leave Patients With High costs, Less Coverage..........
118
Questions submitted for the record by:
Guthrie, Hon. Brett, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Kentucky..................................
121
Smucker, Hon. Lloyd K., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Pennsylvania..............................
121
Ms. Turner's response to questions submitted for the record..
122
EXAMINING THREATS TO WORKERS WITH PREEXISTING CONDITIONS
----------
Wednesday, February 6, 2019
House of Representatives
Committee on Education and Labor,
Washington, DC.
----------
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 2175, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Robert C.
``Bobby'' Scott (chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Scott, Davis, Courtney, Sablan,
Bonamici, Takano, Adams, Norcross, Jayapal, Morelle, Harder,
McBath, Schrier, Underwood, Hayes, Shalala, Levin, Omar, Trone,
Stevens, Lee, Trahan, Castro, Foxx, Roe, Thompson, Walberg,
Guthrie, Byrne, Grothman, Stefanik, Allen, Smucker, Banks,
Walker, Comer, Cline, Fulcher, Taylor, Watkins, Wright, Meuser,
Timmons, and Johnson.
Staff present: Tylease Alli, Chief Clerk; Nekea Brown,
Deputy Clerk; Ilana Brunner, General Counsel; David Dailey,
Senior Counsel; Daniel Foster, Health and Labor Counsel;
Mishawn Freeman, Staff Assistant; Alison Hart, Professional
Staff; Carrie Hughes, Director of Health and Human Services;
Eli Hovland, Staff Assistant; Eunice Ikene, Labor Policy
Advisor; Ariel Jona, Staff Assistant; Kimberly Knackstedt,
Disability Policy Advisor; Stephanie Lalle, Deputy
Communications Director; Andre Lindsay, Staff Assistant; Max
Moore, Office Aide; Merrick Nelson, Digital Manager; Udochi
Onwubiko, Labor Policy Counsel; Veronique Pluviose, Staff
Director; Banyon Vassar, Deputy Director of Information
Technology; Joshua Weisz, Communications Director; Cyrus Artz,
Minority Parliamentarian; Marty Boughton, Minority Press
Secretary; Courtney Butcher, Minority Coalitions and Member
Services Coordinator; Rob Green, Minority Director of Workforce
Policy; John Martin, Minority Workforce Policy Counsel; Sarah
Martin, Minority Professional Staff Member; Hannah Matesic,
Minority Legislative Operations Manager; Kelley McNabb,
Minority Communications Director; Alexis Murray, Minority
Professional Staff Member; Brandon Renz, Minority Staff
Director; Ben Ridder, Minority Legislative Assistant; Meredith
Schellin, Minority Deputy Press Secretary and Digital Advisor;
Heather Wadyka, Minority Staff Assistant; and Lauren Williams,
Minority Professional Staff Member.
Chairman Scott. The Committee on Education and Labor will
come to order, and I want to welcome everyone to the hearing. I
note that a quorum is present. The Committee is meeting today
to hear testimony on examining threats to workers with
preexisting conditions.
Pursuant to committee rule 7(c) opening statements are
limited to the chair and the ranking member. This allows us to
hear from our witnesses a lot sooner and provides all members
with adequate time to ask questions.
I recognize myself now for the purpose of making an opening
Statement.
Today we are here to examine the threats to affordable
healthcare for workers with preexisting conditions. I want to
welcome our distinguished witnesses for agreeing to be here
today and to testify on an issue that affects roughly 133
million Americans across the country.
On March 23, 2010, President Barack Obama signed the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act into law. Over the
last 9 years, this historic legislation has improved the lives
of countless Americans by making insurance more affordable and
more accessible, while strengthening the quality of health
coverage and enacting lifesaving consumer protections.
The Affordable Care Act's success is even more remarkable
in the context of the persistent attempts to repeal and
sabotage the law. Since it was passed the House Republicans
called more than 70 votes to repeal all or parts of the ACA.
Those efforts were punctuated by the American Health Care Act,
a bill passed by House Republicans in 2017, which gutted
protections for patients with preexisting conditions. According
to the CBO, the repeal bill would have resulted in 23 million
fewer Americans with health coverage, would have raised
premiums by 20 percent the first year while providing less
comprehensive benefits, and would have jeopardized many of the
consumer protections found in the ACA.
The Trump Administration has taken an equally aggressive
approach to undermining the law. For example, the
Administration has expanded the use of junk plans that roll
back consumer protections, raise the costs for most consumers,
and have a troubling record of fraud and abuse.
On June 19, 2018, the Department of Labor finalized a rule
to expand association health plans. Under the rule,
associations can sell coverage to small businesses and self-
employed individuals without meeting certain ACA standards that
would otherwise apply, such as: the requirement to cover
essential benefits, the prohibition against charging higher
premiums based on factors such as gender or occupation, and the
age rating limit, which prevents insurers from charging
unaffordable premiums to older people.
Extensive research has shown that association health plans
create a few winners and a lot of losers. A report published by
the Government Accountability Office in 2000 found that they
are likely to increase costs for most workers who are not in
association plans and make it harder for older, sicker workers
to get affordable care. The prevalence of fraud in these plans
is equally concerning. A 2004 Congressional Budget Office
report identified 144 ``unauthorized or bogus'' plans from 2000
to 2002. Those plans covered at least 15,000 employers and more
than 200,000 policyholders, and left unpaid medical bills over
$252 million.
On August 3, 2018, the Departments of Health and Human
Services, Labor, and Treasury jointly moved to expand the use
of short-term health plans. The Departments issued a final rule
to extend the allowable duration of short-term plans from 3
months to up to 12 months, with renewability up to 36 months.
Under the rule the short-term plans do not have include Federal
consumer protections, including protections for patients with
preexisting conditions. Because of the risk of confusion and
overall lack of consumer safeguards, not one single group
representing patients, physicians, nurses or hospitals voiced
support for the rule expanding the use of short-term plans.
The Administration's final and most dangerous attack on the
ACA is its unusual decision to side with a group of Republican
attorneys general in a lawsuit against the Federal Government
seeking to strike the ACA in court. So the Trump Administration
is effectively arguing that the ACA's consumer protections
should be invalidated, along with the rest of the law.
If this ultimately prevails, as it did in the district
court in Texas, the result would be catastrophic. All
Americans, whether insured through the ACA marketplace or
through their employers, would lose the consumer protections we
all take for granted, including elimination of lifetime and
annual caps. The prohibition on lifetime and annual coverage
limits, which protects workers from incurring unreasonable out-
of-pocket expenses. Before the ACA, more than 90 percent of
non-group plans had annual or lifetime caps on coverage, and a
majority of the employer-provided plans imposed lifetime
limits.
Cost-sharing protections, the requirement that plans offer
to limit out-of-pocket costs to an affordable percentage of a
worker's income, elimination of preexisting health condition
exclusions, the requirement that all health plans cover
patients with preexisting conditions at the standard rate. Last
night I was pleased to hear the President's comment that he
wants to protect patients with preexisting conditions and end
the spread of AIDS. As I said, the actions of the
Administration have jeopardized those protections and people
with HIV or AIDS who would be excluded from coverage based on
preexisting conditions if those initiatives succeed. Preventive
services without cost-sharing, the protection that allows
workers and families to access vital preventive care without
paying out-of-pocket expenses. That protection would be
eliminated.
While I appreciate that my Republican colleagues are now
voicing support for many of these protections, their words have
not translated into actions. On January 9, Democrats voted on a
resolution to empower the House counsel to intervene in the
Texas case to defend the ACA and protect people with
preexisting conditions. Only three House Republicans voted to
support the resolution.
There many different views within the Democratic Party and
across the political spectrum regarding the best path forward
to further expand affordable care. But we must all commit, both
with our words and deeds, to maintaining the lifesaving
consumer protections enacted in the ACA and we must refuse to
go backward.
Until efforts to repeal and sabotage this historic
legislation cease, workers with preexisting conditions will be
at risk of losing access to the care they need to live healthy
and fulfilling lives.
I now recognize the distinguished ranking member for the
purpose of an opening statement.
[The statement of Chairman Scott follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'' Scott, Chairman,
Committee on Education and Labor
Today, we are here to examine the threats to affordable health care
for workers with pre-existing conditions. I want to welcome and thank
our distinguished witnesses for agreeing to be here and testify today
on an issue that effects roughly 133 million Americans across this
country.
On March 23, 2010, President Barack Obama signed the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act into law. Over the past 9 years,
this historic legislation has improved the lives of countless Americans
by making insurance more affordable and more accessible, while also
strengthening the quality of health coverage and enacting lifesaving
consumer protections.
Prior to the ACA, Federal law allowed insurers to deny people
coverage for certain pre-existing conditions, including recently
treated substance use disorder, pregnancy, and cancer. Prior to the
ACA, insurers in the individual market could exclude these individuals
from coverage, charge higher premiums, or put annual or lifetime caps
of health care coverage.
According to a 2007 Commonwealth Fund survey, 36 percent of adults
who attempted to purchase coverage in the individual market reported
being turned down or charged a higher price because of their medical
history. The ACA guaranteed access to affordable care for the roughly
133 million Americans with pre-existing conditions at the standard
rate.
By any objective measure, the Affordable Care Act has been a
success. The uninsured rate, which was 16.7 percent in 2009, fell to
just 8.8 percent in 2017.
The ACA's success is even more remarkable in the context of the
persistent attempts to repeal and sabotage the law. Since it was
passed, House Republicans have voted more than 70 times to repeal all
or parts of the ACA. Those efforts were punctuated by the American
Health Care Act, a bill passed by House Republicans in 2017, which
gutted protections for patients with pre-existing conditions. According
to the CBO, the repeal bill would have resulted in 23 million fewer
Americans with health coverage and would have raised premiums by 20
percent in the first year while providing less comprehensive benefits.
The Trump Administration has taken an equally aggressive approach
to undermining the law. For example, the Administration has expanded
the use of junk health plans that rollback consumer protections, raise
costs for all consumers, and have a troubling record of fraud and
abuse.
On June 19th, 2018, the Department of Labor finalized a rule to
expand association health plans. Under the rule, associations can sell
coverage to small businesses and self-employed individuals without
meeting certain ACA standards that would otherwise apply, such as: 1)
the requirement to cover essential health benefits; 2) the prohibition
against charging higher premiums based on factors such as gender or
occupation; and 3) the age rating limit, which prevents insurers from
charging unaffordable premiums to older people.
Extensive research has shown that association health plans create
winners and losers. A report published by the Government Accountability
Office in 2000, found that they are likely to increase costs to some
workers and make it harder for older, sicker workers to get affordable
care. The prevalence of fraud in these plans is equally concerning. A
2004 Congressional Budget Office identified 144 ``unauthorized or
bogus'' plans from 2000 to 2002, covering at least 15,000 employers and
more than 200,000 policyholders, leaving $252 million in unpaid medical
claims.
On August 3rd, 2018, the Departments of Health and Human Services,
Labor, and the Treasury jointly moved to expand the use of short-term
health plans. The Departments issued a final rule to extend the
allowable duration of short-term health plans from 3 months to up to 12
months, with plans renewable for up to 36 months. Under the rule,
short-term plans do not have include Federal consumer protections,
including protections for patients with pre-existing conditions.
Because of the risk of confusion and the overall lack of consumer
safeguards, not one single group representing patients, physicians,
nurses or hospitals voiced support for the rule expanding the use of
short-term plans.
The Administration's final and most dangerous attack on the ACA is
its unusual decision to side with a group of Republican Attorneys
General in a lawsuit against the Federal Government seeking to strike
down the law in court. Specifically, the Trump Administration is
arguing that the ACA's consumer protections should be invalidated.
If it ultimately prevails, as it did in a District Court in Texas,
the result would be catastrophic. All Americans, whether insured
through an ACA marketplace or through their employer, would lose the
consumer protections we all take for granted, including:
Elimination of Lifetime and Annual Caps: The prohibition on
lifetime and annual coverage limits, which protects workers from
incurring unreasonable out-of-pocket expenses. Before the ACA, more
than 90 percent of nongroup plans had annual or lifetime caps on
coverage, and a majority of employer-provided plans imposed lifetime
limits.
Cost-Sharing Protections: The requirement that plans limit out-of-
pocket costs to an affordable percentage of a worker's income.
Elimination of Preexisting Health Condition Exclusions: The
requirement that all health plans cover patients' pre-existing
conditions.
Preventive Services without Cost-sharing: The protection that
allows workers and families to access vital preventive care without
paying out-of-pocket.
While I appreciate that my Republican colleagues are now voicing
support for many of these protections, their words have not translated
into actions. On January 9, House Democrats voted on a resolution to
empower the House counsel to intervene in the Texas case to defend the
ACA and protect people with pre-existing conditions. Only three House
Republicans votes to support the resolution.
There many different views both within the Democratic Party and
across the political spectrum regarding the best path forward to
further expand access to affordable care. But we must all commit both
with our words and our actions to maintaining the lifesaving consumer
protections enacted in the ACA and refusing to go backward.
Until efforts to repeal and sabotage this historic legislation
cease, workers with pre-existing conditions will be at risk of losing
access to the care they need to live healthy and fulfilling lives.
Thank you and I now yield to the Ranking Member, Dr. Foxx.
______
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Americans with
preexisting conditions need health insurance. This is a fact
and a value that Congress and the President have affirmed
countless times. It is also the law. Insurance companies are
prohibited from denying or not renewing health coverage due to
a preexisting condition. Insurance companies are banned from
rescinding coverage based on a preexisting condition. Insurance
companies are banned from excluding benefits based on a
preexisting condition. Insurance companies are prevented from
raising premiums on individuals with preexisting conditions who
maintain continuous coverage.
So it is perplexing why Committee Democrats are even
holding this hearing. And by doing so, they are making it about
threats. Instead, this hearing should focus on how the strong
economy, with its extraordinary job growth, is increasing the
number of workers with employer-sponsored health coverage.
This committee's work on--employer-based health care
options dates back to when the cost of health care began to
rise several decades ago. The status quo was not sustainable,
then and in 2010, the tide took a radical turn for the worse
with the Affordable Care Act, which decimated options for
employers earnestly seeking to provide competitive benefits
packages to recruit and retain workers and sent individual
premium costs on an even faster upward trajectory. Workers paid
the price, employers paid the price.
But, after 8 years of Republican leadership in the House of
Representatives and the election of President Trump, the U.S.
economy and job markets are thriving. With consistent wage
growth and greater availability of highly competitive jobs,
smart employers are continuing to ensure that they offer
competitive benefits packages--including sponsored health care
plans--to recruit and retain workers. And their efforts are
working.
According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, 152 million
Americans--including many who have preexisting conditions--are
insured through plans offered by their employer. That is the
majority of the American work force and more than the
individual market, Medicare, or Medicaid. Since 2013, 7 million
more Americans have gained employer-sponsored health care
coverage, with 2.6 million gaining coverage since President
Trump took office. The plans employers offer are on average
higher quality and provide better value than what can be found
on the individual market.
In 2017, the average premium for individual and family
employer-sponsored coverage increased by a modest 3 and 5
percent respectively. In contrast, the average exchange
premium, Obamacare, went up by roughly 30 percent.
So, if we are going to have this hearing at all, we welcome
it as an opportunity to talk once more about the importance of
making sure American workers have more options, more
flexibility, and more freedom.
Last Congress, the Republican-led House of Representatives
passed the American Health Care Act. The legislation would
restore stability to the health care marketplace and deliver
lower costs to consumers. Ensuring protections for individuals
with preexisting conditions was a central piece of the bill. It
was Section 137 of the legislation stating: ``Nothing in this
Act shall be construed as permitting health insurance insurers
to limit access to health coverage for individuals with
preexisting conditions.'' So, people may have an opinion, but
they cannot argue with the facts. The facts are written in this
legislation--Section 137.
Republicans on this committee also led the passage of the
Small Business Health Fairness Act. That legislation would
empower small businesses to band together through association
health plans, AHPs, to negotiate for lower health insurance
costs on behalf of their employees. And last summer, the
Department of Labor finalized a rule expanding access to AHPs.
During the 115th Congress, House Republicans also passed
the Competitive Health Insurance Reform Act and the Committee-
led Self Insurance Protection Act. What all of these bills have
in common is their goal to expand coverage, lower health care
costs for all Americans, and again, give freedom to Americans.
Committee Republicans welcome this opportunity once again
to assure Americans with preexisting conditions that their
coverage is protected.
House Republicans will continue to champion legislative
solutions to combat some of the most pressing problems facing
our healthcare system, including skyrocketing costs, the high
prices of certain drugs, the industry's lack of cost
transparency, and the looming threat of a single payer system.
These are the factors that pose the real threat to Americans
having options to work for them.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Mrs. Foxx follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Virginia Foxx, Ranking Member, Committee on
Education and Labor
Americans with pre-existing conditions need health insurance. This
is a fact, and a value that Congress and the President have affirmed
countless times. It's also the law. Insurance companies are prohibited
from denying or not renewing health coverage due to a pre-existing
condition. Insurance companies are banned from rescinding coverage
based on a pre-existing condition. Insurance companies are banned from
excluding benefits based on a pre-existing condition. Insurance
companies are prevented from raising premiums on individuals with pre-
existing conditions who maintain continuous coverage.
So it's perplexing why Committee Democrats are even holding this
hearing, and by doing so they are trying to make it about threats.
Instead, this hearing should focus on how the strong economy with its
extraordinary job growth is increasing the number of workers with
employer-sponsored health coverage.
This committee's work on employer-based health care options dates
back to when the costs of health care began to rise several decades
ago. The status quo was not sustainable then, and in 2010 the tide took
a radical turn for the worse with the Affordable Care Act, which
decimated options for employers earnestly seeking to provide
competitive benefits packages to recruit and retain workers and sent
individual premium costs on an even faster upward trajectory.
Workers paid the price. Employers paid the price.
But, after 8 years of Republican leadership in the House of
Representatives, and the election of President Trump, the U.S. economy
and job markets are thriving. With consistent wage growth and greater
availability of highly competitive jobs, smart employers are continuing
to ensure that they offer competitive benefits packages including
sponsored health care plans to recruit and retain workers.
And their efforts are working. According to the Kaiser Family
Foundation,
152 million Americans--including many who have pre-existing
conditions--are insured through plans offered by their employer. That's
the majority of the American work force, and more than the individual
market, Medicare, or Medicaid.
Since 2013, 7 million more Americans have gained employer-sponsored
health care coverage, with 2.6 million gaining coverage since President
Trump took office. The plans employers offer are, on average, higher
quality and provide better value than what can be found on the
individual market.
In 2017, the average premium for individual and family employer-
sponsored coverage increased by a modest 3 and 5 percent, respectively.
In contrast, the average Exchange premium Obamacare went up by roughly
30 percent.
So, if we are going to have this hearing at all, we welcome it as
an opportunity to talk once more about the importance of making sure
American workers have more options, more flexibility, and more freedom.
Last Congress, the Republican-led House of Representatives passed
the American Health Care Act. The legislation would restore stability
to the health care marketplace and deliver lower costs to consumers.
Ensuring protections for individuals with pre-existing conditions was a
central piece of the bill with Section 137 of the legislation stating:
``Nothing in this Act shall be construed as permitting health insurance
issuers to limit access to health coverage for individuals with
preexisting conditions.''
So, people may have an opinion, but they cannot argue with the
facts, and the facts are written in this legislation. Section 137.
Republicans on this committee also led the passage of the Small
Business
Health Fairness Act. That legislation would empower small
businesses to band together through association health plans (AHPs) to
negotiate for lower health insurance costs on behalf of their
employees, and last summer, the Department of Labor finalized a rule
expanding access to AHPs.
During the 115th Congress, House Republicans also passed the
Competitive Health Insurance Reform Act and the committee-led Self-
Insurance Protection Act. What all of these bills have in common is
their goal to expand coverage, lower health care costs for all
Americans, and again, give freedom to Americans.
Committee Republicans welcome this opportunity once again to assure
Americans with pre-existing conditions that their coverage is
protected. House Republicans will continue to champion legislative
solutions to combat some of the most pressing problems facing our
health care system, including skyrocketing costs, the high prices of
certain drugs, the industry's lack of cost transparency, and the
looming threat of a single-payer system. These are the factors that
pose the real threat to Americans having options that work for them.
______
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Without objection, all the
members who wish to insert written statements to the record
should do so by submitting them to the committee clerk
electronically in Microsoft Word format by 5 p.m. February 19,
2019.
I will now introduce our witnesses.
Our first witness will be Sabrina Corlette, a research
professor at the Center on Health Insurance Reforms at
Georgetown University's McCourt School of Public Policy where
she directs research on private health insurance and market
research. Prior to joining Georgetown faculty she was the
director of health policy programs at the National Partnership
for Women and Families where she focused on insurance market
reform, benefit design, and the quality and affordability of
healthcare. She is a member of the Washington, DC Bar
Association.
Chad Riedy is 37 years old, has cystic fibrosis. He lives
in Alexandria, Virginia with his wife, Julie, and two sons. In
addition to volunteering for the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation he
has spent the last 13 year working in the real estate industry.
Grace-Marie Turner is president of Galen Institute, a
public policy research organization she founded in 1995 to
promote free market ideas for health reform. She has served as
a member of the Long-term Care Commission, the Medicaid
Commission, the National Advisory Board for the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality. Prior to founding the Galen
Institute she served as executive director for the National
Commission on Economic Growth and Tax Reform.
Dr. Rahul Gupta is the senior vice president and chief
medical and health officer for the March of Dimes. He is one of
the world's leading health experts. In his role Dr. Gupta
provides strategic oversight for the March of Dimes' medical
and public health efforts to improve healthcare for moms and
babies. Prior to joining the March of Dimes he served under two
Governors as West Virginia's health commissioner, and as the
chief health officer he led the State's opioid crisis response
efforts and several public health initiatives.
We appreciate all of the witnesses for being here today and
look forward to your testimony. Let me remind the witnesses
that we have read your written statements and they will appear
in full in the hearing record. Pursuant to committee rule 7(d),
the committee, and committee practice, each of you will be
asked to limit your oral presentation to a 5-minute summary of
your written Statement.
Let me remind the witnesses that pursuant to Title 18 of
the U.S. Code Section 1, it is illegal to knowingly and
willfully falsify a Statement, representation, writing
document, or material fact presented to Congress or otherwise
conceal or cover up a material fact.
Before you begin your testimony please remember to press
the button on your microphone in front of you so that it will
be turned on and the members can hear you. As you begin to
speak the light in front of you will turn green, after 4
minutes the light will turn yellow to signal you have 1 minute
remaining. When the light turns red we ask you to summarize and
end your testimony.
We will then let the entire panel make their presentations
before we move to member questions. When answering a question
please remember once again to turn your microphone on.
I will first recognize Ms. Corlette.
TESTIMONY OF SABRINA CORLETTE, RESEARCH PROFESSOR, CENTER ON
HEALTH INSURANCE REFORMS, GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY HEALTH POLICY
INSTITUTE
Ms. Corlette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ranking Member Foxx,
members of this committee, it is really an honor to be here
with you today and to discuss the need for affordable, adequate
insurance coverage, particularly for those with preexisting
conditions.
In my testimony I will focus on some of the challenges
faced by people with preexisting conditions before the ACA was
enacted and how current threats to the ACA could have
disproportionately harmful effects on these individuals and
workers.
Before the ACA was enacted roughly 48 million people lacked
health insurance and an estimated 22,000 died prematurely each
year due to being uninsured. 60 percent of the uninsured
reported having problems with medical debt. The high number of
uninsured was costing providers an estimated $1,000 per person
in uncompensated care costs. The lack of affordable adequate
coverage also led to a phenomenon called ``job lock'', where
workers are reluctant to leave the guarantee of subsidized
employer-based coverage for the uncertainty of the individual
market. And for many people with health issues job-based
coverage could also be spotty or include barriers to enrolling.
Prior to the ACA, in most States, people seeking health
insurance could be denied a policy or charged more because of
their health status, age, or gender, or have the services
needed to treat their condition excluded from their benefit
package. Indeed, a 2011 GAO study found that insurance
companies denied applicants a policy close to 20 percent of the
time. Under the ACA these practices are prohibited.
Prior to the ACA coverage also could come with significant
gaps, such as for prescription drugs, mental health, and
substance use services and maternity care. Under the ACA
insurers must cover a basic set of essential benefits.
Extremely high deductibles and annual or lifetime limits on
benefits were also common before the ACA. The law protects
people from both by capping the annual amount paid out-of-
pocket each year and prohibiting insurers from placing
arbitrary caps on coverage.
Members of this committee are aware that the ACA is now
under threat of being overturned due to pending litigation in
Federal court. If the plaintiffs' argument prevails it would be
tantamount to repealing the ACA without any public policy to
replace it. And this is a scenario that Congress rejected in
multiple votes in 2017. Congress rejected it because repealing
the ACA without replacing it would result in 32 million
Americans losing insurance, double premiums for people in the
individual insurance market, leave an estimated three-quarters
of the Nation's population in areas without any insurer, cause
a significant financial harm for hospitals and other providers
due to uncompensated care costs, cause the loss of an estimated
2.6 million jobs around the country, and importantly for this
committee, result in harm to people with job-based covered,
including the loss of coverage for preventative service without
cost-sharing, such as vaccines, well visits, and contraception,
the return to preexisting condition exclusions, young adults no
longer allowed to stay on their parents health plans, and
insecurity due to crippling out-of-pocket costs for people with
high cost conditions.
This Administration has also instituted regulatory changes
that have resulted in higher premiums for people in the
individual market. These include the decision to cut off a key
ACA subsidy, the dramatic reduction in outreach and consumer
enrollment assistance, and the introduction of junk insurance
policies that are permitted to discriminate against people with
preexisting conditions. The zeroing out of the mandate penalty
has also increased premiums.
While the bulk of the negative effects of these policies
are felt by people in the individual market, these negative
effects spill over into the job-based market. The ACA is by no
means perfect. Even its most ardent supporters argue that more
could be done to expand Medicaid and improve affordability for
middle class families. There are a range of policy options that
this committee and others can explore to strengthen the law's
foundation while also building on its remarkable achievements.
Thank you for providing this forum and I look forward to
the discussion.
[The statement of Ms. Corlette follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Mr. Riedy?
TESTIMONY OF CHAD RIEDY, RESIDENT, ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA
Mr. Riedy. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Scott, Ranking
Member Foxx, and distinguished members of the committee for
inviting me to testify today.
I would also like to thank my wife, Julie, and my parents
for being here today and for their support.
My name is Chad Riedy and I have cystic fibrosis. I would
like to share my story of what living with CF is like and what
the protections in the ACA mean to me and millions of other
Americans living with chronic health conditions. CF is a rare
genetic disease that affects about 30,000 people in the U.S.
and causes a thick, sticky mucus to buildup in the airways
causing infections. There is no cure for CF.
When I was diagnosed in 1984 at 3 years old, my parents
were told that they should not expect me to live to age 12.
Today I sit here at 37. I have been married for 12 years and a
father of our 2 boys, Liam, who is 8, and Tate, who just turned
7.
Let me tell you what it is like to live with CF. Every day
I take 30 pills to help me breathe, digest food, and reduce
inflammation in my lungs. I also take inhaled medicines and use
a vest that shakes loose mucus in my lungs. Four times a year I
go through a lengthy evaluation process with a team of doctors
at Johns Hopkins. I do this to keep my lungs well enough to
keep me alive. But I will never have the lung capacity of any
of you sitting here today.
When I was 26 I got really sick for the first time. My wife
and I had just returned from our honeymoon when I started to
notice that I was having a hard time breathing performing
normal, routine activities, like walking up stairs or talking
on the phone. After a visit to my care team I was admitted
immediately to the hospital, where I stayed for 7 days
receiving intravenous antibiotics, chest physical therapy, and
other procedures to stabilize my health. While my healthcare
was covered under my employer-based insurance plan, when I
returned home I received constant reminders about how close I
was to hitting my lifetime and annual caps. Before the ACA
banned these practices I would stay awake wondering would I
exceed my limits or be denied coverage, then what, how would I
pay for these things?
The next time, in 2014, when I got very sick again, over 8
months my lung function, which had been stable for 7 years,
declined dramatically. I was so sick that not only was I
missing work, I could not walk 10 feet across our living room
floor without having to stop and catch my breath. I struggled
to carry my kids, who at the time were four and one. Things
progressed to the point where we started to have conversations
about needing a lung transplant just to stay alive. Thankfully,
because the ACA was in place, I could focus on making a strong
recovery instead of the financial hardships from all these
medical bills.
In January 2018 I started on a drug that has changed my
life called SYMDEKO. It treats the underlying cause of my CF,
not just the symptoms. It has brought more stability to my lung
function, but most importantly it has allowed me to be a better
husband, father, and friend. I no longer worry when carrying
laundry up a couple flights of steps from the basement. And
when my boys are tired and want a piggyback ride or need extra
love, daddy is there for them.
My treatments and care help me breathe a little easier and
stay healthy so that I can work to help provide for my family,
but they are expensive. In 2018 the total cost of all my
medicines was about $450,000. This does not include my care
team, visits to them, or other procedures. While we spend a lot
out of pocket, I am thankful that our insurance covers most of
these.
This is my story and there are so many more like it across
the country. For people battling rare and chronic disease, the
policies we are discussing today are a matter of life and
death. If the Judge's ruling against the ACA stands and
insurance companies are allowed to implement annual and
lifetime caps I would reach them in a matter of years and be on
the hook for unimaginable financial costs. In addition, the cap
on out-of-pocket sharing is vital for someone like me.
I am grateful that I have coverage that allows me to access
a great team of doctors and cutting-edge medicines that help me
fight this disease. Because of this I have hope, hope for a
future where I grow old with my wife, see my kids grow up,
graduate college, get married, and start families of their own.
I am not asking for you to take care of me, I do that
myself. I also understand that the ACA is not perfect, but the
protections it contains are critical to me and millions of
other Americans with preexisting conditions.
I thank the committee for giving me the opportunity to
share my story and I ask that you are to keep our hope alive as
you consider legislation this Congress.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Riedy follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Scott. Thank you, Mr. Riedy. Ms. Turner?
TESTIMONY OF GRACE-MARIE TURNER, PRESIDENT, GALEN INSTITUTE
Ms. Turner. Thank you, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Foxx,
and members of the Committee for inviting me to testify today.
At the Galen Institute we focus on ways to ensure
affordable health coverage to all Americans, particularly
protection for the most vulnerable. I am really pleased to be
on the panel with Mr. Riedy, and thank you for so bravely
sharing your story. I am thankful for the health care system
that supports your care and for continued innovations so new
treatments can be available.
Today in my testimony I am going to discuss the centralrole
that the employer health insurance market plays in our health
sector, new opportunities to reduce costs and expand access to
coverage, and bipartisan support for preexisting condition
protections, and the need for further improvements.
Nine out of ten workers are employed in the U.S. by
companies that offer health insurance. These benefits are tax
free, both to workers and companies, a generous benefit but one
that leverages nearly $3 in private employer spending for every
$1 in Federal tax revenue losses. Employers and employees want
the best value for their health care dollar and often work very
hard to balance cost and quality.
Long before the ACA, employers offered preventative
services because they know that addressing health issues before
they become a crisis can lead to better outcomes and minimize
costs. These employers also play a vital role in supporting our
health sector. Physicians and hospitals are paid much less
under Medicare and Medicaid than under employer plans, and
because private insurance pays more, they provide the margins
that allow many hospitals and providers to stay in business.
Leading proposals to expand Medicare coverage to all Americans
would extend these public disbursement rates universally,
diminishing quality and access to care.
The Trump administration is offering several options
through its regulatory authority to help individuals and
employees with more affordable coverage. The Chairman mentioned
one of them, including association health plans. They allow
small firms to group together to get some of the same benefits
that large employers have. A Washington Post story just
reported on a new study showing that AHP benefits are
comparable to most workplace plans and plans are not
discriminating on patients with preexisting conditions. They
also have new flexibility under Section 1332 of the ACA to
lower costs through risk mitigation programs. They separately
subsidize patients with the highest cost, lowering premiums for
others, and leading to increased enrollment. In Alaska,
premiums for the lowest-cost bronze plan fell by 39 percent in
2018 and Maryland is seeing an even larger drop this year.
Putting the sickest people in the same pool with others
means that their premiums are higher. Virginia Senator Bryce
Reeves talked with one of his constituents recently who said he
makes a good living, provides for his family, but he said his
health insurance premiums are $4,000 a month. And he said that
is more than my mortgage, and really pleading for help.
Unfortunately, many healthy people are dropping out of the
market because costs are so high.
There is strong bipartisan support for preexisting
condition protections. The ACA assures people cannot be turned
down or have their policies canceled because of their health
status, and these protections are still in place. Legislation
passed by the House of Representatives maintained preexisting
condition protection. But they do not work for everyone.
Janet--did not use her last name--reported that she was
diagnosed in 1999 with Hepatitis C. She lives in Colorado and
applied for coverage in the State's high-risk pool. Her
premiums in 2010 were $275 a month. Then her liver failed. She
needed a transplant. The $600,000 bill was covered 100 percent
with only $2,500 out-of-pocket. Colorado's high-risk pools
closed when the ACA started in 2014. Her premiums rose to $450.
By 2018 they were $1,100 a month. The deductible was $6,300.
But her anti-rejection medications were not covered. She said
almost everything I needed was denied, which threw me into a
world of having to appeal to get the care I needed. She said
those of us who are self-employed and are not eligible for tax
credits wind up footing way too much of the bill. She said her
costs are $19,000 a year before insurance pays and she has to
pay extras for her medication. She keeps her insurance because
if something else happened, and her liver failed and she needed
another transplant, she said it would bankrupt my family.
I hope to work with you to achieve the goals of better
access to more affordable coverage and better protection with
those with preexisting conditions.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
[The statement of Ms. Turner follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Dr. Gupta, before you start I
think I need to give full disclosure. I have been an active
member of the--volunteer for the March of Dimes for several
decades. So I appreciate your testimony.
TESTIMONY OF RAHUL GUPTA, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
MEDICAL AND HEALTH OFFICER, MARCH OF DIMES
Dr. Gupta. Thank you for being an active member, Mr.
Chairman, and thank you, along with Ranking Member Foxx and
members of the committee, for the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Rahul Gupta, I am the senior vice president and
chief medical and health officer at the March of Dimes. In
addition to my role representing the March of Dimes I also
bring perspective from my experience as a practicing physician
and as a former State health commissioner and a local health
officer.
As a primary care physician, it was not uncommon for me to
treat women who were struggling with high costs of employer-
based health insurance or priced out of coverage altogether due
to their preexisting conditions. These women were in the
impossible condition of having to make choices between getting
the care they needed and affording their families' basic
necessities, such as food and prescription medications.
Preexisting conditions are common among Americans. Six in every
ten American adults in the U.S. has a chronic disease, and four
in ten have two or more.
Chronic conditions, such as high blood pressure, diabetes,
heart disease, and obesity can have tragic consequences for
women during pregnancy. Each day in the United States more than
two women die of pregnancy-related causes, and more than 50,000
have severe pregnancy complications. More American women are
dying of pregnancy-related complications than any other
developed country in the world, and it is not getting any
better.
As pregnancy or childbirth are also widely considered
preexisting conditions the prevalence of at least one
preexisting condition in this population is almost universal.
If conditions like preterm birth, birth defects, or neonatal
abstinence syndrome, are considered tens of millions of
children could be subject to insurance discrimination
throughout their lives. The Affordable Care Act contains a
range of provisions to help ensure comprehensive, meaningful,
and affordable coverage for women, children, and their
families. Amongst its most important popular provisions is the
requirement that health plans cover all individuals regardless
of preexisting conditions. The law ensures that all American
can obtain coverage without worrying that they will be subject
to discrimination, whether outright denial of coverage, or
carve-outs of the benefits they need the most.
It is difficult for me to overstate the importance of ACA's
requirements that all plans cover the 10 essential health
benefits, including maternity care.
The ACA has also addressed a range of issues related to
affordability of coverage. Cost has historically been and
remains one of the greatest barriers to care. If people are
unable to afford coverage, healthcare becomes all but
inaccessible. Under the ACA, policies sold on the individual
and small group markets are prohibited from charging women high
premiums. Health plans can no longer impose annual or lifetime
caps. In the case of maternal and childbirth and child health,
these caps could be financially devastating.
A woman, for example, with a high-risk pregnancy and
delivery could easily exceed an annual cap, leaving her unable
to obtain needed care for the rest of the year. Worse, a baby
born extremely preterm, who needs months of care in the
neonatal ICU, could exhaust a lifetime cap before even coming
home.
This triad of preexisting condition protections, essential
health benefits, and affordability provisions represent a
three-legged stool that supports access to comprehensive
quality and affordable coverage for all Americans. All three of
these legs must be maintained to protect and promote our
Nation's health, especially the health of women, children, and
families.
March of Dimes is deeply troubled by Texas v. U.S. This
lawsuit appears to have been undertaken as a legal exercise
divorced from any real appreciation of its ramification for
millions of Americans and their health and wellbeing. With the
recent decision of the Federal court judge to declare ACA
unconstitutional in its entirety, the plaintiffs appear to be
in a classic situation of the dog that caught the car. They
were caught off guard by their own victory and now are unsure
how to explain that they have argued for an action that will
cost millions of Americans their health coverage and
potentially even their lives.
In addition, we are deeply concerned about efforts by the
Administration to promote access to short-term, limited
duration insurance plans. These plans are not required to cover
essential health benefits, including maternity care, mental
health, and substance use treatment, and could again exclude or
charge patients more based on their preexisting conditions.
Whatever changes may be undertaken to our Nation's health laws
and systems, they must be made with the express goal of
improving access to coverage and care that is accessible,
comprehensive, and affordable.
In essence, this concept is no different than when I am
seeing a patient in my office. I endeavor to provide her with
the highest quality care in a compassionate manner, keeping in
mind that she should not have to sacrifice her next trip to the
grocery store in exchange. I sincerely hope that we can provide
the same guarantee to all Americans.
Thank you for holding this meeting, and I look forward to
any questions.
[The statement of Dr. Gupta follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Scott. Thank you, thank you. And now we will have
our members ask questions. First, I am going to defer on my
side, and the gentleman from Connecticut, Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, again, I want
to applaud the fact that we are holding this hearing in this
committee. Back in 2009 and 2010, when the Affordable Care Act
was crafted with three different committees, it was our
committee which led the way in terms of preexisting conditions
and all the patient protections, because we have jurisdiction
over ERISA. So, again, we actually were the place where the law
was written that was, in my opinion, you know, one of the great
steps forward of our Nation in terms of social and civil
rights.
You know, again, Ms. Corlette talked about what the
landscape looked like back in 2009 and 2010. I brought along a
flyer that was being sold to a lot of businesses, which again,
brings back the bad old days. Again, it is a health plan where
it is touted as great news for people who buy their own health
insurance, a flexible health plan, affordable. However, if you
flip to the back, it had sort of in the smaller print the fact
that they may not be able to cover people who have ever had
treatment for the following, AIDS, alcohol or drug dependence,
cancer, COPD, connective tissue disorder, Crohn's disease,
diabetes, emphysema, heart attack or stroke, hepatitis,
inpatient emotional or mental illness, organ or tissue
transplant, or colitis. So if you are like an episode of
survivor and you are not in that category, however, you are
still not out of the woods yet because it also says that other
individuals who are obese, underweight, have undergone
diagnostic tests for a whole variety of different illnesses, as
well as expectant parents or children less than 2 months old
are also not going not be able to take advantage of that
policy. And, last, it says this list is not all inclusive.
Other conditions may apply.
So, I mean that is what health insurance looked like until
President Obama signed the Affordable Care Act in March 2010,
which once and for all abolished this whole type of medical
underwriting practice. And, again, it was also architecture
that was built around it to make that meaningful, such as
essential health benefits, the lifetime caps, which Mr. Riedy
so powerfully testified to, adjusted community rating so that
older people can't be charged more than three times a younger
individual.
So, again, regarding the Texas case, as Dr. Gupta said, I
mean there is absolutely no question that the Justice
Department, which participated with the plaintiffs and did not
defend the Department of Health and Human Services, if that
ruling were to stand, again, that would just take a wrecking
ball to the whole architecture, again, that was built. Is that
correct, Ms. Corlette?
Ms. Corlette. That is correct. For the plaintiff States, if
their position prevails the entire law would be invalidated.
Mr. Courtney. And in terms of some of the other changes
that they have made through the regulatory process, the
association health plans, which, again, on surface sounds
great, that small businesses can team together in different
sectors and go out and buy collectively. By the way, that was
totally legal prior to the Trump Administration's ruling and
there were about 600 association health plans across the
country. What the ruling really did was it basically allowed
those plans to avoid, again, a lot of these patient
protections, such as essential health benefits, which were
painstakingly designed with the Institute of Medicine in terms
of what is healthcare and what should health insurance be, and
lifetime caps, et cetera.
So, again, I just wonder if you could sort of focus on that
point, that the Administration, again, is in fact undermining
preexisting conditions and preexisting condition protections
with those types of regulatory actions.
Ms. Corlette. That is absolutely correct. Groups of
employers have always been able to join an association and
offer benefits if they choose to do so. What the Administration
is encouraging is arrangements that essentially are allowed to
cherry pick the healthiest and youngest employer groups out of
the regulated market and thereby gain a pricing advantage.
Mr. Courtney. And the short-term plans, Dr. Gupta, you
mentioned, again, it is the same story, that it is really a
device to avoid again the protections that were built into the
Affordable Care Act.
Dr. Gupta. That is very true. And along with that, the
other part of this is the medical loss ratio that was built
into the ACA and that is not subject to in the short-term
plans. So they can have as much as 50 percent medical loss
ratio and actually profit disproportionately out of--
Mr. Courtney. And the short-terms plans are really not that
short. Again, when the prior Administration allowed for a very
short, short-term plan, these now almost are basically going to
be sold for an entire year. Isn't that correct?
Dr. Gupta. Correct. They could be sold for about 364 days
and then renewable afterwards.
Mr. Courtney. So, I mean it is basically a whole new
product. And, again, we would see the bad old days in terms of,
you know, this type of laundry list of fine print where people
are going to have a rude awakening when they thought they had
insurance and in fact it was totally useless and meaningless.
I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Dr. Foxx.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Turner, people
living with preexisting conditions, such as cancer, diabetes,
or other illnesses face an incredibly difficult battle each and
every day. And, in particular, I commend Mr. Riedy for his
strength and courage to share his story with us today. People
should not worry about having their coverage denied because of
a medical condition when they should be focused on getting well
and managing their quality of life. That is why congressional
Republicans have voted time and time again to protect
preexisting condition protections.
Ms. Turner, are these protections under current law
sufficient to protect access to coverage for the most
vulnerable healthcare consumers, and do you agree that these
protections should be maintained?
Ms. Turner. The protections absolutely should be
maintained. But I do believe that we do have to address the
issue of cost because many people who need coverage are not
able to afford it and then are completely, completely exposed.
So I believe that the preexisting conditions that are in law
today and that the House of Representatives supported in the
American Health Care Act were important, will continue to be
important. I see the strong support, both in Congress and with
the American people, to maintain those protections.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Turner. Because of policies
enacted by the previous House Republican majority and
regulatory actions taken the by Trump administration our
economy is thriving. As I mentioned, the economy added 304,000
jobs last month, almost double what economists were expecting.
As a result, the number of individuals with employer sponsored
coverage has grown by nearly 7 million since 2013, with 2.6
million gaining coverage since President Trump took office. How
does strong economic growth contribute to more workers gaining
health insurance from their employers?
Ms. Turner. Virtually all employers want to offer health
insurance to their employees, but many smaller businesses, in
particular, just can't afford it, both because of the
regulatory burdens as well as the cost. The Trump
administration is giving them some new options, both with
association health plans and with health reimbursement
arrangements. For those that have employer coverage, it is such
a valued benefit and employers and employees work together to
balance cost and quality and comprehensiveness of benefits. And
as a result, employer-sponsored health insurance is certainly
the most popular benefit offered by employers. And I am pleased
to say that is not only continuing but being enhanced by the
strong economy.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you. Ms. Turner, when I travel around my
district in North Carolina, I hear stories from so many people
who struggle with the high and sometimes unpredictable costs
that they face when taking care of themselves and their
families. Out-of-control drug prices, surprise medical bills
are two topics that President Trump has recently identified as
places for reform and areas where I believe we can find
bipartisan agreement.
In addition to these issues, what other areas do you think
that Republicans and Democrats can move forward and work on
together to find a solution that benefits patients, workers,
and families?
Ms. Turner. I do work with a number of people in the policy
community and it is surprising to see how much agreement there
is on really trying to help people. I think we need to
strengthen the system for the most vulnerable. I was on a panel
yesterday--on Monday at the Academy of Health with several
people from center-left and we talked about the importance of
thinking of the whole person, of comprehensiveness of care, of
allowing people to not only have coverage for health care, but
housing support and food support and transportation support.
Thinking of the whole person I think is really crucial and
devolving more power and authority to the States and localities
that have the understanding of their markets and resources I
think is really crucial. But I also think addressing the cost
of health coverage is so important.
Between 2017 and 2018 we lost 2 million people in the
individual health insurance market. They dropped out because of
cost. So we have got to address the cost for people who want
health insurance, who currently are healthy, but know they need
protection. And we need to make sure that we are strengthening
the system for the most vulnerable.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Turner. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentlelady from Oregon, Ms.
Bonamici.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all
of our witnesses.
Last week there was a hearing in the Ways and Means
Committee here in the House about preexisting conditions and
one of the witnesses was the insurance commissioner from my
home State of Oregon, Andrew Stolfi. And he talked about how in
Oregon since the ACA we now have more than 3.7 million
Oregonians, which is about 94 percent of our population, with
health insurance coverage. And since the ACA that has been a
significant improvement, significantly reducing the number of
people without insurance. And before the ACA insurers had
offered limited coverage or excluded so many people who
applied. In fact, before the ACA the denial rate was about 30
percent, 30 percent of people who applied were denied. And in
Commissioner Stolfi's words, he said the ACA has helped change
all of this, pregnant mothers know they can get the care they
need and their babies need, children with developmental
disabilities can get all of the essential physician-recommended
physical, occupational, and behavioral therapy they need to
grow to their fullest potential.
So, the ACA is now protecting millions of people in Oregon
who have preexisting medical conditions. Lisa from Beaverton is
26 years old, she received a diagnosis when she was 23, stage 4
lymphoma. I am happy to report that her cancer is now in
remission and she is pursuing a master's degree, but she is
pretty worried, frankly, when she hears all the conversations
about repealing the ACA, this Texas lawsuit. She said ``I have
hopefully a lot of life ahead of me and it frustrates me that
my history of cancer could limit my access to healthcare.''
Mr. Riedy, thank you so much for sharing your story. I have
an advocate in the district I represent, Ella, a young woman
with CF, and she comes to the Capitol when she can to advocate
for more research and funding. And her family shares your
concern about lifetime caps.
How is the last couple of years--how have you personally
felt when you hear all these conversations about repealing the
Affordable Care Act? And when you hear about this lawsuit that
might repeal the Act?
Mr. Riedy. Thank you. It is scary to think, especially like
I testified earlier, with the cost of my care currently, having
caps or potentially being able to be denied coverage is a scary
thought. Knowing that there is access to drugs that are
changing my life and that there is more medicine coming down
the pike that will ultimately, I fully believe, one day cure
cystic fibrosis. But that will come at a cost. And it is hard
to think or sort of comprehend that those treatments may be
there and because of a lifetime cap or because of being denied
access, that I will not be able to get those medicines, or your
constituent's daughter would not be able to get those medicines
that could potentially save or prolong her life.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much. And you made an excellent
point, that access does not mean affordability. And if there is
not the prohibition against discrimination for people with
preexisting conditions, if the companies are saying well, we
offer insurance to people with preexisting conditions, it just
costs a fortune, it is not meaningful access.
I have another question to Dr. Corlette. I have another
constituent, Diane, who is a small business owner and for a
long time she--she has a son with autism and a small business--
for a long time she could not afford insurance before the ACA.
She almost lost her home and business during the financial
collapse. She went several years without coverage and she was
uninsurable because she had preexisting conditions.
So, she was not able to manage her arthritis, made it
difficult for her to work. So, under the ACA she was able to
get coverage, she could see a doctor, she eventually had hip
replacement surgery, she is now able to work, has rebuilt her
business. So, a really positive story largely because of that
access to marketplace coverage.
So, Professor Corlette, if the ACA protections we have
discussed are undermined, what might that mean for Diane and
other small business owners who do look to provide coverage for
themselves, their families, and their employees?
Ms. Corlette. Sure. So, if the ACA is invalidated in a
Texas court it will wipe away some of the protections that your
constituent has benefited from. So, for example, in the group
market, if she is buying as a small business owner she could--
her employees could face what are called preexisting condition
exclusions where the insurance company excludes from your
benefit package those services that would actually treat your
condition, for which you actually need services, for up to a
year. The insurance company would not be required to cover
essential health benefits, which is a list of benefits that the
Institute of Medicine and others have said should be in a basic
benefit package, it could impose lifetime annual limits, there
may not be a cap on the annual amount that she or her employees
would pay out-of-pocket. So, there are a number of critical
protections that people in job-based coverage would lose.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much and I see my time has
expired. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Dr. Roe.
Dr. Roe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. Riedy, I want to
start with you.
First of all, the easiest vote I have made here in the U.S.
Congress was for the 21st Century Cures Act. To Dr. Collins,
Francis Collins, the director of the NIH, it is very easy for
me to vote to increase his budget to $39 billion. When I was a
medical student, the first pediatric rotation I had in Memphis
was St. Jude's Children's Hospital. Eighty percent of those
children died in 1969 when I rotated there, today 80 percent of
them live. If you have a rare condition, it is 100 percent for
you. So I think there is a cure out there in the way and I
think your future is very optimistic. And thank you for being
here today.
Look, we could all agree that we want to increase coverage
and access and lower costs. That is exactly what we wanted to
do with the ACA. Everyone can agree to that. And we agreed that
we wanted to discuss preexisting conditions. And I want to go
over very quickly, so everybody understands, that if you have
health-based insurance, which I provide in my office for my
employees, everyone--you cannot discriminate based on a
preexisting condition. No. 2, if you have Medicaid or Medicare,
you cannot discriminate versus on a preexisting condition. It
is only in the small group and individual market where this
occurred. And people feared if they lost their job and they
ended up in the small group or individual market that they
couldn't do that.
I have a bill that I am dropping today, a very simple bill.
It has one paragraph, it is three pages long, that essentially
provides ERISA coverage to the small group and individual
market. It treats them--me--as an individual--and I have been
on the individual market--exactly like a large corporation. And
that solves the problem and everyone in here--no matter what
the Court does--if the Court rules whatever they rule. If they
rule and it takes apart this, we have covered everybody and
treated each individual exactly the same as a big company. This
should be simple to do, it is one paragraph.
And let me also say, Dr. Gupta, to you, let me share some
experiences in Tennessee. We were promised the costs were going
to go down. Our costs went up 175 percent and we lowered the
number of plans out there that we could have. In my district,
where I live, three-fourths as many people paid the penalty as
actually get a subsidy. And what is happening in the real world
is with these out-of-pockets and co-pays, if the hospital were
our practice for 30 years, over 60 percent of the uncollectible
debt are people with the insurance, not without insurance, but
with insurance. And what happens is a patient will come to my
office and if they had a condition, one of the 10 essential
health benefits, they got their screening procedure done, that
was fine, that was ``free''. If I found anything wrong with
them and I had to send them down to the hospital for a test,
they then have to meet their out-of-pocket and co-pay, which
can be $3-4-5,000--and my family is $10,000. And so what
happens, the hospitals, the providers, end up eating that. That
is what his happening in the real world. Or people don't get
the second test that they need, and that is what we have to
look at.
I also want to say to you all that I have a preexisting
condition. I was treated 17-18 months ago for proState cancer.
So I am in that pool of preexisting conditions and I don't want
to be excluded either, nor do I want my patients excluded. And
that is why I think we should all support this bill right here.
And, Miss Turner, if you would, I would like for you to
comment a little bit about my suggestion, about just applying
these ERISA rules to me or to any individual out there.
Ms. Turner. As we said, employers so highly value their
employer coverage, and one of the reasons is because someone is
negotiating on their behalf for a quality health plan. And
health plans in the workplace are basically community rated.
You may have different plan options, but everybody is basically
paying the same amount for premiums. And HIPAA, of course,
protections say that if you have group coverage through an
employer and you move from one employer to another, that next
employer must cover you at the same rate. So you can't then be
basically underwritten. So there are a lot of existing
protections in law.
And I am very intrigued with your very creative legislation
to basically extend those protections. I think it is important
to note that if the Supreme Court--and I don't know anyone who
knows what the Supreme Court is going to do--were to strike
down the law, Congress is absolutely determined to fix it and
to maybe improve the ACA in the process.
Dr. Roe. I agree. And one of the things that I think is out
there in the group market, in the self insured market--and we
did this when I was on the City Commission in my hometown--is
you can have disease management--Dr. Gupta knows this very
well. And I have seen those cases where I have a friend of mine
who has a large company with 15,000 employees, had a 1 percent
increase in their premium per year for the last 5 years. And we
can do that in the small group and individual market if we work
together.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Gentleman from California, Mr.
Takano.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me begin by saying
that my home district in Riverside, California, we cut--the
Affordable Care Act enabled us to cut our uninsured rate by
more than half because of expanded Medicaid and because of
Covered California, which is the name of our exchange. I have
personally spoken to older people in my district who have not
reached Medicare age, but at an age when if there were no ACA
they would not get any cost-sharing subsidies and they could
not have afforded the insurance. They were very grateful that
they got the cost-sharing subsidies so that they could reduce
their exposure to a major medical incident.
So, the majority offers these really false solutions of
association plans and short-terms plans. Ms. Corlette, could
you--you know, I think these plans are really evasions around
minimum benefits. Is that correct?
Ms. Corlette. That is right. So short-term plans are exempt
from all of the Affordable Care Act rules, so they don't have
to enroll people who have health issues, they don't have to
cover the essential health benefits, and quite commonly with
these plans, if you do get diagnosed with something after you
enroll, they will do what is called post-claims underwriting
and drop you from the plan to avoid paying your medical bills.
So, if you do have an unexpected medical event or diagnosis,
you might find yourself uncovered.
The concern is that they will siphon away healthy people
from the Affordable Care Act marketplaces and result in higher
premiums for those who are not perfectly healthy and have to
buy one of these ACA plans.
Mr. Takano. So, the same for association plans, which were
available, but the way the Administration has structured them,
a similar sort of result.
Ms. Corlette. Association health plans are similar but not
exactly the same. They do have to comply with some of the ACA
rules, but not all. And so they can use essentially the rating
advantage they have, because they can charge higher rates based
on age and other factors to cherry pick healthier employer
groups from the ACA market.
Mr. Takano. And there goes, you know, any affordability
gain by the ACA. So, these are really ways to undermine the ACA
and to undermine by extension protections for people with
preexisting conditions, is that right?
Ms. Corlette. That is right. If you have a preexisting
condition or you simply want comprehensive coverage, like
maternity care or other things that you feel are important, you
would be buying in the ACA market, and if healthy people are
siphoned away the ACA market risk pool will be smaller and it
will be sicker, and insurers will price higher as a result.
Mr. Takano. So, I would say that attempts to undermine the
pools, undermine enrollment periods--so if we look at slashing
funding for outreach and enrollment activities, that means less
people enroll and makes these insurance pools less viable. That
is also hurting people with preexisting conditions.
Ms. Corlette. That is right. There is no question that
research shows that advertising, marketing, outreach,
education, consumer assistance, those all work to get healthy
people into the pool.
Mr. Takano. And this Administration has, you know, really
refused to spend the outreach to get people to sign up for
insurance, which then creates the premium dollar pool to make
insurance viable and actually keep the cost down.
Ms. Corlette. That is right. This Administration has
slashed outreach and marketing by about 80 percent. So it is
hard to bring healthy people in if they are not aware that the
coverage opportunity exists.
Mr. Takano. It was hard for me to square this President
wanting to protect people with preexisting conditions knowing
that his Administration intentionally did that.
So also shortening the enrollment period, making it less--
giving people less time to enroll into these insurance plans
also has the same result.
Ms. Corlette. That is right. And a number of the State-
based marketplaces that can choose their own open enrollment
periods have extended them to give people more time to enroll,
and that has been a successful strategy.
Mr. Takano. Well, and the Administration has also engaged
in undermining the stability of the markets through ending the
cost-sharing reduction payments for lower-income consumers.
Would prevent people from being able to buy insurance because
they don't have these subsidies.
Ms. Corlette. It is absolutely the case that the decision
by this Administration to cut the cost-sharing reduction
subsidy led to an increase in premiums in the individual market
significantly. I think 20 percent.
Mr. Takano. Well, this intentional undermining in at least
the three ways that I have spoken about, I mean certainly
reduces the viability of these healthcare exchanges and also
really makes meaningless any statement that this President
wants to protect people with preexisting conditions and their
ability to get insurance.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Chairman, thank you for hosting this hearing.
Incredibly important topic. As someone who practiced healthcare
for 28 years as a therapist, rehabilitation services manager,
licensed nursing home administrator, I mean this is an
important topic and preexisting conditions is a serious issue,
an incredibly important issue. I have been disappointed over
the past couple of years where, you know, with preexisting
conditions individuals living with preexisting conditions
obviously need confidence in their lives that they are going to
be able to purchase insurance that they need to cover that
condition, for treatment, rehabilitation. But quite frankly,
what I have been disappointed in is how--there are people with
preexisting conditions--need that health care professionals who
are compassionate and dedicated, they want to provide those
service, they want to access--they want those patients to be
able to access those services. Well, we have got a lot of
politicians that have been weaponizing preexisting conditions
for political purposes. And whenever we do that, you know, my
experience--I have only been here--this is my 11th year. I was
here in 2009-2010. It doesn't serve anyone well.
And so also my background, I used to get very frustrated
advocating for my patients, whether it was in a nursing home,
comprehensive inpatient, rehab, acute care, you know, going to
battle with insurance companies. The people with some of the
more chronic conditions are the ones that are facing those
lifetime benefits. So I certainly support those improvements.
But that said, let us--you know, I really want to clarify
here, Ms. Turner, you know, protections for individuals with
preexisting conditions has been a consistent area of agreement
for both Republicans and Democrats. You Stated that protections
for people with preexisting conditions are currently the law of
the land and under the American Health Care Act, passed by the
House last Congress, would the current law's legal protections
for individuals with preexisting conditions be retained?
Ms. Turner. If the Supreme Court were to invalidate the ACA
and find the individual mandate unconstitutional and non-
severable, which I think is unlikely, but if it would, it would
certainly give several years of transition time before it went
into effect to give Congress ample time to figure out how to
back up these protections. And as you said, the Congress at
the--whoever has been in control of the Congress has been a
strong support of protection for preexisting conditions. Even
if people don't have them now, they think they could get them
in the future and they know someone has chronic conditions. So
those protections need to be in place, but they need to be in a
place in a way that actually allows the market to continue to
work and doesn't drive out the healthy people because the costs
are so high.
Mr. Thompson. I mean there are a lot of things that impact.
I think people getting into the pool, so to speak, that was
mentioned by my friend from California, but the folks that have
gotten out of the pool, I think there is a significant number
who have gotten out because of post ACA, the cost, the
escalating cost. And people with preexisting conditions that
have--that were pleased that they could get it, the insurance
but their costs have escalated. So we can't be complacent with
the law as it is now, whether--we have to take measures.
One final question for you, Ms. Turner. We constantly hear
about the challenges that small employers face when dealing
with costs and compliance burdens in providing health insurance
coverage to their employees. While some small businesses are
able to offer health coverage, many simply can't afford to do
so. And one option, among others, which was passed by this
committee, is for the small employers to band together to
provide economies of scale for purchasing health insurance
through association health plans.
Now, what are other alternatives that encourage and enable
employers, both small and large, to preserve and expand quality
health coverage for their employees?
Ms. Turner. Well, I do think it is important to focus on
association health plans because this recent study by a very
well respected analyst, Kev Coleman, said that he did not see
that the plans that these new association health plans, which
are offered in 13 States, just in the 7-months since the rule
was finalized, and offering more than two dozen plans, that
they really do provide an option for employers.
I have been in seminars with H.R. directors of Fortune 500
companies and talked with innumerable small businesses. They
want to negotiate benefits that their employees want and they
listen to their employees. And they are as comprehensive of
benefits as they can afford and offer that coverage. So I think
that it is important to give respect to the people purchasing
these policies, that they will find a way to make sure people
have coverage that is as good as they can afford, rather than
no coverage at all, which is where too many people are without
these options.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Ms. Turner. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentlelady from Washington,
Ms. Jayapal.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On October 31 of last
year, conveniently just a few days before the midterm election,
President Trump tweeted, and I quote, ``Republicans will
protect people with preexisting conditions far better than
Democrats.'' That was a pretty big flip-flop given that the
President and Republicans in Congress, including many on this
very committee, spent most of last Congress voting to try to
kill the Affordable Care Act and its protections for
individuals with preexisting conditions. In fact, I think I am
right about this, the only Republican members of this committee
who did not vote for the horrible Trump Care bill last Congress
were the eight new members who had not yet been elected.
Now, this Administration is backing a lawsuit that could
strip coverage for more than 133 million Americans with
preexisting conditions with absolutely no plan to replace that
coverage. And if this ruling takes effect more than 17 million
people would lose coverage in the first year alone.
So, to my Republican colleagues, which one is it? Do the
American people deserve coverage for preexisting conditions or
don't they?
Let me also point out that overturning preexisting
conditions protections would disproportionately harm racial and
ethnic minorities. And, Mr. Chairman, I seek unanimous consent
to enter a written Statement from the Asian and Pacific
Islander American Health Forum into the record.
Chairman Scott. Without objection. And I want to remind our
colleagues that pursuant to committee practice, materials must
be submitted to the committee clerk within 14 days following
the last day of the hearing, preferably in a Microsoft Word
format. The materials submitted must address the subject matter
of the hearing. And only a member of the committee or an
invited witness may submit the materials for inclusion in the
record.
Documents are limited to 50 pages. Documents longer than 50
pages will be incorporated into the record by way of an
internet link, so that you must provide the committee clerk
with that in the timeframe, but recognize that years from now
that link may no longer work.
And I will give you a couple of seconds at the end.
Thank you.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And noted for the
future.
So let me start with my first question for Ms. Corlette.
Thank you for your testimony. In your professional opinion as a
research professor at the Center on Health Insurance Reforms,
let us go back a little bit, why did it take an act of Congress
to require insurance companies to insure people with
preexisting conditions?
Ms. Corlette. Well, before the ACA insurance companies, in
order to make money, the business strategy was to enroll as
many healthy people as you could, bring in their premiums, and
pay out as little as possible in claims. So, to do that they
engaged in what was called medical underwriting, which required
people when they applied for coverage to submit health forms.
They had lists of up to 400 different conditions that would
cause you to be excluded from coverage. But, essentially that
was the business strategy.
What the ACA tried to do was change the business strategy
away from risk avoidance to risk management.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you. So, just to be frank, insurance
companies wouldn't cover people with preexisting conditions
because they are too expensive, correct?
Ms. Corlette. Yes.
Ms. Jayapal. OK. So, Ms. Corlette, you also said in your
testimony that the Affordable Care Act was enacted in part to
correct serious deficiencies in health insurance markets that
left millions uninsured and millions more with inadequate
coverage. The reality is that the profit-seeking motives of
insurance companies and big pharma are at odds with providing
comprehensive care for everyone in this country. Do you believe
that government should play a role in insuring that corporate
greed doesn't allow insurance companies to deny coverage to
people with preexisting conditions?
Ms. Corlette. I think absolutely government needs to play a
role, both in terms of financing, and I think it is important--
you know, this committee is as aware as anybody else that
employer-sponsored coverage is the source of the biggest
subsidy in the Federal tax code. So critical role in terms of
financing, but also to set the rules of the road. So, to the
extent that we have private market actors on the provider side
or the payer side, that there are clear rules of the road to
protect people who need help, which is individuals, consumers,
small businesses.
Ms. Jayapal. So, thank you. In 2017--this is again a
question for you--Aetena's CEO was paid nearly $59 million,
Cigna's CEO took home almost $44 million, UnitedHealthcare's
CEO $27 million. So, our healthcare system is underwritten by
greed and health insurance companies and big pharma are
profiting off of sick Americans. Without the protections
ensured by the ACA, do you believe that insurance companies
would continue to guarantee coverage for people with
preexisting conditions?
Ms. Corlette. No, I think they would go back to the
business practices they were engaged in before the ACA was
passed.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you. The Urban Institute estimates that
17 million people will lose coverage in the first year alone if
the Republican lawsuit stripping the ACA goes through. We have
waited long enough for corporate executives to do the right
thing, in my opinion. They simply aren't going to do so without
government intervention. And that is why we passed the ACA.
And, Mr. Chairman, that is why we must go further.
Ultimately, I believe we need to take the pure profit-seeking
motives out of our healthcare system and ensure that the No. 1
thing we do is protect every American's right to have
healthcare. And so today we are united as Democrats in
protecting the ACA, making it clear that we stand with millions
of Americans who are at risk of losing coverage. But I am also
determined to put forward a bold new vision for Medicare for
all, something that the majority of all Americans support. As
Members of Congress, we are ready to listen to them and put
people over profits.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Protections for
individuals with preexisting conditions has been a consistent
area of agreement for both Republicans and Democrats. We have
to keep reiterating that.
I strongly believe that these protections need to remain in
place and I voted and co-sponsored legislation to safeguard
them and give peace of mind to patients, and that is a matter
of record.
I am disheartened with my friends on the other side of the
aisle's continued misinformation on our record on this issue.
There was no Trumpcare, nothing got to his desk. There was the
Affordable Health Care Act that dealt with all of the issues of
concern that the ACA brought up because it didn't work for many
people who did have a health care plan that they paid for, but
when they went to use it, so many of them, so many of them did
not have health care. So I hope that changes at some point in
time, the rhetoric that continues on.
This committee has jurisdiction over employer-sponsored
health insurance. I know there are some that believe we need to
move beyond the employer-sponsored coverage, however, the
employer sponsored system currently provides health insurance
for over 181 million Americans. So instead of forcing Americans
off their plans that they like, or in the cases of union
employees, forcing them to give up health plans that they
worked hard for and made salary sacrifices to negotiate, we
should explore ways to strengthen our employer sponsored
system, reduce costs, so more businesses can offer these good
benefits to their employees.
I constantly hear from small employers in Michigan who are
dealing with the cost and compliance burdens of providing
health insurance coverage to their employees. While some small
businesses are able to offer health coverage, many simply
cannot afford to do so. One option among others, which was
passed by this committee, is for small employers to band
together to provide economies of scale for purchasing health
insurance through an association health plan.
Ms. Turner, thank you for being here. As you know, in
August the Department of Labor issued a final rule to expand
access to AHPs. In your opinion, when finalized, will DOL's
rule help or hinder efforts to increase coverage for small
employers and their employees?
Ms. Turner. It absolutely will provide them an important
new option to negotiate benefits on behalf of their employees.
Talking with another H.R. director who has a work force of
primarily medium and lower income workers, he said what happens
is that as healthcare costs go up it eats up their wage
increases. So employees see their wages as flat, but part of
their compensation because too much of their compensation
package is going to health benefits.
Some employers are very creative, helping to provide
coordinated care for people that they have identified that have
the greatest healthcare needs. So I think employers play an
important role and I think association health plans also play
an important role, as well as the new health reimbursement
arrangement rule, which would allow employers who cannot afford
and do not have the resources to actually provide coverage to
give their employees a stipend to be able to purchase health
insurance on their own. We recommended they be able to combine
salaries from two spouses, for example. One spouse may be
offered health insurance at work, the other one can get a
stipend to help make that a family plan rather than just an
individual plan.
Mr. Walberg. The beauty of more flexibility, creativity,
and options that go on.
Ms. Turner. Yes. And also to recognize the competition out
there.
Mr. Walberg. Right.
Ms. Turner. Plans are competing, companies are competing,
everybody is trying to do the best job to get the best value.
Mr. Walberg. You mentioned in your testimony a study by Kev
Coleman, a former analyst at the insurance information website
HealthPocket. In his study, what type of plans did Mr. Coleman
find that AHPs were offering? And let me ask this as well, are
essential benefits covered in the plans that he discussed?
Ms. Turner. The study by Kev Coleman showed that these AHP
plans are offering benefits comparable to the largest employers
that have negotiated these benefits for years and that they are
not discriminating against patients with preexisting
conditions. Many of these employers may have someone on their
staff, maybe even a family member, that has a preexisting
condition.
Mr. Walberg. Or themselves.
Ms. Turner. Yes. And so they want those benefits and they
are really pressing the market to figure out how do you do that
in a price that they can afford to purchase that coverage.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Mr. Morelle from New York.
Mr. Morelle. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
very important hearing, and thank you to the panelists for
being here and for answering the questions, particularly Mr.
Riedy. Thank you for your courage in being here and sharing
your story with us.
Back in 1993 I co-sponsored and helped pass a law in New
York that provided community rating for all New Yorkers that
were in small business, the individual marketplace, as well as
ending the practice of--well, beginning the practice of having
protections for preexisting conditions. Something I am very
proud of. So I took it as an article of faith that everywhere
was like that, and then I became chair of the insurance
committee about 15 years ago and during the time of the
implementation of the ACA. I learned a great deal about what
happens in the rest of the country. So this is very, very
helpful in terms of understanding all of this.
The first comment I would just make around coverage is we
use the word coverage as though it means the same thing to
everyone. The truth is, I remember as insurance chair, when
people would come to me and say I had out-of-network benefits
and it said out of network services were covered, yet it only
covered 25 percent of my bill and I have this huge balance that
I have to pay. You learn quickly that coverage doesn't mean
coverage, that it means different things to different people.
And cost avoidance is a big part of trying to provide coverage.
But I wanted to just talk a little bit about the definition
if I might. My daughter, Lauren, was diagnosed with triple
negative breast cancer just a few years ago and she passed away
about 17 months ago. I had never heard of triple negative
breast cancer, but it is part of the diagnosis. And when you
begin to look at treatment, you look at genetic panels and what
you can learn from the genome. And it turned out that in
Lauren's case while it wasn't passed on genetically, she did
have a mutation in one of her genes.
And so perhaps Ms. Corlette might be able to answer this,
is there a concern that genetic predispositions will be defined
more broadly as preexisting conditions in the way that some
insurers view this or some people view it?
Ms. Corlette. Well, there is a Federal law that was enacted
before the ACA, the acronym, is GINA, the Genetic Information
Nondiscrimination Act, that does prohibit insurance companies
from discriminating against people based purely on genetic
information.
Mr. Morelle. And does that include then predispositions
based on other things that would affect chronic conditions?
Ms. Corlette. With respect to the preexisting conditions
that we are talking about today, most insurance companies
require you actually be diagnosed with a specific condition
before it would be underwritten. Although I will say for short-
term plans, you know, they will look at your medical history
and even if you were not given a formal diagnosis they might
say that you had the condition, you know, the cancer cell was
in your body before you enrolled and might disenroll you
because of that.
Mr. Morelle. Yes, because it is certainly hard to tell when
it manifests itself and--
Ms. Corlette. Exactly.
Mr. Morelle [continuing]. when it actually becomes disease
state. Also to my colleague, Mr. Courtney, mentioned as he
showed the pamphlet, in the description had obesity, which that
would be a preexisting condition presumably?
Ms. Corlette. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Morelle. And that would be the case even if you had not
exhibited or manifested any disease because of that condition,
is that correct?
Ms. Corlette. Correct.
Mr. Morelle. And obviously that is not genetic in nature,
but that is effectively underwriting which could lead
ultimately to preexisting conditions?
Ms. Corlette. Right.
Mr. Morelle. And I did want to just mention coverage too
because when you have community rating, and we don't even do an
adjustment in New York for community rating, it is all the
same. So that you have as you get older--as I am finding you
have more medical conditions as you get older. Young, healthy
people, obviously we want in the pools, and adverse selection
often leads people to avoid coverage until they have a reason
for it. But the larger the pool and the more that you
essentially flatten the experience of the larger pool is really
what insurance is all about. The avoidance of that with some of
the plans that have either high deductibles or that in a sense
sequesters the better risks is actually what causes the case of
either uninsured or high premiums. Is that not right?
Ms. Corlette. That is exactly right. You said it better
than I ever could.
Mr. Morelle. And that is my real concern here, Mr.
Chairman, members, is that as we talk about coverage, as I
said, it is not all the same, and you could be left with
significant balance billing for procedures where you thought
you had coverage, and this notion of sort of shifting risk to
other groups of less well people is essentially what I
understand the Administration policy to be.
Would you care to comment on that?
Ms. Corlette. Yes. I mean with respect to association
health plans, short-term plans, it is really about shifting the
risk from young, healthy people to older and sicker people. So,
it is sort of rearranging the deck chairs without addressing
some of the underlying issues about cost. Which is they are
real. We have a cost problem in this country. But just creating
new winners and losers is I don't believe the answer.
Mr. Morelle. Very good. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Byrne.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding this hearing.
Ms. Turner, I am sort of just the facts type person, and I
didn't get here until I was elected in 2013, so I am having to
go back and sort of make sure I understand how we got where we
are.
When Congress passed Medicaid and Medicare, embedded in
those programs was protection for people with preexisting
conditions. I think that is correct. And when they created some
other public programs, like TRICARE, they did the same thing.
And then I think I was told that when HIPAA was passed in 1996,
bipartisan bill, that we provided similar protection to people
that are in-group plans, employer-provided plans. Have I got
that right?
Ms. Turner. Absolutely.
Mr. Byrne. So I asked my staff to go back and look at the
most recent numbers we could get, which was 2017. Forty-nine
percent of the people in America are under an employer provided
plan. When you add up all the people on the public plans, like
Medicare and Medicaid, it is another 36 percent. So if I am
doing my math right, since at least 1996, 85 percent of the
people in America have had protections on preexisting
conditions as a result of bipartisan acts of the U.S. Congress.
Have I got that right?
Ms. Turner. Yes.
Mr. Byrne. OK. So that is another 15 percent and every one
of those people in the 15 percent is important. I do not think
any of us can gain say that, but sometimes we start talking
about this, we forget that 85 percent of the people in America
have got the protections that they need. So when we look at
what happened in the Affordable Care Act--and I was not here
when it was passed, so I was not a part of that debate--I have
actually talked to people in my district who were in that 15
percent. In fact, the very moment I was running for Congress is
when those notices went out to people, who were told by the
President of the United States that if they liked their health
care plan they could keep it, they actually came up to me at a
high school football game where I am passing out pamphlets, and
showed me the notice they got from their insurance company that
said we are canceling your health care plan. But here is our
new one for you, and the cost was a multiple of what they were
used to paying. And these people, while they were working
people, they could not afford it. And ACA did not provide those
type people with the sort of help they need financially to do
it. So I have met those people across my district who now are
uninsured because they can't pay their premiums.
So let me just ask you, are there individuals, including
individuals with preexisting conditions, that the ACA might
have actually materially hurt?
Ms. Turner. There are people who say that the coverage that
they had before, even in the individual market, was better than
the coverage they have now because it is more affordable. Some
of them are facing deductibles of $10,000. And they say that I
might as well not be insured because I can't meet that
deductible.
Another friend who had a liver transplant needs significant
anti rejection medications and he says that a health savings
account actually is beneficial to him because he knows what his
out-of-pockets costs are going to be, he can pay that on a tax
free basis, and his catastrophic coverage actually was much
better because it allowed him to wee any doctor without so many
restrictions.
So, yes, there are people who preferred the coverage they
had before, but I absolutely agree with you that preserving the
preexisting condition protections is vital. And also not
frightening people to think that they might lose it. I had a
friend write to me saying that she was worried if the court
case were to be successful that she would lose her preexisting
condition protection and Medicare. And there is no reason for
her to be so frightened.
Mr. Byrne. No, there have been scare tactics out there like
that. It is unfortunate because even on Medicare you have got
older people and they have got lots of other things that they
are thinking about, and we don't need to be scaring them, we
need to be helping them.
I have talked to many Members of Congress since I have been
here. I have not met a single person in either party that
doesn't want to protect people that have preexisting
conditions. The question is how do you do it? What is the
smartest way to do it? What is the most cost-effective way to
do it? But when you get up and tell the people of the United
States, if you like your healthcare plan, you can keep it, and
then they get a notice that says no, I can't keep it, and the
substitute is something I can't afford, you have materially
hurt people in the United States. And everybody in this
Congress, Democrat or Republican, we should all want to work
together to make sure we help those people, because those are
the good, hardworking people in America who depend on us to
look after them.
I appreciate your testimony. And I yield back the balance
of my time.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from California,
Mr. Harder.
Mr. Harder. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all
of our witnesses for being here on such an important issue.
Protecting folks with preexisting conditions is the entire
reason I ran for this office. On my district in the California
Central Valley this is my highest priority. Over 100,000 people
in our district have health insurance only thanks to the
Affordable Care Act. And those 100,000 folks were at risk of
losing their coverage if the Affordable Care Act was repealed,
and it was only after that vote a year and a half ago, almost 2
years ago now, that I decided to get on in and see what I could
do to fix that. And I think the reality is, is in a district
like ours, where nearly 50 percent of our individuals have a
condition that qualifies as a preexisting condition, this
affects every single human being, every person in my community
has a loved one who would be affected if the Affordable Care
Act was threatened. Every single person, including me. In my
case it is my little brother David. He was born 10 weeks
premature, less than 2 pounds when he was first born, spent the
first 2 years of his life in and out of a hospital, came out
with a healthcare bill 104 pages long. And because of that he
would be without insurance until he is 65 and on Medicare if we
did not have protections for folks with preexisting conditions.
And, Mr. Riedy, I really was so touched to hear your story.
I think your voice gives power to millions of folks. I think we
need to be humanizing these statistics. And so when folks think
about what life is really like with a preexisting condition,
they are thinking about people like my little brother, they are
thinking about people like you, and all of us, because the
reality is each one of us has a loved one who would be affected
by these changes.
And in your testimony you mentioned you had a cost of
medical treatment $450,000 in 2018. Is that correct?
Mr. Riedy. That is correct. That was just for the cost of
medicines.
Mr. Harder. One year, one year. And I think that, you know,
in a district like ours, where we have a high rate of
unemployment, we have a lot of folks that have real financial
stress, there is a lot of folks that could be impacted by that.
I am very interested, based on your own experiences, Mr.
Riedy, how do the annual lifetime caps affect patients with
costly medical conditions?
Mr. Riedy. So with the passing of the ACA and the ban on
lifetime caps, it has--and annual caps, it has allowed me
personally, and others with preexisting conditions, to have a
better frame of mind to be able to focus on our health versus
if I go and see this doctor, or I get sick and I have to go
into the hospital or I have to have some costly procedure, what
is that going to do, how close is that going to get me toward
that cap, and then potentially if I get to that cap, what
happens then. So not only are you dealing with having to fight
to stay alive or have to focus on treatment regimens that take
3 to 4 hours a day in my case, you are also then focusing on
the mental aspect of this also and trying to focus on if I get
to this point am I going to have to make decisions basically
that affect my care and my family's wellbeing versus
essentially dying or not being able to access that care which
then will shorten my life and others.
Mr. Harder. What do you would believe would happen to
people like yourself and the people you advocate for if the
Affordable Care Act was undermined by the court in the Texas
case?
Mr. Riedy. You know, I worry if the court case is upheld, I
worry that insurers will institute lifetime and annual caps
again, that they will reinstitute the ability potentially for
me to be denied coverage simply because I was born with a
genetic disease and have a preexisting condition, and that I
will lose the comfort knowing that no matter where I work or
what happens to me that I can continue to be there for my
family and focus on what needs to happen versus--to take care
of myself versus what the cost of that medicine is that my
doctor prescribed, or not even being able to go and see
especially--the highly specialized care that I need to take
care of my lungs and by body.
Mr. Harder. Thank you for your powerful testimony and for
putting a face on what this really looks like. I think there
are so many of us affected, nearly 50 percent of my district,
and of many others. And we talk about millions of Americans, we
talk about the 100,000 people in our community that would be
without insurance if the Affordable Care Act were repealed and
if it were undermined by some of these efforts of litigation,
but I think the most important thing that we need to be
considering is really understanding the day to day lives of
folks who are living through these challenges today and
understanding how those lives would be so different if we had
not passed the Affordable Care Act.
Thank you so much for your powerful testimony today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Allen.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
having this hearing today. It is very enlightening. Obviously,
you know, I have some preexisting conditions, I have family
members that have preexisting conditions, so we are all very,
very interested in how we go about making healthcare available
to all Americans.
The question and the big debate is how do we pay for it.
Obviously we have the resources in this country to provide--
and, Mr. Riedy, thank you for your testimony--to provide
excellent medical care and hopefully a cure. We are all praying
for cures for Alzheimer's, for all types of issues that we are
dealing with in this country. And we are spending a lot of
money to try to find cures for those things. But in the
meantime, what is the best way to provide health care?
Now, the question is, does the government do it more
efficiently than the private sector? And I think, Ms. Turner,
is there any information, like for every dollar of taxes that
we pay, how much of that dollar gets back to take care of a
patient under the Affordable Care Act.
Ms. Turner. I have not seen--well, there is a medical loss
ratio, so we know that based upon the company's size that
either 20 or 15 percent of the money can only go to
administration, the rest has to go to medical care.
Mr. Allen. Right.
Ms. Turner. But I do think that it is important to look at
the approach that the American Health Care Act that the House
passed in 2017 took. It actually dedicated specific resources
to help people that have high health care costs--$123 billion.
A similar amount in a Senate bill that didn't make it through,
but that would have separately subsidized and provided extra
money for the people that have chronic healthcare conditions.
The ACA put them in the same market with everybody else and
that raised prices to the point that you are driving the
healthy people out. So there is a lot of evidence that if you
separately subsidize those with the highest cost and the
highest risks, you can lower premiums for other, get more
people covered, and then focus on providing the coordinated
care that people with multiple health conditions actually need.
Mr. Allen. Exactly. And, you know, right now I think that
Health and Human Services has a budget of about $1.2 trillion,
the largest single piece of the Federal budget, and, you know,
out of that $1.2 trillion I am interested--of course my
background is the business world--and I am interested in
exactly how much of that $1.2 trillion is taking care of Mr.
Riedy. And I think we need to look at that and then we need to
look at what would it cost if we returned health care back to
the health professionals and we were able to, through programs
deal directly in our health providers, deal directly with our
health providers rather than got through HHS and these other
agencies that have these huge budgets.
And, frankly, as I understand it, our health care in this
country is much more expensive than compared to other
industrialized countries in the world. Is that correct?
Ms. Turner. That is correct. We are also the research
center for the planet. The great majority of new prescription
drugs, like the one that Mr. Riedy says is so valuable, are
developed in the United States. We pay a disproportionate share
both for the research and for the drugs, and also new medical
technologies and other innovations.
Mr. Allen. Right. So we are subsidizing health care across
the world? Would that be correct?
Ms. Turner. Well--
Mr. Allen. How can we afford--we are $21 trillion in debt
and, of course, you know, I do not know who is going to be
paying my health care bills, but it is probably going to be one
of my grandchildren or great-grandchildren, but we have got to
solve this problem. We have the ability to take care--you know,
I tell folks back home, we have got plenty of money to take
care of folks, particularly those with preexisting conditions,
I just think it is all in Washington, and we need to get it out
in our States and our communities and make healthcare
affordable.
And with that I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Dr. Schrier.
Dr. Schrier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses today.
I just want to say that I can't think of a more important
topic to bring up today as our first hearing because one thing
that I have heard about from all of my constituents is
healthcare, and that is their No. 1 issue. And I sit here today
not just as a Member of Congress, but also as a pediatrician, a
doctor who is taking care of patients for the last two decades,
and as a person with Type I diabetes. And so I really share a
kinship with people in my district and in this country with
preexisting conditions.
So, I can report to you first hand that my patients are
worried. They are worried that either they or their loved ones
will not be covered if they have a preexisting condition or
that they will be priced out of the market, as we have been
hearing a lot about, and they are worried even in these popular
employer-based health plans that their prices are also going up
and their deductibles are skyrocketing.
And so, you know, I came here to bring down costs and
protect my patients and make sure that no family goes bankrupt
because of medical expenses. And so, I hear about these
solutions, like these short-term health plans. And you can
imagine, as a pediatrician, that preventative care, essential
health benefits, and mental health care, well woman care, these
are all critical, and that is why they are essential health
benefits.
And I just want to clarify, Dr. Gupta, you have not had to
communicate anything for a while, so I thought I would give you
a chance. Can you just be--very clearly, are those services
covered under these short-term health plans?
Dr. Gupta. Thank you for that questions. Certainly they do
not have to be covered. I mean the idea of motherhood being a
sort of preexisting condition comes back after a decade again.
The idea well woman, well child preventative care, knowing that
we are going through an opioid epidemic today that we are
having a lot of adverse childhood experiences and a whole
generation is going to have to deal with as children and grow
up. And that will be the future of this country. None of those
things will be covered. Neither will be things like
vaccinations. Those will not be covered. Mental health
screenings, domestic violence screening will not be covered
potentially. Of course mammograms, pap smears, none of those
things have to be covered.
Dr. Schrier. Thank you. You are speaking my language. And
then just also to clarify, do patients know that these are not
covered when they buy these short-term less expensive health
plans that are proposed to be a solution to skyrocketing
medical costs?
Dr. Gupta. That will certainly be in fine print, as was
mentioned today. And I am sure that most of us are not going to
realize until you get sick and then that will be the time that
most patients will realize that they were not covered for those
services.
Dr. Schrier. And to read that fine print you would need
glasses like these.
OK, my next question is that I have seen in my own
practice, you know, the classic story, a girl with a terrible
rash whose mom brought her in and it had been weeks that they
had been trying to deal with this at home with all the powders
and creams and everything they possibly could. And when she
finally came to me it was a disaster, she needed antibiotics
and steroid creams. But she delayed care because of the cost of
care. She knew that because of her deductible it would cost her
a lot to come in and that she may as well try everything in the
kitchen cabinet at home.
And so when I think about these short-term plans and that
preventative care would not be covered--and I know how
important those well child checks are--I just would like your
opinion as to how many families will show up for that
critically important primary care and preventative care if
those are not provided for free.
Dr. Gupta. We know from studies that compared to the
insured population, uninsured individuals tend to delay their
care. That leads to lack of those preventative services,
ultimately poor outcomes, and more expensive outcomes, not just
from health but also for financial reasons. And what we saw
after ACA was the amount of uninsured childbearing women went
down from about 20 percent to 13 percent. So additional 5.5
million women got the care for things like maternity care. So
those things are happening now that we will again walk back
several steps and we will end up the emergency rooms with
uncompensated care, at doctors' offices, while mostly in
primary care, where we already have shortages of tremendous
amount across the field. And those offices will once again be
seeing a lot of patients who do not have insurance and, like
you have, I often provide care for those without regard to the
level of insurance they have.
Dr. Schrier. Thank you, Dr. Gupta. And I yield back my
time.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The Gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Comer.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would like to
talk about healthcare in Kentucky. Obamacare, or the Affordable
Care Act, however you want to pronounce it, in Kentucky was a
great deal for people who got free health care via Medicaid.
But it was a terrible deal for working Kentuckians who actually
have to pay for their health care premiums. In Kentucky, 30
percent of the State is on Medicaid. That is pretty much free
health care. But the rest of Kentuckians in the State who are
working, struggling to pay health care premiums, they do not
have a very favorable opinion of the Affordable Care Act.
Ms. Turner, I would like to ask you a question addressing
the rising cost of health care, including premiums,
deductibles, and out-of-pocket expenses. This is a huge concern
for most Americans and it should be a concern for the
democrats. What options do you think policymakers should
consider when discussing how to lower the cost of health
insurance and provide a variety of affordable options,
especially for employers and workers?
Ms. Turner. I described in my testimony a plan that I have
helped to develop with a number of my policy colleagues, called
the health care choices plan. And it basically recognizes the
States have a lot more knowledge about their individual markets
and the needs of their citizens, and it is very difficult for
Washington to finely tune legislation enough to let them do
what they need to do. So we have recommended formula grants to
the States to let them figure out how do they make sure that
existing populations are supported. But they have the
flexibility to be able to get coverage not only for the
continued coverage for them, but to make sure that new people
can come into the market and afford coverage, and quality
coverage.
Mr. Comer. Mm-hmm. If there is one thing that I think all
of us would agree on in both parties is that everyone should be
protected with preexisting conditions in health care. No one
should be denied coverage based on their medical history. Given
that, and given current law, Ms. Turner, are any reforms needed
to ensure that individuals with preexisting conditions have
access to health coverage?
Ms. Turner. One of the things that several States have done
is request waivers to use some of the ACA money to more heavily
subsidize those with high risks to make sure they can have
access to care and coverage. I talked about Janet in my
testimony who is now under ACA coverage in Colorado, but it is
inferior coverage to the high-risk pool coverage she had
before. States can fine-tune that, high-risk pools, invisible
high-risk pools, reinsurance, to make sure those with the
highest healthcare costs are covered. Devote money to them, you
cannot only lower premiums for other but increase access for
the healthy people we need to come into the market.
Mr. Comer. In Kentucky, prior to passage of the Affordable
Care Act, we had a high-risk pool, called Kentucky Access, and
it was successful. But it was eliminated with the passage of
the Affordable Care Act.
Just to followup on that question, would you say there are
other factors that affect consumer access to health care?
Ms. Turner. Well, that is one of the reasons I believe
these short-term limited duration plans are so important,
because somebody may be, you know, in a bridge between--they
have just graduated from college, they had coverage then, they
don't have a job yet, they are older than 26. Somebody who is
near Medicare eligibility needs bridge coverage, somebody who
is starting a new business needs to--there are people who need
these temporary plans and that is another option.
Indiana had a great plan called the Health Indiana Plan, a
State-based plan. An account to make sure that people could get
the preventative care they need, but they also had major
medical coverage. There are a lot of other options, but I think
that the State creativity, working with healthcare providers,
is really valuable.
Mr. Comer. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The Gentlelady from Illinois,
Ms. Underwood.
Ms. Underwood. So, we have just heard from our colleagues,
Ms. Foxx and Mr. Comer, who mentioned how they support
protections for individuals with preexisting conditions.
However, congressional Republicans and the Trump Administration
have had relentless--attacked protections passed by the
Affordable Care Act. And so many of my colleagues here voted
more than 70 times to repeal parts of the ACA. Moreover, last
August the Administration finalized a rule that expands short-
term limited duration insurance, commonly known as junk plans.
Junk plans do not have to comply with key Federal laws that
protect patients and they can pose a serious risk to patients
with preexisting conditions.
Earlier today, along with Representative DeSaulnier, my
Democratic colleagues and I introduced my first legislation in
Congress to overturn the Trump Administration's rule expanding
junk plans. Insurers should never have the option to
discriminate against patients with preexisting conditions.
So, Dr. Gupta, can you tell us more about why they are
called junk plans and what kinds of consumer protections can
junk plans exclude?
Dr. Gupta. Well, thank you. I think part of the--what is
important is not just the preexisting conditions protections,
but also the affordability as well as the accessibility in
terms of essential health benefits. So, none of this is covered
or required to be covered in these short-term plans, or also as
you termed them, junk plans. There are States that have taken a
proactive lead, like California, Oregon, New York, New Jersey,
who have actually worked to prohibit those plans in the way
that they are today. And, obviously, other States will have to
do more. Because what that does basically is sells people out
there who may not be suspecting a bill of goods that they have
no idea about. So, unless they read the fine print, when in so
many ways stepping back to about a decade ago, and people when
they find that they need the help that they need, they are not
going to be able to get it because the preventative care, as
well as a number of those essential health benefits, including
maternity care, will not be covered.
For example, prior to the ACA only 11 States required
maternity care in individual plans, and only 13 percent of the
insurers' individual plans covered maternity care.
Ms. Underwood. That is why patients' groups, including the
March of Dimes, the American Cancer Society, the American Heart
Association are opposing the junk plan rule.
Mr. Chairman, at this time I would like to ask unanimous
consent to enter a letter from those patient groups opposing
the rule into the record.
Chairman Scott. Without objection.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you. Dr. Gupta, what effects can junk
plans have on patient access to care, particularly patients
with preexisting conditions?
Dr. Gupta. Ultimately it will cost their lives or their
bank account, or both. The challenge with that is when somebody
needs the help, early help to be able to detect cancer, like
breast cancer, colon cancer, or be immunized for important
conditions that could be communicable--we are seeing outbreaks
of measles, for example--those could get worse. And people we
diagnose much later in their stage and then they will not be
able to be covered by those because of the preexisting
conditions clause missing, and therefore they will be--again,
will lose life and it will cost us a lot more. It is just the
most--the least effective way of administering healthcare.
Ms. Underwood. In fact, an analysis by the Los Angeles
Times found that not a single group, not a single group
representing patients, physicians, nurses, or hospitals
supports the junk plan rule. And 90 percent of the comments
from the public on this rule were either critical or opposed
the rule outright.
So, Ms. Corlette, are you concerned that public opinion on
junk plans was disregarded when the rule was written? What
needs to be done to ensure the needs of patients with
preexisting conditions are truly represented in this debate?
Ms. Corlette. Well, certainly with respect to the comments
on the short-term plan rule, it would suggest that the
Administration's mind was made up about what they wanted to do
before the rule was finalized and the public comments did not
make much of a difference there.
I do think there is a real concern that a lot of people who
are healthy before they sign up for these plans, have an
unexpected medical event, and are left on the hook for
thousands, tens of thousands of dollars in unpaid medical
bills.
Of course, for those who have preexisting conditions, they
couldn't buy these plans even if they wanted to. They would
have to buy in the ACA market, but the ACA market will be more
expensive. CBO has said it will be about 3 percent surcharge on
premiums as a result of these plans.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
all the witnesses for being here.
I yield back.
Chairman Scott. OK, thank you. The gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Wright.
Mr. Wright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Thank you.
Mr. Wright. I want to thank all of you all for being here
today. Mr. Riedy, God bless you and your family. I think it
speaks to your character and your determination that you are
even here today participating. So thank you.
Ms. Turner, I think you would agree that, you know, we
should never have laws on the books that are unconstitutional,
and when the Supreme Court made its decision on the ACA, Chief
Justice Roberts, of course, his opinion was that it was
Constitutional by virtue of being a tax. I thought that was a
very slender thread, but that is the opinion. If you take that
thread away, then it follows that the law is unconstitutional.
And as a Texas Congressman I am terribly proud of my State
attorney general for leading the effort in this lawsuit.
Because, again, if the reason it was determined that it was
unconstitutional was that it is a tax and you take that away,
doesn't it follow that it is no longer Constitutional?
What is your opinion, Ms. Turner?
Ms. Turner. Well, this is going to go through the Courts to
determine whether or not the fact that the Congress did in fact
zero out the tax penalty for individual insurance does
invalidate the law, but I think the important thing is that we
have seen since then all of the efforts by you and others in
Congress to repeal and replace the law. So I think we have seen
that there are definitely places that improvement is needed and
to try to find a way to replace the coverage that people are
relying on, but to allow markets to work better so that healthy
people are not being driven out.
Mr. Wright. Yes, ma'am. And the key word there is replace.
I think the assumption that if ACA had not passed or if it had
been ruled unconstitutional, that nothing would have happened,
that there would have been no improvements in healthcare, is a
completely false narrative, just as if it were to go away
tomorrow we are not going to revert back to the status quo of
2009 because there was always, even in 2009--I don't know if
you were part of crafting or helping either side on that, I was
here then. I was the chief of staff for the ranking Republican
on Energy and Commerce Committee. I sat in some of those
meetings, saw the markup. There was always Republican
alternatives that included coverage for preexisting conditions,
even going back to 2009.
So this narrative that we keep hearing that Republicans are
somehow opposed to that or don't want it, is patently and
demonstrably false, and it needs to stop because it is not
true.
My last question is this, it has to do with the idea that
is being advanced by the other side, and we heard it earlier
today, about Medicare for all. Well, Medicare-for-all is
Medicare for none. Would you agree with that? Can you speak to
it?
Ms. Turner. It certainly would not be the Medicare that
seniors know now.
Mr. Wright. If we go to socialized medicine, where it is
all run by the government, then doesn't Medicare cease to
exist?
Ms. Turner. As I mentioned in my testimony, my colleague,
Doug Badger, has done some research looking at these cross
subsidies from the employer-based system with 170-some billion
people participating. They pay a higher rate to physicians and
hospitals that allow Medicare and Medicaid to save taxpayer
money and to pay a lower rate. But if those reimbursement rates
went across the board, 40 percent of physicians and hospitals
would find that they couldn't even keep their doors open.
So we need the employer-based system.
Mr. Wright. Absolutely.
Ms. Turner. And the private sector, not only for its
innovation but for the money that it provides to support
existing public programs.
Mr. Wright. Right. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentlelady from Georgia, Ms.
McBath.
Ms. McBath. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I do want to thank
you for holding this hearing today. And I would like to thank
the witnesses who are here to discuss the importance of
protecting access to healthcare for all Americans.
This is an issue that is deeply personal to me. I myself,
like millions of Americans, live with a preexisting condition.
As a two-time breast cancer survivor, I understand what it is
like to have your life turned upside down by this very
diagnosis. I was first diagnosed with stage 1 breast cancer in
2010. And after completing treatment my cancer returned again
in 2012. My cancer was detected because of a routine mammogram.
I will never forget the way that I felt when I first heard my
doctor say the words stage 1 breast cancer.
For each of the two cancer diagnoses that I have received I
underwent surgery through a procedure called a lumpectomy to
remove the remaining cancer. And I received radiation treatment
and drugs thereafter. I did it all while raising my family and
working full-time. And I can tell you I was terrified. Despite
being lucky and having good health insurance through my job, I
was still worried about my financial security. I was concerned
about making it to radiation treatments, sometimes every single
day for weeks, and then back to work and then back home to
raise my son, Jordan. It was exhausting, both physically and
emotionally. But I had to do it, just like millions of
Americans out there who share a similar story to mine.
I truly do not know what I would have done or what would
have happened if I had lost that health insurance coverage. And
I am happy to say today that I am cancer-free. But, Mr.
Chairman, not everyone is as lucky as I am. And I am worried
for Americans and for those in my State of Georgia who might
not detect their cancer or chronic health condition early on,
when it is most easily treatable.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention states that
preventing diseases is critical to helping Americans live
longer, healthier lives and keeping healthcare costs down. It
is so important that Americans have access to the preventive
services that are an integral part of the Affordable Care Act.
These include screenings for certain cancers, screenings for
Type 2 diabetes, and other critical health services. And I am
worried about their future and their financial security.
We here in congress, we have a responsibility to protect
people. That is what we must do.
Ms. Corlette, could you talk a little bit more about how
the ACA protects patients and has created greater access to
preventive services, like breast cancer screenings or high
blood pressure screenings? Particularly how the ACA cost-
sharing provisions impacts and also ensures Americans have
access to these types of services?
Ms. Corlette. Absolutely. Thank you for the question. So,
the Affordable Care Act requires insurers both in the
individual market and in the employer market to cover a set of
evidence-based preventive services without any cost-sharing for
the enrollee. And that includes many of the services that you
mentioned in your Statement, but also vaccines, contraception,
tobacco cessation counseling, a range of services that not only
prevent disease but help keep people healthy over the long-
term. Those services can also help diagnose issues that people
have and help get them early treatment in order to get a better
outcome at the end of the day.
So, if the ACA were overturned or this decision in the
district court in Texas is upheld, insurance companies would no
longer have to provide that protection and people would face
cost-sharing. And we know, and Dr. Gupta mentioned, that if
people do face co-insurance or cost-sharing for those services,
they tend not to get them or they delay them.
Ms. McBath. Thank you. And my followup question is how
could the Texas litigation impact American's access and
affordability of these lifesaving services?
Ms. Corlette. If the Texas decision is upheld millions of
people will lose their insurance, about 17 million in the first
year and up to 32 million by 2026. It is well documented that
people without insurance delay, forego care. Before the ACA
about 22,000 people died each year simply for not having
insurance.
For people with job-based coverage, they lose access to
critical protections, like the lifetime and annual limits that
Mr. Riedy discussed, the protection against excessive out-of-
pocket costs--ACA has a cap on that every year--as well as the
preventive services and essential health benefits that you
mentioned.
Ms. McBath. Thank you. Thank you.
Chairman Scott. The gentleman from South Dakota, Mr.
Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Riedy, you spoke
so eloquently about your family. Are any members of your family
with you here today?
Mr. Riedy. Yes, my father and mother and my wife are
sitting behind me.
Mr. Johnson. I kind of suspected that was the case. And, of
course, you were facing us during your testimony, and so I just
want to take a minute to tell you, because you couldn't know,
their faces were filled with an incredible pride during your
testimony. And, of course, you should feel good because you did
a good job. You should also feel very good because they clearly
are very proud of you.
Mr. Riedy. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. Almost every member of the Committee that has
spoken has done a nice job raising their voice in support of
protections for people with preexisting conditions. Of course,
I want to raise my voice to echo theirs. Critically important
and I am glad we are having this conversation.
I also like how the panelists all in different ways have
called forth this important connection between employer-based
health coverage and some of these preexisting condition issues.
I was a little concerned, Ms. Turner, in your testimony you
talked about how 65 percent of employers offered health
insurance in 2001, you mentioned that number had come down in
recent years. I assume affordability is a key driver. Are there
others that are maybe not as intuitive to me?
Ms. Turner. It is primarily affordability, and also because
there are fewer carriers now offering coverage in the
individual and small group markets. But one point that I think
is so important about when employers do offer coverage, they
have an incentive. They were offering coverage for preventive
care before the ACA because they know it works. It is so much
better to detect breast cancer at stage one than at stage four.
So helping their employees stay healthy, making sure that they
have access to preventive care, and being able to access the
diagnostics that they need early on for their coverage. So I
think that employer coverage brings particular value to our
health sector without the mandates. They know this is important
because it works.
Mr. Johnson. So I just want to make sure that I can square
the math here. The number of employers how are offering this
type of benefit has gone down. A number of people have talked
about the how the number of people receiving that type of
benefit has gone up. Is that just macRoeconomic trends, large
employers getting larger, and smaller businesses being the ones
more likely to drop this type of benefit?
Ms. Turner. I could look further into the research, but
based upon everything I have read since the ACA, the cost of
compliance in providing health coverage to employees is
significant. So it is not only the cost of the coverage, but
also compliance. And if a company is hitting near that 50
employee threshold where the employer mandate triggers, they
often will sometimes put workers on part-time, they will scale
back their staff, to avoid having to trigger that employer
mandate.
So I think in some ways the employer mandate has actually
worked against smaller employers offering coverage. And without
it and with more flexibility I think we would see more
participation.
Mr. Johnson. This is an area of concern, and I suspect it
is an area of concern for everybody on the Committee,
regardless of party or region, because so many people, from Mr.
Riedy to others, have talked about how well I had an employer-
based coverage, or I had job-based coverage. It is clearly a
really important leg of this stool about how we make sure
Americans are covered, how they can get the healthcare service
they need.
Are there things that we can do to strengthen employer-
based coverage? Because the trends you are talking about we
should not feel good about in this country right now.
Ms. Turner. What employers want most is flexibility to meet
the needs of their employees without having to charge so much
that health insurance eats up their employees' pay increases.
So they are looking for affordability, they want more
competitors, they want more options rather than having to meet
such specific benefit requirements to really allow them to--
there may be other benefits that their employees value more
than the essential health benefits list. So giving them more
flexibility to meet their employee needs and keep costs down
would increase participation.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you very much. Well, Mr. Chairman, I
just think this is a critical area for further study by the
Committee. And, of course, I appreciate the time and I yield
back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Gentlelady from Connecticut, Ms.
Hayes.
Ms. Hayes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all of
the people who have come to share your testimony today. I
really appreciate it on this very critical issue.
Before I begin my questioning, I cannot underscore what my
colleague, Ms. Underwood, said before she left, that while we
hear everyone talk about protecting preexisting conditions our
Republican colleagues voted more than 70 times to either roll
back or repeal the Affordable Care Act, which really undergirds
those protections.
My questions this afternoon are for Dr. Gupta. In your
testimony you talked about how the Affordable Care Act has
improved the lives of millions of Americans, particularly women
and children. And this was strengthened by those 10 essential
health benefits that we all know about. Of those benefits, we
have mental health and substance abuse treatment. Do you think
that those are important benefits to protect?
Dr. Gupta. Thank you for the question. Absolutely. I think
one of the things we have yet to appreciate is the increase in
tens of millions of people across this country who are
suffering now from substance use disorder that may not have
been the case even a decade ago. And a lot of the--when we look
at the data, access issues, fear of being fired from their
employer are some of the reasons that people do not seek care.
So, it is a big stigma issue as well. For women, things like
breastfeeding supplies, very simple things like a breast pump
and not having to cost share on those things, are another one
of those things that we should be working to protect, in
addition to the maternity care benefits.
Ms. Hayes. Thank you. Because I know we are talking a lot
about preexisting conditions and our conversations are centered
around genetic conditions or health-related diseases. So I am
happy to hear that you recognize that addiction is also
something that really further exasperates those conditions. It
is undeniable that we are in a crisis with opioid addiction. In
my own home State of Connecticut we have had significant
increases. Over the past 6 years our numbers have tripled. In
2017 my State marked a grim milestone of over 1,000 opioid-
related deaths. And in June of last year we were on track to
surpass that. In the district that I represent three of the top
ten towns are the highest opioid deaths.
This is no stranger to me. I grew up in a family that
struggled with addiction. In my own hometown 45 people died
last year as a result of opioid-related deaths.
Does the current opioid crisis make the need for mental
health and substance use disorder coverage more important?
Dr. Gupta. Absolutely. And, again, when we talk about
employer-based coverage, here is the real problem on the
ground. When I am seeing patients at a charity clinic who have
substance use disorders they are unable to have gainful
employment because of their addiction issues, which need to be
treated in the first place. And that allows them to actually
gain and have meaningful employment to begin with. So, I think
it is very important for us to make sure that we have systems
in place that allow the treatment and access to treatment for,
you know, one of the biggest crises to face our generation
today.
Ms. Hayes. I appreciate you viewing this as a crisis and
talking about treatment and coverage and healthcare, as opposed
to a criminal action, as we heard last week from our friends
over at Purdue Pharma, who talked about people who were
addicted to opioids as, ``reckless criminals''.
During your time at the Department of Health and Human
Services in Virginia you led several important initiatives to
address the opioid crisis in your State. Could you tell us what
impact the Affordable Care Act had on access to treatment for
substance abuse disorder and families, not just the individual,
but I am the daughter of an addict, so how families were
impacted by the protections provided by the Affordable Care
Act.
Dr. Gupta. Absolutely. In a State like West Virginia, which
is not any different from a number of States that are having to
deal with this crisis firsthand on the ground, we found that
having access to treatment, being able to expand those
treatments and make that available--a part of which was
Medicaid expansion. West Virginia was one of the first States
that--we worked very hard to ensure Medicaid expansion. Allowed
a number of people to enter the treatment spectrum and we found
that the access to mental health treatment, access to the
medications, being able to be able to transport it and being
paid for being able to transport for treatment, are some of
those factors that help us remove the stigma of addiction and
help us move forward in that. And it is very important that we
provide--reduce all the barriers to treatment when it comes to
a stigmatizing disease, such as addiction.
Ms. Hayes. Thank you for your time. Mr. Chair, I yield
back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Meuser.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you Dr. Foxx,
thank you to all testifying today.
Ms. Turner, I am Dan Meuser, Pennsylvania's 9th
congressional district. And I appreciate you taking the time
here, and all of you. I believe every American should have
access to high-quality, affordable health care, regardless of
health status, including preexisting conditions. Given current
law, are there any reforms that you would feel, Ms. Turner,
that are needed to ensure that individuals with preexisting
conditions do in fact continue to have access to health care
coverage?
Ms. Turner. I don't think there is one particular answer,
Congressman. I think they need a myriad of options. I think
giving States the option to recreate their high-risk pools
would be helpful to make sure people who have preexisting
conditions have a place to go if their health insurance becomes
so expensive. As Senator Bryce Reeves' constituent described,
$4,000 a month premiums or deductibles that are $10,000. They
need other options. And I think States also could do things
like the Healthy Indiana Program, an account-based plan that
allows people resources to access primary care, but knowing
that they have major medical coverage as well.
But I think the crucial issue is addressing cost and giving
people more options, more flexibility, and giving companies the
option to provide coverage that is more attractive, that
healthy people want to get in the market, so they are not
staying out of the market, putting more and more people who
have high health costs in the market and driving up premiums
for everyone.
Mr. Meuser. That is encouraging to hear. Now that we have
established that we are in agreement on preexisting conditions,
I would like to ask you your thoughts on the Affordable Care
Act's effect on association health plans. In Pennsylvania, for
instance, the Pennsylvania Farm Bureau had 12,000 members in an
association health plan and it worked very well, along with
other organizations. The Trump administration has issued a
final rule allowing for the use of AHPs, however, many
Governors, democrat Governors it so happens to be, across the
country, including in Pennsylvania, are blocking the formation
of AHPs.
Can you speak to the importance of the efforts to allow
AHPs and maybe comment technically as to why these efforts
would be blocked?
Ms. Turner. So far association health plans are available
in 13 States, about two-dozen plans in all. And some States are
considering invalidating or blocking these plans, which they
have full right to do, just as they are short-term limited
duration plans. But what they are doing is foreclosing options
for people who are otherwise likely to simply be uninsured. If
they don't have an affordable option their family cannot only
face bankruptcy, but not having access to that good high
quality care that private insurance brings.
So it is unfortunate if States take a view that because, I
don't know, the Trump administration rules that therefore they
should be opposed, because they are providing options for
people who are desperate for coverage.
Mr. Meuser. Yes. OK. That is unfortunate. Thank you.
Medicare Advantage. I have people coming into my office and
throughout my district talking about, speaking about how
terrific Medicare Advantage programs are, how relatively
affordable they are versus other Medicare plans. And, as a
matter of fact, the Medicare Advantage plans have decreased,
reduced in cost by 6 percent this past year when other plans on
average are going up 12 percent. So would you say that this is
a successful example of private sector innovation? And could
you offer any other insight on the effectiveness of Medicare
Advantage.
Ms. Turner. They were created, as you know, in 2003 through
the Medicare Modernization Act and went into effect in 2006.
And there was no real significant promotion of Medicare
Advantage plans. It was offered as an option for private
coverage to seniors, so they didn't have to be in something of
a Swiss cheese of a program with a fee-for-service Medicare.
They have been hugely popular. I think almost half of seniors
now have individually selected on their own, without any
mandates, Medicare Advantage plans. And these plans compete
fiercely for seniors. They have to cover a basic level--not
basic but very generous level of benefits and many of the plans
offer much more comprehensive coverage than people can get in
traditional Medicare. And many of them also incorporate
prescription drug coverage.
I think that seniors see it is crucially important because
it also provides an environment for coordinated care, rather
than going from doctor to doctor and fee-for-service
traditional medicine Medicare. Maybe getting the same
prescription with different names from physicians and then
winding up in the hospital with drug toxicity, they have
somebody looking out for them and being able to really
coordinate and help manage their care.
Very, very beneficial. And, of course, these are private
plans within Medicare.
Mr. Meuser. OK. Do I have any more time, Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Scott. Not really.
Mr. Meuser. OK. Well, I yield the remainder of my time.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. I appreciate it. The gentlelady
from Florida, Secretary Shalala.
Ms. Shalala. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I don't
want to add, a lot of my colleagues have asked the same
questions I would have asked.
I do want to point out that Medicare Advantage gets a lot
more money than traditional Medicare and therefore it is
expected to provide a lot more benefits. It also pays
dramatically for the kind of marketing that the private plans
want to do. So, we are paying with taxpayer money for Medicare
Advantage significantly. And most analysis has shown that we
are overpaying for Medicare Advantage given the benefits that
are provided.
I do have a couple of questions though. I want to ask Ms.
Corlette, we focused here on preexisting conditions, but would
coverage for preexisting conditions actually work very well if
we didn't have the other consumer protections? I mean we could
all agree on preexisting conditions, but if you don't take the
caps off, preexisting conditions are limited. And Mr. Riedy
would have a very difficult time with CF.
Ms. Corlette. Yes, absolutely. And, in fact, New York is a
great example of a State that had a number of preexisting
condition protections before the ACA was passed, but they had a
very expensive individual market because they didn't have the
other provisions that the ACA included, such as the subsidies
to support people up to 400 percent of the Federal poverty
level to buy insurance, as well as the individual mandate
penalty.
So, it is important to note that the ACA included not just
preexisting condition protections, but a number of provisions
that were more holistically designed to try to make coverage
accessible and affordable for people. All of those, of course,
have been at least preliminarily ruled to be invalid by the
Texas court.
Ms. Shalala. Thank you very much. And, Dr. Gupta, yesterday
the President said that he was going to invest some money in
HIV drugs. And I want to ask you about that, because it is very
important in my district. We have the highest incidence per
capita, and therefore I am very supportive of any investment in
HIV. But those investments don't work without a comprehensive
plan around them. And could you talk a little about that?
Dr. Gupta. Absolutely. Thank you for that question. So as
opposed to the 1980's, where we had a challenge of diagnosing
HIV, figuring out how to treat it, and make it a condition.
People were dying on the streets because of that. Now, we have
a challenge of finding those individuals who may not know that
they have HIV. So, screening--that is why we have moved to what
we call universal screening and you really have to opt out of
it, otherwise most of us need to get screened. The idea behind
that is most people that may have HIV do not know they have
HIV. And if they can be caught early and put in treatment it
becomes a chronic condition you can live with. You don't have
to die because of the complications now.
When you start to remove the other legs of that stool, in
terms of essential health benefits, then obviously those people
are going to not want to be screened for the HIV. The diagnosis
will not occur and then they will not be treated. As a result
they will continue to transmit the disease and we will result
in having more cases than fewer cases and our conquest to
eliminate HIV from the United States will not happen anytime
soon.
Ms. Shalala. Thank you very much. And, Ms. Turner, if I
could ask a quick question about the flexibility you are
talking about. Would it be OK with you if a State was willing
to develop a plan that continued caps, had covered preexisting
conditions but continued caps? Because, you know, private
insurance is a mixed bag in this country. I have got half a
million people in my own district that are covered by private
insurance, but some of it is underinsurance because it has high
deductibles. And how much flexibility would you give the States
so that we would really recognize it as insurance and
comprehensive insurance? Would you continue some of these
consumer protections that we are talking about?
Ms. Turner. I think that it is important to recognize that
State officials have to answer to the same constituents when
they are making changes, health policy changes that Federal
officials do. And so that needs to be a conversation with their
voters, and to make sure that they are answering the
constituents' needs for affordable, quality coverage, but doing
so in a way that may give them more flexibility.
Some States in Medicaid, as you know, and I am sure under
your Secretaryship some of the waivers were approved to give
States like Oregon, for example, a lot of flexibility within
its Medicaid program and what benefits were covered. So I think
States can better fine-tune the mandates than a Washington
mandate. The Affordable Care Act has been changed already
either by administrative order or by acts of Congress 70 times.
So, I think needing to give the States the flexibility to
answer the needs of their constituents and know that their
constituents actually can be better heard at the State level, I
think is important.
Ms. Shalala. I should point out that the Oregon simply took
the same package. It actually didn't mix up the package of
benefits very much. I am asking you specifically about caps and
about preexisting conditions. Do you think that States ought to
be able and the other consumer protections ought to be able to
waive those consumer protections and would it actually be
comprehensive insurance at the end of the day if they had
flexibility on those consumer protections including preexisting
conditions?
Ms. Turner. We see with States that are saying they don't
want short-term limited duration plans, California and offered
in their States, Pennsylvania, restrictions on association
health plans. If States feel that those consumer protections
are important, I believe that they will keep them and if they
feel that there needs to be some flexibility along with
consumer awareness and transparency, then I think States should
have the option of figuring out what works best for their
constituents.
Ms. Shalala. So you wouldn't favor ERISA protections for--
and overrule States--using ERISA protections?
Ms. Turner. I think that right now we basically have under
HIPAA we have the protections that allow people to go from
their employer plan--
Ms. Shalala. Right.
Ms. Turner [continuing]. to another employer plan and
maintain that continuity of coverage and not be discriminated
against. So those protections are already on the books and
because of the community rating within employer plans, people
are protected to make sure that their health status does not
affect their premium costs.
Ms. Shalala. I yield.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. OK, thank you. Moving now, Ms. Turner, and
one more time, I think you've answered this, but it seems to me
the Republicans, the Democrats are all favored, in favor of
protecting coverage for preexisting conditions. Can you just
one more time tell us, we have said it so many times but not as
many times as the ads we have saying otherwise running against
us in election. Under current law, are workers with preexisting
conditions allowed to be charged more, denied coverage based on
their condition?
Ms. Turner. I'm sorry, repeat.
Mr. Grothman. Under current law, are people allowed to be
charged more, denied coverage based on their conditions?
Ms. Turner. No, Congressman.
Mr. Grothman. OK. So that is the current law right now.
Good. Now I will give you some other general questions. I am
from Wisconsin. In 2018 last year, Scott Walker worked with the
Trump administration and CMS to approve a 1332 State innovation
waiver, which caused our premiums to drop. Are you familiar
with that situation?
Ms. Turner. Yes, I am, sir.
Mr. Grothman. Could you talk about what we did in
Wisconsin?
Ms. Turner. I mentioned actually in my testimony some of
them, some of the impact that these plans have had and of
course I can't find this chart when I'm looking for it. But
they have been able to basically repurpose existing ACA money
to help increase access to coverage or to improve access to
coverage for people with chronic conditions, preexisting
conditions, and therefore lower premiums in their general
market.
So a number of States have--Wisconsin is often taking the
lead in health policy innovations and waivers and I think that
this is an important one to move forward with.
Mr. Grothman. And at least I am told that premiums dropped
a little over 4 percent, is that your?
Ms. Turner. Premiums dropped and enrollment increased as a
direct consequence.
Mr. Grothman. Good. And in the past, before this type of
thing, we saw incredible increases in premiums and open
enrollment falling. Is that--we saw that in Wisconsin. Is that
your nationwide?
Ms. Turner. Because the premiums were so much higher--
Mr. Grothman. Right. As the premiums--a lot of people just
throw in the towel.
Ms. Turner. People just can't afford it and they also--we
talk about a high deductible. The deductibles are so high and
the ACA plans that if people are not eligible for cost-sharing
reduction subsidies they basically say they might as well not
be insured because they can't afford to pay the first $10,000
every year out of pocket before coverage kicks in.
Mr. Grothman. I am glad you mentioned association plans. My
experience with health care in general, when you take a group,
not a Statewide group because it is hard for the State to
duplicate it, but when you take a business with a 1,000
employees or something, a lot of those innovative businesses
were doing a very good job. One of the things they did is
employer-based clinics which saved tremendous amount of money
for a variety of reasons. Is there any way that you can see
that sort of thing can be duplicated through something like
Obamacare or is this the type of innovation that is why we want
the vast majority of Americans hopefully still insured through
their employer?
Ms. Turner. Well, the Affordable Care Act did allow some
innovation incentives for people to do--not association health
plans, I'm blanking on the name of the creative coordinated
care plans within Medicare. And because the rules that were
written around the Affordable Care Act were so strict, even
plans like the Mayo Clinic and Cleveland Clinic and others that
had been--Geisinger, that had been very successful in managed,
coordinated care, couldn't make it work.
So I do think that flexibility is really important and
trusting employers--some employers have said for example that
they feel it is worth flying their employee to another State
and family members to get care at a center of excellence, of
cardiac care, cancer care. So they really do try to innovate to
get the best value and the best quality care.
Mr. Grothman. It is another thing. I did mention employer-
based clinics but these centers of value, flying people to
other States because an employer has the ability to hire
somebody and do a good job. Now I know there are a lot of
people who always feel that setting up another big Federal
bureaucracy is going to work after this seems to have failed
like 120,000 times in a row, but what you are telling me is a
way that the private insurance plans and for individual
companies and hopefully to be duplicated by associated plans,
they are able to find ways to reduce premiums and reduce costs
that really as a practical matter are not being duplicated with
a government bureaucracy.
Ms. Turner. That is correct.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Levin.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to dig in
a little more deeply to the Texas v. United States case and I
have a question to start for Ms. Corlette. In a departure from
long standing precedent of defending Federal law against
constitutional challenges, the Trump Administration's
Department of Justice filed a brief last year requesting that
the court strike down several provisions of the ACA in the
Texas case. Among the provisions that the administration argues
should be overturned include guaranteed issue, community
rating, discrimination based on health status and preexisting
conditions exclusions.
Last week, President Trump told the New York Times that he
is optimistic that the ongoing Texas lawsuit will terminate the
Affordable Care Act. Would you say that the Justice
Department's decision not to defend the ACA is consistent with
Republican promises to protect patients with preexisting
conditions?
Ms. Corlette. Well, I would say that the Justice
Department's provision--position if it prevails would strike
down the protections that the ACA provides for people with
preexisting conditions. So no, it's not consistent.
Mr. Levin. And how does this, his statement reflect the
Administration's approach to this issue?
Ms. Corlette. I--
Mr. Levin. Of preexisting conditions that we are here to
talk about.
Ms. Corlette. I have, yes. I have a little trouble divining
exactly what the Administration's position is given that there
do seem to be differences between what President Trump has said
and what the Justice Department position is so I am not sure I
can comment.
Mr. Levin. And what they are actually doing. So you pointed
out in your testimony that Republicans never have come up with
a proposal to replace the ACA yet they continue with their
efforts to unravel it, the most recent example being the Texas
lawsuit.
During the last Congress when we were debating the
Republican bill to repeal the ACA, Republicans put proposed
segmenting the population and dumping sick patients into high
risk pools. The CBO had the following assessment of this
proposal: ``Less healthy people would face extremely high
premium. Over time it would become more difficult for less
healthy people, including people with preexisting medical
conditions in those States to purchase insurance because their
premiums would continue to increase rapidly.''
One of our witnesses, Ms. Turner, has put forth a similar
proposal this morning or early this afternoon. Ms. Corlette,
how do risk--high-risk pools stack up as an alternative to the
coverage provided through the ACA?
Ms. Corlette. Sure. Well, we have a history of high-risk
pools. Before the ACA there were about 35 States that had high-
risk pools and they varied. They were different, but I can tell
you that for people who were in high-risk pools, the premiums
could be as much as two times the standard rate. They often had
preexisting condition exclusions so the condition that got you
denied coverage in the individual market you didn't get covered
in the high-risk pool for up to a year. You had annual and
lifetime limits quite often, high deductibles and often many of
these high-risk pools limited enrollment. Even still, they
operated at a loss so they needed to be subsidized by the
government.
Mr. Levin. OK, thank you. I have a question for Mr. Riedy.
In your testimony, you described the enormous cost of your
medical treatments, totaling nearly $450,000 last year. Prior
to the ACA plans in the both the individual and employer market
were permitted to impose annual and lifetime limits on care and
many of them did, including more than 90 percent of the plans
in the individual market. You better than most people can speak
to the real-world impact of these limits. Based on your
personal experience, how do annual or lifetime limits on
coverage impact patients with high-cost conditions?
Mr. Riedy. Thank you for the question. Annual and lifetime
caps for me personally if they were allowed to exist again
would cause a severe financial burden on my family. Not just
from the cost of having to pay for the care that I receive, but
also from the impact that if I do reach that cap, what happens
next? Do I have to pay for them out of pocket? And if I do then
those costs can be unmanageable.
As you mentioned my care last year just for the medicines
was $450,0000. That is a lot of money to take and so the
impacts of those caps, having them now provide peace of mind.
They also know that I can continue to receive the highly
specialized care and that I have access to that coverage that
allows me to get that care.
Mr. Levin. I can't thank you enough for coming and sharing
your story with us and with the American people. And just in a
note of solidarity, I like the gentlewoman from Georgia who
spoke earlier, I am a two-time cancer survivor but also Mary
and I have four kids. The two oldest both have Crohn's disease
and have for 14 years and we would have gone bankrupt multiple
times over just trying to pay for their medications if they
weren't covered and because of, you know, caps. Lifetime, we
would have blown by lifetime caps already so I really thank you
for sharing your story. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
Watkins.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question is for
Ms. Turner. Ma'am, I represent Kansas and in Kansas, Kansans
with preexisting conditions face a number of challenges and
hardships. And I am glad that a lot of Democrats and
Republicans agree that Americans with preexisting conditions
should and have been for years been protected, for decades
actually. And so in that of course even before the Affordable
Care Act so unfortunately since its passage, the ACA continues
to be problematic. Premiums continue to rise and the answer I
believe is not to double down on ACA but and seek a one size
fits all government-run health care regime.
Therefore, Ms. Turner, since the passage of Obamacare, can
you speak to the lack of actual affordability for the vast
majority of Americans? Also the rate of continued premium
increases because of the law?
Ms. Turner. Premiums in the exchange markets have about
doubled on average since the law went into--since the exchanges
took effect in 2014. That is much higher than in the regular
market and certainly before that. And a consequence of that is
that it's driving more and more healthy people out of the
market.
The ACA as you know forces young people to pay a
disproportionally high amount for their coverage because of the
three-to-one age rating in the exchanges. And so we are
losing--if young people are not eligible for their parent's
coverage and trying to afford premiums on their own, they're
paying a disproportionate amount for people who are older and
sicker and therefore they're dropping out as well. So I think
it is crucial if we really want to increase access to health
coverage that we figure out a way to get cost down and to
attract the healthy people into the market.
Senator Reeve's constituent in Virginia, he doesn't want to
drop out of health insurance market but he can't afford $4,000
a month for premiums and having no choices of coverage. Some
people need more choices. They need to be able to have more
flexibility with benefits to protect their family and they need
some of these bridge plans like association health plans and
short-term limited duration plans.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you. I also want to touch on our
increasingly strong economy propelled by comprehensive tax cuts
and regulatory reform. In fact, CNBC recently noted that
January job reports just last week payroll surged by 304,000
smashing estimates. Thanks to recent pro-growth Federal policy
changes, more and more Americans are finally finding good
paying jobs. Many of these jobs offer generous employer
sponsored healthcare. So all the employers simply know that
they can--that they have to be competitive to attract good HR.
So, Ms. Turner, can a strong jobs market spurred by pro-growth
policies lead to increased coverage rates nationally for
employees--employers with preexisting coverage? What are some
policies that can continue fueling work force participation?
Ms. Turner. You are absolutely right that employees highly
value the, their workplace coverage and the workplace--the H.R.
departments, especially for big companies work tirelessly to
try to negotiate the best benefits, the best drug formulary and
the access to the highest quality hospitals for their employees
to attract them so that they won't go to a competitor. And
there are how many, 2 million jobs, two and a half million jobs
that aren't filled now and employers can't even find the
workers to fill them. So being able to offer attractive,
affordable health coverage with the flexibility to meet the
needs of their workers, and having providers that are competing
for that business to get, to offer those lower costs, higher
value plans, I think is really a crucial part of a thriving
economy.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you, Ms. Turner. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Trone.
Mr. Trone. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Corlette, 30
years ago I started my business with my wife and two little
girls and I know firsthand starting a business can be scary
without the fear you are going to be able to afford healthcare
for yourself and your family. You mentioned prior to the ACA
people were often tied to jobs they'd have otherwise left but
simply because they needed to maintain healthcare, access to
affordable health insurance. Could you elaborate on what the
ACA's protections for patients with preexisting conditions has
meant for entrepreneurship, startups, small business creation?
Ms. Corlette. Sure. So, before the ACA, if you were leaving
a job-based plan, you were required to maintain what was called
COBRA coverage which was continuation coverage, but you had to
pay the full premium. And for most people that was
unaffordable. And so, people often had a lapse in coverage and
then if you had a preexisting condition it was almost
impossible to find an individual market plan to cover you and
your family.
With the ACA you can now if you have a business idea or
want to go out on your own and start a consultancy or invent
something, you can do so without having to worry that your
preexisting condition would cause you to be denied or have a
preexisting condition imposed on your--exclusion imposed on
your policy.
Mr. Trone. So, Dr. Gupta, the opioid epidemic as you spoke
about and you are from West Virginia. My district borders
western Maryland so we are right there together in the heart of
the opioid epidemic on I-81. I lost my nephew, age 24, to a
fentanyl overdose a couple years ago and so many folks in my
district have been adversely affected by this tragedy.
With the ACA, we closed a lot of gaps in coverage,
especially in the area of behavioral health. And I think that
is so important and it is all part and parcel of this disaster
substance disorders. If the ACA was gone, what do you see as
the human toll?
Dr. Gupta. Thank you for that question. Certainly we
understand, you know, States with border counties populations
don't treat those as States, they are one community within
those areas. So, it's very important for people to be able to
move across and not have to worry about what is the State
regulation in this State and the State regulation in that
State? ACA allows that consistency to happen State to State.
The mental health protections as well as the ability to get the
help that need and people would have so many other challenges
ongoing at the same time. ACA really allows that to happen and
I think that is the most important piece as we are combatting
this opioid crisis is to be able to not have any extra barriers
in terms of coverage and accessibility to care. As the good
treatments are existing and more come up, we have got to be
able to have the access to provide tens of millions of people
who are suffering and dying actually, tens of thousands per
year to be able to save them and get them back to work.
Mr. Trone. As we put together legislation on opioids to
address that, what do you see as a couple key points that
should be in that to address the mental health connectivity
which was so crucial and part and parcel of this at all times?
Dr. Gupta. I think it is very important for us to go back
to see what we did with HIV. We realized HIV was much more of a
social determinant aspect of this in the 80's and we put
together, you know, the Ryan White Care Act for example, that
not just took care of you as an individual, your medication,
but you--looked at your house and your access and all those
things.
So I think it is very important when you look at this
crisis, we are looking at housing, we are looking at access,
daycare, all of those tools that surround somebody who is
suffering from addiction to be able to be provided so that they
can get into treatment and then they can have a successful,
fair chance of recovery and back into employment.
So, it is a lot more than just pills or just counseling.
There is a societal response that we must have to this crisis
in order to address it and I think that is the part that we can
do more, not less.
Mr. Trone. OK, thank you. I yield the balance of my time.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from Indiana, Mr.
Fulcher.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and panelists.
Chairman Scott. Excuse me, Idaho. Excuse me.
Mr. Fulcher. Yes, it is a common mistake. Thank you.
Panelists take heart. I think the end is near. It is coming
close here OK and please forgive the lack of attendance by some
of us on the front end. I, for one, am still struggling with
the multiple committees as the same time. And so please know
that wasn't rudeness.
My question and I will probably address this to Ms. Turner
because I know some of this has been covered and I am going to
shorten things up because Mr. Watkins hit part of that. But in
our State of Idaho, 2012 I think it was we--I believe we were
the only State with Republican leadership in the House, the
Senate, and the Governor's office that embraced the State-based
exchange. And I was in the Senate leadership role at that time
and in hindsight it just hasn't worked out well for us.
Our insurance premiums across the board have averaged
somewhere between a 15 and a 27 percent per year increase. And
so as we speak right now, in our State, there is a lot of
things on the table. It is--that have been--that are being
discussed right now. Alternatives to try to figure out a better
path and I would just like to get your counsel, your input, on
some of those things and I will just list a few. But the
expansion of HSAs, medical memberships, medishare, charity
care. The expansion of insurance procurement across State lines
which in our State we can't do, high-risk pool reform. Those
types of things which are--they are more market-based and given
our history and our struggle with the status quo that there is,
your thoughts, your counsel on that type of an approach.
Ms. Turner. States do talk about the difficulty of figuring
out how to address the needs of their State but it's even more
than the State. It's sometimes at a county level. You have
rural counties who have very different problems then Cincinnati
and Canton and Cleveland. They've really need to have the
resources and the flexibility to meet the needs of those areas.
And I want to really reinforce what Dr. Gupta was saying
about the social determinants of health. We put so much money
just into health care when people may actually need other kinds
of supports to make their lives work better. And I believe that
Ohio is one of the States that has--is implementing work
requirements as well for Medicaid. And people who work with
these communities say that is a valuable thing to make sure
that people have someplace to go once they get through
rehabilitation treatment, to have a job, something to give
stability to their life. Help them with housing.
If States had more flexibility and I believe the Trump
Administration is working to do that. As we have said before,
Congress had repeatedly voted for money to dedicate money to
high-risk pools. Many States that were doing--the States that
were doing high-risk pools in the past were doing it all with
State money. With the ACA there is new money to put on the
table to make those risk pools work better so that you can
provide dedicated resources for them and more comprehensive
care for chronic conditions.
So care management for those high end patients, being able
to have more flexibility, to provide the kinds of benefits
structures that people actually want to purchase to protect
themselves and their families I think are really crucial. And
hopefully we can work with Ohio and other States in trying to
think about what some of those waiver options might be to
work--make it work better for your State.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, a quick followup and
I will--thank you. Ms. Turner, in a few words because I am
going to yield my time here in just a second. But that makes
sense. But when it comes right down to it, should we be
focusing on solutions that come out of this room and out of
this building and out of the building next door or should be
focusing on more market--enabling market-based solutions to try
to improve our situation?
Ms. Turner. We see in Medicare advantage for example that
market-based solutions to provide more comprehensive care and I
believe it is really based upon a formula very close to what
traditional Medicare pays for Medicare advantage, can give
incentives to begin to find the same kinds of cost efficiencies
in the health sector that we see at other sectors of the
economy.
When you have so much of the time of health care providers
and administrators focused on following Washington's rules
rather than figuring out what is best for the patient, what is
best for our State that it really takes away time and energy
from solving the problem.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, panelists, Ms. Turner. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Gentlelady from Michigan, Ms.
Stevens.
Mr. Stevens. I would like to take a minute to thank our
panelists today. Ms. Corlette, your expertise and knowledge
was--is so welcome and we thank you for taking the time.
Mr. Riedy, thank you for your courage and your words of
wisdom and sharing your personal story. It was a delight to be
in this room with your family who was looking at you with very
proud eyes. You are one of the reasons why the ACA was so
critical and critical to every American taxpayer and American
worker and I admire you from the bottom of my heart.
And, Ms. Turner, I want to thank you for your eloquence and
answering a lot of questions today. And, Dr. Gupta, thank you
for being here.
As we are here examining threats to workers with
preexisting conditions, this topic could not be more critical
as our Ranking Member Foxx indicated. We have a healthy economy
and the health of our taxpayers and our workers is paramount.
And Dr. Gupta, I would like to take my questions to you and
your expertise which we are delighted to have in the room
today. In your testimony, you discussed the issue of high-risk
pregnancy and delivery and how women prior to the enactment of
the ACA often found that, you know, they reached their policy's
cap. They would reach their policy's cap on the amount of care
provided. They would find themselves exposed financially,
unsupported in the workplace, and generally pushed to a brink.
And so, I would like to ask you, what is the cost of high-risk
pregnancy and how likely are women to run up against these caps
in the absence of the ACA protections.
Dr. Gupta. Certainly, thank you for that question. March of
Dimes certainly is doing a lot of work around this because we
know that maternal mortality and morbidity amongst the 49
developed countries in the world, we are number 49. We are
actually three times mortality of the next country in line
which is UK. So we are really in a bad shape right now. For--we
have women dying every single day.
The cost can be tremendous and when we look at the cost
really it is not just human lives lost, but we are talking
about one complicated pregnancy can cause that woman to lose
potentially her absolutely full annual lifetime limits. So, she
may not have coverage for the rest of the year and have to take
care of not just the baby but the rest of the family.
Same way we go back to the severe prematurity. One simple
birth with severe prematurity can land a child, an infant for
multiple months in a neonatal ICU. So, when the baby returns
home for the first time when there should be a cause for
celebration, it would then be a cause that the baby could meet
his or hers lifetime limits on care and not be insurable until
Medicare. And that's just a terrible thing to think about and
those are the challenges we are dealing with where we need to
be making progress to work in those maternity care deserts.
We have a third of the counties in this country or 1,000
counties, 5 million women, 150,000 babies that are being born
what no obstetric care. And so that we are actually, you know,
talking about walking backwards.
Mr. Stevens. Well, and not only is this a cost to the
mother and the family, it is a cost to the employer as we, you
know, are talking about the workforce and our economy writ
large. And, Dr. Gupta, as you know, the Affordable Care Act
requires insurers to cover preventative health services without
cost-sharing and these obviously include family planning, well
women visits, screenings for domestic violence and other
crucial health services.
And I, just to back this out a minute, I would love for you
to just reflect on how pregnant women and other new members--
mothers, excuse me, utilize these services and what impact
would overturning these provisions maybe through the Texas
litigation have on these women?
Dr. Gupta. So first of all, just the idea of preconception
care to be healthy in order to get pregnant is very important.
That would not happen. Then within prenatal care the notion of
having things like vitamin--folic acid and vitamins, which we
think is very basic, we recommend that all across the globe,
yet we can have women that can have, deliver and cause real
harm to the babies developing because of neural tube defects
and other things that are not being provided. Throughout the
prenatal care we know the amount of visits that happen with the
doctor's office and this following a standard of care leads to
better delivery, better care of not just the mother but also
the baby as a result, getting the family dyad back together,
the mom and baby. None of that would be possible if we were to
remove that.
And obviously one of the things that used to happen was the
only time you could get into Medicaid was if you were--if you
got pregnant and then it would be removed the coverage right
after. Now we have 60 days, up to 60 days coverage post-partum.
When we are dealing with challenges of post-partum depression,
suicide, post-partum hemorrhage, hypertension, eclampsia, heart
conditions, it's very critical for us to build on that coverage
post-partum up to a year because of the increasing maternal
mortality that is happening.
This is still the most dangerous place for a woman to have
birth in the developed world. And we need to be working again
not at removing that but actually developing more steps but at
this time, removal of ACA provisions will cost women and their
children not only just their jobs but potentially their lives.
Mr. Stevens. Yes. Well, Dr. Gupta, while you don't share my
gender, I appreciate you sharing the stories of women and
mothers and making that at the forefront of our minds today.
Thank you.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentlelady from Nevada, Ms.
Lee.
Mr. Lee. Thank you. I wanted to first thank all of the
panelists today for your testimony and answering the questions.
And, Mr. Riedy, I wanted to speak directly to you. First of
all, CF has had a place in my family. My husband lost a cousin
about 30 years ago before groundbreaking technologies and
treatments were available. And more importantly, my sister,
Mary Lester, is a respiratory therapist at Keck Medical Center
at USC and dealing with adult cystic fibrosis. So, through her
years, through my years and I have experienced alongside her
many of the struggles that patients like you go through. So,
thank you very much for being here and your testimony.
I wanted to ask, in your testimony you pointed out that
you're fortunate to have comprehensive health coverage through
your wife's employer. If your wife were to change jobs, choose
to start a small business or possibly take time off for
education, you might end up in a situation where you would have
to change this coverage. And I wanted to know from you how do
the Affordable Care Acts protections for patients with
preexisting conditions provide peace of mind that you would
never be without coverage?
Mr. Riedy. Thank you for that question. Knowing that my
wife or I could switch employers and still be adequately
covered, it gives us peace of mind that allows us to be
flexible and explore new opportunities potentially that before
the ACA may not have existed. And without the ACA, you know,
there is always that fear that leaving a job if I went to
another one that I could still be denied insurance because of
my preexisting condition or if my wife changed jobs, you know,
would they deny me coverage because of my preexisting
condition.
Mr. Lee. And thank you. And to followup on that, what
impact would an adverse decision in Texas case have on your
wife's ability to change jobs?
Mr. Riedy. Well, if the ACA was--if the ruling stands, my
wife would have less of the opportunity to explore new
opportunities. She is a teacher so she is at a great place
right now but if she had to--if she wanted to do something
other than teach or switch employers there's still that fear
that we may be or I may be denied coverage or access to it. So,
it could lock her into where she is.
Mr. Lee. Lock her in. All right, thank you. One other
question. According to the Department of Health and Human
Services, the number of Americans with preexisting conditions
ranges from at least 23 percent, 61 million people to as many
as 133 million people. And prior to the Affordable Care Act
these Americans with preexisting conditions could be denied
coverage or charged an exorbitant premium to get coverage,
something that my parents had experience both having high blood
pressure at one point in their lives.
Some families have even declared bankruptcy from high
medical bills due to having a preexisting condition. Today,
however, insurance companies cannot discriminate against people
based on their medical history.
Mr. Riedy, without employer-sponsored health insurance or
insurance through your family prior to the Affordable Care Act,
do you believe you would have been able to attain affordable
health insurance?
Mr. Riedy. Before the ACA I would have likely been denied
coverage because of my preexisting condition without the access
to employer-sponsored health coverage. And the ACA provides me
with the opportunity to be adequately covered on the individual
market I'm currently in. Without them I don't know if that
would be possible.
Mr. Lee. Well, thank you so much for your testimony. I want
to say I texted my sister to tell her I was going to be
speaking with you today and she sent me this message back that
said please make sure we help people with cystic fibrosis
because these patient needs to have their medical needs met and
it is extremely expensive illness. She said they didn't cause
this disease, but they must fight it and so thank you for your
courage for being here. I appreciate it.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentlelady from
Massachusetts, Ms. Trahan.
Ms. Trahan. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having
this hearing and thank you, everyone, for hanging in for a long
hearing. Part of the challenge of being later in the program
and new here is so many of the thoughtful inquiries have
already been made but I do have a couple of questions. I am a
mother of two young girls, 8 and 4 as well as three grown
stepsons who have benefited from the ACA and being able to stay
on my health plan as they enter the workforce.
Before the ACA women were often charged more than men just
because of their gender and some couldn't even get coverage on
the individual market. For women of childbearing age, the
discrimination was particularly blatant, and the vast majority
of plans excluded maternity coverage of any kind. And I
appreciate my colleague from Michigan and her inquiry around
maternal care.
Dr. Gupta, I am wondering if you could just explain to us
what it was like for women to get health insurance coverage
before ACA and how many plans covered maternity coverage in the
individual market and what improvements have women and their
families seen since ACA?
Dr. Gupta. Certainly, thank you for that. We know that
prior to the ACA, only 11 States mandated the coverage of
maternity care. Only 13 percent of the individual health market
actually covered maternity care. We know that at that time
obviously the gender of being female was a preexisting
condition in effect. We also know that 47 percent of people who
tried, adults who try to get coverage with preexisting
condition were either denied, charged more or were precluded
from at least one condition. That's from the Commonwealth Fund
Study. So, we know that this was a big problem.
Since then, March of Dimes did a study in 2015 and found
that between 2013 and 2015 the uninsured coverage for
childbearing age women went down from about 20 million to 13
million, I'm sorry 20 percent to 13 percent. That means that
another 5 and a half million of childbearing age gained
coverage. Not only that, the unmet needs actually went down by
10 percent points of those women. So clearly that has been a
big gain.
I would say when we talk about preexisting conditions,
health inequities are the first cause of preexisting
conditions. And when I talk about maternal mortality, a black
woman in this country is more likely to die--three to four
times more than a white woman. So, we still have for healthcare
institutions across and healthcare systems across the country,
today, race is a preexisting condition and we need to continue
to work on that and I think that is a critical piece that I
must bring up as well.
Ms. Trahan. Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Gupta. and, Ms.
Corlette, to borrow a phrase that is going around a lot, the
dignity of work is something that means a lot of me. And I am
the daughter of a union ironworker. My mom worked multiple
part-time jobs while raising my sisters and me. I am constantly
thinking about how are we going to support work and labor as it
transitions to the future and what the future of work actually
looks like?
We talk a lot about our economy and adding more jobs but
those don't always translate into employer-sponsored plans. So,
a recent Department of Labor survey found that 10 percent of
the workforce are categorized as either independent contractors
or self-employed. This represents a growing segment of the
workforce, in fact more than half of all ACA marketplace
enrollees are small business owners, self-employed individuals
or small business employees.
I am wondering if you have looked at any additional
research on the impact of the Texas lawsuit or even just the 70
plus ACA repeal attempts would have on the future of work? And
also, if we have time, can you discuss the impact of removing
preexisting condition protections for gig economy workers,
independent contractors specifically?
Ms. Corlette. Sure. Thank you. It's a great question. So,
for folks who do have job-based coverage, there are a couple of
things to be concerned about if the Texas court decision
stands. One of course is that people could lose--with chronic
or high-cost health needs could lose some of the protections
that Mr. Riedy has spoken so eloquently about. The other issue
of course is job lock, and this is a phenomenon that was well-
documented before the ACA where folks sort of hung onto their
jobs and their job-based coverage because of the uncertainty of
the individual market. And they may have had a great business
idea or been a terrific entrepreneur but did not pursue that
because of their need to maintain job-based coverage.
Ms. Trahan. Great. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentlelady from North
Carolina, Dr. Adams.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you all very
much for your testimony and for sitting out with us, we
appreciate that very much. Mr. Riedy, thank you so much for
sharing your story.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into the record first
from the--some organizations that have commented regarding the
preexisting conditions and the GOP plan. First, the American
Cancer Society Action Network who says that these protections
are hollow if patients and survivors can't afford insurance.
From the American HealthCare Association, the plan would do
just the opposite and not serve the health needs of all
Americans. And then they also say that the greatest achievement
of the ACA is protecting those with preexisting conditions. The
National Disabilities Rights Network says that GOP plan permits
discrimination against people with disabilities in the
insurance market for preexisting conditions and I would like to
enter this into the record, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Let me just say as I have listened to you, all
of you I thought about Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., who talked
about healthcare and inequities and who said that ``of all the
forms of inequality, injustice in healthcare is the most
shocking and most inhumane'' and indeed it is. I do want to
just mention the impact that ACA has had on communities of
color, in particular the protections of those with preexisting
conditions.
I am a diabetic and that's an illness that was considered,
is considered a preexisting condition. It is very prevalent in
my family. I had a sister who suffered with sickle cell, from
sickle cell anemia, a preexisting condition who passed away
before she was 27. African-Americans are 80 percent more likely
than Whites to have been diagnosed with diabetes. About 365
African Americans suffer with sickle cell anemia. Latin--Latino
Americans have the highest rates of cervical cancer and Asian
women are at the highest risk of osteoporosis.
Simply put, the Affordable Care Act has saved lives and has
provided healthcare to millions who previously thought
affordable treatment was just a dream. Folks like me, families
that grew up who didn't have healthcare at all, no health
insurance, having to go to the emergency room to get our care.
Dr. Gupta just one or two questions. For those with
preexisting conditions or minority communities, how many more
people with chronic illnesses have been covered and have those
who suffer from chronic ailments seen improvements in their
conditions as a result?
Dr. Gupta. I can tell you that there has been a great
progress made in that and I will certainly get you the exact
numbers but the great progress made in that and the ability to
again, level the playing field in our pursuit to level the
playing field to get people to be covered. And we, I say that
because these conditions are a part and representative of your
socioeconomic condition. They're representative oftentimes of
the culture we come from and lots of other things. What we call
social determinants of health, education level. So being able
to provide the basic healthcare that has happened as part of
the health ACA has allowed our communities of color actually to
be--have one less thing to worry about. So that's one of the
things.
The other piece I will go back to, you know, as March of
Dimes we are focused on the health of moms and babies and
nowhere is it more evident, the disparities and health
inequities when we look at moms and babies. As I mentioned,
three times to four times more likely to die if you're a black
woman. Same way prematurely. Twice as likely to die if you're a
premature child who is African-American. So, these are the type
of things that we are fighting for and I think it is very
important to understand that this will take us many steps
backwards and we need to be moving forwards.
Ms. Adams. Great, thank you very much. Wanted to just, you
know, note that since the President assumed office we have seen
a constant attack against ACA. So much so that we are seeing a
reversal in quite a bit of the progress that we have made and
just wanted you to just briefly comment on how this reversal in
progress has impacted people of color specifically.
Dr. Gupta. I think what we are--once again will end up
happening, we will have individuals who will be dependent again
on emergency care and urgent care as a result of which
screenings will not happen, preventive visits will not happen.
As a result of which we will not have--be able to catch those
diseases early. It will be delayed, it will be more expensive
and it will cost more lives. As Ms. Corlette eloquently pointed
out a couple of times that we have clear data for ACA that when
people were uninsured there were about, over 20,000, 22,000
people we know in this country were dying every year because of
the lack of insurance per say. We will go back to that.
Ms. Adams. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Gentlelady from Minnesota, Ms.
Omar.
Ms. Omar. Thank you, Chair. Thank you all for being here.
Thank you for having this really important, critical
conversation but sometimes frustrating conversation. And I say
frustrating because of two reasons. One, to see the disconnect
between what some of my colleagues would say in committee about
healthcare and what their votes say about where their
priorities and their values are, seems very, very frustrating
for me.
And the second is for us to have conversations about policy
that have real impact on humans but to not really think about
the humans that we are talking about in this discussion. So I
am one that sees healthcare as a human right and I want to take
some time for us to humanize this particular conversation
because, you know, there are--there are people who will talk
about the costs, they will talk about, you know, what struggles
corporations will have or companies will have or a small
businesses or all of these kind of things. But oftentimes we
don't talk about the kind of stresses and the traumas that
people like yourself, Mr. Riedy, have lived with as you not
only deal with getting the diagnosis and figuring out how you
go on with life, with the condition that could be a hindrance
to your day-to-day life or could, you know, maybe end your
life.
So, what I wanted to do was maybe have you walk us through
what it must have been like to go through the process to
receive those letters from insurance companies before the
passage of the ACA.
Mr. Riedy. Well, thank you for the question. And this was,
back in 2007 and to know--have spent 7 days in the hospital and
to know that--what the cost of that care is and then after that
I also spent 14 days at home on IV antibiotics at home which
required a home healthcare nurse who came every couple days to
draw blood and just check on the dressing and the IV and
everything.
But to receive information that describes the cost of your
care A, is a shock to see how much it actually costs. But then
to see how that is then compiled toward a limit of what an
insurance company or someone is willing to pay is worrisome and
scary because you know that without that care or access to--
without access to the coverage that will give you that care, it
will be much harder for you to stand a chance. And not just for
me but for others with CF or with other preexisting conditions
that faced those same struggles.
It takes a toll not only on us as people but also on our
families and those that love us because it, it's not just me
that would sit and think about it. It's my wife, right. And my
kids are--at the time at 2007 they weren't alive yet. But now
if that was to happen again, that puts an unnecessary burden on
them as well.
And having the knowledge that there are no caps and not
having to receive those letters anymore allows us to focus on
our family and to continue to seek the best coverage and care
that allows - and medicines that are highly specialized to
target what the issues are with my disease and to help prolong
my life so that like I mentioned earlier I can see my children
grow up and go to college and not fear that I may have to make
a decision one day so that they can continue to grow and me not
have to have that coverage.
Ms. Omar. Thank you. I see an immorality in the way that we
are creating policy without taking in the actual impact that it
has on the people's lives. We take a constitutional oath to
protect the safety and the wellbeing of the people that we
serve. So, thank you so much for sharing your story and I will
tell you that you have people here in Congress who will make
sure to constantly center that. So, thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. And I recognize myself now for
questions and the vote has been called so these are going to be
some quick questions. Appreciate some quick answers.
Ms. Corlette, you mentioned the New York situation where
they covered--they guaranteed issue notwithstanding the
preexisting condition and when the Affordable Care Act came in,
is it true that the cost for individual insurance dropped more
than 50 percent?
Ms. Corlette. Yes. It's true.
Chairman Scott. The effect of the Texas case, is it true
that if the case is upheld there will be no protection,
national protection against--for preexisting conditions?
Ms. Corlette. The ACA protections will be stuck down, yes.
Chairman Scott. Now we have heard that if it is
unconstitutional the court would provide some transition time.
Is there any--you are a lawyer, is there any guarantee that
there would be a transition time if they call it
unconstitutional?
Ms. Corlette. There is no such guarantee.
Chairman Scott. Now the repeal and replace, are you
familiar with the American HealthCare Act that passed the
House?
Ms. Corlette. I do remember it, yes.
Chairman Scott. OK. Is it true that if that had passed 23
million fewer people would have insurance, costs would go up
about 20 percent the first year, and there would be fewer
consumer protections?
Ms. Corlette. I don't remember the exact numbers but that
sounds like what I remember, yes.
Chairman Scott. And we have heard a citation in the bill
that protects people with preexisting conditions but what
wasn't read was an ability for States to waive that protection,
so if you are unlucky enough to be in the wrong State that you
could have no protection against preexisting conditions. Is
that right?
Ms. Corlette. Right.
Chairman Scott. 11 million people who have, who got
coverage through Medicaid expansion would they lose their
coverage?
Ms. Corlette. Yes.
Chairman Scott. And the 10 essential benefits including
prescription drugs, mental health, maternal and newborn care,
preventive care, would those evaporate if the bill, if the
law--if the ruling is upheld?
Ms. Corlette. Yes.
Chairman Scott. And we have heard about essential benefits
and Dr. Gupta has been very articulate on that. If maternal
and--maternity care were optional, who would buy it?
Ms. Corlette. Well, who would offer it is the first
question? Insurance companies generally would not offer it. And
if they did, it would typically be as what is called a rider
and the cost would be exorbitant.
Chairman Scott. Because the only people that would buy it
would be those who expect to have a baby in the next year.
Ms. Corlette. Right.
Chairman Scott. And the cost would be not insurance but
essentially prepaid maternity care.
Ms. Corlette. That's exactly right.
Chairman Scott. And that is why it would be unaffordable.
Now on the association plans, as I understand it you can get a
healthy group, young healthy men and who would pay less. The
arithmetic therefore says everybody left behind would pay more.
Is that right?
Ms. Corlette. That's correct.
Chairman Scott. Now the navigators which you mentioned are
community-based organizations that help consumers sign up for
coverage. Language recently published by the Centers of
Medicaid and Medicare--Medicare and Medicaid--states that
priority will be granted and funding organizations that promote
``coverage options in addition to marketplace plans such as
association health plans, short term limited duration
insurance.'' Is that consistent with the original purpose of
the navigators?
Ms. Corlette. No. Navigators are supposed to help people
enroll in marketplace coverage.
Chairman Scott. The--you know what has happened to the rate
of bankruptcy because of medical bills as a result of the
Affordable Care Act?
Ms. Corlette. I don't have that data at my fingertips, but
it has gone down.
Chairman Scott. And can you say another word about job lock
and why the Affordable Care Act gives people, particularly
entrepreneurs the opportunity to switch jobs?
Ms. Corlette. Sure. So, for people who have a preexisting
condition themselves or somebody in their family who has a
health condition, economists documented this phenomenon called
job lock which prior to the ACA led a lot of people to stay
with job-based coverage even if that job was not optimally
deploying their skills or talents.
Since the ACA if you are an entrepreneur or you want to
start your own business, you can do so without worrying about
coverage for your preexisting condition and if you are at least
initially not earning much income, you can qualify for
subsidies or even Medicaid.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. I would like to thank our
witnesses for their testimony. I now recognize the
distinguished ranking member for closing comments.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank our
witnesses also for being here. I particularly appreciate the
opportunity that this hearing has given for Republicans to set
the record straight on our position on preexisting conditions.
I believe most every member spoke to it but we know that
every member believes in coverage for preexisting conditions
both those of us who were here to vote for the replace bill and
the other, and the numerous replacement bills that we have
offered.
There is so much to say to correct the record here that
there is not enough time. Perhaps I will submit some things for
the record but I want to point out that if the court rules the
ACA illegal, it would not repeal ERISA. It would not repeal
HIPAA. There are safeguards in both of those pieces of
legislation for preexisting conditions. Some of our witnesses
have been extremely careful in how they have answered those
questions and I appreciate that because they have been very
careful not to completely mislead people about that situation.
Contrary to what has been said about the work of Republicans,
we have made provisions in all our proposals and past
legislation that protects people with preexisting conditions.
And I think it is important we continue to say that.
The Affordable Care Act was built on lies. If you like your
insurance, you can keep your insurance. If you like your
doctor, you can keep your doctor. All of those things were said
and they--or costs will be lowered. Those were not true. The
ACA ordered people into a one-size-fits-all plan which
increased costs dramatically and we know that. What America--
what Republicans have done is to offer Americans freedom and
choice. And what we should have been talking about today was
what the ACA has done to raise the costs of healthcare and make
it less affordable and less accessible. And with that again I
thank the witnesses and I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Again, I want to thank the
witnesses and members for their participation. What we have
heard I think is a very valuable. The hearing has allowed us to
take stock of where we are, to examine the attacks on
preexisting conditions through unnecessary litigation, harmful
rules that have a negative impact on those with preexisting
conditions and I think we should try to improve and protect the
healthcare that we have now and not jeopardize it.
It is obvious that even the employer-based coverage with
the protection for preexisting condition, those with employer-
based coverage if we don't have the individuals covered, we
will have uncompensated cost-shifting so they will be paying
more if these, all off these other protections are repealed. If
there is no further business to come before the committee, the
hearing is now adjourned.
[Additional submissions by Ms. Adams follow:)
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[Whereupon, at 1:49 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[all]