- HIGH-RISK LIST 2019: RECOMMENDATIONS TO REDUCE RISK OF WASTE, FRAUD, AND MISMANAGEMENT IN FEDERAL PROGRAMS
[Senate Hearing 116-43]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-43
HIGH RISK LIST 2019: RECOMMENDATIONS
TO REDUCE RISK OF WASTE, FRAUD AND MISMANAGEMENT IN FEDERAL PROGRAMS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MARCH 6, 2019
__________
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-772PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin, Chairman
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
RICK SCOTT, Florida
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Gabrielle D'Adamo Singer, Staff Director
Patrick J. Bailey, Chief Counsel for Governmental Affairs
Jennifer L. Selde, Professional Staff Member
David M. Weinberg, Minority Staff Director
Ashley E. Poling, Minority Director of Governmental Affairs
Alexa E. Noruk, Minority Director of Homeland Security
Yelena L. Tsilker, Minority Professional Staff Member
Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
Thomas J. Spino, Hearing Clerk
C O N T E N T S
------
Opening statements:
Page
Senator Johnson..............................................
1
Senator Peters...............................................
2
Senator Lankford.............................................
12
Senator Rosen................................................
12
Senator Romney...............................................
14
Senator Sinema...............................................
17
Senator Hassan...............................................
19
Senator Carper...............................................
28
Prepared statements:
Senator Johnson..............................................
39
Senator Peters...............................................
40
WITNESSES
Wednesday, March 6, 2019
Hon. Eugene L. Dodaro, Comptroller General of the United States,
U.S. Government Accountability Office; accompanied by Cathleen
Berrick, Managing Director, Defense Capabilities and Management
Team; Nikki Clowers, Managing Director, Health Care Team;
Elizabeth Curda, Director, Education, Workforce and Income
Security Team; Mark Gaffigan, Managing Director, Natural
Resources and Environment Team; Nick Marinos, Director,
Information Technology and Cybersecurity Team; and Chris Mihm,
Managing Director, Strategic Issues Team
Testimony....................................................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
44
APPENDIX
Minors and Families chart........................................
161
GAO Priority Recommendations to EPA..............................
162
Senior Executives Association Report.............................
164
Responses to post-hearing questions for the Record:
Mr. Dodaro...................................................
204
HIGH-RISK LIST 2019: RECOMMENDATIONS
TO REDUCE RISK OF WASTE, FRAUD, AND
MISMANAGEMENT IN FEDERAL PROGRAMS
----------
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 6, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:31 a.m., in
room SD-342, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Ron Johnson,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Johnson, Lankford, Romney, Scott, Peters,
Carper, Hassan, Harris, Sinema, and Rosen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JOHNSON
Chairman Johnson. Good morning. This hearing will come to
order.
I want to welcome the Comptroller General, Mr. Gene Dodaro,
and everybody that has come here in the audience to really
review a very important report. It is interesting, the
Government Accountability Office (GAO), every Congress issues
its High-Risk Report, and the goal of that High-Risk Report is
very similar to this Committee's stated mission statement,
which is to enhance the economic and national security of
America and promote more efficient and effective government. I
think that pretty well is the whole goal behind both your High-
Risk Report as well as the Duplication Report.
I will just ask that my written statement be entered in the
record,\1\ without objection.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Johnson appears in the
Appendix on page 39.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I will keep my comments pretty short, but I think it was
pretty noteworthy--and it is in my statement--that since 2006,
because of the recommendations made by GAO in their High-Risk
Reports, Federal agencies have saved nearly $350 billion, and
in fiscal year (FY) 2018 the saving was $47 billion alone. So
it just shows where a little bit of attention--and Senator
Scott is working on a little project as well in terms of just
taking a look at efficiencies in terms of disaster spending
with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), that type
of thing. Attention to detail is incredibly important.
The point I wanted to primarily make in this is I know I
think last year the Duplication Report, one of my
recommendations was to work with GAO to actually help Congress
craft the legislation. I was talking to my staff. We really
were not able to do that effectively because so many of the
recommendations in duplication had to do with getting agencies
to cooperate. It is kind of hard to put that into legislative
language.
My sense is the High-Risk Report might lend itself more
toward potentially legislative solutions. Now, a lot of it
would be outside of this Committee's jurisdiction, but I just
wanted to make the point that it is important to hold this
hearing so we raise the profile of what I consider an
incredibly important report established by GAO, along with all
your other detailed reports, but this is the one that kind of
prioritizes areas. We need to get the attention of Secretaries
and department heads and Deputy Secretaries. That is one way of
doing it.
The other way of doing it is honestly just leading the
horse to water, helping Congress craft the--where a legislative
fix is required--I mean, so many of your recommendations can be
carried out and need to be carried out by the agencies. But
where there is a legislative fix required, I would just ask GAO
to work very cooperatively with this Committee, and we can pass
it along to other committees' jurisdiction as well. I have just
found the easier you make things, the more likely they are to
get done.
I just want to thank all of your staff for their dedicated
efforts. These are excellent reports. They really guide the way
and just the numbers pretty well speak for themselves--$350
billion worth of savings since 2006 and $47 billion just last
year. That is pretty remarkable. So, again, thank you for all
your efforts. Thank all your staff.
And with that, I will turn it over to Senator Peters.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PETERS\1\
Senator Peters. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like
to join you in welcoming our Comptroller General Gene Dodaro to
today's hearing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Peters appears in the
Appendix on page 40.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Dodaro, thank you for joining us and for all of the
hard work of the men and women that are a part of the GAO. You
work very hard to hold the Federal Government accountable and
to ensure that taxpayer dollars are being spent appropriately.
As always, I look forward to your testimony here today.
Since 1990, the GAO has alerted Congress to areas that are
considered ``high risk'' by providing this list of Federal
agencies and programs that they have identified as vulnerable
to fraud, waste, abuse, or mismanagement.
The High-Risk List is a road map to cut waste, save
taxpayer dollars, and set our country on a course for a more
fiscally responsible future. Yet Federal agencies and Congress
have struggled to effectively address many of the problems that
are identified in this report.
I believe that this failure is rooted in the dysfunctional
budgeting and appropriations process that is filled with last-
minute deadlines, continuing resolutions (CRs), and
brinkmanship that leads to government shutdowns.
Instead of thoroughly examining whether the programs we
authorize and fund are serving the American people effectively,
Congress routinely relies on stopgap spending measures and
continuing resolutions that disrupt the regular order and
really do not allow for meaningful oversight of taxpayer
dollars.
This leads to governmental short-termism. Too often, we
spend more money to lease office space over years or decades
than it would cost to build and own that property. We did not
invest effectively in Federal cybersecurity, and we are now
paying for credit monitoring for over 20 million people in the
wake of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) breach.
Efforts we make now to prepare for and mitigate climate
change could also save the Federal Government, farmers,
homeowners, and small businesses billions of dollars in the
coming years.
The Federal Government is also dragging its heels in
addressing toxic chemicals. The sooner the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and other agencies act to address
Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFAS)--fluorinated chemicals that
are harmful to human health--the more money we can save on
billions of dollars of future cleanup and health care costs.
This pattern of waste and delay is particularly alarming at
a time when our country is on course to reach a $1 trillion
deficit in the fiscal year coming up. Taxpayers in Michigan and
across this country certainly deserve a whole lot better, and
we simply cannot afford to continue down this same path.
As Members of Congress, it is our duty to root out waste
and ensure that government is being held accountable to
taxpayers. We must fulfill our obligation to conduct rigorous
oversight and craft bipartisan, commonsense reforms to
strengthen the programs that Americans have come to count on.
We must also look for smart ways to cut spending and save
tax dollars, such as eliminating duplicative or overlapping
efforts that end up costing us a whole lot more in the long
run.
I appreciated the opportunity to work with my colleagues
Senator Paul and Senator Lankford to enact legislation to
increase government efficiency last Congress. I also look
forward to reviewing Senator Lankford's ``Waste Report'' and
finding new areas to work in a bipartisan way with Chairman
Johnson and Members of this Committee to make our government
function better.
We must make real progress on these goals--starting with
today's hearing.
By examining the areas of concerns raised in today's
hearing, we can focus on providing the proper funding and
oversight of Federal programs that will enable us to rein in
spending, reduce waste, and provide greater accountability for
the American people.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to the
discussion.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator Peters.
Mr. Dodaro, you are fully aware that we swear witnesses in,
so if you will please stand and raise your right hand. Do you
swear the testimony you will give before this Committee today
will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you, God?
Mr. Dodaro. I do.
Chairman Johnson. And, actually, we needed everybody else
to stand as well, and I forgot to do that.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Johnson. You are all sworn in. Thank you.
[Laughter.]
Gene Dodaro has been the Comptroller General of the U.S.
Government Accountability Office since 2010 and has more than
40 years' experience at the agency, including as Acting
Comptroller General, Chief Operating Officer (COO), and head of
the Accounting and Information Management Division. Mr. Dodaro.
TESTIMONY OF HON. EUGENE L. DODARO,\1\ COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF
THE UNITED STATES, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE;
ACCOMPANIED BY CATHLEEN BERRICK, MANAGING DIRECTOR, DEFENSE
CAPABILITIES AND MANAGEMENT TEAM; NIKKI CLOWERS, MANAGING
DIRECTOR, HEALTH CARE TEAM; ELIZABETH CURDA, DIRECTOR,
EDUCATION, WORKFORCE & INCOME SECURITY TEAM; MARK GAFFIGAN,
MANAGING DIRECTOR, NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT TEAM; NICK
MARINOS, DIRECTOR, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CYBERSECURITY
TEAM; AND CHRIS MIHM, MANAGING DIRECTOR, STRATEGIC ISSUES TEAM
Mr. Dodaro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good morning
to you, Ranking Member Peters. Senator Romney, Senator Rosen,
good morning to you both. I am very pleased to be here today to
talk about GAO's high-risk update.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Dodaro appears in the Appendix on
page 44.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, this program continues to
be a valuable congressional oversight tool and produces
tangible benefits for the American people. You mentioned the
financial benefits that we have saved, approaching $350
billion. A lot of that, I might point out, is where we have
seen progress in the high-risk areas, Congress has had a hand
in helping that progress. We have a two-page section in my
written statement about all the actions Congress has taken
through legislation, through authorization bills, and through
appropriation bills to implement GAO's recommendations.
You asked where congressional action is needed. There is
actually a note in our report next to each of the high-risk
areas where Congress needs to act. And we can talk more about
that, but we have specific recommendations to Congress, where
appropriate, to remedy these high-risk areas.
Now, since our last update in 2017, we have seen some
progress. Seven areas have improved. Two areas have improved to
the point that we are taking them off the list. One is
Department of Defense (DOD) supply chain management. Through
efforts to implement our recommendations, DOD is now saving
millions of dollars in inventory management, asset visibility,
and material distribution, and DOD has strengthened its ability
to help support military operations.
The second area we are taking off is mitigating weather
satellite data gaps. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) launched a new satellite a year or so
ago. It is now producing better weather forecasting information
for the public, so there is a clear benefit there. And DOD is
on track to update its polar orbiting weather satellites in the
next couple of years. We think that program is on track now
thanks to implementation of our recommendations. Both of these
areas had congressional involvement, and I want to underscore
that.
The majority of the 35 areas that are on the list have not
really progressed very much, so substantial effort is really
needed by the agencies and by Congress to help make further
progress in these area.
Three areas have actually regressed since our last
assessment: acquisition at National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), the EPA's oversight of toxic chemicals
and assessments, and limiting the Federal Government's fiscal
exposure by better managing climate change risk. All of those
have moved backward in a number of areas.
There are many areas that need attention, but there are a
few that I want to single out this morning for your special
attention. One is the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
(PBGC). The multi-employer portion of the PBGC is expected to
be insolvent by 2025. That basically means that 11 million
Americans who are counting on that will not potentially have an
adequate pension. The amounts that would be available to them
if this went insolvent would be $2,000 a year--hardly enough to
qualify as an adequate pension.
The second area is the Federal role in housing finance.
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are still in Federal conservatorship
10 years after the global financial crisis. The Federal
Government has assumed all or most of the risk associated with
housing programs. About 71 percent of all single-family
mortgages are supported by the Federal Government, either
directly or indirectly. The portfolio of Ginnie Mae has swollen
to about $2 trillion, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA)
over $1.2 trillion. There is tremendous exposure here. A lot of
the lending in the mortgage area is being done by nonbanks,
which are not regulated as much as the banking industry, and so
this increases the risk. So this area is very important.
Cybersecurity and protecting the Nation, both the Federal
Government systems, critical infrastructure protection, but
also protecting the privacy of Americans, are important and we
have many recommendations. Actually, last year--Mr. Chairman,
you mentioned we do this update every 2 years. I have been so
concerned about cybersecurity, we did a special update that I
testified on last summer before Congress. We need a more
comprehensive national and global strategy. We need to fix the
problems. We still have over 700 GAO recommendations that have
not been implemented. We do not know as much as we need to know
in the Federal Government about critical infrastructure
protection, the electricity grid, financial markets,
telecommunications, and other areas. We have called for
Congress to pass a comprehensive privacy protection framework
for consumers. This is, we believe, is needed.
The 2020 Census, I have been before this Committee and
talked about that before. That still needs a lot of attention.
We are concerned about lack of testing in the preparation for
the 2020 Census, and I can talk more about that in the question
and answer (Q&A).
I know you are also concerned in this Committee about the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS). In that area, they have
made a little bit of progress. We are tracking 30 performance
measures. They now have 17 that they have fully met, but we
have not really materially changed the overall rating.
Financial management modernization continues to lag.
Acquisition policies have been improved, but not consistently
implemented. And morale continues to be a real problem there at
the Department.
So there is a lot to talk about today. I will conclude my
opening statement now, and I would be happy to engage in
questions with the Committee. I underscore GAO's full support
to work with this Committee and others in Congress to make
these high-risk areas experience progress.
When I was before this Committee for my confirmation, one
of the goals I set for myself was to not only identify all the
high-risk areas across government, but to get them actually
solved and off of the list. So that is definitely our goal, and
I know this Committee shares that goal. I look forward to
engaging with you today and beyond.
Thank you very much.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Dodaro.
Normally I would defer my questioning, but I am going to
have to leave for another hearing here in about 10 minutes, so
I do have a number of questions to ask you.
Let us start with DHS. It has been a troubled agency
because it cobbled together 22 different agencies with
different missions, and it has enormous responsibilities. Brock
Long took over as being head of FEMA and within literally days
was hit with just unprecedented hurricanes, fires, that type of
thing. We just updated our chart of unaccompanied alien
children (UAC) and family units coming to this country. In 5
months, we have 159,000 unaccompanied children and people
coming in illegally as family units compared to 2014 where
President Obama declared the humanitarian crisis of 120,000. So
2014, 120,000 as a humanitarian crisis. In 5 months, we are
already at 159,000.
So the Secretary is, from my standpoint, dealing with
crisis after crisis. It is kind of hard to get DHS management
of 22 different agencies together. Can you just kind of speak
to that basic reality of that Department?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. We placed DHS on the High-Risk List in
2003 the day it was created. They were compromised of 22
different departments and agencies, each of which had their own
challenges to begin with.
Now, to be fair, they have made a lot of progress. They
have set policies in place. They have strategies. They have
come a long way, and we have reduced the scope of the high-risk
area down to management integration of their basic functions on
purchasing and acquisitions, financial management, human
capital, and those type of areas. So they have a good plan. We
have probably the best relationship that we have with any
agency in working with them to make progress. We have agreed on
these 30 measures they need to put in place, and they have made
good progress.
Chairman Johnson. Again, you are seeing----
Mr. Dodaro. I am seeing progress.
Chairman Johnson. You are seeing buy-in from management and
from the Secretary.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. They have a plan. But they are down to the
real tough issues right now, and that is really the problem.
While they get a clean opinion on their financial statements,
their financial management systems still require a lot of
manual intervention to produce the financial statements. They
have tried and failed a number of financial system
modernizations. They are trying again now. For some components,
FEMA and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), they
do not even have a plan yet on how they are going to go forward
on financial system modernization. They need more people with
the right kind of skills in financial management.
For the morale issues, we have made recommendations. They
have implemented our recommendations to have plans at the
component agencies where they are having problems where you
really have to manage at the detailed level in those
situations. But they have not been successful in breaking
through. They are still last out of the 20 largest Federal
agencies in the Federal Government with an employee
satisfaction score of only about 60-61 percent, I think. And we
are going to dig in a little bit more there.
On the acquisition side, they have put in place a lot of
good policies and practices. They have not fulfilled one of our
recommendations to really assess the capabilities of their
current acquisition staff and fill gaps if needed. And they
have not really adhered to implementing their own policies and
practices. As a result, the last time we looked, about half of
their portfolio of major acquisitions were over cost and behind
schedule.
So they have a road map. They just need to execute.
Chairman Johnson. Under our homeland security part of our
Committee, we have four primary priorities. You mentioned three
of them, or I mentioned: border security, cybersecurity,
protecting our critical infrastructure. Last week, we held what
I thought was an excellent roundtable on the threat of
electromagnetic pulse (EMP) and geomagnetic disturbance (GMD)
against our electrical grid, but our grid is vulnerable,
whether it is a cyber attack or whether it is other kinetic
attack or whatever.
I know in your testimony you are talking about--and Senator
Peters has a bill that recognizes this, but the whole issue of
attracting and then retaining personnel in cyber, in computer
science, because the private sector pays so much more. That is
a real issue.
I want to go to a different issue. We had the blue ribbon
study panel come in here talking about the threats on
biothreats. Their number one recommendation was somebody has to
be in charge. Throughout all the departments, all these
agencies, there are so many different agencies that have some
part in different budgets in the whole biothreat. But we have
the same issue, whether it is cybersecurity, whether it is
protecting our critical infrastructure, things like the
electrical grid.
I would like you to just kind of speak to that, from my
standpoint, imperative. Somebody has to be in charge, and they
have to have a high enough profile, they have to have direct
access to the President and top levels of government to really
drive this process and consolidate all these responsibilities
so we have a unity of effort, as we are trying to do with DHS,
in some of these critical areas, like cyber, like protecting
our critical infrastructure.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Most of the high-risk areas we have added
to the list in recent years have been areas where multiple
Federal agencies need to work together in order to have an
appropriate effort to address the problem.
Chairman Johnson. Let me stop you right there. So where you
have seen that, have you really seen, without somebody in
charge--I hate to use the word ``czar,'' but, I mean, that
shows the concept. Have you seen those agencies ever really
effectively work together?
Mr. Dodaro. Not really, no. Many of our recommendations are
focused on that. Our recommendations in the cyber area is to
have a comprehensive national strategy that is both domestic
and global. We need cyber diplomacy as well, because there are
no international norms in this area. And while the government
has put out national strategies--and we give this
Administration and prior Administrations credit--still there is
no implementation plan with clear roles and responsibilities,
resources that are needed, metrics to decide how much progress
is being made over time.
I put cybersecurity on the high-risk area across the entire
Federal Government in 1997. We have been pushing for this. We
put critical infrastructure protection on in 2003. I still do
not believe there is enough of a sense of urgency in correcting
the problems across the government, whether it is in individual
agencies or across the government. I think the cyber risks are
getting more complicated. With the Internet of Things (IoT),
artificial intelligence (AI), and quantum computing on the
horizon, this issue is going to get more complicated, not less,
and these are global supply chain issues. And so we need a
strong, comprehensive national strategy. We need leadership.
The leadership has to come out of the White House in a number
of these areas, and the National Security Council (NSC) is
charged with this right now. We are doing an assessment right
now to find out exactly who is in charge of what and how it is
being executed since they eliminated the position of
Cybersecurity Coordinator in the White House. So we are trying
to pin down that very issue, and we will provide this Committee
with a detailed report with our recommendations on that.
But you are exactly right. We need a strategy. It needs to
have all the elements of a successful strategy, and it needs to
be implemented and tracked over time.
Chairman Johnson. Again, I think urgency exists, but when
the urgency is diffuse, we need somebody in charge in these
different areas, whether it is bio, whether it is cyber,
whether it is critical infrastructure. Because that is the only
way you create the public pressure to have the urgency that is
going to be required.
Mr. Dodaro. I agree with you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with
you. But you also need the urgency within individual
departments and agencies. Given the OPM breach occurred several
years ago, they still have not implemented our recommendations
to address the vulnerabilities at OPM. So virtually every
Federal department and agency has problems that they can fix
themselves. There are national issues that need the leadership
that you are talking about, so you need both. I would not
overlook the individual agencies and departments because every
vulnerability that is not fixed is a vulnerability that can be
exploited and cause the Federal Government great harm.
Chairman Johnson. Well, thank you. Now I will turn it over
to Senator Peters, and I mean fully turn it over, probably, so
thanks.
Senator Peters. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Do you want
me to take the----
Chairman Johnson. Sure, sit in the big chair. [Laughter.]
Senator Peters [Presiding.] I will sit here until Senator
Lankford gets here.
Mr. Dodaro, I think it is quite evident that the EPA is
facing some serious challenges in assessing and controlling a
number of toxic chemicals, things that you have outlined in
your report as well. I would argue that the EPA and the
Department of Defense have consistently failed to take
responsibility and protect Michigan residents and communities
across the country from exposure to PFAS, which are harmful
fluorinated chemicals, as you know.
I appreciated the GAO's participation last September when I
convened the first Senate hearing on PFAS, and I want to follow
up on the Federal Government's exposure to what could be
considerable cleanup costs. While you have estimated the
government's total environmental liability, has the GAO since
determined the Federal cost of cleaning up PFAS contamination
specifically?
Mr. Dodaro. We have not been requested to do that and,
therefore, have not, but we would be happy to work with you in
designing some work where we could go in and try to determine
that figure.
Senator Peters. So there is some precedent for analyzing
total costs related to clean up, health care, and liabilities
for something as specific as PFAS? And how would you do that
analysis kind of generally?
Mr. Dodaro. I would have to talk to our experts and be able
to figure out how to do it. We would start with what efforts
the agencies have made to deal with it and find out what
methodology they have used. Under Federal accounting standards,
departments and agencies are supposed to determine their
environmental liabilities and report them in their financial
statements. The largest environmental liabilities that we have
at the Federal Government are at the Department of Energy. This
year they reported almost half a trillion dollars alone just at
the Energy Department.
So all the departments and agencies are supposed to do
this, so we would look at what the departments and agencies
have done. We would look at best practices and how to develop
such methodologies, and then we have a standing contract with
the National Academy of Sciences (NAS), so we would bring in
some experts in that area that have experience to advise us in
developing an estimate, if one is not already available.
Senator Peters. Well, I think we certainly need a
coordinated, multiagency action plan to tackle the PFAS
contamination crisis. But I am also concerned that an
interagency review process could be used to delay action to
protect health and safety, which we cannot allow to happen.
This morning, along with three of my colleagues, I sent an
oversight letter asking for information on how the interagency
process influenced the development of the PFAS Action Plan and
if any agency tried to weaken EPA's plan to address drinking
water contamination.
So my question for you, sir, is: Has GAO done a
comprehensive assessment and evaluation of the Federal response
to the PFAS contamination crisis, and looking specifically at
how the EPA, DOD, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB),
and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) have
worked on this issue and what can be done better?
Mr. Dodaro. We have looked at how DOD handles some of these
chemicals for example, firefighting foam that is used at their
military installations and bases. But we have not been asked to
and have not done a comprehensive assessment in that area. But,
again, we would be happy to work with you and other Members of
the Committee if you want us to do one and to do that.
Senator Peters. Well, I appreciate that. This is a priority
for me. It is certainly a priority for the people of Michigan.
I know many of my colleagues, Senator Hassan and others, have
significant issues in their States as well. So I think we would
all like to work----
Senator Carper. Would the Senator yield for a moment?
Senator Peters. Yes.
Senator Carper. I have to run off to the Environment and
Public Works Committee where we are having a hearing that
starts in about a minute. This is an issue that has popped up
all over the country. It is one we have been very much focused
on. We very much appreciate your taking a look at it.
Thank you so much.
Senator Peters. That is great. Senator Carper is a lead on
a very important bill related to that. Thank you, Senator
Carper, for your leadership on that bill.
The Federal Government suffers, as you have already
mentioned, from a shortage of trained cybersecurity
professionals for a number of reasons, including the
recruitment and retention of these professionals. Can you talk
about improvements agencies have made in shoring up our
cybersecurity workforce? And, specifically, which agencies are
making the most progress, in your estimation, and perhaps you
could share some of those best practices for us?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, I will call our cybersecurity expert to
the table, Mr. Nick Marinos, to help give you specifics. But
one of the things that we found is Congress has put a lot of
legislative requirements on agencies to assess their
cybersecurity workforce gaps, and most of the agencies have not
completed that task. So recently there has not been a full
assessment in most parts of the Federal Government about their
existing cybersecurity workforce and what gaps they need to
fill in those areas. So that has been an important area. We
have looked at that and made lots of recommendations to the
agencies to be able to do that.
But this is an area where OPM has not provided enough
leadership over time, in my opinion, to determine
classification standards for the cyber workforce. There is
really no planning ahead for this type of situation that we
find ourselves in now. But Nick can give you more details.
Senator Peters. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Marinos. We completely agree, Senator, there is a
significant shortage not only within the Federal Government but
globally for cybersecurity talent. We have seen with respect to
the Federal Government one of the biggest challenges have
been--and we have heard this actually from chief information
security officers (CISOs)--that you bring in great talent, you
develop them into a great workforce, and they become the most
competitive folks to actually leave government for higher-
paying jobs in the private sector.
One of the things that I would mention, though, to kind of
double down on what Mr. Dodaro mentioned, is the importance of
agencies knowing what their current workforce is and then
knowing what they are going to need. So, ultimately, the
Federal agencies really do need to do a better job at really
assessing what their gaps are.
Mr. Dodaro. And, Senator Peters, I would mention, too, that
I do not think this is necessarily an insurmountable issue. I
wanted to expand our cybersecurity workforce at GAO. We just
hired over 30 cybersecurity people. I have gone to colleges and
universities--Carnegie Mellon, University of Maryland--where
they have Cybercorps scholarship programs, and they are
producing good people. Some of these people are going back for
second careers, so they have a variety of experience, and we
try to establish a pipeline where we can continue to recruit
and bring people in.
So you have to work at this. There are a lot of
flexibilities the agencies have been given. I am not minimizing
the task associated with this, but I do think with concerted
effort, greater results could be achieved.
Senator Peters. I am out of time here, but just as part of
looking at some of those gaps and how we make Federal service
more attractive to folks, it seems to me we have rules that
were made many years ago before people moved from job to job,
and they go into the private sector, then come back because
they believe in the mission of what we do here, but then they
want to go back to the private sector. And yet people are
limited in what level they can come into in the Federal
Government based on rules. So those are the kinds of things
that I am sure you have seen that we need to fix. We need to
have a 21st Century personnel policy, particularly in cyber,
but in other critical areas. Would that be an accurate
statement?
Mr. Dodaro. Absolutely. In 1980, GAO got its own personnel
authority from OPM, and we got rid of the General Schedule (GS)
classification system, and went to a broadband system where it
is much easier to bring people in and out of the government.
Actually, we have changed our whole recruiting approach so that
we can facilitate that kind of activity, particularly with
today's modern workforce. So we recruit all levels. In any one
year, a number of people we hire are people we are hiring back
into GAO, who had been there earlier, but went to the private
sector, went to academia or some other place, and then come
back to the organization. So with this different personnel
structure, it would be a lot easier than it is under the GS
structure.
Senator Peters. All right. Thank you.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR LANKFORD
Senator Lankford [Presiding.] That could be the most earth-
shattering personnel whole series of hearings conversation I
have heard in a long time, that we got rid of the GS structure,
we went to this, and it actually worked more effectively. We
will follow up on that in the days ahead because there have
been a lot of questions on that. So glad to have you in the
dialogue. Senator Rosen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ROSEN
Senator Rosen. Thank you for being here and for your
report, and I want to kind of continue in this vein of not just
cyber workforce but the information technology (IT) workforce
in general and how we are preparing and planning and developing
this people pipeline, maybe not just at the college level but
even down starting in the junior high level.
I am a former computer programmer and systems analyst, and
I am really concerned that IT staffing is an issue that comes
up over and over again in this report. For example, there is a
lack of staff to oversee the $886 million contract for
integrating IT systems needed, like you said, to conduct the
census next year; problems with recruiting IT personnel for the
Defense Department over and over again.
However, conversely, elsewhere in your report you point out
that the Federal Government invests $90 billion a year in IT,
so this is concerning to me that we have a shortage, we are
investing $90 billion, and how our tax dollars are effectively
spent.
But where I really think this is an issue is on workforce
planning, training, and development. So I want to be sure that
we are forecasting the need of IT professionals going forward
across the spectrum, not just cyber. There are many areas in
the IT world.
And so what I would like to do is to see if you would be
willing to institute an analysis going forward of the needs
that we are going to have, how we invest in our trained
workforce and how we partner with our State, Federal, and
community partners.
So do you have this analysis in your department for the
next 5 to 10 years, as much as you can currently do, knowing
that we could be rolling and changing it?
Mr. Dodaro. This is one of the key issues that we have
looked at. We have designated IT acquisitions and operations
across the entire Federal Government as a high-risk area. Most
of the $90 billion that gets spent every year is spent to
maintain existing legacy systems and not put new systems in
place.
I worked with this Committee back in 1996 to actually
create Chief Information Officers (CIOs) for the Federal
Government to provide leadership. Congress strengthened the
leadership requirements for the Chief Information Officers, but
our recent work has shown that the Chief Information Officers
and departments and agencies still do not have all the roles,
responsibilities, and authorities to work on the IT workforce
issues.
So this is a particular problem because you have to----
Senator Rosen. Would you be willing to conduct an analysis
of the need? So then we can go out to those junior high and
high school counselors, college counselors, work with the
businesses in our States to be sure that we are developing the
skills and people, especially kids or anyone who needs
retraining, to enter this workforce.
Mr. Dodaro. Well, that definitely needs to be done. We
would not substitute our judgment for the management of the
individual departments and agencies, however. So they would
have to determine what their needs are.
Let me ask Nick Marinos, who is our cybersecurity expert,
to tell us, but we have identified this as a high-risk area
across the government.
Senator Rosen. I want to ask you one more question about
legacy systems. I know the importance of legacy systems. Like I
said, I used to write computer code. But there also is an
importance for transitioning from those legacy systems and
having that bridge as technology and things change and the
people who are able to maintain and support those legacy
systems begin to retire or move on.
And so would you be willing to do an analysis of how we
bridge from the legacy systems in smart ways, effective ways,
on to newer technology and different platforms?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. We would be happy to work with you on
that. In fact, we are currently examining how agencies are
identifying and categorizing their IT positions, and we expect
to issue a report next week on that subject. So perhaps after
you take a look at the report, we could get together and work
out what additional things you would like to have done.
Senator Rosen. I would love to do that. This is a huge
challenge as technology changes and challenges of the past are
not challenges of the future and how do we bridge that in smart
ways going forward.
Mr. Dodaro. I agree with you, Senator Rosen. This is a very
important issue, and we are committed to working with you on
it.
Senator Rosen. Perfect. Thank you.
Did you want to talk about cyber?
Mr. Marinos. Yes, Senator. I think even more broadly to
your comments with respect to the IT workforce, I think one
thing to build on what Mr. Dodaro mentioned with respect to the
authorities that are empowering our Chief Information Officers,
we also find routinely across IT and cybersecurity issues that
coordination among the C-suite entities within the Federal
Government agencies is absolutely critical. That is the only
way really to know that the IT workforce needs are really
getting communicated effectively to the human capital office as
well.
Senator Rosen. So let me ask you this question, because we
are here in Congress and we write legislation. So what do you
think might be some effective ways that we can help promote and
encourage our businesses, our institutions, our educational
opportunities? How can we best partner to provide this
workforce?
Mr. Marinos. Well, one thing I would say is that Federal
agencies have a lot of flexibility when it comes to the hiring
authorities that they can use but quite frequently are only
leveraging a small percentage of those. And so part of it is
educating the human capital workforce on these critical areas
of need. So as you have human capital officers and their staff
making decisions ultimately on where to recruit, who to hire,
how to make those decisions, and they are informed about the
technical issues. And so actually training is quite a
substantial component of this.
Senator Rosen. But does it go deeper than recruiting down
to younger educational levels, so that the pipeline is already
there by the time you are starting to get out of high school
and people are thinking about what they are going to do next?
Mr. Marinos. I absolutely agree, and I would say that with
respect to the cybersecurity workforce side of things, we have
explored and do routinely look at efforts within the Office of
Personnel Management and DHS. There are programs that they are
partnering on to really do that, look at the K-12 education
aspect of this as well. And I completely agree, if we do not
get people really focused and interested in these areas even
before they enter into universities, then we are losing out on
some very good talent.
Senator Rosen. Thank you.
Mr. Dodaro. I think in addition to what Nick just said,
Congress' role could be also in addition.
Senator Rosen. Yes.
Mr. Dodaro. To do additional oversight over departments and
agencies. I think that the congressional oversight in this area
is to inquire what agencies are currently doing to manage their
IT workforce, to get coherent answers from the agencies on what
they are doing, because Congress could, as they have done in
the past, give a lot of additional authorities, but if they are
not being used effectively----
Senator Rosen. Right. We have apprenticeships, grants, and
work opportunity tax credits. We want to be sure that they are
out there, not being wasted, and used in the best ways.
Mr. Dodaro. That is my point. So I think you need both.
Senator Rosen. Yes. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Mr. Dodaro. Thank you.
Senator Lankford. Senator Romney.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ROMNEY
Senator Romney. Thank you. I appreciate the chance to speak
with GAO this morning, and I appreciate your work, Mr. Dodaro.
Obviously, the responsibility you have is massive. I cannot
imagine any accounting firm in the country that has a client as
big as this one or as dysfunctional sometimes as this one. And
so I appreciate the work that you do and the work of your
entire team. It is essential, and I wish we were more effective
in responding to the identification of concerns that you bring
to our attention.
I do not have to tell you that one of the great challenges
of our Nation is a debt of about $22 trillion, which is going
to be growing by about $1 trillion a year into the indefinite
future. And if we were to take all the money that the Americans
earned this last year, take all of the money that they earned
and used it to pay down the debt, why, we would still have more
debt to pay down. So it is becoming a very large number, and
the interest on that debt is becoming a real challenge as well.
I would note that that number is large and growing larger and
certainly presents a certain risk to us.
Those of us who have run national campaigns--and there are
quite a few in this chamber that have, and some are right now.
[Laughter.]
Often talk about balancing the budget with just taking care
of waste, fraud, and abuse. And I would like to ask a question
which may be impossible to answer because it is not really in
your purview to have to add all this together. I am wondering,
if one were able to gather all of the waste, fraud, and abuse
that exists throughout government and not to reach perfection,
not nirvana, but a realistic, if you will, best demonstrated
practice that might be employed in either governments or in
corporate America, and to say if we were able to apply those
techniques in Medicare, for instance, if we were to do it as
effectively as the best insurer does in preventing waste,
fraud, and abuse among their subscribers, if we were to take
those kinds of practices and apply them throughout government,
do you have a sense of what the number might be? How much
number is available in waste, fraud, and abuse if we were just
to apply the best practices that are reasonably existent?
Because, for instance, there is a tax gap, which is worth half
a trillion dollars, but we are not going to close the tax gap
entirely. But being realistic, what kind of number might we be
looking at?
Mr. Dodaro. I think you are basically looking--in addition
to the tax gap, the current most recent estimate of improper
payments--these are payments that were made or were made in the
wrong amounts--is $140 billion in the last year. So you have
that figure out there. But you are not going to eliminate all
that either.
The bottom line is you can do a lot, and the amounts will
be maybe in the tens of billions or hundreds of billions of
dollars, but it will not be enough to deal with the
unsustainable long-term fiscal path of the Federal Government.
The amount of debt to gross domestic product (GDP) right
now is 78 percent, and it is on a path to exceed the historical
high of 106 percent of gross domestic product for World War II.
The Social Security program this year, both the Old Age portion
and Disability, will be approaching $1 trillion a year. Both
Medicaid and Medicare are on track to achieve individually $1
trillion by 2026. The Medicaid amount considers State spending
as well, so it is not all Federal, but mostly. And the interest
on the debt is expected to be $928 billion, according to
Congressional Budget Office (CBO), by 2029. So we are on track
for just those areas alone to be $4 trillion, sort of an
opening bid before you fund anything else in the Federal
Government.
There is considerable fraud, waste, and abuse in the
Federal Government, but not enough to deal with the structural
problem that we have between our expenditures and our revenues.
It is going to require Congress to look at all the entitlement
programs and the revenue side of government, in order to get it
on a more sustainable path.
I have also recommended that Congress change how it tackles
the debt ceiling issue. The current approach is divorced from
the appropriations process, and all it does is authorize
Treasury to borrow the money to pay the bills Congress and the
President have already authorized. And when there is a concern
about whether the Federal Government is going to raise the debt
ceiling in time, as we are right now--we are in a debt issuance
suspension period. Treasury is taking extraordinary actions.
They are actually borrowing against Federal retirement funds in
order to pay the government's bills until they get the
authority from Congress to borrow more. We did a study on the
interest costs of borrowing money, if there is concern in the
markets, it shows the interest rates go up; markets want more
of a premium.
Also, some in the markets, Treasury security markets, are
avoiding purchasing securities that might mature around the
time Treasury could run out of cash. So it is distorting
liquidity in the secondary markets. So it does not control the
debt, it is causing our interest costs to go up, and it is
distorting the markets. And so we need to have a different
approach in this area.
We should do everything we can to reduce fraud, waste, and
abuse in the Federal Government, but I have also recommended
that Congress have a plan to deal with the long-term
unsustainable nature of the Federal Government's budget and to
change the debt ceiling. We need to do everything we can to
never affect the full faith and credit of the Federal
Government, which if we do not pay our bills on time, that
would be broaching, I think, very dangerous territory.
Senator Romney. Thank you. For some of us who have been
outside Washington for our entire career, the fact that
Washington did not grab the work that was done by Simpson-
Bowles and the effort that was done by their group was a bit of
a mystery. And it does sound like waste, fraud, and abuse might
be able to come up with tens of billions of dollars or even
$100 billion, but that we have to address the structural
challenge that we have, in particular with regard to some of
our entitlement programs as well as other parts of our
spending, to avoid, as you say, almost $1 trillion in interest
costs.
I had the occasion at the end of one of my unsuccessful
campaigns to receive a call from a former Democrat President
who said, ``We cannot lead the world if we are paying interest
like that.'' I hope you will help give us some encouragement to
move in that direction.
I know my time is up. I want to underscore the comment made
by our Chairman just before he had to leave for another
committee hearing with regard to cybersecurity, and your
agency's suggestions as to how we can organize an effort to
actually implement true agency-to-agency cybersecurity would be
helpful, and I think his point, which is you need someone or
some group responsible for this across agencies and perhaps on
a more strategic basis than hoping each agency will just do it
on their own. I do not know how to go about doing that, but you
might be able to give us some guidance in that regard.
Mr. Dodaro. On that point, Senator Romney, the Department
of Homeland Security does have central responsibility for
working across the Federal departments and agencies. But to
address fully cybersecurity issues, in our opinion, you also
need to be able to work with the private sector and others. And
so DHS is an important component of coordinating across the
Federal Government, but to deal with cybersecurity issues, you
need a national strategy to deal with State and local
governments as well as the private sector, and that has to be
out of the White House.
Senator Lankford. Senator Hassan.
Senator Hassan. Actually, I think Senator Sinema has a
pressing problem, so I will yield to her.
Senator Lankford. Yes, Senator Sinema.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SINEMA
Senator Sinema. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Senator
Hassan. And thank you so much, Mr. Dodaro, for being here
today.
The GAO does important work, and I look forward to working
with you and all of my colleagues to improve the effectiveness
and efficiency of Federal programs. As you know, the Phoenix
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) was the epicenter of the VA
crisis, and that crisis was the result of oversight, gross
mismanagement, a broken scheduling system, and insufficient
resources and staffing.
There has been progress, but I am concerned that the VA
appears twice on the High-Risk List for access to care and its
contracting practices. Our office continues to hear from
veterans about problems accessing care and navigating the VA
bureaucracy. Access to care is especially challenging in rural
areas in our State where veterans have to navigate existing
community care policies and transportation to facilities. I
have heard from our Veterans Service Organization (VSO) leaders
about veterans who actually forgo medical treatment because it
is just too difficult to navigate the travel and the
regulations.
As you know, Congress passed the VA Maintaining Internal
Systems and Strengthening Integrated Outside Networks Act of
2018 (VA MISSION) to streamline and improve contracted care in
the community, and under these recently released standards,
veterans who have to wait more than 20 days or drive more than
30 minutes to get primary care can use this contracted care. I
support that effort because our veterans deserve the best care.
I am concerned that the GAO names the VA's acquisition policies
and health care access programs as most at risk for waste,
fraud, abuse, and mismanagement. This is, of course, very
concerning because this is at the core of implementing the VA
MISSION Act, and poor implementation of the act could further
strain the issues that have been identified by the GAO and
further put at risk the quality of care for our veterans.
So given the importance of the VA MISSION Act, which we are
working to implement, and how important it is to improving
health care access for veterans, how do you recommend that
Congress exercise oversight on the MISSION Act and its
implementation?
Mr. Dodaro. I think one of the first things--and I have
been joined by Ms. Nikki Clowers, who is head of our Health
Care Team and does a lot of work at the Veterans Affairs
department. Actually, it is on the High-Risk List three times.
You caught two of them. The third one is in the disability area
where we have their inability to process disability claims, and
particularly appeals on disability claims, in a timely fashion.
So there is a lot of room for congressional oversight in
this area. We placed the Veterans Health Care portion on the
High-Risk List in 2015. There has yet to be a comprehensive
plan on how to address the high-risk issues that we identified
in that area.
I have met with four VA Secretaries since then, and I met
most recently with Secretary Robert Wilkie, and he has a
modernization approach that he pledges that will address our
high-risk areas. But there are a lot of details that need to be
worked out and resources and commitments. We have met with the
heads of the Veterans Health Administration (VHA). I met with
the head of the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA). We just
put the acquisition area on the High-Risk List because of
concerns about outdated policies and procedures. They have not
updated their acquisition regulations in about 11 years. They
have been working since 2011 on an update, and they still do
not have the update available. Their approach to save money in
the surgical and medical supplies areas produced limited
savings. We found about 20 percent of their procurements are
still emergency procurements where they are not going through
all the competitive processes to get the benefits of lower
costs.
So I will ask Nikki to explain a little bit more in the
health care area, but these are areas I am very concerned
about, and we are committed to working with Congress. But I
think congressional oversight is absolutely essential.
Senator Sinema. Thank you.
Ms. Clowers. Senator, you raise an important issue in terms
of the Choice program, the program that we have right now in
terms of veterans getting care in the community as they
transition to the new program under the MISSION Act. We found a
number of problems that veterans were experiencing under the
Choice program, as well as providers in terms of timely payment
to providers, as well as access to providers on the beneficiary
side. For example, last summer, we were looking at the access
and timeliness in terms of veterans getting care, and the
policy states the veteran should be seen within 30 days under
the Choice program. And when you just outlined the process, it
could take up to 70 days for the veterans to receive care. And
we went through the medical files and found cases where the
time was exceeding that 30 days.
So we made a number of recommendations to VA to consider as
they transition to the new program to make sure that the
contracts are written in a way that will hold everyone
accountable for providing timely access to care for the
veterans.
Senator Sinema. Thank you.
Of the five criteria that GAO uses to determine if a
program can be taken off the High-Risk List, what is the area
amongst those five criteria where the VA struggles the most?
And how can we help the VA overcome that particular challenge?
Mr. Dodaro. The number one issue is to get an action plan
in place that outlines with specific milestones and measures
and timeframes for being able to address those issues that we
have struggled to get that. Without a good plan, you are really
going to struggle to determine how to fix the problems and
determine what kind of progress you are making.
The second area I would say is the leadership. I think the
Secretary is committed to this. He has said that to me and my
team. He has brought his team in to work with our team. We have
people working with them as much as possible. But there has
been a lot of leadership instability at the VA at a lot of
levels within the organization. So they need to have all the
vacancies filled; they need to have some leadership stability;
they need to really deal with the fundamental problems of the
lack within VA of oversight and accountability. They really
struggle with that. They are a very decentralized operation.
You need to give discretion to the different areas, but you
need to have some central oversight and accountability within
VA.
Their policies are outdated in a lot of different areas.
The training needs to be better developed. Over time we
continually find that to be a problem where they may have a
good policy, but the people have not been trained properly, and
it has not been implemented.
So they have many fundamental management weaknesses. Their
management structure at the VA is among the most challenged in
the Federal Government, in my opinion, looking across the
entire Federal Government. And that is why they have many areas
on the list, and they need leadership, they need plans, and
then they need follow up and holding people accountable for
results, both within the VA, holding their managers
accountable, but also Congress holding the VA accountable.
Senator Sinema. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I see my time has expired. Thank you.
Senator Lankford. Thank you. Senator Hassan.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HASSAN
Senator Hassan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Peters. And good morning, Mr. Dodaro. Thank you so much for
being here and for your service.
I want to try to touch on three different areas: one is to
follow up a little bit on the issues of toxic chemicals
generally; the second is on cybersecurity; and the third is on
domestic terrorism, actually. So let us see how we can do here.
One of the high-risk entries in GAO's report examines EPA's
challenges with assessing and controlling toxic chemicals. The
report points out that EPA has made little progress on this
task over the past 2 years, and, in fact, that EPA's leadership
has actually become less committed to addressing these
challenges.
Let me repeat that. The leadership has become less
committed to assessing the public health threat of toxic
chemicals, according to the High-Risk Report.
In particular, the report cites EPA's leadership decision
to cut in half the funding for the Integrated Risk Information
System (IRIS) program which identifies and assesses the health
threats posed by chemicals. Deeply concerning to me and people
in New Hampshire that even with growing evidence that toxic
chemicals are infecting our drinking water supplies, the EPA's
leadership wants to undermine and underfund one of its key
tools for identifying these kinds of health risks.
In your view, sir, is this a conscious policy decision from
the Administration to ignore these health concerns? Or have
ineffective management practices led to inaction?
Mr. Dodaro. We lowered the rating in leadership for two
reasons: one was that there had not been a statement or
commitment to focus on the IRIS issue where we have seen that
in the past Administration; and, second, they proposed budget
cuts in those areas.
Congress ultimately said no to the budget cuts and held the
budget stable at 2017 levels, but they still have to execute
against that budget area. We just were not comfortable that
they have stated a commitment. I will not speculate on their
motives, but those are the facts. And that is why we lowered
the rating. We would like to see more attention in that area.
The IRIS program has not had a release of program outlook in
December 2018, but we had fewer chemicals on it. Some
assessments that they had started did not appear, so it was not
clear why those disappeared and whether they plan to do that in
the future.
I know you have other areas, so I will stop there.
Senator Hassan. This is helpful, and I am actually going to
follow up, and if I have to do questions for the record, I
will. But, in your view, what level of funding does the IRIS
program need to be truly effective?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, we typically do not give specific
numbers. That is a management responsibility in the agencies,
but it has to be sufficient.
We make in our recommendations not only funding for IRIS
but funding for implementation of Toxic Substances Control Act
of 1976 (TSCA).
Senator Hassan. Right.
Mr. Dodaro. For example, they have proposed to have a fee.
Whether the fee will cover the full cost or not--so both
resource issues, are very important to focus on there.
Senator Hassan. Well, I thank you for the focus. I am very
frustrated to hear about EPA leadership's failure to take this
particular public health threat seriously. People in New
Hampshire have really struggled to get the Federal Government
to acknowledge the public health threat of PFAS chemicals in
their water supply, and they really do not appreciate the
Administration's lack of urgency.
Do you have any recommendations about what steps their
leadership, EPA's leadership, can take today to immediately
address the public health crisis resulting from toxic chemicals
in our water supplies?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, they need to prioritize the IRIS
assessments that are put in place. They need to have an
implementation plan for TSCA that has measures among other
things. And we have detailed out a number of recommendations I
would be happy to submit for the record.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information referenced by Mr. Dodaro appears in the
Appendix on page 162.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senator Hassan. All right. Thank you for that.
Let us turn now to another issue that a couple of Members
have also talked about. In its 2019 High-Risk Report, GAO
states that Federal agencies and other entities must take
urgent action to, among other things, ``perform effective
oversight'' of efforts to secure the Federal Government from
cyber attacks.
Now, we have talked about the workforce issue, but could
you quickly expand on what you mean by ``increased oversight''
and what you think this should look like?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. We have a listing--it is in my statement--
of four critical areas that need attention and 10 specific
actions that are needed. The first is a comprehensive national
and global strategy that deals with emerging technologies,
global supply chain risk, the workforce issue you mentioned. So
we need a plan, a specific implementation plan, clear roles and
responsibilities, resources, etc.
Second, we have to fix the problems that are known at the
individual departments and agencies, effectively implement
continuous diagnostics and monitoring and attention; add when
there are incidents that happen, to respond quickly. We have
not seen that in a lot of cases. And we have known weaknesses
that are not being fixed. There is no excuse for that.
Senator Hassan. OK.
Mr. Dodaro. Third is understanding more of critical
infrastructure protection in our country. Right now those
standards are voluntary, so the Federal Government tries to
encourage them. There are some areas they have regulatory
authority, they can be more specific. But in most of the areas,
it is pretty much voluntary. And so we do not really know how
prepared the private sector is to secure critical
infrastructure protection, some of which we rely on for both
military and other homeland security purposes as well.
Last is improving the privacy of personally identifiable
information (PII) and also dealing with information reselling
on the Internet. Congress has really only dealt with that as it
relates to health care information and consumer reporting.
Other than that, there is really no framework, and the privacy
laws have not been updated since 1974. So we have recommended
that Congress legislate a comprehensive privacy security
framework for the private sector.
Senator Hassan. Excellent. Can you speak to whether
agencies' Inspectors General (IGs) are adequately equipped to
perform this cybersecurity oversight?
Mr. Dodaro. We look at what they do. We have worked with
them on a methodology that we both share and both use the
methodology. We are updating it now, and the IGs do a good job
in those areas. Again, the problem is that they keep finding
the same things and problems are not fixed, the same as we do.
But we rely on them to cover agencies where we just do not have
all the resources necessary.
Senator Hassan. Do you think there would be a value in an
independent Cyber Inspector General that could perform
oversight both across the Federal interagency as well as for
specific Federal agencies?
Mr. Dodaro. I would not think that would be necessary.
Senator Hassan. OK.
Mr. Dodaro. We have the authority at GAO to look across
departments and agencies. They have the authority within
departments and agencies. So I think there is a potential for
duplication there, just to give you my opinion.
Senator Hassan. Right, and that is why I ask because the
issue is we keep hearing that, despite good intentions, it is
not happening; that there is a list of recommendations, and the
question becomes if there was somebody specifically designated
across agency to actually also look at duplicative efforts and
free up the other Inspectors General to do the other work, but
really coordinate across agencies our cybersecurity efforts,
whether that would have value.
Mr. Dodaro. I think the problem is not lack of audit. The
problem is lack of management, the intention to fix the
problems identified in the audit. I think the auditors are
perfectly well equipped and are highlighting the areas. They
are just not getting fixed. And having another auditor find
more problems is not really going to fix the problems that have
already been identified.
Senator Hassan. Got it. Yes.
Mr. Dodaro. We made 3,000 recommendations just at the GAO
alone since 2010; 700 of them are still not implemented.
Senator Hassan. OK. That is great.
Thank you. I realize I am over time, and I appreciate your
generosity.
Senator Lankford. Thank you.
Senator Hassan and I have worked on trying to solve the
government shutdown issue together, and we have a piece of
legislation that we will probably drop by at some point for you
to be able to take a look at also, but there are multiple
issues that you bring to our attention that require a solution,
and I appreciate it. I appreciate that you bring it to the
attention of all of us. This is something only Congress can do,
and this is something the Administration can do. That is very
helpful to be able to continue to get out.
Let me pick up a couple of things. One is keep doing the
work you are doing and keep being as blunt as you can possibly
be. Every one of your reports, when it goes through any kind of
government editing process, everyone is always editing it and
trying to make sure the right word is in there and it is not
too harsh of a word and not too strong and make it as blunt as
you can possibly make it. And so keep going, keep pushing back
against the forces that say, ``Make that more careful.'' Make
it clear. So thanks. We appreciate the work you are doing on
that.
On the debt ceiling, I would be interested to be able to
finish that conversation that you started with Senator Romney
as well. Are you making a recommendation for a process?
Because, obviously, this is unique in the world in the way that
we do a debt ceiling vote. No one else does it like we do, and
probably for a good reason, no one else does it like we do. Do
you have recommendations on that that you would want to
present?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. We have highlighted three potential
options that Congress could consider. One would be to set it
within the budget resolution process each year, so when you
make appropriation decisions and the revenue decisions, you can
say, just like any household would say, here are our
expenditures, here are our revenues, here is how much we are
going to have to borrow. OK, we recognize that when we make the
decisions on appropriations. I also think that the Budget
Committees need to have a more holistic look at the government.
Somebody needs to do it in the Congress. So that could be done
that way.
Second, another option could be that Congress just
authorize Treasury and say, OK, when you need more money to
borrow against, you can notify us, and we will disapprove it or
not. So they can move forward unless Congress acts to say no.
The third option would be to just authorize Treasury to
borrow whatever sums are necessary in order to execute
decisions and laws that Congress has passed and the President
has signed into law.
Up until 1917, Congress approved every borrowing in the
Federal Government, but after World War I and then World War
II, and the government got bigger, until it was not practical.
So we arrived at this solution. So it was really a mechanical
solution, and it is separate from the decisions that Congress
makes on the budget and the allocation.
Part of the problem is two-thirds of the Federal
Government's budget is on automatic pilot and does not even go
through the appropriation process. There is no real look.
Now, one recommendation we have not formally made except
orally is another improvement, I think, would be for Congress
to agree on what the debt-to-GDP ratio should really be. What
are we willing to tolerate? It just sort of is what it is.
Senator Lankford. It is.
Mr. Dodaro. And we do not plan or manage on a budget
standpoint, and there are many things that are not accounted
for in the budget process--major disasters, for example. A lot
of our fiscal exposures are not accounted for in the budget.
These estimates I was talking to Senator Romney about
earlier are not even considering if we have a recession, there
is another war, there are all these other major catastrophes
and disasters. Congress does not have a game plan.
Senator Lankford. Last year, I was on the budget reform
committee. It was an ad hoc committee, eight Democrats, eight
Republicans, trying to be able to find a solution to how we fix
the budgeting process. Obviously, debt ceiling was a major
portion of that. It was very unfortunate that after a year's
worth of work, that failed at the end, and it was really a
trust issue, is the reason that failed at the end in December.
I have talked to the Budget Committee about reviving some of
those same issues. Senator Enzi is very committed to that.
Senator Whitehouse and several others are very committed to
getting that done.
I am hopeful that we can address that, but one of the
things that came out of it was our blunt conversations with CBO
when they said if you want to keep debt-to-GDP at 78 percent
where it is right now, it does not get worse, and it is already
bad--obviously, $22 trillion in debt is bad, 78 percent debt-
to-GDP is bad. If you want to just keep it at bad, you have to
either increase taxes or decrease spending by $400 billion a
year every single year for the next 30 years. I think most of
our colleagues do not realize that we have already tipped over.
Is there a tipping point? We are over the tipping point. We are
on the other side of it now. There is no will in Congress to
raise taxes or decrease spending by $400 billion a year this
year, much less every single year for the next 30 years, just
to be able to keep the status quo where we are debt-to-GDP.
I appreciate you raising this. The debt ceiling is a
portion of the conversation. It used to be a useful tool. Now
it is a destabilizing tool that is there in the arsenal, and it
will continue to be an issue for us.
I want to bounce a couple of issues, and Senator Peters has
some additional questions, and I will probably have some
additional as well.
You raised the issue of tribal issues on your High-Risk
List for both the Federal Government's engagement with tribes
and tribal members. I would like to be able to finish that
conversation as well. There is some progress in areas I am
grateful to be able to see, but I saw none of them as being met
at this point.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, that is correct. There has been some
progress, and we got some immediate attention right after we
put it on the High-Risk List in 2017 with the update at that
point in time. But there is still a lot of work that needs to
be done in that area, and we need to see some consistent
leadership. We put on the health care area, the education area,
and then allowing them to use energy resources on their lands.
So we have seen improvements in each of the areas, but they are
not at the met level yet.
Senator Lankford. Have you looked at the coordination
agency to agency? Because if you look at tribal connections and
responsibilities, obviously it is not just Bureau of Indian
Affairs (BIA). It is every agency has a tribal component to it
as well on how they are actually working together for strategic
focus.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, this is Mr. Mark Gaffigan. He is head of
our Natural Resources and Environment Team that handles
coordination for Indian issues.
Senator Lankford. OK.
Mr. Gaffigan. Yes, Senator, I think you are absolutely
right, the coordination issue is key. In December 2018, the
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights issued its most recent report
on the Federal Governmnet's commitment to tribal nations, and
it is not meeting its commitment, and this is through a lot of
areas across government. And even within GAO, we are talking
about doing a more coordinated effort to look at these issues
across government to ensure that we are doing a coordinated
look at the audit and that the different agencies that are
involved, whether it is education, health care, broadband on
tribal lands, economic development, sustainable communities,
environmental, it is all government all across the scheme of
things, and we are definitely going to be looking at that.
Senator Lankford. OK. That would be very helpful, because
even areas like criminal justice, BIA will say, well, that is
not really us, the Department of Justice (DOJ) has that, and
they have that in that certain wing, but it does not coordinate
actually with BIA and the requests may have four different
forms from four different entities to be able to do one thing
and no one really knows who has the ball. And in Government, as
we know, if everyone has the ball, no one has the ball. And it
has become a really big issue in our tribal areas.
Mr. Gaffigan. Absolutely, Senator.
Senator Lankford. OK. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Senator Peters and I have worked a lot together on Federal
real property, as you know because we poked you on it several
times. We have passed some different pieces on it, on leasing
properties. I want to just open up one thing on it, and that
is, when I was chairing the Financial Services and General
Government (FSGG) Appropriations Committee, it was the first
time I got into the financing and saw the Department of
Transportation (DOT) building that we had leased for 15 years
for $700 million, and at the end of our 15 year lease had the
opportunity to buy it for $700 million.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Senator Lankford. We can never do that again. We have to
figure out how to do this. And one of the big questions we have
had is how we can work out a lease to own type process with a
discounted purchase at the end. You have made some
recommendations and ideas on that. We have to figure out how to
be able to manage it better.
We lease buildings that we are going to have temporarily.
We are probably going to have a Department of Transportation
long term. That seems like an office we should probably own. We
will probably do that more than 15 years.
Mr. Dodaro. We will go out on a limb.
Senator Lankford. I am just reaching out into the future
and just guessing that. [Laughter.]
Help us with this issue of what you have seen on the lease
to discount purchase type structure.
Mr. Dodaro. Well, first, the team gave me a note that the
General Services Administration (GSA) plans to buy the DOT
building this year.
Senator Lankford. Yes, we put that intentionally into the
appropriations bill. That was in my Committee. I said, no, we
cannot do this, so you are correct. We are purchasing that
building.
Mr. Dodaro. Right.
Senator Lankford. We are not going to continue leasing a
building we should have owned a long time ago.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, there are three different areas that we
focused on. One is to try to get GSA to focus on these high-
value leases that it makes sense to look at whether you should
purchase it or not. So they have agreed to do that finally.
That took several years. So they are going to at least look at
one this year. But they need a plan, and I think Congress needs
to push them to go a little faster in that area. So at least
they have agreed to do it. They have a plan to do it. So we
will see. They have a target of trying to save a certain amount
of money in doing that, which is an improvement.
They have also thought about having a capital--or made a
proposal for a capital fund to set up to be capitalized to
allow them to have some money to operate that the agencies
would pay back. That needs congressional authority. They have
not yet developed a legislative proposal to present to
Congress, so that is another area.
A third recommendation that involves when you are going to
lease and it makes sense to lease and there are improvements
that need to be done to the property before you are ready to
occupy it, right now that gets funded through the lessor, and
then the government ends up paying interest costs on that. So
our recommendation is to have GSA loan the money to the agency
through the Federal Building Fund unless there would not be any
interest cost necessarily, but it would save the government a
lot of money to be able to do that.
So those are the three recommendations that we have had.
Senator Lankford. All right. That is very helpful. Senator
Peters.
Senator Peters. Good, and we want to continue to work with
you on that area, and, Senator Lankford, thank you. We have to
keep going down that path to make sure we are saving money long
term for the government.
Mr. Dodaro, I wanted to talk a little bit more about cyber
just briefly. We have already had a pretty full discussion of
that and the threat and how we have to deal with preventing
this. But, I was struck by the 2016 Federal Information
Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA) report that noted even
beyond the well-known OPM breach, which got a lot of attention
and impacted a huge number of folks, there were about 6,000
other incidents that impacted almost half a million
individuals. They flew below the radar as far as press, but had
a significant impact on people.
We have already talked about the challenges about cyber. My
question to you is: Would providing impacted individuals early
notice that their information has been compromised, would that
help mitigate some of the damage?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, I think there is definitely--in the
Federal Government, there are breach notification requirements.
I will ask Mr. Marinos, Nick, to explain that in a little bit
more detail. But, definitely, I mean, people need to be
notified.
Senator Peters. The earlier, the better.
Mr. Dodaro. The earlier, the better, so that they can take
actions to protect themselves. Congress has now made it
available for people to--the cost is free to freeze their
credit, which is a good move for people to take if their
information has been compromised. So, yes, they should be
notified, and it should be as early as possible.
Senator Peters. Can we do more?
Mr. Marinos. Yes, Senator, I think we can. As Mr. Dodaro
mentioned, Federal agencies have responsibility. I will
highlight two key pieces of that.
One, they have a responsibility to be good stewards of the
information that they collect on U.S. citizens for the purpose
of their mission.
And then in addition to that, they are required by law to
report major incidents to you, to Congress as well.
So what that really means is that we need to ensure that
Federal agencies are doing a better job of identifying
incidents when they are occurring, understanding the impact of
those incidents, and then being able to communicate quickly to
potential individuals that are affected as well as to Congress.
Senator Peters. All right. Thank you.
The other issue that you brought up in the High-Risk List
that I think we need to spend a little bit more time on is
climate change and the impact of climate change in particular
related to storms and the fact that we are seeing the severity
of storms increase, and that is likely to continue in the years
ahead. And it is driving big increases to the cost to the
American taxpayers as we deal with these disasters.
It seems to me that investing some money up front in
mitigation and planning to have more resiliency with our
infrastructure is critically important, and it is kind of back
to the buying or leasing concept. If you build hardened assets
that are not going to be destroyed in a storm, that is going to
be cheaper than actually going in and fixing it and cleaning it
up and then rebuilding.
Could you help us better understand the costs to our
economy of climate change based on your analysis?
Mr. Dodaro. The last several years have been some of the
most costly in U.S. history--in 2017 in particular, several
hundred billion dollars, I believe. We have had very costly
storms. But the Federal Government's cost to respond to this
since 2005 is approaching half a trillion dollars to be able to
handle this area.
Now, the National Institute of Building Services estimates
that for every dollar spent in hazard mitigation and resilience
building saves $6 later. And it states that if we went in the
United States to the most recent international building
standards, building codes, you could save $11 for every dollar
invested.
So I think there is a lot of material, but, Mark, can you
explain the cost?
Mr. Gaffigan. Sure. NOAA estimates since 1980 there have
been 241 billion-dollar events. That is an average of about six
a year. But over the most recent years, it is averaging about
15 of those types of events a year, and the number 1 year was
2017, $312 billion; the number 2 year was 2005, with Hurricane
Katrina; 2012, $128 billion; in 2018, it is the fourth highest
year, $91 billion in costs.
Mr. Dodaro. And I would point out, Senator, those are
direct costs. They do not consider lost productivity during
that period of time or all the individual trauma that
individuals go through, because it takes several years, as you
know, to rebuild these areas. I mean, it is going to take a
long time in Puerto Rico, for example, from the 2017 storms. We
are looking at the results of the 2017 and 2018 disasters in
terms of Federal recovery efforts.
Senator Peters. Right. You mentioned some of the direct
costs to the government, particularly to the military, and this
is an area where the Department of Defense for a number of
years has talked about this as a high risk, as you have at the
GAO. I am just reminded during Hurricane Michael, a number of
F-22 Raptors at Tyndall Air Force Base were damaged because
they could not be moved prior to the storm. And the storm cost
the Air Force an estimated $3 billion to address the damage to
the infrastructure as a result of that and the impact to the
aircraft.
What specifically should the Department of Defense be
doing?
Mr. Dodaro. They need to have a plan to look ahead as they
are building their infrastructure, modernizing their
infrastructure, to build in resilience, climate resilience
policies and procedures. They are starting to move in that
direction. Congress required them to develop a plan and submit
it to Congress, which they did, but many members of the Armed
Services Committees were not satisfied with the plan, and so
the Defense Department is now back preparing an additional plan
to send to Congress. We will look at that plan once it is
submitted and have additional recommendations, which we will
share with this Committee.
They just need to put it in their planning activities and
guidance. I mean, they have coastal issues with sea level
rises. And the plan, Senator Peters, for DOD needs to not only
be domestic but international, because we have a lot of
facilities around the world that are at risk in these areas as
well.
So that is really the issue, is just better planning and
making sure it gets built into their decisionmaking process as
they go forward, because they have a massive amount of
facilities.
Senator Peters. They do.
Mr. Dodaro. And they are threatened--you mentioned Tyndall
Air Force Base, but also at Camp Lejeune, with Hurricane
Florence, there was over $3 billion of damage there as well. So
this is very costly, and there is a lot that could be done to
prevent this ahead of time.
I am also concerned that the Administration revoked the
flood hazard mitigation standard that required buildings to be
elevated to have a national standard in that area. The Flood
Insurance Program is on the High-Risk List. Even though
Congress has forgiven $16 billion in debt, it still over $20
billion in debt to the Treasury. It is not operating on an
actuarially sound basis. So there is a lot of exposure for the
Federal Government.
Senator Peters. Yes, and I am glad you brought that up
because to me that makes no sense whatsoever to rescind the
flood risk management standard given all that you have said. So
in your mind we need to have a standard. Is that a correct
statement?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Senator Peters. Great. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson [Presiding.] Senator Carper.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CARPER
Senator Carper. Thanks. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Welcome. We
welcome both of you this morning and are delighted you are
here. Thank you to you and the folks you lead at GAO for the
important work.
Our country's budget deficit last year in this country hit
$757 billion. This year we are looking at $850 billion, next
year maybe $1 trillion. And I like to say everything I do, I
know I can do better. We have to find a whole lot of ways to do
things better in this country.
I have just come from a hearing in Environment and Public
Works on surface transportation where we just basically are not
raising through user fees anywhere close to the money we need
to build our roads, highways, bridges, transit systems. And
that is just not sustainable. We are just in an unsustainable
direction. Thank you for helping us to restore some sanity to
all of this.
The first question I have deals with chemical safety at
EPA, and I just want to say thanks for being responsive on this
front. But EPA's chemical safety efforts have been on GAO's
High-Risk List, as you know, for years. And on Monday, GAO
released a long report, one that I requested, on chemical
safety. That report describes some disturbing developments
about EPA's Integrated Risk Information System. It is called
IRIS, which studies the health hazards posed by chemicals.
Here is my question. GAO's report said that, until
recently, EPA's IRIS program had been implementing many of the
recommendations made by both GAO and the National Academy of
Sciences. But the report also said that that progress was
halted almost a year ago when EPA's political officials told
the EPA's career staff to stop working on some of its reports,
including the Formaldehyde Health Assessment. Is that correct?
Mr. Dodaro. This is Mr. Gaffigan, who has led the effort on
that report.
Senator Carper. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Gaffigan. Thank you, Senator Carper. What had happened
is EPA has an IRIS assessment plan in which they list all the
chemicals they are working on at the current time. And as of
May 2018, they had a list of about 20 or 22 chemicals that they
were working on, including formaldehyde. They had checked in
with the program offices because they do these studies on
behalf of the program offices to meet their needs in assessing
safety in various areas, in air, water, whatever it may be. And
that May 2018 list was good to go, but they were told in June
to hold off, that the leadership wanted to take a look at that
list. They sent a survey out to the program offices to
reconfirm their interest in those 20 or 22 chemicals.
Eventually, the survey had 20 chemicals listed on it. There
were two that were already at peer review, so it did not
include those.
And then they got the answer back from the program offices,
yes, indeed, we would like to look at these same 20. They
reconfirmed that. But then later, in October, before they
released the survey results, there was a further inquiry as to
prioritization asking again the program offices to prioritize.
Yet they did not provide any criteria for deciding how to
prioritize.
The next thing that we were aware that happened is in
December 2018. They released a new list. There were only 11
chemicals on EPA's internal memo and 13 on its publicly
released list.
Senator Carper. So almost cut in half.
Mr. Gaffigan. Almost cut in half, and there was no
explanation as to why they decided to drop some chemicals.
There are at least four chemicals in the later stages ready to
go to peer review, including formaldehyde, that vanished. And
so that raises a lot of uncertainty and questions about what
happened and what was the rationale for doing that.
Senator Carper. All right. Thank you. That is a very good
explanation.
Just for my colleagues, let me just note for my colleagues
that formaldehyde is a known carcinogen. It has been reported
that EPA's career scientists have concluded that it causes
leukemia. There have actually been chemical industry and
congressional efforts to stall the publication of this report
now for more than a decade.
I would ask, Mr. Dodaro, for you and Mark--GAO's report
also found that initially EPA's Water and Superfund offices
both said that they considered the completion of the
formaldehyde report to be a priority. A priority. But after
that, EPA's political officials asked for a new list of
priorities, as Mark has mentioned, and magically vanishing, the
formaldehyde report was not listed as a priority on this new
list. That means EPA no longer plans to finish the formaldehyde
report even though it has been ready for peer review since 2017
and they have spent, I am told, about $10 million on the
research.
Do I have all that right?
Mr. Gaffigan. And I would just add, they have been working
on it actually since 1997.
Senator Carper. Wow, 21 years or 22 years.
Another question related to this, but I would ask again,
Gene, of you and of Mark, did GAO learn why EPA's political
officials asked for a new list of priorities that has resulted
in a decision not to publish the Formaldehyde Health
Assessment?
Mr. Gaffigan. This came in December toward the end of our
report. We never were able to assess what the rationale was.
There was some talk about trying to limit the budget, but as we
had the conversation before, Congress did not support
reductions for IRIS, whose budget makes up about half of the
human health risk assessment area, which ended up about $20
million in the President's budget requests. And in May, with
that list of 20 chemicals, IRS officials felt they had the
resources to do all 20 with their budget. So that explanation
does not seem to make sense unless, in fact, they were trying
to not spend as much money in IRIS.
Senator Carper. Well, thank you both for the responses.
Mark, especially, thank you. For an agency that is so concerned
about so-called secret science that it is writing a rule
against the topic, EPA appears to be going to great lengths to
keep its own science secret. I would just note that for the
record.
I have another question, and I will direct this one back to
you, Gene. It deals with Medicare improper payments and the
Payment Integrity Information Act. I understand there has been
some progress in reducing the overall improper payment rate for
Medicare. That is good. And while improper payments in Medicare
remain unacceptably high, I believe your report notes that
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) has made some
progress in addressing this issue.
Could you just take a moment, Gene, and share with us how
CMS has been able to reduce its Medicare improper payment rate
over the last couple of years? And is there any lesson from CMS
that can be shared across the government where we have a lot of
improper payments? Please.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Ms. Nikki Clowers has joined me from the
Health Care Team. I will give an answer, and then she can add
to that.
Senator Carper. Good.
Mr. Dodaro. First, they have a Program Integrity Center for
payment integrity that they have established, so they have a
clear leadership in place for that center. They have increased
the staff by over 200 people in that area over a period of
time, so they have put more resources in it. And those are the
two criteria on the High-Risk List: you have clear leadership,
you have capacity. They have a fraud system they put in place
to help them identify areas that they could look at more
quickly in that area, and we have said that that system is
working well, and they should expand it to other areas. So
those are the things that they have done to improve it.
I will ask Nikki to add.
Ms. Clowers. In addition to what the Comptroller General
mentioned, another effort was working with both private sector
companies and other public agencies through a Healthcare Fraud
Prevention Partnership to learn best practices and implement
them.
The other issue is continuing to look at efforts on the
prepayment side, to move away from the pay-and-chase model of
putting the money out and then trying to claw back the money
when it is deemed improper, because that takes time and it does
not always work.
One of our outstanding recommendations for CMS is to seek
legislative authority to allow their recovery auditors to
conduct prepayment checks. They are one of the auditors that
right now focuses primarily on post-payment issues, but through
a demonstration where they were given in this one demonstration
the authority to conduct prepayment checks, CMS deemed that
successful. And so we have recommended CMS seek legislative
authority to expand this.
Senator Carper. Well, good. Mr. Chairman, I have been
working on improper payments for some time, and, in fact, we
have collaborated on legislation, I think it is called the
``Payment Integrity Information Act,'' which consolidates and
updates existing improper payment laws while trying to make
some key improvements in this area.
I would just add, Gene, I think your folks have been
helpful to us in crafting the legislation. We appreciate that
help, and I would just ask, do you think that Congress ought to
pass the legislation and could it be helpful as we try to curb
the $140 billion plus made in improper payments?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Senator Carper. Good. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. I guess that was the right answer.
[Laughter.]
Senator Carper. I thought it was a very good answer.
Chairman Johnson. Unfortunately, improper payments, it is
not going away.
Just real quick, I want to follow up with improper payments
in Medicaid, which the Committee has done a fair amount of
work, and I know that GAO has as well. I believe the figure was
$37 billion last year.
One of the drivers is Medicaid expansion that incentivizes
States to provide the Medicaid expansion to potentially just
the primary Medicaid population because they get a better--they
are going to get a higher reimbursement from the Federal
Government. Have you done any further work on that? Would you
comment just on that area of improper payments?
Ms. Clowers. Senator, yes, we continue to look at the
improper payment issues under the Medicaid program, and as you
know, the rate is composed of three components, and one of them
is the eligibility. This is one area that we are concerned
about they froze the eligibility component since 2014 exactly
for some of the reasons you were mentioning. With the expanded
populations, there were new systems put in place, so they
wanted the States to have time to implement them before they
started measuring again.
They plan to start measuring this year, in 2019, but our
concern with that is during this time we are not getting an
accurate picture of the improper payments that could be made in
the eligibility component. And it is at the exact time when
things got more complicated, so you would want more additional
scrutiny on those issues.
The other area that we have concerns about in the Medicaid
improper payment area is the second component, which is managed
care, and we have reports documenting that the managed care
component does not account for all the program risk, in
particular, the payments that go from the Federal Government to
the State and from the State down to the managed care
organizations. There are opportunities for over-repayments to
come into play there and then get factored into the payments
that are made the next year, sort of a compounding problem. So
we have recommendations to CMS to address those issues.
Chairman Johnson. My concern with Medicaid is there are so
many areas where we incentivize the States to game the system,
and so they do. And we need to track that down, but the
frustration is getting the information on how extensive this
is, and the information does not exist. So I want to continue
to work with GAO, the Inspector General, and CMS to try and get
the information so that--again, these programs are already
spending a lot of money. We have huge deficits. We cannot
afford to be paying money to ineligible individuals. We cannot
afford to have States game the system.
Mr. Dodaro. I agree with you, Mr. Chairman. And I mentioned
earlier that Medicaid is on a track by 2026, to be $1 trillion
a year, Federal and State money, just for the Medicaid program
alone. And my concern is because of the limits on looking at
the beneficiary eligibility determination.
Now, managed care is also half of the funding, so right now
you are not really getting a good estimate on the improper
payments of about half of Medicaid spending. So it conceivably
could be a very underestimated figure, and more needs to done.
Also CMS is supposed to come out with a new disclosure on the
supplemental payments that we talked about the last time I was
here, and so we will look at that and give you our thoughts on
that as soon as that is out. But we are definitely going to
continue our work in this area, and the dialogue between CMS
and the State auditors has continued based on your hearings.
That is a good development as well.
Chairman Johnson. OK. One thing I have encouraged all the
Members of this Committee--Senator Scott, I have deputized him
in terms of taking a look at FEMA and some of the abuse, some
of the waste we see in disaster spending, and he is in a
perfect position to do that. But I am trying to get other
Members to grab a hold of one of these issues. I think the
Committee in general has looked at Medicaid, because I just
think with the Medicaid expansion we have just created greater
incentive for improper payments. And so I want to work very
closely with you.
Mr. Dodaro. OK.
Chairman Johnson. I guess Senator Lankford has a few
questions as well.
Senator Lankford. I do. I just have about 75 more.
[Laughter.]
We are getting close to the end.
Mr. Dodaro. You missed your chance when you were Chairman.
Senator Lankford. I know. I could have just taken over from
there.
You and I have talked about the Taxpayers Right-to-Know
bill multiple times.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Senator Lankford. It has passed the House multiple times
now and has been stuck here in the Senate. It has been the
interest of some to say we really do not need the Taxpayers
Right-to-Know Act, that it is not needed, there is data in
other places and other ways, but that particular bill and that
particular gathering of data is not necessary.
Do you have a perspective on that?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, I do not agree with that statement. I do
not think it is that transparent or available in other formats
at the level at which as I recall the Taxpayers Right-to-Know
Act is asking for the information. It also pulls together what
is the results of the spending. That is not really available.
But it would bring it together in one effort at a more
transparent and accountable and actionable information for
Congress and the public to act on. So I think that Congress
would do well to pass that legislation, but also make sure it
gets implemented effectively. The Digital Accountability and
Transparency (DATA) Act is still not implemented effectively
because the information is not as accurate as it needs to be.
But the first step is to get the legislation passed, and I
think it would be a good move for government accountability and
transparency to have that legislation enacted.
Senator Lankford. We will keep nudging and pushing on that.
I appreciate that very much.
Let us talk about the Federal disability programs. Have we
talked about that yet this morning? Has that come up?
Mr. Dodaro. Just once as it relates to VA.
Senator Lankford. OK. I would like to do the non-VA side of
it, just in the disability programs and to be able to see--you
highlighted some things that are affectionately called ``the
grid,'' the vocational list, the giant dictionary of all
occupations in America that is now well in excess of $100
million to be able to compile this. I have been tracking it for
7 years and have heard over and over again next year, next
year, next year, next year it is coming.
Now my understanding is it is actually next year that it is
coming and that we are actually seeing some progress in this
area on disability and on the vocational grid. I would love to
be able to see what your team has seen as well.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, this is Ms. Elizabeth Curda, who is our
expert in the disability area, Senator. She can give you an
update.
Ms. Curda. Yes, there are two systems in play here involved
in updating the occupational information that the Social
Security Administration (SSA) uses to decide disability claims.
The first is the Occupational Information System. That is
what is very close to being completed. They are in their final
year of data collection for that system using Bureau of Labor
statistics surveys. And they plan to start using that system in
2020, according to their most recent plans.
Now, the grid is another tool that SSA uses in addition to
the Occupational Information System--when they have it
implemented, they will be using it, but not yet. The grid is
something that is a decisional tool that helps them decide
what--they take all this information, medical, occupational,
and they make a decision about what work this person with a
disability could do in the current economy. That has not been
updated, and that is why we have actually lowered their rating
in the High-Risk List for action planning because they have not
given us plans for how they plan to update that system and use
it in conjunction with the new information----
Senator Lankford. So your concern is we are going to have
the occupational list and not have any way to be able to
implement that in 2020, so we will basically have a book and no
way to use it.
Ms. Curda. Potentially, yes.
Senator Lankford. OK. So what steps need to be taken at
this point to be able to move that from I have the occupational
list to actually transitioning that into a usable form in the
grid?
Ms. Curda. We would need to see an action plan for the use
of the grid in terms of how they plan to change that. They have
indicated they have plans to update it, but they have not given
us any detailed action plan for that.
Senator Lankford. Do you remember offhand how long it has
been since the vocational list has been updated?
Ms. Curda. 1970s.
Senator Lankford. Yes, that is what I thought, it was the
1970s. I do recall the famous list of their elevator operator
is in the vocational list, but there are no IT jobs listed at
all because they were not around in the 1970s other than a
punch card operator.
Ms. Curda. I heard about this problem just last week when I
was in West Virginia visiting with disability examiners, and
they said this is a key problem for them to process claims.
Senator Lankford. It is an enormous issue for us to be able
to say, yes, there is nothing available, no way to be able to
help transition somebody.
One other quick question that I had and that is on the
security clearance programs. There is a pretty massive
transition that is happening right now into DOD and being able
to manage this. I have seen some progress, you have listed some
progress in trying to deal with our backlog. This affects all
of our Federal hiring that the Chairman and I have worked so
much on in trying to be able to bring to greater attention that
we are exceeding 100 days for Federal hiring. A lot of that
ends up being security clearance in the process, and so we are
all very concerned. When DOD said no, we want to give this to
OPM years ago, and now it is all going from OPM back to DOD, we
are trying to figure out how that handoff is going. Can you
give us an update?
Mr. Dodaro. Ms. Cathy Berrick has been leading our work in
that area, Senator. She can give you an update. It is moving,
but there are still a lot of issues that need to be dealt with.
She can detail those for you.
Ms. Berrick. Sure. DOD is planning to assume responsibility
for conducting investigations for all Federal workers. That is
supposed to be transitioned by September 30th of this year. So
they are doing some planning related to the National Background
Information Services (NBIS), which is the information system
that they are going to use to conduct investigations.
There is one key concern that they have, which is linking
to the OPM legacy systems and the security issues that exist
with those systems. DOD is ultimately planning to separate from
those systems, but they are going to need to rely on them at
least for a few years.
Another key area that the entire Performance Accountability
Council (PAC), which governs the security clearance process
within the Executive Branch, really needs to do is focus on the
quality of investigations. They have been attempting to develop
quality metrics since back in 2010. They have taken a couple of
important steps to get there, but they still have not completed
those metrics.
And then, finally, I would say although the Executive
Branch has made some progress in reducing the investigative
backlog, they were at about 720,000 a year and a half ago; they
are at about 565,000 investigations right now backlogged. They
do not have a plan for meeting their timeliness objectives for
their investigations moving forward. They have made some tweaks
here and there, but they really need a comprehensive plan. Just
to give you a statistic----
Senator Lankford. Is that in process, by the way?
Ms. Berrick. They are working on it, and there was just a
big announcement last week that the Executive Branch is rolling
out Trusted Workforce 2.0, which is a new strategy for
conducting security clearances that involves continuous
vetting. They made some key process improvements.
But just to give you a stat on the significance of this
problem, last year only 3 percent of agencies within the
Executive Branch met mandated and other established timeliness
objectives for conducting background investigations for initial
secret clearances, and for top secret it was only 13 percent of
agencies met those requirements. So it is a big problem. There
are some plans in place, but this issue has always been one of
implementation.
If you go back, since the early 2000s, there has been a
number of studies, a number of initiatives. The problem has
always been the coordination among the agencies and actually
executing on these plans.
Senator Lankford. Is there a congressional action that is
required other than oversight at this point? Do they have what
they need to be able to make the decisions and implement the
way they need to?
Ms. Berrick. I believe they do have what they need.
Senator Lankford. All right. That is helpful to know.
Mr. Dodaro. Congress reinstituted the requirement to get
reports on the status of this effort. That was a good move by
Congress. But, based on what we know of their current plans, I
do not think they need anything else other than oversight at
this point. However, if they do develop plans and we notice
something, we will let you know.
Senator Lankford. I know it is a human resource (HR) issue
for us, obviously, in the hiring and the process they would go
through, but there is a larger HR issue just with the handoffs
that you will have identified multiple times. If I go into many
private businesses, they have a software system that, when they
do the interview, all the information is dumped in the
interview. If they decide to hire them, that same system will
actually start getting them through all the forms that they
need to do for hiring. That same system will also manage all of
their personnel reviews they do on an annual basis, and when
they retire, that same system will also do it, as well as their
tax forms and their raises all go through this one system. We
have about 19 different systems that do those same things, and
I think 18 of them we would call ``legacy'' in the process, and
none of them talk to each other. And that is not the way that
it is going to be most effective to do it.
Have you seen any progress in agencies moving to a seamless
system to be able to handle HR? Or is this still multiple
different systems that are out there to be able to do the most
straightforward personnel issues?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, this is Mr. Chris Mihm. He is the head of
our Strategic Issues Team that looks at personnel matters.
Chris.
Mr. Mihm. Senator, there are still too many legacy systems
out there, is the short answer on that. One of the things--and
this gets back to what you were talking about with Taxpayer
Right-to-Know and the DATA Act. That data is going to help
agencies identify, as the DATA Act is implemented,
opportunities for shared services so they can bring together
some of these legacy systems. So that is just a minor potential
advantage going forward of better integration--not just in the
HR area but across a whole series of back-office functions.
Senator Lankford. Right. I am just tired--and the Chairman,
we have heard this over and over and over again--of a Federal
employee that worked in two different agencies that goes to
retire and it takes 6 to 9 months for them to start their
retirement process because the two agencies did not talk to
each other and because the handoff does not work, and now
somebody that has worked 35 years for the Federal Government is
waiting 6 months to start their retirement process because the
data is not all together.
Mr. Mihm. And, sir, that is not just with the agency
systems, which it is and we have found that there are problems
in the agency systems, but just on the retirements with the
Office of Personnel Management as well. They have huge backlogs
in that. We have been urging them to get--it is the word you
have been hearing all day. We have been urging them to get a
plan in place in order to deal with their backlogs that they
have in place to get a more--I mean, there are known spikes
each year of when they have increases in retirements. They
should be able to deal with those spikes much easier than just
each year being caught with----
Senator Lankford. Again, a streamlined system where
everything is consistent would make an enormous difference on
that. It is not like it does not exist. I can go to Paycom, a
huge national company, and they can put that off the shelf
right now and be able to adapt that into a government system
they could do. So it is doable software. It is not something
new and radical. But we have to be able to help implement that.
Mr. Mihm. Yes, sir.
Senator Lankford. Mr. Chairman, thank you for allowing me
to be able to come back and do another round of questions.
Chairman Johnson. I appreciate you, first of all, talking
about the whole security clearance issue, which is big. Of
course, the retirement system, part of it, it is still a paper
system. They are in files in some cave. I cannot remember
exactly which State, somewhat close at least, but----
Mr. Dodaro. It is in Pennsylvania.
Chairman Johnson. There you go. So you are fully aware of
that.
Again, General Dodaro, thank you. I thank all of the
members of your team for providing testimony and for all your
great work. You know better than anybody that you have so many
things that you can take a look at. The analogy is use, it is
like a mosquito in a nudist colony. It is a target-rich
environment where you are looking for waste, fraud, and abuse
in the Federal Government.
One of the things I am trying to get the Members of this
Committee to do is to concentrate on an issue, one of those
targets, and, utilize their staff in conjunction with our
Committee staff and Inspectors General and the GAO to highlight
the issue, because that is what it takes. You have to publicize
the issue to create the incentive within the departments and
agencies to actually take action. So that is what your High-
Risk List does. That is what this hearing does. But that is
really what I want Committee members to do. I would like them
to look at the big things, prioritize it, let us go after the
low-hanging fruit, the massive dollars. But, again, you have
already done the $350 billion since 2006, $47 billion just last
year, pretty remarkable results, and I am sure you and your
team will keep investigating these things and even increase
those savings. So, again, thank you for your testimony. Thank
you for all your work.
The hearing record will remain open for 15 days until March
21 at 5 p.m. for the submission of statements and questions for
the record.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:22 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]