- THE ROAD TO 2020: DEFENDING AGAINST ELECTION INTERFERENCE
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
THE ROAD TO 2020: DEFENDING AGAINST ELECTION INTERFERENCE
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION, AND INNOVATION
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
NOVEMBER 19, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-51
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
40-467 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Peter T. King, New York
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
John Katko, New York
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Mark Walker, North Carolina
J. Luis Correa, California
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Xochitl Torres Small, New Mexico
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Max Rose, New York
Mark Green, Tennessee
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Van Taylor, Texas
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan
John Joyce, Pennsylvania
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri
Dan Crenshaw, Texas
Al Green, Texas
Michael Guest, Mississippi
Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Dina Titus, Nevada
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Chris Vieson, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND
INNOVATION
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
John Katko, New York, Ranking
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Member
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Van Taylor, Texas
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan
John Joyce, Pennsylvania
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex
Mike Rogers, Alabama (ex officio)
officio)
Moira Bergin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Sarah Moxley, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Statements
The Honorable Cedric L. Richmond, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Louisiana, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................
1
Prepared Statement.............................................
3
The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................
4
Prepared Statement.............................................
5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
6
Prepared Statement.............................................
7
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................
7
Witnesses
Mr. Francis X. Taylor, General, U.S. Air Force, Retired, Former
Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis, U.S. Department
of Homeland Security, Board Member, U.S. Cyberdome:
Oral Statement.................................................
10
Prepared Statement.............................................
12
Mr. Richard Stengel, Former Under Secretary of State for Public
Diplomacy and Public Affairs, U.S. State Department:
Oral Statement.................................................
14
Prepared Statement.............................................
16
Mr. Matt Blaze, Ph.D., Mc Devitt Chair of Computer Science and
Law, Georgetown University:
Oral Statement.................................................
18
Prepared Statement.............................................
20
Ms. Ginny Badanes, Director, Strategic Projects, Defending
Democracy Program, Microsoft:
Oral Statement.................................................
30
Prepared Statement.............................................
31
Appendix
Questions From Chairman Cedric L. Richmond for Francis X. Taylor.
59
Questions From Chairman Cedric L. Richmond for Richard Stengel...
60
Questions From Chairman Cedric L. Richmond for Matt Blaze........
61
Questions From Chairman Cedric L. Richmond for Ginny Badanes.....
61
THE ROAD TO 2020: DEFENDING AGAINST ELECTION INTERFERENCE
----------
Tuesday, November 19, 2019
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection,
and Innovation,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:14 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Cedric L. Richmond
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Richmond, Rice, Slotkin, Thompson;
Katko, Walker, Taylor, and Joyce.
Mr. Richmond. The Committee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation will come to order.
The subcommittee is meeting today to receive testimony on
election security in a hearing titled, ``The Road to 2020:
Defending Against Election Interference.''
Good afternoon. I want to welcome the witnesses to today's
hearing on how we can secure the 2020 election against outside
interference. Today we will take a broad look at election
security issues, including efforts from the private sector to
protect election infrastructure and political campaigns against
malicious actors.
This threat is real, and it is personal. Yesterday it was
reported that my State of Louisiana was the victim of a
ransomware attack. The attack happened while the Secretary of
State was awaiting certification of the recent election. While
State officials activated the State's cybersecurity team in
response to the attack, this incident highlights the exact
scenario this committee is trying to prevent in the 2020
election.
It is an undisputable fact that in 2016 the Russian
Government carried out a concerted, sophisticated operation to
meddle in our Presidential election. The Kremlin leveraged
sophisticated cyber capabilities to target our election
infrastructure and amplify divisive, and at times, false
rhetoric in an unprecedented way to sow discord, undermine the
public's faith in democratic institutions, and ultimately
damage the global leadership of the United States.
The Russian government's covert and malicious foreign
interference campaign attacked every aspect of our elections.
It involved engaging in conversations with personnel from a
U.S. Presidential campaign, hacking a National political
committee, conducting a phishing attack against a campaign
chairman, targeting voter registration databases and other
election infrastructure, and mobilizing bots and fake on-line
personas to carry out influence operations.
Today 2 other nation-state actors, China and Iran, are
following suit, weaponizing new technologies to disrupt our
democracy, distort the daily news, and compromise our election
security.
As we move into the heart of the 2020 election cycle, we
must set aside party politics and work together to improve
election security and preserve the integrity of our democracy.
To that end, I urge the White House to accept the intelligence
community's unanimous conclusions about 2016 meddling, refrain
from engaging in conspiracy theories ahead of the 2020
elections and show some needed leadership on election security.
Failing to do so will further erode public confidence in our
election process, and advance Vladimir Putin's goal of
undermining the U.S.-led liberal democratic order.
For its part, Senate leadership must pass House-passed
measures that would make election infrastructure more secure,
and it should match the House's commitment to funding election
security grants. Security vulnerabilities and an outdated,
unsupported election infrastructure could jeopardize the
accuracy of voter registration databases, or even the tally of
votes cast. That is simply unacceptable. Voters deserve to know
that they will be able to vote when they show up, and that
their vote will be counted accurately.
To guard against covert, malicious, foreign influence
campaigns, owners and operators of on-line platforms must
understand and be candid with the public about how our
adversaries use their platforms. Also, we need to educate the
public so that they are informed and have the opportunity to
distinguish between facts and disinformation. And our party
organizations and campaigns must take cybersecurity seriously,
monitor for disinformation, and refuse to take advantage of
malicious disinformation circulated about their opponents.
Party and campaign organizations have tremendous power to
counter efforts by foreign adversaries, simply by rejecting
opportunities to take the cheap shots based on fake news.
Together, those truly interested in defending our elections
from foreign adversaries can make a real difference.
For example, despite a lack of leadership from the White
House, the Department of Homeland Security is building
relationships and providing a full suite of election security
services to State and local election officials.
In addition, the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence, Federal Bureau of Investigation, National
Security Agency, and U.S. Cyber Command have teams to
coordinate and integrate election security threat information.
The private sector is also stepping up. Cybersecurity
researchers at non-profit and for-profit organizations are
providing cybersecurity services to campaigns and election
officials. I commend these efforts.
I look forward to hearing more from our distinguished panel
on their efforts and yield back the balance of my time.
[The statement of Chairman Richmond follows:]
Statement of Chairman Cedric L. Richmond
Today, we will take a broad look at election security issues,
including efforts from the private sector to protect election
infrastructure and political campaigns against malicious actors. It is
an undisputable fact that, in 2016, the Russian government carried out
a concerted, sophisticated operation to meddle in our Presidential
election. The Kremlin leveraged sophisticated cyber capabilities to
target our election infrastructure and amplify divisive--and at times
false--rhetoric in an unprecedented way to sow discord, undermine the
public's faith in democratic institutions, and ultimately damage the
global leadership of the United States. The Russian government's covert
malicious foreign interference campaign attacked every aspect of our
elections.
It involved engaging in conversations with personnel from a U.S.
Presidential campaign, hacking a National political committee,
conducting a phishing attack against a campaign Chairman, targeting
voter registration databases and other election infrastructure, and
mobilizing bots and fake on-line personas to carry out influence
operations. Today, 2 other nation-state actors, China and Iran, are
following suit--weaponizing new technologies to disrupt our democracy,
distort the daily news, and compromise our election security. As we
move into the heart of the 2020 election cycle, we must set aside party
politics and work together to improve election security and preserve
the integrity of our democracy.
To that end, I urge the White House to accept the intelligence
community's unanimous conclusions about 2016 meddling, refrain from
engaging in conspiracy theories ahead of the 2020 elections, and show
some needed leadership on election security. Failing to do so will
further erode public confidence in our election process and advance
Vladimir Putin's goal of undermining the U.S.-led liberal democratic
order. For its part, Senate leadership must pass House-passed measures
that would make election infrastructure more secure, and it should
match the House's commitment to funding election security grants.
Security vulnerabilities in outdated, unsupported election
infrastructure could jeopardize the accuracy of voter registration
databases or even the tally of votes cast. That is simply unacceptable.
Voters deserve to know that they will be able to vote when they
show up, and that their vote will be counted accurately. To guard
against covert malicious foreign influence campaigns, owners and
operators of on-line platforms must understand and be candid with the
public about how our adversaries use their platforms. Also, we need to
educate the public so that they are informed and have the opportunity
to distinguish between facts and disinformation. And our party
organizations and campaigns must take cybersecurity seriously, monitor
for disinformation, and refuse to take advantage of malicious
disinformation circulated about their opponents. Party and campaign
organizations have tremendous power to counter efforts by foreign
adversaries simply by rejecting opportunities to take the cheap shots
based on fake news.
Together, those truly interested in defending our elections from
foreign adversaries can make real progress. For example, despite a lack
of leadership from the White House, the Department of Homeland Security
is building relationships and providing a full suite of election
security services to State and local election officials. In addition,
Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Federal Bureau of
Investigation, National Security Agency, and U.S. Cyber Command have
teams to coordinate and integrate election security threat information.
The private sector is also stepping up. Cybersecurity researchers at
non-profit and for-profit organizations are providing cybersecurity
services to campaigns and election officials. I commend these efforts.
I look forward to hearing more from our distinguished panel on their
efforts.
Mr. Richmond. With that I now recognize the Ranking Member
of the subcommittee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Katko,
for an opening statement.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for being
here this afternoon on this very, very important topic.
Securing our elections remains one of the most pressing
issues our country faces today. Secure voting systems and the
accurate reporting of votes is foundational to our democracy.
Americans should have full confidence in every aspect of our
election process.
Unfortunately, our election systems have become the
principal target of several adversaries. Disinformation
campaigns engineered by Russia have sown political discord
within our election process. Social media has become a haven
for false information regarding Election Day procedures and
misinformation of candidates. Disinformation campaigns serve to
confuse voters and undermine their confidence in the electoral
process.
While foreign influence has had a measured effect on our
discourse, election results have, fortunately, remained
untouched. The success of the 2018 midterms demonstrated the
progress that the Federal Government and our State and local
partners have made together. I want to applaud election
security efforts led by CISA and the partnerships with State
and local governments that have resulted in a marked
improvement of information sharing and cohesion.
Additionally, growing participation within the election
infrastructure ISAC by local election officials has provided
thousands of election offices with the cyber resources they
need to maintain the reliability of their election
infrastructure. Paper trails for voting systems are now in use
in all but a few States, providing voters with a tangible,
incorruptible record of their vote.
The continued development of auditing techniques confirms
voting results where voter tallies may be called into question.
These software independent techniques have become invaluable to
protecting our election systems from cyber attacks. Software
independence of our election infrastructure is absolutely
essential for the integrity of our election systems.
This progress does not mean our election systems are
secure. In my district we have seen multiple ransomware attacks
affecting critical functions of the Syracuse City School
District, for example, and the Onondaga County Library system.
One can only imagine the effect of a similar targeted
ransomware campaign aimed at voter registration databases
before an election. Such an attack would hijack our election
process and undermine all voter confidence in election results.
Furthermore, we must continue to develop our relationships
with State and local partners to ensure Federal cybersecurity
resources are being utilized. While participation in the
alleged election infrastructure ISAC has improved since the
2016 elections, thousands of local election offices remain
independent. Local election offices are not equipped to handle
the cyber threats to their election infrastructure alone. It is
imperative that the Federal Government makes available its
cybersecurity resources to every local election office.
Election security has a history of bipartisan cooperation
and support. Ensuring that our election process is
uncompromised must remain a top priority for both sides of the
aisle. I am confident that we can take the necessary and
reasonable steps to continue to improve the integrity of our
election systems.
I thank the witnesses for providing the committee with
their testimony and look forward to hearing their ideas on how
we can further improve the security of our election systems.
General Taylor, I must say it is nice to see you again,
sir.
I want to thank all of you, and Chairman Richmond, and
everyone here today for calling this important hearing. I yield
back the balance my time.
[The statement of Ranking Member Katko follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member John Katko
Nov. 19, 2019
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Securing our elections remains one of the most pressing issues our
country faces. Secure voting systems and the accurate reporting of
votes is foundational to our democracy. Americans should have full
confidence in every aspect of our election process.
Unfortunately, our election systems have also become the principal
target of several adversaries.
Disinformation campaigns engineered by Russia have sown political
discord within our election process. Social media has become a haven
for false information regarding election day procedures and
misinformation of candidates. Disinformation campaigns serve to confuse
voters and undermine their confidence in the electoral process.
While foreign influence has had a measured effect on our discourse,
election results have fortunately remained untouched. The success of
the 2018 midterms demonstrated the progress that the Federal Government
and our State and local partners have made. I want to applaud election
security efforts led by CISA and their partnerships with State and
local governments that have resulted in a marked improvement of
information sharing and cohesion. Additionally, growing participation
within the Election Infrastructure ISAC by local election officials has
provided thousands of election offices with the cyber resources they
need to maintain the reliability of their election infrastructure.
Paper trails for voting systems are now in use in all but a few
States, providing voters with an incorruptible record of their vote.
The continued development of auditing techniques confirms voting
results where voter tallies may be called into question. These software
independent techniques have become invaluable to protecting our
election systems from cyber attacks. Software independence of our
election infrastructure is essential for the integrity of our election
systems.
This progress does not mean our election systems are secure. In my
district, we have seen multiple ransomware attacks affecting critical
functions of the Syracuse City School District and Onondaga County
Library System. One can imagine the effect of a similar targeted
ransomware campaign aimed at voter registration database systems before
an election. Such an attack would hijack our election process and
undermine all voter confidence in election results.
Furthermore, we must continue to develop our relationships with
State and local election partners to ensure Federal cybersecurity
resources are being utilized. While participation in the Election
Infrastructure ISAC has improved since the 2016 elections, thousands of
local election offices remain independent. Local election offices are
not equipped to handle the cyber threats to their election
infrastructure alone. It is imperative the Federal Government makes
available its cybersecurity resources to every local election office.
Election security has a history of bipartisan cooperation and
support. Ensuring that our election process is uncompromised must
remain a top priority for both sides of the aisle. I am confident that
we can take the necessary reasonable steps to continually improve our
election systems.
I thank the witnesses for providing the committee with their
testimony and I look forward to hearing their ideas on how we can
further improve the security of our election systems.
I want to thank Chairman Richmond for calling this important
hearing and I yield back.
Mr. Thompson [presiding]. Thank you very much. The Chair
recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Good afternoon to our panel of witnesses. Thank you very
much for being here.
Since 2016 officials throughout the intelligence community
have described in disturbing detail the many ways the Russian
government sought to meddle in our elections. For the 3 years
that followed, heads of the Department of Homeland Security,
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence
Agency, and the National Security Agency, among others, have
warned that the Russian government will continue its efforts to
sow discord and undermine confidence in our democracy.
More disturbing yet, Russia is not alone. According to the
2019 World-wide Threat Assessment, other adversaries, including
China and Iran, will pursue opportunities to interfere in our
elections. The intelligence community assesses that adversaries
could exploit cyber means to target election infrastructure or
engage in targeted influence campaigns to manipulate public
opinion.
We also know that our adversaries will target political
campaigns because they have done so in the past. Adversaries
have hardly kept their desire to undermine the integrity of our
elections a secret.
As Members of Congress, we have a duty to act. Today we are
less than 1 year away from the 2020 Presidential election. The
question everyone on this dais must ask themselves, is have we
done enough to secure the 2020 elections from our adversaries?
Despite multiple efforts led by the House of
Representatives, Congress has yet to send a single piece of
comprehensive election security legislation to the President's
desk. Instead, good pieces of legislation to provide additional
resources to State and local elections officials and limit
foreign interference have stalled in the Senate.
Moreover, despite multiple requests, the White House has
failed to identify an official to coordinate the election
security activities at various Federal agencies. In the mean
time, with just a handful of legislative days left this year,
and only a limited amount of time for legislative action next
year, I will be interested to learn from our witnesses how they
recommend Congress use that time to improve election security
in advance of the 2020 elections.
Importantly, I am interested to know how academics and
private sector can work with State and local election officials
and campaigns to improve election security in the absence of
Congressional action. The election security problems we face
are shared, and we have a shared responsibility to solve them.
State and local election authorities, with help from the
Federal Government, must invest in IT departments, train their
employees, and upgrade and certify their election equipment.
The private sector, including voting system vendors, must
take responsibility to secure their equipment, make it user-
friendly, and demonstrate a willingness to admit weakness in
their systems when examined by third-party cyber professionals.
Political campaigns must step up, too. They must implement
robust cybersecurity policies to deprive our adversaries of
information that can be twisted into a divisive narrative and
serve as an extra check on disinformation.
Finally, the American public must also be vigilant and
scrutinize the information presented to them carefully.
Before I close, I would also like to note that November is
Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience Month. I can
think of no better way to observe it than to assess our
preparedness for the 2020 Presidential elections.
I also thank Chairman Richmond for his steadfast leadership
on election security, and I look forward to the hearing and
witnesses' testimony today.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
November 19, 2019
I'd like to thank Chairman Richmond for calling today's hearing on
election security. Since 2016, officials throughout the intelligence
community have described in disturbing detail the many ways the Russian
government sought to meddle in our elections. For the 3 years that
followed, heads of the Department of Homeland Security, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the
National Security Agency, among others, have warned that the Russian
government will continue its efforts to sow discord and undermine
confidence in our democracy. More disturbing yet, Russia is not alone.
According to the 2019 Worldwide Threat Assessment, other adversaries,
including China and Iran, will pursue opportunities to interfere in our
elections. The intelligence community assesses that adversaries could
exploit cyber means to target election infrastructure or engage in
targeted influence campaigns to manipulate public opinion. We also know
that our adversaries will target political campaigns because they have
done so in the past. Our adversaries have hardly kept their desire to
undermine the integrity of our elections a secret. As Members of
Congress, we have a duty to act.
Today, we are less than 1 year away from the 2020 Presidential
election. The question everyone on this dais must ask themselves is:
``Have we done enough to secure the 2020 elections from our
adversaries?'' Despite multiple efforts led by the House of
Representatives, Congress has yet to send a single piece of
comprehensive election security legislation to the President's desk.
Instead, good pieces of legislation to provide additional resources to
State and local election officials and limit foreign interference have
stalled in the Senate. Moreover, despite multiple requests, the White
House has failed to identify an official to coordinate the election
security activities at various Federal agencies. In the mean time, we
have just a handful of legislative days left this year, and only a
limited amount of time for legislative action next year. I will be
interested to learn from our witnesses how they recommend Congress use
that time to improve election security in advance of the 2020
elections.
Importantly, I will be interested to know how academics and the
private sector can work with State and local elections officials and
campaigns to improve election security in the absence of Congressional
action. The election security problems we face are shared, and we have
a shared responsibility to solve them. State and local election
authorities--with help from the Federal Government--must invest in IT
departments, train their employees, and upgrade and certify their
election equipment. The private sector, including voting system
vendors, must take responsibility to secure their equipment, make it
user-friendly, and demonstrate a willingness to admit weaknesses in
their systems when examined by third-party cybersecurity professionals.
Political campaigns must step up, too. They must implement robust
cybersecurity policies to deprive our adversaries of information that
can be twisted into a divisive narrative and serve as an extra check on
disinformation.
Finally, the American public must also be vigilant, and scrutinize
the information presented to them carefully. Before I close, I would
also like to note that November is Critical Infrastructure Security and
Resilience Month. I can think of no better way to observe it than to
assess our preparedness for the 2020 Presidential elections.
Chairman Thompson. Other Members of the subcommittee are
reminded that, under committee rules, opening statements will
be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Honorable Jackson Lee follows:]
Statement of Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee
Chairman Richmond and Ranking Member Katko, thank you for convening
today's hearing on ``The Road to 2020: Defending Against Election
Interference.''
I thank today's witnesses:
Panel I
General Frank Taylor (Ret.-U.S. Air Force), former under secretary
for intelligence and analysis, U.S. Department of Homeland Security;
executive director (pro tempore), US CyberDome;
The Hon. Richard Stengel, former under secretary for public
diplomacy and public affairs, U.S. State Department;
Dr. Matt Blaze, McDevitt chair of computer science and law,
Georgetown University; and
Ms. Ginny Badanes, director, Strategic Projects, Defending
Democracy Program, Microsoft (Minority Witness).
I thank each of today's witnesses for bringing their expert view on
state of election security as the 2020 elections approach.
The efforts to ensure that every eligible person can register to
vote, and cast a vote in a public election have spanned generations.
I have been persistent in my efforts to protect the rights of
disenfranchised communities in my district of inner-city Houston and
across the Nation.
Throughout my tenure in Congress, I have cosponsored dozens of
bills, amendments, and resolutions seeking to improve voters' rights at
all stages and levels of the election process.
This includes legislation aimed at:
1. Increasing voter outreach and turnout;
2. Ensuring both early and same-day registration;
3. Standardizing physical and language accessibility at polling
places;
4. Expanding early voting periods;
5. Decreasing voter wait times;
6. Guaranteeing absentee ballots, especially for displaced
citizens;
7. Modernizing voting technologies and strengthening our voter
record systems;
8. Establishing the Federal Election Day as a National holiday; and
9. Condemning and criminalizing deceptive practices, voter
intimidation, and other suppression tactics;
Along with many of my colleagues in the CBC, I was an original
cosponsor of H.R. 9, the Fannie Lou Hamer, Rosa Parks, and Coretta
Scott King Voting Rights Act Reauthorization and Amendments Act, which
became public law on July 27, 2006.
I also authored H.R. 745 in the 110th Congress, which added the
legendary Barbara Jordan to the list of civil rights trailblazers whose
names honor the Voting Rights Act Reauthorization and Amendments Act.
This bill strengthened the original Voting Rights Act by replacing
Federal voting examiners with Federal voting observers--a significant
distinction that made it easier to safeguard against racially-biased
voter suppression tactics.
In the 114th Congress, I introduced H.R. 75, the Coretta Scott King
Mid-Decade Redistricting Prohibition Act of 2015, which would prohibit
States whose Congressional districts have been redistricted after a
decennial census from redrawing their district lines until the next
census.
The voting rights struggles of the 20th Century are now joined by
voting rights threats posed by the 21st Century.
Russia an adversary of the United States engaged in repeated
attempts to interfere in the 2016 Presidential election, which prompted
an unprecedented all-of-Government effort to alert local and State
election administrators to be aware of the threat.
Russia targeted our Presidential election according to the report,
``Background to Assessing Russian Activities and Intentions in Recent
U.S. Elections: The Analytic Process and Cyber Incident Attribution,''
provided by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence's
National Intelligence Council.
Russia used every cyber espionage tool available to influence the
outcome of the Presidential election by using a multifaceted campaign
that included theft of data; strategically-timed release of stolen
information; production of fake news; and manipulation of facts to
avoid blame.
The Russian General Staff Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) is
suspected by our intelligence agencies of having begun cyber operations
targeting the United States election as early as March 2016.
They took on the persona of ``Guccifer 2.0,'' ``DCLeaks.com,'' and
Wikileaks as the identities that would be reported as having
involvement in the work they had under taken to undermine our Nation's
Presidential election.
Russia is blamed for breaching 21 local and State election systems,
which they studied extensively.
In February 2018, special counsel Robert Mueller released
indictments of 13 Russians, at least one of whom has direct ties to
Russian President Vladimir Putin.
The 37-page indictment details the actions taken to interfere with
the U.S. political system, including the 2016 US. Presidential
election.
Among the charges, which include charges for obstruction of
justice, are several especially notable details.
The indictment states that 13 defendants posed as U.S. persons and
created false U.S. personas and operated social media pages and groups
designed to attract U.S. audiences.
The Russians are not deterred by these indictments and are poised
to interfere in the 2020 election.
Russian interference in the 2016 election was a ``calculated and
brazen assault'' on our democracy.
In September 2019, Acting Director of National Intelligence Joseph
Maguire told Congress that ``the greatest challenge that we do have is
to make sure that we maintain the integrity of our election system.
``We know right now that there are foreign powers, not just Russia,
that are trying to get us to question the validity on whether or not .
. . our elections are valid.''
Last month, a senior CISA official renewed the agency's warnings
about threats to the 2020 elections.
Unfortunately, these warnings are being met with no response from
current President and those who support him.
The current matter under consideration by the House Intelligence
Committee alleges that the current President sought the assistance of a
foreign leader to meddle in the 2020 election.
The committee must prepare the Nation to address the pending Russia
threat to our Nation's election system, while also preparing to defend
against threats to our election system posed by other nations.
The United States has enemies in other corners of the globe who
would not hesitate to attack our election system if given the chance.
These foreign adversaries do not share our commitment to democracy,
liberty, and human rights, or the precious freedoms we hold dear.
On January 6, 2017, Homeland Security Secretary Johnson, as one of
his last official acts under the Obama administration, designated
election systems as critical infrastructure, and created a new
subsector under the existing Government Facilities Sector designation.
On January 29, 2019, the director of national intelligence
testified before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence that our
adversaries ``probably already are looking to the 2020 U.S. elections
as an opportunity to advance their interests.
The House Committee on Homeland Security has the responsibility of
providing for the cybersecurity of Federal civilian agencies as well as
the security of the Nation's 16 critical infrastructure sectors from
cyber and other threats.
The Election Infrastructure Subsector covers a wide range of
physical and electronic assets such as storage facilities, polling
places, and centralized vote tabulation locations used to support the
election process, and information and communications technology to
include voter registration databases, voting machines, and other
systems to manage the election process and report and display results
on behalf of State and local governments.
The work to secure our Nation's election system from cyber threats
is on-going, which is why this hearing is relevant.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) mission in
cybersecurity and infrastructure protection is focused on enhancing
greater collaboration on cybersecurity across the 16 critical
infrastructure sectors and the sharing of cyber threat information
between the private sector and Federal, State, and local partners.
This committee will work hand-and-glove with the House Judiciary
and House Administration Committees as well as the Senate Committees to
ensure that the tools applied to the current threat to our elections is
effectively and adequately addressed.
We know the threats that computing devices and systems face, which
are almost too numerous to count:
Internet of things-enabled devices;
Ransom-ware;
Mal-ware;
Denial of Service Attacks;
Distributed-Denial-of-Service Attacks;
Pharming;
Phishing;
Data Theft;
Data Breaches;
SQL Injection;
Man-in-the-middle attack.
This hyper cyber-threat environment poses risks to election systems
because of the nature of Federal elections.
Elections are date- and time-sensitive, which means any disruption
or interruption can have catastrophic implications.
During the 2016 election we learned of new threats from cyber space
that go far beyond any that would have been considered in previous
elections.
This Congress is poised to do the hard work of delving into the
issue of Russian involvement in our National election and providing
solutions.
The work today must focus on election recovery should a serious
cyber incident occur during an election.
Vulnerabilities of computing systems are not limited to intentional
attacks, but can include acts of nature, human error, or technology
failing to perform as intended.
I am particularly concerned that so many jurisdictions rely on
electronic poll books, to check-in voters before issuing them ballots,
with no paper backups.
Finally, the use of untrustworthy paperless electronic voting
machines without enough paper ballot options will come to an end when
H.R. 1 becomes law.
The right and better approach to election cybersecurity is to be
prepared and not need options for voters to cast ballots should voting
systems fail, rather than being unprepared and needing options for
voters to cast ballots during an election that are not available.
We must be steadfast in our resolve to have a strong shield to
defend civilian and critical infrastructure networks for all threats
foreign and domestic.
I look forward to the testimony of today's witnesses.
Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. I welcome our panel of witnesses. First,
I am pleased to welcome back General Frank Taylor, United
States Air Force, retired. He is a former under secretary for
intelligence and analysis, and--at the Department of Homeland
Security, and a board member of the U.S. CyberDome, a non-
profit organization which provides cybersecurity at no cost to
political parties, elected officials, and candidates across
party lines.
Next, we have Mr. Richard Stengel. He is a former under
secretary of state for public diplomacy and public affairs,
where he created and oversaw the Global Engagement Center.
Next, we have Dr. Matt Blaze. He holds the McDevitt chair
of computer science and law at Georgetown University. He
works--his work focuses on technology, encryption, and, most
importantly, election security.
Finally, we have this Ms. Ginny Badanes. Close? OK. She is
the director of strategic projects at Microsoft's Defending
Democracy Program, where she leads a team that works with
political campaigns to protect against hacking and defend
against disinformation campaigns.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statements will be
inserted in the record.
I now ask each witness to summarize his or her statement
for 5 minutes, beginning with General Taylor.
STATEMENT OF FRANCIS X. TAYLOR, GENERAL, U.S. AIR FORCE,
RETIRED, FORMER UNDER SECRETARY FOR INTELLIGENCE AND ANALYSIS,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY, BOARD MEMBER, US
CYBERDOME
General Taylor. Thank you, Chairman Thompson, Ranking
Member Katko. It is a pleasure to appear before this committee,
this time as the acting executive director of US CyberDome, a
non-profit organization dedicated to helping to secure Federal
campaigns against undue influence. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear and to discuss defending our election
infrastructure.
You--both you, Chairman Thompson, and Mr. Katko--have
outlined what the threat was from 2016. That threat continues
to manifest itself, so I will not speak further to that.
But as the executive director of US CyberDome, I have
talked with many other organizations who are helping campaigns
with cybersecurity and to protect against disinformation. I
have been engaged with personnel in the National party
committees, the Federal campaign committees, as well as
personnel who have worked for these types of committees in the
recent past. The observations of this testimony come from those
dialogs, my professional experience, and the experiences of US
CyberDome founders and advisors.
US CyberDome is a 501(c)(4) non-profit organization. Our
objective is to ensure the integrity of elections and
confidence in their outcomes. We operate in full alignment with
the Federal Election Commission Advisory Opinion 201(a)-12, to
fund qualified vendors using US CyberDome donations. Initial US
CyberDome activities have focused on the 2020 U.S. Presidential
and Senatorial campaigns, but over time will apply to other
campaigns.
We broker no-cost cybersecurity and disinformation
protection services from qualified vendors to Federal campaign
committees, National party committees, think tanks, and non-
Governmental organizations. Using this cybersecurity framework
as a measure of comprehensive cyber risk management, we have
identified services for a multi-phase improvement initiative.
Perhaps not every campaign will need every service.
However, our objective is to increase the overall level of
protection across the campaign infrastructure, both within
campaigns and in the National parties and services they depend
on, envision services--ones that have a high probability of
success within the campaigns, offer low disruption--and will
offer low disruption to campaign workers, and offer the highest
impact, and address the most urgent threats.
Our intent is to start with detection and response
services, to include impostor website monitoring, social media,
and dark web monitoring. These services are allowed per current
Federal Election Commission advisory opinions. These services
will hold the line. These services will hold a line against
malicious actors. In later phases of our initiative we intend
to broker more proactive and protective services, such as
perimeter security management, distributed denial of service,
and ransomware mitigation services. These will be enabled by an
FEC opinion request that we are now staffing.
US CyberDome is comprised of cybersecurity experts who have
trained and practiced the world's--at the world's largest
accredited computer forensic and incident response institute in
the world, the Defense Cyber Crime Center, which I am proud to
also say I started in 1997, as the commander of OSI, and it
continues to grow.
A special note: US CyberDome believes our role is to help
ensure U.S. political discourse is free from foreign influence,
but not participate in or affect that discourse.
Just a couple of observations about campaigns. Our
assessment is campaigns are underprepared. Their focus is on
getting their candidate elected, and the investment that is
required to protect against the more sophisticated threats that
the campaigns and our election infrastructure face are much
more expensive than campaigns can afford. Our focus is to
provide the campaigns with free-of-charge services to protect
themselves as they pursue the election process.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield my time.
[The prepared statement of General Taylor follows:]
Prepared Statement of Francis X. Taylor
November 19, 2019
introduction
Chairman Richmond, Ranking Member Katko, and Members of the
subcommittee, I am Frank Taylor, the executive director of US
CyberDome, a non-profit dedicated to securing Federal campaigns against
undue influence. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today to discuss defending against election interference.
us cyberdome's role in defending against election interference
US CyberDome is a 501(c)(4) non-profit organization. Our objective
is to ensure the integrity of elections and confidence in their
outcomes. We broker no-cost cybersecurity and disinformation detection
services from qualified vendors to Federal campaign committees,
National party committees, think tanks, and non-governmental
organizations. Initial US CyberDome activities are focused on the 2020
U.S. Presidential and Senatorial campaigns, and will apply to other
campaigns over time. We operate in full alignment with the Federal
Election Commission's Advisory Opinion 2018-12 to fund qualified
vendors using US CyberDome donations.
US CyberDome is comprised of cybersecurity experts who have trained
and practiced at the world's largest accredited computer forensics and
incident response institute in the world, the Defense Cyber Crime
Center, as well as the U.S. Department of Defense and National
Institute of Standards and Technology. The team was formed by a group
of cybersecurity experts who became alarmed by increasing cyber threats
and the lack of protection for campaigns and voters. They formed the
non-profit organization to absorb the extraordinary cost of providing
cyber protection to campaigns by working with donors and charitable
foundations.
Of special note, US CyberDome believes our role is to help ensure
U.S. political discourse is free of foreign interference, but not to
participate in or affect that discourse. For that reason, we are non-
partisan in our approach. Our Board of Advisors represents a variety of
political parties and beliefs to ensure we are guided in a balanced
way. Additionally, our services are designed to be delivered fairly and
equitably, regardless of political party or beliefs.
political campaigns in 2019
Our freedom of speech and democracy are under attack by
increasingly sophisticated and ever-evolving threats to the election
process, including purposeful attacks and exploits from foreign
governments, terrorists, organized crime, foreign corporate spies, and
others.
The 2016 U.S. Presidential elections demonstrated that cyber
attacks and disinformation can be used to manipulate the U.S. election.
As set forth in the Bob Mueller's Report on the Investigation into
Russian Interference in the 2016 Presidential Election, ``the Russian
government interfered in the 2016 Presidential election in sweeping and
systematic fashion.'' They did so principally through 2 operations.
First, a Russian entity conducted a sophisticated social media
campaign, and second, a Russian intelligence service conducted
computer-intrusion operations against campaign entities, employees, and
volunteers, and then released stolen documents. Successful and public
foreign interference in 2016 increased the likelihood that other
nations will seek to influence in 2020 and beyond.
Other factors will very likely increase interference in the U.S.
2020 Presidential election. For instance, as the United States
increases trade pressures around the world, cyber attacks from affected
nations have increased. These, and potentially other factors, will
likely lead to increased attacks on 2020 U.S. Presidential campaigns,
and Federal campaigns in general.
In summary, I offer the affirmation of one US CyberDome Advisor,
former Secretary of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Michael
Chertoff. ``Malign foreign actors continue their efforts to attack our
democracy, including through the on-line penetration and disruption of
our candidate and campaign organizations.''
Even more insidious, some nation-states are busy gathering
information about U.S. Presidential candidates, Senators, and
Representatives, that may be used at a moment in time that is
advantageous to that nation in the future; potentially far beyond 2020.
Not even the Government can guarantee a 100 percent success rate
against every attack or exploit from malicious nations or nation-
states. However, we can greatly increase success rates through
diligence in detecting adversary activity, and expediency in responding
to and reporting that activity.
As executive director for US CyberDome, I have talked with many
other organizations who are helping campaigns with cybersecurity and
disinformation. Organizations such as Microsoft and Area 1 Security who
have received positive Advisory Opinions from the FEC and are
supporting campaigns. Organizations such as the DigiDems who offer on-
site technical personnel to campaigns and currently have over 80
personnel embedded in those campaigns. I have been engaged with
personnel in National party committees and Federal campaign committees,
as well as personnel who have worked for those types of committees in
the recent past. The observations of this testimony come from those
dialogs, my professional experiences, and the experiences of the US
CyberDome founders and Advisors.
observations about campaigns
Campaigns are under-prepared.--They are not adequately resourced to
defend against many expert, persistent, and well-funded threat actors
such as nation-states. Most campaigns do not have enough technical
expertise or historical experience against the myriad threats they
face. Simply put, if they have not previously detected and responded to
sophisticated threat actors, they will not be able to. Even campaigns
with a very knowledgeable cybersecurity professional on-staff are
hindered. One person cannot hold off the Korean People's Army or the
Armed Forces of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
There are very few workplaces in the United States where campaigns
can find someone with past experience defending against a wide variety
of nation-state cyber attacks or disinformation. The intelligence
community and Department of Defense have groups of such individuals.
Also, the Defense Cyber Crime Center, an organization I commissioned
while serving as the commander of the Air Force Office of Special
Investigations also employs and trains some of these cyber specialists.
Without this type of field-tested past experience, even well-skilled
information technologists and cybersecurity professionals are ill-
prepared to detect and respond to nation-state actors. Again, if they
have not previously detected and responded to sophisticated threat
actors, they likely will be unable to successfully do so.
Additionally, U.S. political campaigns are unlike any corporate or
Government entity. They are essentially start-ups that can endure for
weeks or years. The short tenure of personnel--both volunteers and
employees--diminishes the effect of cybersecurity measures used
successfully in corporate America. For instance, anti-phishing training
has been demonstrated to reduce the effectiveness of phishing attacks
in corporate America. Campaigns have less long-term effect from similar
training, because their personnel are relatively short-tenure.
Campaigns are isolated.--Our democracy is rooted in the separation
of powers--Executive, Legislative, Judicial. Our election process is a
key component that must be independent. This very independence tends to
isolate the election community from some of the core National security
apparatus that it needs to protect it.
The United States Government has the best intelligence, law
enforcement, National security, and cybersecurity capabilities in the
world, but conditions isolate campaigns from U.S. Federal Government
resources.
Campaign personnel may be concerned about the interests of for-
profit organizations. Specifically, campaigns wonder how they can trust
the advice of an organization that stands to profit on that advice. In
particular, product vendors following common sales practice only
represent their own products. This can inadvertently lead campaigns to
a less-than-comprehensive cybersecurity solutions.
Campaigns focus.--Their singular focus is to get elected. Any
effort not directly in support of getting elected, is not funded or
underfunded. For election campaigns, every dollar spent on services
like cybersecurity is a dollar that is not being spent on their core
mission. Even proactive candidates may think twice about spending
effort and money on cybersecurity, for fear this diversion of resources
will result in less votes than their competitors. This results in a
lack of incentive for campaigns to address cybersecurity more fully,
despite the imminent threat.
Last mile cybersecurity.--In addition to the above campaign
observations, I offer a technical one. We still struggle with the
``last mile'' of cybersecurity within our communities--getting
actionable security intelligence in the hands of those who need to
defend themselves. There are at least two aggravating circumstances.
First, the classification level of threat information slows down the
flow of actionable threat intelligence. Second, threat information is
mainly conveyed in formats that cannot be automatically processed by
computers. In cyber space, the pace of engagement is extremely fast. It
far outpaces the rate of de-classification and re-formatting threat
intelligence. We are fighting an asymmetrical war on the cyber front,
and we must adjust.
what can we do
Capitalize on the non-profit model.--Non-profit organizations are
uniquely positioned and scoped to support campaigns. Specifically, non-
profits avoid misgivings campaigns may have about utilizing Federal
Government and for-profit resources directly. When non-profits engage
campaigns, it reduces risks they may face, and we all face, if those
campaigns are isolated. Non-profits are not a part of the Executive
branch of Government, therefore they are not affiliated with a
competing candidate. Non-profits less prone to the financial conflicts
of interest faced by a for-profit. At the same time, non-profits can
still play an integral role in brokering the resources of the Federal
Government and for-profit organizations. For instance, non-profits may
offer an indirect way to disseminate cyber threat information (and do
so in formats that can be immediately utilized by campaigns). For all
of these reasons, I believe non-profit organizations are well-suited to
support political committees and campaigns with on-going and proactive
measures.
Specify minimum standards for campaign cybersecurity.--Campaigns
may have greater incentive to spend effort and funds on cyber
protections if they know their competitors are obligated to the same
expenditures.
Here is a similar circumstance from recent history. In the past, US
CyberDome personnel helped create the DoD-Defense Collaborative
Information Sharing Environment (DCISE). The DCISE stemmed from the
Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative to be one of the first
successful examples of ``need to share'' in America. The DCISE used
specific methodologies and techniques to anonymously share intelligence
and law enforcement information with the defense industrial base (DIB),
and share that information with the Federal Government. In the DIB,
there existed similar competitive pressures about the effort and time
spent on participation in DCISE. Ultimately, the Defense Federal
Acquisition Regulation incorporated requirements for DIB organizations
to participate in the DCISE, thus ``leveling the playing field'' for
all DIB organizations to participate. This propelled the DCISE to a
well-utilized and effective solution for threat information sharing in
the DIB. Similar requirements for Federal campaign committees would
likely prove useful.
Focus on key technical challenges.--Congress should consider
mandating that all U.S. Government threat intelligence be disseminated
in computer-readable formats, in addition to prose. This simple
requirement would go a long way to ensuring that action can be taken
swiftly once threat intelligence information is received. I do not
espouse a specific format. I would leave that up to the experts.
Expressing all threat information in computer-readable formats will be
a big step forward.
Challenges like de-classification are more complex to solve. Over-
classification is something that intelligence organizations should
evaluate for themselves. In other words, is it possible that certain
aspects of the threat information never needed to be Classified to
begin with? Accelerating de-classification should also be considered.
We are living in an age where machine learning is broadly applied, and
artificial intelligence is starting to be well-understood. These
technologies hold significant promise to automate large portions of the
de-classification process.
conclusion
US CyberDome is defending against election interference by working
with Federal campaign committees, National party committees, think
tanks, and non-Governmental organizations. Our status as a non-profit
affords us unique insights and opportunities to help the community.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I am happy to answer any
questions you may have.
Chairman Thompson. General Taylor, let me thank you for
your testimony. I now recognize Mr. Stengel for his opening
statement.
STATEMENT OF RICHARD STENGEL, FORMER UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE
FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS, U.S. STATE DEPARTMENT
Mr. Stengel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I said thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I feel very comfortable here today, because I spent
so much time sitting next to General Taylor in Government.
So the consent of the governed, that is the basis of our
democracy. If that consent is acquired through deception, the
powers derived from it are not just. That is why disinformation
is so dangerous to our democracy. Disinformation is
deliberately false information designed to deceive or mislead.
Misinformation is simply false information, whether deliberate
or not. Disinformation is the much greater threat, because it
is on the rise around the world and at home, particularly here
at home.
Disinformation is asymmetric warfare. You might not be able
to afford an F-35, but you can certainly hire some people with
laptops who act as trolls. Yet it is often a weapon used by the
strong against the weak, because authoritarian leaders have
understood that they can repress free speech at home and spew
disinformation on state media.
It is difficult to fight, because it is hidden in plain
sight. It uses all the same principles of behavioral economics
and the tools of the big social media companies to find a
targeted audience. It is as old as humanity, but social media
has made it exponentially easier to create, deliver, and
instantly find large audiences.
I spent 3 years at the State Department, attempting to
combat ISIS propaganda and Russian disinformation. In fact, we
started the first counter-Russian group at the State
Department, which eventually became the Global Engagement
Center. I came to the State Department after 7 years as the
editor of Time, where I understood media. What I found was that
fighting ISIS was a lot more direct than fighting the Russians.
ISIS at least said who they were. The Russians masqueraded as
Americans to insert their poison into our digital bloodstream.
We saw from the State Department the first wave of Russian
disinformation around Putin's illegal invasion of Ukraine in
2014. Then the Russians took what they learned in the periphery
and brought it here to our election in 2016.
But in attempting to counter Russian disinformation, I came
to the conclusion that Government wasn't the answer. I saw that
countering disinformation was often counter-productive. After
all, we were the enemy. A tweet from the under secretary of
state to someone was not going to change their mind.
Democracies aren't actually very good at combating
disinformation. Why is that? In part, because our opponents use
our freedoms against us. They exploit freedom of speech to
create false speech, which is protected by the First Amendment.
They use the same tools of microtargeting that advertisers use
to sell us sneakers and phones, to sell us false narratives and
conspiracy theories.
The truth is disinformation doesn't so much create division
as amplify it. Even though I don't think Government has a
direct role in countering disinformation through creating
content or taking it down, I do think Government has a clear
role in creating resilience to disinformation.
First, Congress can impose stricter regulations on the
platforms that host all of this disinformation. Right now the
law, the Communications and Decency Act, doesn't treat them as
publishers, and they have complete immunity from liability for
all this content on their platforms.
Take it from me. Not only are these companies publishers,
they are the biggest publishers in the history of the world. To
be sure, they can't have the same liability that I had when I
was editor of Time. But they need to have some more liability
for content that is on their platforms that is demonstrably
false, that is created by robots, that attacks people on the
basis of race, religion, ethnicity, gender, or sexual
orientation, that is created by foreign actors to deceive
American voters. They need to be much more accountable for
making a good-faith effort to remove that content.
So as 2020 approaches, we see a host of new problems, deep
fakes, data manipulation, where they--bad actors don't just
steal data but manipulate it. The professionalization of
interference, where private companies teach people how to do
disinformation for profit, and the rise of home-grown
disinformation and the recruitment of Americans as witting or
unwitting agents of disinformation.
I actually think the platform companies need to embrace is
what I call the five Ds of combating disinformation: Detection,
demotion, deletion, disclosure, and digital literacy. They not
only need to remove foreign influence; they need to publicize
it.
I do think the one entity in Government that I mentioned
before, the Global Engagement Center, which was created to
combat global disinformation, can help with this election, too.
I would urge the passing of the Honest Ads Act, which would
bring a lot more transparency in political advertising.
As I have often said, we don't have a fake news problem, we
have a media literacy problem. There was a poll this past week
that showed that 47 percent of Americans say they find it
difficult to evaluate whether the information they are getting
is true. We need to teach deep media literacy and digital
literacy in the schools. I can't think of anyone better to pay
for that than the platform companies.
Ultimately, the problem of disinformation is not so much
that people will come to believe what is false. The greatest
problem is that they will doubt what is true.
I am honored to be here today, and I welcome your
questions. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stengel follows:]
Prepared Statement of Richard Stengel
November 19, 2019
``Governments are instituted among men,'' the Declaration declares,
``deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.'' In a
democracy, how do we obtain that consent? Through information, the
Framers said, true information. The rise of disinformation is a threat
to our democracy because it undermines our consent. If that consent is
acquired through deception and disinformation, the powers derived from
it are not just.
Disinformation is deliberately false information designed to
deceive or mislead. Misinformation is simply false information that is
not deliberate or designed to mislead. Disinformation is the much
greater threat and it is on the rise around the world and at home. In
the realm of politics, it is the promulgation of false narratives to
undermine democracy.
Disinformation is asymmetric warfare: You might not be able to
afford an F35, but you can always hire a few trolls with laptops. Yet
it is often a weapon used by the strong against the weak: Authoritarian
leaders have learned that they can repress free speech at home and spew
disinformation on state media. That's a dangerous combination for the
future of democracy. Disinformation is difficult to fight because it is
hidden in plain sight. It uses all the principles of behavioral
economics--and the tools of the big social media companies--to find a
targeted audience. Disinformation is as old as information, but social
media has made it exponentially easier to create, deliver, and
instantly find large and receptive audiences.
My book Information Wars is the story of how we attempted to fight
Russian and ISIS disinformation from the State Department during the
last 3 years of the Obama administration. I went into Government after
7 years as the editor of TIME and I thought I understood media. ISIS
was something new in terrorism: A non-state actor as adept at social
media as barbaric killings. But ISIS's digital jihadis did not pretend
to be anyone else other than who they were--unlike the Russians, that
is. The Russians adopted other identities and masqueraded as Americans
to insert their poison into our digital bloodstream. From the State
Department, we first saw Russia create a wave of social media
disinformation in the Russian periphery around Putin's illegal invasion
of Ukraine in 2014--and then the Russians took what they learned there
and aimed it squarely at our election space in 2016.
What also makes disinformation effective is that there is often a
kernel of truth in it. What united ISIS and Russian disinformation was
what I called the weaponization of grievance. ISIS weaponized the
grievances of Sunni Muslims who felt left out by modernity and
repressed by their rulers. Putin weaponized the grievances of Russians
who mourned the loss of the Soviet Union and never adapted to the
modern world. If ISIS had a slogan, it was Make Islam Great Again. If
Putin had a slogan, it would be Make Russia Great Again. They had their
mantras long before we heard about making America great again. This
global weaponization of grievance is the unified theory behind the rise
of nationalism and right-wing strongmen across the globe.
But the ultimate threat is here at home. It's easier and more
comfortable for us to see this problem as a threat from the outside,
from foreign influence operations. And, indeed, they remain a grave
National security threat. But the scale and range of domestic
disinformation--created and spread by Americans to other Americans--
dwarfs any foreign threat or troll factory. Our foreign adversaries
seek to engage Americans and do so, but our home-grown disinformation
overwhelms what our adversaries produce. Our internal challenge is far
greater and more dangerous than any external one.
In attempting to counter Russian and ISIS disinformation I came to
see that Government was not the answer. I saw that ``countering''
disinformation was often counter-productive. When we tried to create
content ourselves, we very often played into our adversaries' hands.
After all, we were the enemy. It's very hard for a tweet from the U.S.
State Department to persuade someone of our point of view if we are
seen as the cause of the problem. They see our efforts to rebut them as
confirmation that they are right and that their strategy is working.
Democracies just aren't very good at combatting disinformation. Why
is that? One reason is that our opponents not only use our freedoms
against us, but our technology. They exploit freedom of speech to
create dangerous and false speech, which is protected by the First
Amendment. They utilize the same tools of micro-targeting that
advertisers use to market sneakers and phones but they use them to sell
us false narratives and conspiracy theories. Disinformation is hard to
fight because it's not just a supply problem, it's a demand problem.
People embrace it when it seems to confirm their beliefs. It's a
missile that hits its target because the target welcomes it. The truth
is, disinformation doesn't create divisions so much as widen them.
At the end of last year, the initial Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence report on Russian interference in the 2016 election said
the Internet Research Agency in St. Petersburg had created more than 10
million tweets--of which 6 million were original--across 4,000
accounts; more than 100,000 Instagram posts; and more than 50,000
Facebook posts. The second Senate Intelligence Committee report that
came out last month reported that the Russians had done more since the
election than they did before it. Now, as then, it's a whole-of-
Government effort which includes Russian intelligence services,
conventional Russian media, and even the foreign ministry. The Russians
are shrewd about using our own biases against us. In 2016, they sought
out groups who were afraid of immigrants and Muslims and stoked their
fears. They targeted African American voters and told them voting was a
waste of time. After Twitter and Facebook removed many on-line assets
attributed to Russia in 2017, the Russians returned with a more
tailored focus to activist communities who were susceptible to
disinformation. With a focus on 2020, the Russians will again seek out
cultural and social divisions and try to magnify them. As with 2016,
they will often amplify both sides of divisive issues. Anything to
create chaos and disunity and doubt about the integrity of our
political process.
Even though I don't think Government has much of a role in
countering disinformation through creating content or taking it down, I
do think there is a clear Government role in raising awareness and
creating resilience to disinformation. Combatting disinformation is a
cross-cutting issue that has implications for a wide range of different
agencies and committees. First, I think Government has a role in
regulating the platforms that host disinformation. Currently, there is
an alignment of economic interests between the disinformationists and
the platforms: The social media companies make money when
disinformation goes viral. Right now, the law doesn't treat the
platform companies as publishers and they have complete immunity from
liability for the content on their platforms. Not only are these
companies publishers, they are the biggest publishers in the history of
the world. No, they don't have human editors, but as a former editor
I'm here to tell you that algorithms and content recommendation engines
are editors--the fastest and most efficient editors in history.
To be sure, these companies cannot have the same liability that I
used to have as editor of TIME. But they need to have some liability
for content that is on their platform that is demonstrably false, that
is created by robots, that attacks others on the basis of race,
religion, ethnicity, gender or sexual orientation, that is created by
foreign actors to deceive American voters. They need to be legally
accountable for making a good-faith effort to remove such content from
their platforms.
As the 2020 election approaches, there are a host of new problems:
Deep fakes; data manipulation, where bad actors don't steal data but
manipulate it; the professionalization of interference, as private
companies hire out their services to create disinformation; the rise of
domestic disinformation and the recruiting of Americans as witting or
unwitting agents of disinformation.
Combatting these new efforts requires the detection and removal of
foreign influence in our election, greater ad transparency, more
accountability for the platform companies, and greater data protection.
I would endorse the Senate Intelligence Committee's recommendations for
fighting disinformation, and in particular the timely sharing of
information between the private and public sector of real-time threats.
I believe the tech companies would welcome that too. I'd also recommend
the Five D's of combatting disinformation: Detection, demotion,
deletion, disclosure, and digital literacy. The empowering of the
Global Engagement Center, which was created at the end of 2016, to
truly help fight all kinds of disinformation could be a vital effort of
the Government. It is important to pass the Honest Ads Act, which would
provide for more transparency in political advertising. All of this in
addition to giving the content companies more liability for publishing
proscribed content would help but not remedy the flood of
disinformation. I've often said we don't have a fake news problem, we
have a media literacy problem. Media and digital literacy need to be
taught and the schools, and I can't think of a better source of that
funding than the platform companies. We also need a privacy bill of
rights that protects our information as part of a new digital social
contract. The ownership of one's personal information is an unalienable
right.
The disinformationists know that it's far easier to create
confusion rather than clarity, to confuse rather than persuade. They
want people to see empirical facts as an elitist conspiracy. Citizens
have trouble discerning fact from fiction and we need to teach media
and digital literacy in the schools from an early age. In a new poll
from this past week, 47 percent of Americans say they find it difficult
to know whether the information they encounter is true. The public
needs to see that countering disinformation is a civic duty for which
we all are responsible. Ultimately, the problem of disinformation is
not so much that people will come to believe what is false. The
greatest problem is that they it will cause them to question what is
true.
Mr. Richmond [presiding]. Thank you. I will now recognize
Dr. Blaze for 5 minutes to summarize his statement.
STATEMENT OF MATT BLAZE, PH.D., MC DEVITT CHAIR OF COMPUTER
SCIENCE AND LAW, GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY
Mr. Blaze. Thank you, Chairman Thompson, Chairman Richmond,
and Ranking Member Katko for convening this hearing on the
vitally important topic of securing American elections against
foreign interference.
I am here today as an academic and technologist who studies
particularly election system security. As I know you are well
aware, the integrity of elections across the United States
today depends heavily on the integrity of the computers and
software systems embedded across our election infrastructure.
Complex software lies at the heart of not just the vote-casting
equipment used at polling places, but also the information
systems used by local authorities to manage everything from
voter registration records, to the tallying and reporting of
election results, to the dissemination of authoritative
information to voters.
Unfortunately, much of this information--much of this
infrastructure has proven dangerously vulnerable to tampering
and attack, in some cases in ways that can't easily be detected
or corrected after the fact. These vulnerabilities create
practical avenues for our adversaries to do everything from
cause large-scale disruption on Election Day, disenfranchise
large numbers of voters, create uncertainty as to the
legitimate winners of election, or even to undetectably alter
election outcomes.
Now, for the purpose of our discussion, it is helpful to
consider voting machines and election management infrastructure
separately. They have different properties and different
mitigations. So let me begin with the voting equipment used at
polling places first.
To be blunt, it is a widely recognized and indisputable
fact that every piece of computerized voting equipment used at
polling places today can be easily compromised in ways that
have the potential to disrupt election operations, compromise
the firmware and software in these devices, and alter vote
tallies that get reported by county offices. Now, this is
partly a consequence of poor design and implementation by
equipment vendors, which is a notorious problem, but it is also
ultimately a reflection of the nature of complex software.
It is simply beyond the state-of-the-art to build software
systems that can reliably withstand a targeted attack by a
determined adversary in a high-stakes environment like voting.
The vulnerabilities are real. They are serious and, absent a
surprising breakthrough in technology and computer science,
probably inevitable for quite some time to come.
Now, fortunately, there is now also overwhelming consensus
among experts who have studied this problem on how we can
conduct reliable elections, despite the inherent unreliability
of the underlying hardware and software that we use to cast our
votes.
This requires 2 things, 2 properties of the equipment and
processes.
The first is that the voting technology must retain a paper
record that reliably reflects the voter's intended choices.
Now, fortunately, equipment with this property already exists
and is in use in many jurisdictions throughout the Nation. It
has the added virtue of being relatively simple and
inexpensive, compared to other alternative voting technologies
that we use and have been using. I am referring here to paper
ballots, preferably marked by hand, that are fed into optical
scan ballot readers at the time that the vote is cast by the
voter.
Now, paper ballots alone are not sufficient to accomplish
reliable elections in the face of tampering, since the software
in ballot scanners themselves all are vulnerable to tampering
and to error. So there is a second requirement, and that is
that the election be reliably audited to ensure that the
software is reporting the correct outcome of each race.
Now, there is a statistically rigorous technique recently
invented called risk limiting audits that can accomplish this
efficiently and quickly. But it must be done routinely after
every election in order to provide meaningful assurance that
election outcomes are correct.
Unfortunately, here and now, only a handful of States
currently conduct risk limiting audits, although it is
encouraging that more and more States are experimenting with
them.
So the second technology at risk is the election management
infrastructure that is used by local jurisdictions. While
voting--vote casting equipment has justifiably gained a great
deal of attention, there is more to this than just the voting
machines. Each of the more than 5,000 local jurisdictions
responsible for running elections has to maintain a number of
critical information systems that are attractive targets for
disruption by adversary. Most prominently are the voter
registration databases that determine who is allowed to vote on
Election Day.
Now, all of the 5,000 different local jurisdictions
responsible for running these systems have different resources,
practices, and regulations that govern them, but they have in
common that they are targets of some of the world's most
sophisticated intelligence services, and they are at the front
line of our Nation's defense against election disruption.
There is no simple fix here, but--except the provisioning
of significant additional resources to protect these systems.
We don't expect the local sheriff to single-handedly defend
against military ground invasions, and we should not expect
county election IT managers to defend against cyber attacks by
foreign intelligence agencies, yet that is what we effectively
ask them to do.
So thank you again for your attention to these important
issues.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Blaze follows:]
Prepared Statement of Matt Blaze \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Professor and McDevitt chair of computer science and law,
Georgetown University, 600 New Jersey Ave NW, Washington, DC 20001.
[emailprotected] Affiliation for identification only.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 19, 2019
introduction
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony on the important
questions raised by the security of the technology used for elections
in the United States.
For more than 25 years, my research and scholarship has focused on
security and privacy in computing and communications systems,
especially as we rely on insecure platforms such as the internet for
increasingly critical applications. My work has focused particularly on
the intersection of this technology with public policy issues. For
example, in 2007, I led several of the teams that evaluated the
security of computerized election systems from several vendors on
behalf of the States of California and Ohio.
I am currently the McDevitt chair of computer science and law at
Georgetown University. From 2004 to 2018, I was a professor of computer
and information science at the University of Pennsylvania. From 1992 to
2004, I was a research scientist at AT&T Bell Laboratories. I hold a
PhD in computer science from Princeton University, an MS in computer
science from Columbia University, and a BS from the City University of
New York. This testimony is not offered on behalf of any organization
or agency.
In this testimony, I will give an overview of the security risks
facing elections in the United States today, with emphasis on
vulnerabilities inherent in electronic voting machines, as well as the
exposure of our election infrastructure to disruption by National
security adversaries. I have attempted, to the extent possible, to
represent the current consensus of experts in the field, but space and
time constraints limit my ability to be comprehensive or complete. An
especially valuable resource, with comprehensive discussion and
recommendations. is the recent National Academies ``Securing the Vote''
consensus study report.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.nap.edu/catalog/25120/securing-the-vote-protecting-
american-democracy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I offer 3 specific recommendations:
Paperless (``DRE'') voting machines should be phased out
from U.S. elections immediately, and urgently replaced with
precinct-counted optical scan ballots that leave a direct
artifact of voters' choices.
Statistically rigorous ``risk-limiting audits'' should be
routinely conducted after every election, in every
jurisdiction, to detect and correct software failures and
attacks.
State and local voting officials should receive access to
significant additional resources, infrastructure, and training
to help them protect their election management IT systems
against increasingly sophisticated adversaries.
i. elections and software security
A consequence of our Federalist system is that U.S. elections are
in practice highly decentralized, with each State responsible for
setting its own standards and procedures for registering voters,
casting ballots, and counting votes. The Federal Government has set
only broad standards for such issues as accessibility, but has
historically been largely uninvolved in day-to-day election operations.
In most States, the majority of election management functions are
delegated to local county and town governments, which are responsible
for registering voters, procuring voting equipment, creating ballots,
setting up and managing local polling places, counting votes, and
reporting the results of each contest. Consequently, thousands of
individual local election offices shoulder the burden of managing and
securing the voting process for most of the American electorate.
Elections in the United States are among the most operationally and
logistically complex in the world. Many jurisdictions have large
numbers of geographically-dispersed voters, and most elections involve
multiple ballot contests and referenda. Baseline election security must
account for sophisticated adversaries, ballot secrecy, fair access to
the polls, and accurate reporting of results, making secure election
management one of the most formidable--and potentially fragile--
information technology problems in government.
Computers and software play central roles in almost every aspect of
our election process: Managing voter registration records, defining
ballots, provisioning voting machines, tallying and reporting results,
and controlling electronic voting machines used at polling places.\3\
The integrity and security of our elections are thus inexorably tied to
the integrity and security of the computers and software that we rely
on for these many functions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ A typical election administration office is much like any
modern enterprise, with local computer networks tying together desktop
computers, printers, servers, and internet access. This increasing
connectivity served as a critical avenue in 2016 for what U.S.
intelligence agencies have identified as attacks by Russian military
intelligence.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The passage of the Help America Vote Act (HAVA) in 2002 accelerated
the computerization of voting systems, particularly with respect to the
ways in which voters cast their ballots at local polling stations. HAVA
provided funds for States to replace precinct voting equipment with
``accessible'' technology. As implemented, however, some of this new
technology has had the unfortunate unintended consequence of
increasing, rather than decreasing, the risk of our elections being
compromised by malicious actors.
A. Election Software and Hardware
A typical \4\ county election office today depends on computerized
systems and software for virtually every aspect of registering voters
and conducting elections. Generally, an election office workflow will
include at least the following pre- and post-election functions:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ The precise nature of the systems used and how they interact
with one another will vary somewhat depending on the vendors from which
the systems were purchased and the practices of the local jurisdiction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Voter registration.--The on-going maintenance of an authoritative
database of registered voters in the jurisdiction, including the
precinct-by-precinct ``poll books'' of voters (which might be on paper
or in electronic form) that are used to check in voters at precinct
polling stations.
Ballot definition.--The pre-election process of creating data files
that list the various contests, candidates, and rules (e.g., number of
permitted choices per race) that will appear on the ballot. The ballot
definition is used to print paper ballots, to define what is displayed
on touchscreen voting terminals, and to control the vote tallying and
reporting software. Local races (such as school boards) may sometimes
require that different ballot definitions be created for different
precincts within a county in any given election.
Voting machine provisioning.--The pre-election process of
configuring the individual precinct voting machines for an election.
This typically includes resetting internal memory and loading the
appropriate ballot definition for each precinct. Depending on the model
of voting machine, provisioning typically involves using a computer to
write removable memory cards that are installed in each machine.
Absentee and early voting ballot processing.--The process of
reading and tabulating ballots received by mail and from early voting
polling places. Mail votes are typically processed in bulk by high-
volume optical scan ballot reading equipment.
Tallying and reporting.--The post-election process of tabulating
the results for each race received from each precinct and reporting the
overall election outcomes. This process typically involves using a
computer to read memory card media retrieved from precinct voting
machines.
Each of the above ``back end'' functions employs specialized
election management software running on computers. Depending on the
size and practices of the county, the same computers may be used for
more than one function (e.g., the ballot definition computer might also
serve as the tallying and reporting computer). These computers are
typically off-the-shelf desktop machines running a standard operating
system (such as Microsoft Windows), often equipped with electronic mail
and web browser software along with the specialized voting software.
Election office computers are typically connected to one another via a
wired or wireless local area network, which may have a direct or
indirect connection (sometimes via a firewall) to the internet.
In some jurisdictions, some of these election management functions
(most often those concerned with voter registration databases and
ballot definition), may be outsourced by a county or State to an
election services contractor. These contractors provide jurisdictions
with specialized assistance with such tasks as creating ballots in the
correct format, managing voter registration databases, creating
precinct poll books, and maintaining voting machines. The degree to
which jurisdictions rely on outside contractors varies widely across
the Nation.
Much of the voting equipment used at precincts is computerized as
well, although it is generally packaged in specialized hardware. This
equipment includes:
Direct Recording Electronic (DRE) Voting Machines.--DRE machines
are special-purpose computers that display ballot choices to the voter
(based on the ballot definition) and record voter choices. Both the
ballot definition configuration and the vote count are typically stored
on removable memory media.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Some models of DRE can be equipped with a Voter Verified Paper
Audit Trail (VVPAT) option in which the voters' selections are printed
on a paper tape roll that is visible to the voter. VVPATs can assist
with determining the voter's intent during a recount, but their
efficacy depends on each voter's diligence in confirming that their
choices are correctly recorded on the paper tape before they leave the
voting booth. Research consistently suggests that, in practice, very
few voters successfully perform this confirmation step.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Optical Scan Ballot Readers.--Optical scan ballot readers are
specialized computers that read voter-marked paper ballots. The ballot
is read according to the ballot definition configuration (typically on
removable memory media), and a tally is maintained in memory (also
typically on removable media). The machine also captures the scanned
ballots and stores them in a mechanically-secured ballot box.
Ballot-Marking Devices (BMDs).--Ballot-marking devices are an
assistive technology used in optical scan systems to allow visually or
mobility impaired voters to create ballots for subsequent scanning.
BMDs are similar in appearance to DRE machines in that they display (or
read aloud) the ballot electronically, based on a ballot definition
configuration, and accept voter choices for each race. However, instead
of recording those choices in computer memory as DREs do, BMDs print a
marked paper ballot that can then be submitted through an optical scan
ballot reader.
Electronic Poll Books.--These devices are typically tablet-style
computers that contain an authoritative copy of the database of
registered voters at each precinct. Electronic poll books are not used
directly by voters, but rather by precinct poll workers as voters are
checked in at their polling place. They are not used in all
jurisdictions.
B. Software and Election Security
Securing complex software systems is notoriously difficult, and
those that perform the various functions described above are no
exception.\6\ There are several avenues of vulnerability in such
systems. Common software ``bugs'' often introduce vulnerabilities that
can be exploited by an adversary to silently compromise the integrity
of data or make unauthorized (and difficult to detect) changes to the
behavior of systems. Configuration and system management errors (such
as the use of vulnerable out-of-date platforms and weak passwords) can
further compromise security. Computer networks (which are not generally
used by precinct voting machines themselves but are commonly connected
to back end systems in election offices) compound these risks by
introducing the possibility of remote attack over the internet.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The fact that software systems can be, and often are,
vulnerable to attack is not unique to election systems, of course.
Serious data breaches are literally daily events across the public and
private sectors, and cybersecurity is widely recognized to be a serious
law enforcement and National security problem. To the extent that
elections depend on software or are administered by networked computing
systems, they are subject to all the same risks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The integrity of the vote today thus increasingly depends on the
integrity of the software systems--running on voting machines and on
county election office networks--over which elections are conducted.
Any security weakness in any component of any of these systems can
serve as a ``weak link'' that can allow a malicious actor to disrupt
election operations, alter tally results, or disenfranchise voters.
In many electronic voting systems used today, a successful attack
that exploits a software flaw might leave behind little or no forensic
evidence. This can make it effectively impossible to determine the true
outcome of an election or even that a compromise has occurred.
Unfortunately, these risks are not merely hypothetical or
speculative. Many of the software and hardware technologies that
support U.S. elections today have been shown to suffer from serious and
easily exploitable security vulnerabilities that could be used by an
adversary to alter vote tallies or cast doubt on the integrity of
election results.
ii. current electronic voting systems have proven vulnerable to a range
of known, exploitable security flaws
A. Risks in Various Election Components
Security concerns about computerized voting systems have been
raised from almost the moment such systems were first proposed. Most of
these concerns have focused on electronic voting equipment used at
polling stations, although the ``back end'' election management
software used to manage voter registration, provision voting machines,
and tally are at least equally critical to the integrity of the vote.
To be clear, all electronic voting technology can and does suffer
from security vulnerabilities. The consequences of these
vulnerabilities being successfully exploited, however, depends on the
particular class of device and whether the technology permits effective
post-election auditing to validate or recover correct election results.
1. Election Management IT Systems
As noted above, local jurisdictions rely on computers for almost
every aspect of election administration. Official information for
voters is distributed on public-facing websites. Voter registration
records, used on election day to determine who is permitted to vote,
are maintained in computerized databases. Ballots forms are created and
edited on computers. Absentee ballot mailings are managed by computer.
Preliminary and official election results are maintained and
disseminated by computer. Specialized ``Election Management'' software
(generally provided by the vendor of the voting equipment) is used to
configure ballots and read results from precienct voting machines.
In most cases, the computers used for election administration
employ the same hardware, operating systems, and networking platforms
employed by other enterprises, and are connected, directly or
indirectly, to the internet. Election management systems are exposed to
the same risks of compromise by malicious actors that cause the
commonplace ``data breaches'' in other private- and public-sector
domains that have become regular fixtures of on-line life.
Many jurisdictions outsource some of their election management
tasks to outside vendors or contractors. This further amplifies the
exposure of local election systems to external tampering.
Disruption or compromise of any local election administration
functions can have grave and often non-recoverable consequences for the
integrity of elections. Compromise of voter registration databases can
be exploited by adversaries to cause long lines at polling places
(forcing large numbers of voters to cast provisional ballots) and can
selectively disenfranchise voters to favor particular candidates.
Provisioning of voting machines with incorrect ballot definitions can
prevent correct ballots from being cast. Errors in in unofficial or
final tallies can cast doubt on the legitimacy of entire elections. In
some cases, successful attacks may not be discovered until long after
polls have closed, or may never be discovered at all.
The IT and security administration of election management computers
varies widely from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. In the best cases,
there may be a full-time staff devoted to securing and managing
election computers and networks. In a more typical case, computer
security is relegated to the general county IT staff, which may have
only limited resources relative to the threat. In all cases, however,
even the best defensive cybersecurity resources of a local county are
of only limited value against a foreign state adversary.
Local election management computers and networks are especially
attractive targets for foreign tampering and interference. They can
often be attacked remotely, without the need for physical presence in
the targeted jurisdiction, and successful attacks may be rewarded with
partial or complete control over a county's voter registration
databases, voting machine configuration, and results reporting
infrastructure.
2. Electronic Poll Books
Electronic poll books, which are not used in every jurisdiction,
perform the initial voter ``check-in'' function at polling places on
election day. They must, by nature of their function, have reliable
access to an authoritative list of the voters registered to vote at
each polling places. This may be accomplished either with an internal
copy of the voter registration database or by on-line remote access to
a central computer. In either configuration, electronic poll books
perform an essential election function and must be reliably secured
against tampering. If poll books are unavailable or if their databases
are corrupted, voters will not be able to cast ballots (except by
provisional ballot, to the extent that is a viable option).
Electronic poll books have received much less scrutiny than other
precinct voting equipment, but are subject to all the same risks and
attack vectors as other electronic devices. In many jurisdictions, they
are largely unregulated and require little or no outside certification
or audit.
3. Optical Scan Ballot Readers
Optical scan ballot readers are specialized computers that scan and
retain printed ballots and record on electronic storage media the tally
of votes cast in each race. They depend on the integrity of their
software and hardware for their ability to correctly interpret ballots
and to correctly record votes. They are exposed to physical access by
poll workers, and, in many cases, individual voters.
Ballot scanners can be compromised in a number of practical ways,
any one of which can compromise the recorded vote tally. However,
because they retain the physical paper ballots marked by voters, it is
possible to recover from such a compromise if it is detected. A
technique called ``risk-limiting audits'' can reliably detect and
recover from defective or compromised ballot scanners and is discussed
in the sections that follow.
4. Ballot Marking Devices
Originally, Ballot Marking Devices (BMDs) were conceived of
narrowly, as an assistive technology for use by voters with
disabilities to assist them in marking optical scan paper ballots,
(bringing such systems into compliance with Help America Vote Act
(HAVA) requirements for accessible voting). However, certain recent
voting products greatly expand the use of BMD technology by integrating
a BMD into the voting process for all voters, whether they require
assistive technology or not.
BMD-based voting systems are controversial, since, by virtue of
their design, the correctness of their behavior cannot be effectively
audited except by every individual voter carefully verifying his or her
printed ballot before it is cast. A maliciously compromised BMD could
subtly mismark candidate selections on ballots in a way that might not
be noticed by most voters. If BMDs fail or must be rebooted at a
polling place, there may be no way for voters to create marked ballots,
making BMDs a potential bottleneck or single point of failure on
election day.
As a relatively new technology, BMD-based systems have not yet been
widely examined by independent researchers and have been largely absent
from practical election security research studies. However, even with
relatively little scrutiny, exploitable weaknesses and usability flaws
have been found in these systems, This underscores the need for more
comprehensive studies and for caution before these systems are
purchased by local jurisdictions or widely deployed.
5. Direct Recording Electronic (DRE) Voting Machines
From a security perspective, by far the most problematic and risky
class of electronic voting systems are those that employ Direct
Recording-Electronic (DRE) machines. DRE machines are special purpose
computers programmed to present the ballot to the voter and record the
voter's choices on an internal digital medium such as a memory card. At
the end of the election day, the memory card containing the vote
tallies for each race is generally removed or electronically read from
the machine and delivered to the county election office, where the
tallies from each precinct are recorded by the county tallying
software. DRE machines are sometimes informally called ``touchscreen''
voting machines, although not all DRE models use actual touchscreen
displays (nor are all election devices that employ touchscreens DREs).
The design of DREs makes them inherently difficult to secure and
yet also makes it especially imperative that they be secure. This is
because the accuracy and integrity of the recorded vote tally depends
completely on the correctness and security of the machine's hardware,
software, and data. Every aspect of a DRE's behavior, from the ballot
displayed to the voter to the recording and reporting of votes, is
under control of the DRE hardware and software. Any security
vulnerability in this hardware or software, or any ability for an
attacker to alter (or re-load new and maliciously behaving) software
running on the machine, not only has the potential to alter the vote
tally, but can make it impossible to conduct a meaningful recount (or
even to detect that an attack has occurred) after the fact. If a DRE is
compromised at any time before or during an election, any votes cast on
it are irreparably compromised as well.
DRE-based systems introduce several avenues for attack that are
generally not present (or are not as security-critical) in other voting
technologies:
Alteration or deletion of vote tallies stored in internal
memory or removable media
Alteration or deletion of ballot definition parameters
displayed to voters \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ An incorrect (or maliciously altered) DRE ballot definition can
make it impossible to determine the true election results even without
any malicious software exploitation. For example, in York County, PA, a
DRE ballot definition programming error in the 2017 general election
appears to have allowed candidates in some local races to be voted for
twice, with the possible consequence that the election will have to be
invalidated and redone. See http://www.ydr.com/story/news/2017/11/08/
voting-machine-problems-what-york-countys-options/843423001/. Paper-
based systems, in contrast, are more robust against such errors. For
example, the 2000 general election in Bernalillo County, NM had a
similar error in their punch card-counting software, but was later able
to correct the error without a new election; see https://www.wsj.com/
articles/SB976838091124686673.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alteration or deletion of electronic log files used for
post-election audits and detecting unauthorized tampering.
Attacks might be carried out in any of several ways, each of which
must be reliably defended against by the DRE hardware and software:
Direct tampering with data files stored on memory cards or
accessible through external interface ports
Surreptitious replacement of the certified software running
on the device with a maliciously altered version
Exploitation of a pre-existing vulnerability in the
certified software.
Successfully exploiting just one of these avenues of attack can be
sufficient to undetectably compromise an election. The design of DREs
makes it necessary not only that their hardware be highly secure
against unauthorized tampering, but that the software running on them
not suffer from any vulnerabilities that could be exploited by a
malicious actor. This makes the security requirements for DREs more
stringent--and also more easily defeated--than for any other currently-
deployed election technology.
Unfortunately, the DRE-based systems purchased by and used in
various States under HAVA have repeatedly been found to suffer from
exactly these kinds of exploitable hardware and software
vulnerabilities.
B. The 2007 California and Ohio Studies
To date, the most extensive independent studies of the security of
electronic voting systems were commissioned 10 years ago by the
Secretaries of State of California and Ohio. Expert review teams were
given access to the voting machine hardware and software source code of
every system certified for use in those States. The systems used in
California and Ohio were also certified for use in most of the rest of
the country, so these studies effectively covered a large fraction of
available electronic voting equipment and software. I led the teams
that reviewed the Sequoia products (for the State of California) and
the ES&S products (for the State of Ohio); other teams in these studies
reviewed the Diebold/Premier and Hart InterCivic products.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ The various final reports of the California ``Top-To-Bottom
Review'' studies can be found at http://www.sos.ca.gov/elections/
voting-systems/oversight/top-bottom-review/. The final report of the
Ohio ``Project EVEREST'' study can be found at https://www.eac.gov/
assets/1/28/EVEREST.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In both studies, every team found and reported serious exploitable
vulnerabilities in almost every component examined. In most cases,
these vulnerabilities could be exploited by a single individual, who
would need no more access than an ordinary poll worker or voter. Such
an attacker would be able to alter vote tallies, load malicious
software, or erase audit logs. Some of the vulnerabilities found were
the consequence of software bugs, while others were caused by
fundamental architectural properties of the system architecture and
design. In some cases, compromise of a single system component (such as
a precinct voting machine) was sufficient to compromise not just the
vote tally on that machine, but to compromise the entire county back-
end system.
In response, California and Ohio ordered some equipment decertified
and some election-day procedures modified. However, all the vulnerable
equipment and software remained certified for use in at least some
other States.
Some equipment vendors and local voting officials claimed at the
time that the findings of the California and Ohio studies were
irrelevant or overstated, that any problems identified could be easily
fixed, and that it would be difficult or impossible for anyone but an
expert with extensive experience and access to privileged information
(such as source code) to exploit vulnerabilities in practice. However,
as exercises such as the DEFCON Voting Village (described below) have
demonstrated, not only do these systems remain vulnerable, but they can
be readily exploited by people with no more than ordinary computer
science experience and expertise and without access to any secret or
proprietary information.
C. The DEFCON Voting Village Exercise
The DEFCON conference is one of the world's largest and best-known
computer security ``hacker'' conferences. This year's DEFCON was held
August 8-10, 2019, in Las Vegas, NV, and drew more than 25,000
participants from around the world. DEFCON participants have broad
interest in technology, and include security researchers from industry,
Government, and academia, as well as individual hobbyists.
For the last 3 years, DEFCON has featured a Voting Machine Hacking
Village (``Voting Village'') to give participants an opportunity to
examine and get hands-on experience with the security technology used
in U.S. elections, including voting machines, voter registration
databases, and election office networks. I am one of the organizers of
the Voting Village.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Organizers of the DEFCON Voting Village include the author as
well as Harri Hursti, Margaret MacAlpine, and Jeff Moss.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The voting machines available in the Voting Village included a
variety of DRE, optical scan readers, ballot marking devices and
electronic poll books from a range of commercial vendors. We acquired
(from the surplus market) and made available to participants a sampling
of different pieces of election hardware, including both DRE and
optical scan voting machines as well as ``poll book'' devices used by
used by precinct workers to verify and check in voters at polling
places. Every model machine currently at the Voting Village is still
certified for use in U.S. elections in at least one jurisdiction today.
The DEFCON Voting Village is not intended to be a formal security
assessment or test, but rather an opportunity for a general audience of
technologists to examine election equipment and systems. However,
participants are encouraged to critically examine and probe the
equipment and software for vulnerabilities, and to seek practical ways
to compromise security mechanisms. No proprietary information or
computer source code is made available.
The results of the Voting Village are summarized each year in
detail in a report.\10\ It is notable that participants, who
overwhelmingly do not have any previous special expertise in voting
machines or access to any proprietary information about them, have been
very quickly able to find ways to compromise every piece of equipment
in the Village by the end of the weekend. Depending on the individual
model of machine, participants have found ways to load malicious
software, gain access to administrator passwords, compromise recorded
votes and audit logs, or cause equipment to fail. In most cases, these
attacks could be carried out from the ordinary interfaces that are
exposed to voters and precinct poll workers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ The current Voting Village final report is available at:
https://media.defcon.org/DEF%20CON%2027/voting-village-report-
defcon27.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ease with which participants compromise equipment in the Voting
Village should be regarded as at once alarming and yet also
unsurprising. It is alarming because the very same equipment is in use
in polling places around the United States, relied on for the integrity
of real elections. But it is also ultimately unsurprising. Versions of
many of the machines at DEFCON had been examined in the 2007 studies
and found to suffer from basic, exploitable security vulnerabilities.
It should not come as any surprise that, given access and motivation,
people of ordinary skill in computer security would be able to
replicate and expand on these results. It is, in fact, precisely what
the previous studies of these devices warned would happen.
In summary, the DEFCON Voting Village demonstrates that much of the
voting technology used in the United States is vulnerable not just to
hypothetical expert attack in a laboratory environment, but also to
practical analysis, manipulation, and exploitation by non-specialists
with only very modest resources.
iii. us election systems are not engineered to resist national
adversaries
The traditional ``threat model'' against which electronic voting
systems have been evaluated has been largely focused on resisting
traditional election fraud, in which domestic conspirators, perhaps
assisted by corrupt poll workers or election officials, attempt to
``rig'' an election to favor a preferred candidate in a local, State,
or National contest. Fraud might be accomplished by altering votes,
adding favorable votes, deleting unfavorable votes, or otherwise
compromising the security mechanisms that protect the ballot and tally.
While virtually every study of electronic voting technology has
raised questions about the ability of current systems to resist serious
efforts at fraud, traditional election fraud is not the only kind of
threat, or even the most serious threat, that a voting systems must
resist today.
Electronic voting systems must resist not only fraud from corrupt
candidates and supporters, but also election disruption from hostile
nation-state adversaries. This is a much more formidable threat, and
one that current systems are far less equipped to resist.
The most obvious difference between traditional election fraud by
corrupt domestic actors and disruption by hostile state actors is the
expected resources and capabilities available to each. The intelligence
services of even small nations can marshal far greater financial,
technical, and operational resources than would be available to even
highly sophisticated criminal conspiracies. For example, intelligence
services can feasibly conduct advance operations against the voting
system supply chain. In such operations, the aim might be to obtain
confidential source code or to secure surreptitious access to equipment
before it is even shipped to local election officials. Hostile
intelligence services can exploit information and other assets
developed broadly over extended periods of time, often starting well
before any specific operation or attack has been planned.
But their greater resources are not the most important way that
hostile state actors can be a more formidable threat than corrupt
candidates or poll workers. They also enjoy easier goals. The aim of
traditional ``retail'' election fraud is to tilt the outcome in favor
of a particular candidate. That is, to succeed, the attacker must
generally alter the reported vote count or add, change, or delete
votes. But a hostile state actor--via an intelligence service such as
Russia's GRU--might be satisfied with merely disrupting an election or
calling into question the legitimacy of the official outcome. With
election systems so heavily dependent on demonstrably insecure software
and voting equipment, this kind of disruption could be comparatively
simple to accomplish, even at a National scale.
A hostile state actor who can compromise even a handful of county
networks might not need to alter any actual votes to create widespread
uncertainty about an election outcome's legitimacy. It may be
sufficient to simply plant suspicious (and detectable) malicious
software on a few voting machines or election management computers,
create some suspicious audit logs, delete registered voters from the
rolls, or add some obviously spurious names to the voter rolls. If the
preferred candidate wins, they can simply do nothing (or, ideally, use
their previously-arranged access to restore the compromised networks to
their original states, erasing any evidence of compromise). If the
``wrong'' candidate wins, however, they could covertly reveal evidence
that county election systems had been compromised, creating public
doubt about whether the election had been ``rigged''. This could easily
impair the ability of the true winner to effectively govern, at least
for a period of time.
Electronic voting machines and vote tallies are not the only
potential targets for such attacks. Of particular concern are the back-
end systems that manage voter registration, ballot definition, and
other election management tasks. Compromising any of these systems
(which are often connected, directly or indirectly, to the internet and
therefore potentially remotely accessible) can be sufficient to disrupt
an election while the polls are open or cast doubt on the legitimacy of
the reported result. The decentralization of election operations,
managed by thousands of individual local offices throughout the Nation
(with widely-varying resources) is sometimes cited as a strength of our
electoral process. However, this decentralization can be turned to the
adversary's advantage. An attacker can choose arbitrarily from among
whatever counties have the weakest systems--those with the least secure
software or most poorly defended networks and procedures--to target.
It is beyond the scope of my testimony to speculate on specific
intrusions that occurred against State and local election management
systems in the 2016 U.S. general election, much of which remains
Classified or under investigation. It has been reported that voter
registration management systems in at least several States were
targeted for exploitation and access. It is unclear whether voting
machines or tallying systems were also targeted. However, targeting and
exploiting such systems would have been well within the capability of
any major rival intelligence service.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ For a comprehensive discussion of technical attacks against
our election infrastructure in 2016, see the Report of the Select
Committee on Intelligence, US Senate on Russian Active Measures in the
2016 US Election, Vol 1. https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/sites/
default/files/documents/Report_Volume1.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In summary, the architecture of many current electronic voting
systems, especially those that employ DRE voting machines, makes
disruption attacks an especially attractive option for our foreign
adversaries--and especially difficult one to effectively defend
against. These systems can give hostile actors interested in disruption
an even easier task than that facing corrupt candidates seeking to
steal even a small local office. And the consequences of election
disruption strike at the very heart of our National democracy.
iv. recommendations: all u.s. elections should employ paper ballots and
risk-limiting audits
It is perhaps tempting to conclude pessimistically that election
technology in the United States is fatally flawed, leaving our Nation
irreparably vulnerable to election fraud and foreign meddling. But
while it is true that the current situation exposes us to significant
risk, it is by no means hopeless or beyond repair. Relatively simple,
and available, technologies can be deployed that render our elections
significantly more robust against attack.
While electronic voting machines do indeed suffer demonstrably
fundamental weaknesses, some electronic voting technologies are
significantly more resilient in the face of compromise than others. The
most important feature required is that there be a reliable record of
each voter's true ballot selections that can be used as the basis for a
post-election audit to detect and recover from failure or compromise of
the software or hardware.
Among currently available, HAVA-compliant voting products, the only
systems that meet this requirement are those that employ optical scan
paper ballot technology. In such systems, the voter fills out a
machine-readable paper ballot form (possibly with the aid of an
assistive ballot marking device for language-, visually- and mobility-
impaired voters), that is then deposited into a ballot scanning device
that reads the ballot choices, maintains an electronic tally, and
retains and secures the marked paper ballots for subsequent audit.
After the polls close, the electronic tally records are read from each
ballot scanner and preliminary results calculated.
The paper records of votes that precinct-counted optical-scan
systems provide are a necessary, but not by themselves sufficient,
safeguard against software. As noted above, even non-DRE systems can
suffer from flaws and exploitable vulnerabilities in the voting machine
and back-end software. The second essential safeguard is a systematic
and reliable process for detecting whether the software has reported
incorrect results, and to recover the true results if so.
The most reliable and well-understood method to achieve this is
through an approach called risk-limiting audits.\12\ In a risk-limiting
audit, a statistically significant randomized sample of ballots are
manually checked by hand and the results compared with the electronic
tally. (This must be done for every contest, not just those with close
results that might otherwise call for a traditional ``recount''.) If
discrepancies are discovered between the manual and electronic tallies,
additional manual counts are conducted. The effect of risk-limiting
audits is not to eliminate software vulnerabilities, but to ensure that
the integrity of the election outcome does not depend on the herculean
task of securing every software component in the system. This important
property is called strong software independence.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ A good introduction to the theory and practice of risk-
limiting audits in elections can be found at https://
www.stat.berkeley.edu/?stark/Preprints/RLAwhitepaper12.pdf.
\13\ See Ron Rivest. ``On the notion of `software independence' in
voting systems''. Phil. Trans Royal Society A. Volume 366 Issue 1881.
October 28, 2008. http://rsta.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/366/
1881/3759.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Optical scan paper ballots and risk-limiting audits comprise a
critical, and readily deployable, safeguard against both traditional
election fraud and nation-state disruption. Taken together, they permit
us to more safely enjoy the benefits of computerized election
management, without introducing significant new costs or requiring the
development of speculative new technology. The technology required for
this is available today, from multiple vendors, and is already in use
in many States.
As important as paper ballots and risk-limiting audits are,
however, they are not panaceas that solve every threat to our
elections. It is also critical that the State and county back-end
computer networks and systems used for election management and voter
registration be vigilantly protected against compromise. As we saw in
2016, hostile adversaries might attempt to breach not just voting
machines, but also back-end election management systems and voter
registration database systems, which are often connected, directly or
indirectly, to the internet.
It is no exaggeration to observe that State and local election
officials serve on the front lines of our National cybersecurity
defense. They must be given sufficient resources, infrastructure, and
training to help them effectively defend their systems against an
increasingly sophisticated--and increasingly aggressive--threat
environment. It is notable that the budgets for election administration
often must compete for resources with essential local services such as
fire protection and road maintenance. Election management represents
only a miniscule fraction of the total National spending on political
campaigns. Additional investment here will pay significant dividends
for our security.
By analogy, we do not make the county sheriff responsible for
defending against ground invasions by foreign military forces. Yet that
is precisely the role into which we have placed our local county IT
administrations in defending our election infrastructure against
electronic attacks. Just by doing so, we have set them up for failure.
Simply put, much of our election infrastructure remains vulnerable
to practical attack, with threats that range from traditional election
tampering in local races to large-scale disruption by National
adversaries. We should take no comfort if such attacks have not yet
been widely detected. At best, it is only because, for whatever reason,
serious attempts have not yet been made. Given the potential rewards to
our adversaries, it is only a matter of time before they will.
National-level investment in safeguards such as those described
above serve our democracy in critically important ways. They can
provide a significant improvement to election security, both in our
ability to resist attack and in our ability to recover from attacks
when they occur. Perhaps most importantly, they provide meaningful
assurance to voters that their ballots truly count and that their
elected officials are governing truly legitimately. Our republic cannot
long survive without the confidence that comes from that assurance.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Dr. Blaze.
We have votes that have been called. There is a minute and
48 seconds left on us to vote. There is still 282 people who
have not voted.
But what we will do is we will go into recess right now; we
will go vote. There is probably going to be 1 vote--at most, 2
votes. So we will come back and resume immediately when votes
are over.
So with that we will stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Richmond. I will now call the committee back to order,
and I will recognize Ms. Badanes for 5 minutes to summarize her
testimony.
Thank you for your patience.
STATEMENT OF GINNY BADANES, DIRECTOR, STRATEGIC PROJECTS,
DEFENDING DEMOCRACY PROGRAM, MICROSOFT
Ms. Badanes. Absolutely. Chairman Richmond, Ranking Member
Katko, and Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on the important topic of campaign
security. My name is Ginny Badanes, and I am the director of
strategic projects for Microsoft's Defending Democracy Program.
Our team works globally with a variety of stakeholders to
preserve and protect electoral processes, protect campaign
organizations from cyber-enabled threats, and defend against
disinformation campaigns.
Microsoft has several initiatives to achieve these goals.
But my testimony today will focus on our efforts to increase
the cybersecurity and resilience of campaign organizations.
To address how campaigns can protect themselves, it is
helpful to first understand the threats that they are up
against. Campaigns face a unique challenge when it comes to
securing themselves. Most campaigns have limited budgets, and
even more limited cybersecurity expertise. Yet they can face
outsize threats and a symmetry that can harm our democratic
process.
Microsoft's work to protect campaign organizations builds
upon our broader experience in assessing and tracking
cybersecurity threats. The Microsoft Threat Intelligence
Center, known as MSTIC, has focused on tracking nation-state
adversaries for more than a decade. We provide notification to
customers when an on-line service account has been targeted or
compromised by a nation-state actor that we are tracking.
As a technology provider with many customers in this space,
we believe we have an obligation to do more to support
campaign's efforts to protect themselves. For that reason, we
now offer services specifically designed to assist the campaign
community.
In August of last year we began offering a free service
called Account Guard, which provides campaign customers of our
email and productivity tools with additional security support.
We did this for 2 reasons.
First, we wanted to address the reality that threat actors
do not only attack the enterprise accounts of their targets.
They go after personal accounts of staff, as well. For that
reason, Account Guard customers have the option to also enroll
their personal Microsoft email accounts, such as Hotmail or
Outlook. This optional enrollment provides our threat
monitoring team with valuable information about what might
otherwise appear to be a standard consumer account. More
importantly, it allows us to notify the individual and the
organization quickly if we identify a threat actor targeting
that personal account.
Second, we recognize that campaigns might not be equipped
to receive a nation-state attack notification. While the
information can be very valuable, it doesn't serve much purpose
if the recipient isn't sure what to do with the information
that they receive. For that reason, in addition to informing
the customer about an attack, we also include information about
what to do next, especially if the attack resulted in a breach.
This additional communication ensures that notifications reach
the right person within the organization, and that they can
turn that information into action.
We have also created a new version of our email and
productivity tools just for campaigns. We did this based on
feedback that sophisticated security tools aren't realistic on
a campaign budget, and that setting them up was too difficult
for the typical campaign IT staff. So we made Microsoft 365 for
Campaigns available this past summer. This allows campaigns to
access security tools at a much lower cost, and provides non-
technical users with, essentially, an easy button to turn on
key security features.
While new tools and free services are helpful, they don't
address the most impactful thing that campaigns can do to
protect themselves, and that is to educate their team about
cybersecurity hygiene. That is why we provide a variety of
cybersecurity trainings in person, as well as on-line, tailored
to the specific needs of the campaign community. We encourage
campaigns to do the basics, such as turn on two-factor
authentication, use better password management, use a cloud
service provider, and use secure communication platforms.
In conclusion, Congress plays a critical role in securing
our campaign organizations and elections. In addition to the
recommendations made by my fellow witnesses, Congress also can
contribute to a multi-stakeholder approach that addresses the
threats themselves. We believe that combating attacks at the
root will require a joint effort, from private-sector actors
such as Microsoft, as well as State, local, and Federal
Governments, civil society, academia, and campaign
organizations themselves.
Campaigns face the threat of capable, well-funded, and
agile adversaries. While there is much they can do to protect
themselves, we have seen first-hand that they benefit from
assistance from the private sector, and they would certainly
benefit from Congressional and Executive branch leadership and
multi-stakeholder engagement, especially around establishing
international norms to discourage nation-state attacks against
our democratic institutions.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Badanes follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ginny Badanes
November 19, 2019
Chairman Richmond, Ranking Member Katko, Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the
important topic of campaign security.
My name is Ginny Badanes and I am the director of strategic
projects for Microsoft's Defending Democracy program. We focus on
advocating for and contributing to the stability and security of
democratic institutions globally. In a non-partisan manner, our team
works with a variety of governmental and non-governmental stakeholders
in democratic countries to achieve the following goals:
Explore technological solutions to preserve and protect
electoral processes and engage with Federal, State, and local
officials to identify and remediate cyber threats;
Protect campaign organizations from hacking through
increased cyber resilience measures, accessible and affordable
security tools, and incident response capabilities; and,
Defend against disinformation campaigns in partnership with
leading academic institutions and think tanks dedicated to
countering state-sponsored digital propaganda and falsehoods.
Though the Defending Democracy team undertakes several initiatives
in pursuit of these goals, my testimony today will focus on our efforts
to increase the cybersecurity and resilience of campaign organizations.
threats to campaign organizations
To address how campaign organizations can protect themselves, it is
helpful to first understand the threats that they are up against.
Campaign organizations face uniquely challenging circumstances when it
comes to securing themselves. Outside of a handful of Presidential
campaigns, many campaign organizations often have limited technology
budgets and usually even more limited cybersecurity expertise. Yet,
they can face outsized threats, an asymmetry that can have detrimental
effects on our democratic processes. Campaign organizations are like
technology startups with enterprise cybersecurity needs.
Microsoft's work to protect campaign organizations and democratic
institutions broadly builds upon the company's experience in assessing
and tracking cybersecurity threats. The Microsoft Threat Intelligence
Center (MSTIC) has focused on tracking nation-state actors for more
than a decade. We provide notification to customers, including
election-sensitive customers, when an on-line service account has been
targeted or compromised by a nation-state actor that we are tracking.
We continuously track these global threats, building this intelligence
into our security products to protect customers and using it in support
of our efforts to disrupt threat actor activities through direct legal
action or in collaboration with law enforcement. But let's be clear--
cyber attacks continue to be a significant weapon wielded in cyber
space. In some instances, those attacks appear to be related to on-
going efforts to attack the democratic process.
In the past year, Microsoft notified nearly 10,000 customers,
including campaign organizations,\1\ that they have been targeted or
compromised by nation-state attacks. About 84 percent of these attacks
targeted our enterprise customers, and about 16 percent targeted
consumer personal email accounts. This data demonstrates the
significant extent to which nation-states continue to rely on cyber
attacks as a tool to gain intelligence, influence geopolitics, or
achieve other objectives.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ New Cybersecurity Threats require new ways to protect
democracy. https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2019/07/17/new-
cyberthreats-require-new-ways-to-protect-democracy/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Based upon the threats we are tracking, most of the nation-state
activity in recent months originated from actors in 3 countries--
Iran,\2\ North Korea, and Russia.\3\ We have also seen activity by
actors operating from China, but not at the same volume as the actors
in these 3 nations. These actors have targeted a variety of industries
including a number of stakeholders that are important to political
dialog and democratic processes, including think tanks, universities,
diplomatic entities, journalists, current and former Government
officials, and campaign staff.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Recent Cyberattacks Require Us All To Be Vigilant. https://
blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2019/10/04/recent-cyberattacks-
require-us-all-to-be-vigilant/.
\3\ New Cyberattacks Targeting Sporting and Anti-Doping
Organizations. https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2019/10/28/
cyberattacks-sporting-anti-doping/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
microsoft & campaign security
Recognizing the unique needs of campaign organizations, Microsoft
offers services to help them increase their cybersecurity and
resilience.
On-line account security protection
Security guidance, on-going education, and training
Microsoft 365 for Campaigns
on-line account security protection
In August 2018, Microsoft instituted enhanced cybersecurity
services for campaign users of Office 365 and free consumer email
services. With more than 60 million users of its paid Office365 (O365)
cloud-based productivity software and free Outlook.com and Hotmail.com
web-based e-mail services, Microsoft found itself in a unique position
to protect election-sensitive users of its products against such
hacking. To that end, Microsoft requested and received an advisory
opinion from the Federal Election Commission (FEC) confirming that
Microsoft may offer a package of free enhanced on-line account security
protections at no additional charge on a nonpartisan basis to its
election-sensitive customers. The Advisory Opinion concluded that the
provision of such services is not a prohibited in-kind contribution
under campaign finance law.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ FEC Advisory Opinion 2018-11, https://www.fec.gov/files/legal/
aos/2018-11/2018-11.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until this advisory opinion, the FEC had not robustly addressed the
provision of cybersecurity services to political campaigns and National
committees. In response, this advisory opinion sparked a series of
similar requests for approval \5\ from cybersecurity firms to provide
cybersecurity services to Members of Congress, political campaigns, and
National committees at reduced costs or at no cost at all.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ FEC Advisory Opinion 2018-15 (approving Senator Wyden's request
to use campaign funds for cybersecurity expenses), https://www.fec.gov/
data/legal/advisory-opinions/2018-15/; FEC Advisory Opinion 2018-12
(approving the provision of free cybersecurity resources to candidates
and political party committees, by nonprofit corporation and its
private-sector sponsors and partners), https://www.fec.gov/files/legal/
aos/2018-12/2018-12.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Microsoft service is called AccountGuard,\6\ and it serves 2
primary functions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Microsoft AccountGuard, https://www.microsoftaccountguard.com/
en-us/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Cross-Account Notifications.--We recognize that threat actors
do not only attack the enterprise accounts of their targets,
they go after the target's personal accounts as well. We
provide AccountGuard customers with the ability to enroll the
personal Microsoft email accounts (Hotmail.com, Outlook.com) of
staff and other affiliates of their organization. This optional
enrollment provides our threat monitoring team with valuable
information about what might otherwise appear to be a typical
consumer account. More importantly, it allows us to notify the
individual and organization quickly if we identify a threat-
actor targeting that personal account.
(2) Nation-State Attack Enhanced Monitoring.--If an AccountGuard
customer is targeted by a nation-state actor that we track, the
team provides customers with additional services and
notification. In addition to informing them about the attack,
we include information about what to do next, especially if the
attack resulted in a breach. This additional communication
ensures that notifications reach the right person within an
organization.
Since the launch of AccountGuard we have uncovered attacks
specifically targeting organizations that are fundamental to democracy.
We have steadily expanded AccountGuard to political campaigns,
political parties, think tanks, and democracy-focused non-governmental
organizations (NGO's), in 26 countries across 4 continents. While this
service is relatively new, we've already made over 900 notifications of
nation-state attacks targeting organizations participating in
AccountGuard. This data shows that democracy-focused organizations in
the United States should be particularly concerned as 95 percent of
these attacks have targeted U.S.-based organizations. By nature, these
organizations are critical to society but have fewer resources to
protect against cyber attacks than large enterprises.
Many of the democracy-focused attacks we've seen recently target
NGO's and think tanks and reflect a pattern that we also observed in
the early stages of some previous elections. In that pattern, a spike
in attacks on NGO's and think tanks that work closely with candidates
and political parties, or work on issues central to their campaigns,
typically serves as a precursor to direct attacks on campaign
organizations and election systems themselves. Similar attacks occurred
in the U.S. Presidential election in 2016 and in the last French
Presidential election. In 2018 we detected attacks targeting, among
others, U.S. Senate offices, and think tanks associated with key issues
at the time.\7\ Earlier this year we saw attacks targeting democracy-
focused NGO's in Europe close to European elections.\8\ As we head into
the 2020 elections, given both the broad reliance on cyber attacks by
nation-states and the use of cyber attacks to specifically target
democratic processes, we anticipate potential attacks targeting U.S.
election systems, campaign organizations, or NGO's that work closely
with campaign organizations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ ``Microsoft Says It Stopped Cyberattacks on Three 2018
Congressional Candidates'', Time, July 19, 2018: https://time.com/
5343585/microsoft-candidate-cyberattacks/.
\8\ ``New steps to protect Europe from continued cyber threats'',
Feb. 20, 2019,
https://blogs.microsoft.com/eupolicy/2019/02/20/accountguard-expands-
to-europe/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our adversaries have a stated goal of seeking to diminish the
confidence of our citizens in the processes that are at the very core
of our democracy. We should anticipate that we will see more attacks on
our election processes in 2020 in furtherance of this goal.
security guidance, on-going education & training
Informed by our observations about campaign challenges, Microsoft
provides in-person cybersecurity trainings tailored to the specific
needs of the campaign community regardless of whether there is any
formal relationship with Microsoft.\9\ These trainings cover the basics
of cybersecurity hygiene and highlight many of the best practices
recommended by our partners at Harvard Belfer Center in their
Cybersecurity Campaign Playbook.\10\ To date, we've trained over 1,000
political professionals in 13 countries with our security workshop
trainings.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ We acknowledge these security solutions and on-going trainings
depend on the campaign organizations and individuals having access to a
smart phone or to broadband connectivity. Microsoft notes that
broadband connectivity is also an urgent National problem that we are
committed to helping solve. We've contributed to this effort through
our Microsoft Airband Initiative, a 5-year commitment to bring
broadband access to 3 million unserved Americans living in rural
communities by July 2022. Microsoft is partnering with a number of
local providers across the United States to offer new broadband
services where there is no option or affordable alternative.
\10\ Cybersecurity Campaign Playbook, https://www.hks.harvard.edu/
publications/cybersecurity-campaign-playbook.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to the in-person trainings, we conduct webinars focused
on specific cybersecurity topics of interest to campaign organizations.
Just this week, for example, Microsoft security experts are hosting 2
webinars representative of our training efforts in this area. One helps
non-technical election-sensitive customers learn how to protect their
user accounts. We will cover topics such as common attack vectors,
multi-factor authentication, credential hygiene, and identity best
practices. The other webinar helps information technology (IT)
professionals in the election-sensitive space learn technical best
practices and tools available to them to secure their organization's
environment.
Finally, all our AccountGuard customers receive monthly guidance
from us. This guidance highlights stories of relevance, provides best
practices, and promotes better cybersecurity hygiene across their
organization.
microsoft 365 for campaigns
Campaign organizations are fast-moving environments that face
significant security threats from nation-state actors and criminal
scammers--much like large enterprises. However, unlike enterprises,
campaign organizations often must ramp up and down quickly, vary in
their ability to hire dedicated and experienced IT staff, and have
unpredictable budgets.
While the AccountGuard service is a step in the right direction to
help protect campaign organizations facing these challenges, we
recognized that we could do more to provide this community with access
to secure, reliable, accessible, and affordable software. For those
reasons, Microsoft recently announced the availability of Microsoft 365
for Campaigns.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ ``Protecting political campaigns from hacking'', May 6, 2019:
https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2019/05/06/protecting-
political-campaigns-from-hacking/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, to address the constrained budgets of campaign
organizations, we have used our non-profit pricing model for this
offering so campaign organizations can get access to software at a
significantly reduced rate.
Second, to address the problem of ease of use for non-technical
users, we have streamlined the configuration and set-up of high-impact
security settings. With only a click or two, customers can now turn on
recommended security features to create a secure baseline from which to
operate their campaign organization.
Just a few examples of the settings that can now be automated--
Enabling multi-factor authentication.--A second layer of
security for sign-ins.
Turning on Office 365 Advanced Threat Protection.--A service
that protects emails, links, and files from phishing and
malware attacks.
Providing device protection.--Secures access to sensitive
data on mobile devices using a service called Microsoft
Intune.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Microsoft InTune, https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-
365/enterprise-mobility-security/microsoft-intune.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This offering derives from our Microsoft 365 Business product,
which is tailored to small and medium businesses. That means campaign
customers can now access the high-end security capabilities typically
leveraged by enterprise customers, enjoy easier deployment of those
features, and do so at an affordable rate.
other ways campaign organizations can protect themselves
While we encourage innovation in this area, campaign organizations
can best protect themselves by employing basic hygiene.\13\ A few
examples of how that can be achieved:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Your Pa$$word Doesn't Matter. https://
techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/Azure-Active-Directory-Identity/Your-Pa-
word-doesn-t-matter/ba-p/731984.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Password management.--In 2016, Microsoft saw over 10 million
username/password pair attacks every day. This gives us a
unique vantage point to understand the role of passwords in
account takeovers.\14\ Despite general awareness of the
importance of using unique passwords to secure data, users
admitted to reusing the same password 62 percent of the time
for multiple accounts as recently as a year ago.\15\ As a
result, we train campaign organizations to use strong unique
passwords and more importantly, to use password managers to
generate them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Microsoft Password Guidance by the Microsoft Identity
Protection Team. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/
uploads/2016/06/Microsoft_Password_Gui- dance-1.pdf.
\15\ See eg. Passwords Reuse Abound Recent Survey Shows. https://
www.darkreading.com/informationweek-home/password-reuse-abounds-new-
survey-shows/d/d-id/1331689.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Two-factor authentication.--We encourage campaign
organizations to use a 2-step authentication source like a
phone app or a physical key for all accounts.
Using a cloud service provider.--We encourage campaign
organizations to leverage cloud services for email, documents,
and infrastructure and avoid public or anonymous sharing.
Using a secure communications platform.--For sensitive data,
Microsoft encourages campaign organizations to use encrypted
communications channels and avoid using public Wireless
Fidelity (Wi-Fi) channels for accessing sensitive information.
emerging threats
Earlier this fall, director of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA), Chris Krebs drew attention to the threat of
ransomware attacks against our local governments and the impact that
could have on our elections if executed against voter registration
systems close to, or on, election day.\16\ We agree this is a risk that
deserves attention from all election security stakeholders. Voter
registration databases (some of the same systems targeted in 2016), are
vulnerable because they are some of the only election sensitive systems
that are regularly connected to the internet. We are currently
exploring how we can work with Government and others in the tech
community to continue to raise awareness of this threat while also
providing additional solutions to protect against ransomware. Basic
security recommendations in this context include using modern
technology, setting up two-factor authentication for all relevant
accounts, creating secure back-ups, and engaging in exercises to ensure
rapid restoration of data in the event of an attack.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ ``CISA Director's Outlook on Ransomware'', Aug 23, 2019:
https://www.politico.com/newsletters/morning-cybersecurity/2019/08/23/
cisa-directors-outlook-on-ransomware-5g-more-727286.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
An additional emerging threat is the increased potential for bad
actors to use artificial intelligence to create malicious synthetic
media, better known as ``Deepfakes''. Advances in synthetic media have
created clear benefits; for example, synthetic voice can be a powerful
accessibility technology, and synthetic video can be used in film
production, criminal forensics, and artistic expression. However, as
access to synthetic media technology increases, so too does the risk of
exploitation. Deepfakes can be used to damage reputations, fabricate
evidence, and undermine trust in our democratic institutions. To help
guard against this challenge, Microsoft has established clear
principles that govern its use and deployment of synthetic media and
other artificial intelligence, including fairness, inclusiveness,
reliability & safety, transparency, privacy & security, and
accountability. Furthermore, Microsoft has engaged with partners in
academia, civil society, and industry to work together to advance best
practices for the ethical use of AI. One such effort includes a recent
``Deepfakes Detection Challenge'' we helped launch together with
Facebook and the Partnership on AI, a technology industry consortium
focused on best practices for AI systems, which invites researchers to
build new technologies that can help detect deepfakes and manipulated
media.
what congress can do
When conducting trainings for political parties and campaign
organizations in democracies around the world, we always encourage
leadership of those organizations to attend the sessions alongside
their teams. While leaders may not have a technical background, they
play an incredibly important role when it comes to their organization's
cyber health: Setting the culture.
Similarly, Congress plays a critical role in securing our campaign
organizations and elections. By holding this hearing on the
cybersecurity health of campaign organizations and the election space
more broadly, the committee is contributing to the culture of security
that is necessary to ensure a more secure environment.
Beyond culture-setting, Congress also can contribute to a multi-
stakeholder approach to addressing the threats themselves. We believe
that combatting attacks will require a joint effort from private-sector
actors such as Microsoft, as well as State, local, and Federal
Governments, civil society, academia, and campaign organizations
themselves.
Cyber attacks, especially ransomware attacks, are increasingly
targeting State and local authorities, including for example, Atlanta
(GA), Baltimore (MD), Cleveland (OH), Greenville (NC), Imperial County
(CA), Stuart (FL), Augusta (ME), Lynn (MA), Cartersville (GA). Most
recently there was an attack on over 20 government entities in Texas.
Overall, we can reasonably expect that the situation will only get
worse. Importantly, these and other attacks are increasingly leveraging
sophisticated tools that are developed by governments, creating a
dangerous ecosystem of cyber weapons and requiring adoption of
international norms for responsible behavior on-line. Microsoft
advances support for the adoption and observance of such norms.
Microsoft supports the multi-stakeholder approach taken by the
Paris Call for Trust and Security in Cyber Space.\17\ It reaffirms a
number of norms and principles established in other forums, including
at the U.N. Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field
of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International
Security (UN-GGE), and at the G7 and G20, respectively. Importantly,
the Paris Call includes a comparatively new principle to protect
electoral processes from foreign interference--``Strengthen our
capacity to prevent malign interference by foreign actors aimed at
undermining electoral processes through malicious cyber activities.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Paris Call for Trust & Security in Cyber Space: https://
www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/en/french-foreign-policy/digital-diplomacy/
france-and-cyber-security/article/cybersecurity-paris-call-of-12-
november-2018-for-trust-and-security-in.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, what truly distinguishes the Paris Call is that it
recognizes that a multi-stakeholder approach is essential to achieve
success. The Call has so far been endorsed by over 1,000 signatories,
the largest coalition of signatories ever in support of a cybersecurity
document: 74 governments, 357 civil society and public sector
organizations, and 607 industry members all agreeing to 9 core
principles to govern conduct in cyber space. Microsoft was one of the
private-sector signatories and we will continue to advocate that all
governments agree to observe the 9 principles of the Call.
While we are here today to discuss campaign organizations, we'd be
remiss not to address other ways Congress can support securing our
elections. In our discussions with voting officials around the country
we have learned that consistent and reliable funding over time will
best enable election officials to plan ahead, purchase new equipment
rather than letting outdated systems remain active, and invest in the
kind of cybersecurity training and staffing that we expect of all
critical infrastructure owners and operators. Our adversaries are
relentless and well-resourced. To ensure we can maintain defenses, our
State and local voting officials need a durable source of Federal
financial support so that the most secure technology can be deployed
rapidly to ensure our vote is protected. The stewardship of our
democracy demands nothing less.
conclusion
Campaign organizations face the threat of capable, well-funded, and
agile adversaries. Organizations of any size would struggle to be
prepared for these challenges, but the size and nature of campaign
organizations makes them especially vulnerable. There is a lot that
campaign organizations can do to protect themselves. They can create a
culture of cyber awareness, encourage everyone associated with the
campaign organization to turn on two-factor authentication on all their
accounts (personal as well as organizational), and be aware of phishing
campaigns. These are the most important actions campaign organizations
can take to protect themselves. But they need additional help. They
will benefit from industry partners providing access to tools that
support these efforts. They will benefit from NGO's like Defending
Digital Campaigns and Cyberdome who can help filter and provide tools
at affordable rates. And finally, they would benefit from Congressional
and Executive branch leadership in multi-stakeholder engagement,
especially around establishing international norms to discourage
nation-state attacks against our democratic institutions.
Mr. Richmond. The gentlelady yields back. Thank--I want to
thank the witnesses for your testimony.
I will remind each Member that he or she will have 5
minutes to question the panel. I will now recognize myself for
opening questions.
Let me start where we just finished, with Ms. Badanes. You
heard me mention the Louisiana ransomware attack on our
secretary of state, and it appears it was the business side of
that office, as opposed to the election side.
But you mentioned in your testimony that ransomware attacks
against election infrastructure--how has Microsoft seen this
threat grow, No. 1?
No. 2, how can the private sector assist our local
governments in securing sensitive election systems?
You mentioned the campaign, so--the infrastructure.
Ms. Badanes. Thank you for the question. This is a topic
that Microsoft has been aware of for a long time, ransomware,
generally, an issue. We tend to agree with Director Krebs of
CISA, who has pointed out recently that ransomware attacks, if
timed a couple weeks before an election or, indeed, the week of
an election, could have dramatic effects on the results of the
election.
As you discussed in your opening statements, it could do
things like tying up the voter registration database, sowing
chaos when people go to try and vote. It could also, depending
on the timing, make it difficult or impossible to deliver
ballots, or the ballot formats in the right--at the right time.
So it is a real concern.
The reason that we address it--and why I believe Director
Krebs has, as well--as a potential emerging threat, is because
we have seen it happen in large and small cities in the recent
past. So clearly, we have seen this in Baltimore and Atlanta,
and lots of other places. Then, of course, the information that
just came out this morning about what was happening in
Louisiana.
So it is a big concern. It is one that we are working with
our partners in Government, DHS in particular, to think through
what steps can be taken to form a resilient response. Because
the reality is these systems will remain vulnerable, as long as
there are people trying to attack it. But if they have
resilient plans in place, they can respond accordingly.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you.
General Taylor, over the last couple years, since 2016, we
have put an enormous amount of time from this committee into
looking at our election infrastructure. We learned in 2016 that
our adversaries can exploit cybersecurity vulnerabilities in
campaign organizations to steal information and spin a divisive
narrative.
How can campaigns help serve as a line of defense against
foreign influence in our elections?
General Taylor. Well, thank you for the question, Mr.
Chairman.
I think the important thing is recognizing that they are a
target, first, and that they need to invest in cybersecurity.
Part of what U.S. CyberDome is attempting to provide to them
free of charge is expert-level capability to protect
themselves.
As I mentioned in my remarks, campaigns are not built to--
with cybersecurity expertise. They--and the nature of the
threat that is coming at them requires a very sophisticated
understanding of how that threat is manifesting itself. That
can only be done by security experts, cybersecurity experts,
and campaigns just don't have those kinds of people, routinely.
They are startups only together for 1 or 2 years, at most, and
can't invest in those kinds of capabilities.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you. Mr. Stengel, in the beginning of
your book you stated that disinformation doesn't create
divisions, it amplifies them. We know the Russians' influence
of campaigns fed off of conflict, manipulating discussions on
race relations, gun control, global warming, among others, to
turn Americans against each other.
How do we equip voters to understand when public debate is
being manipulated by the Russians or some other adversary to
undermine U.S. interests?
Then the second part of that would be how can we de-
politicize the conversation about disinformation and foreign-
influenced campaigns all together?
Mr. Stengel. Thank you for that question, Mr. Chairman. In
my book I talk about what the Internet Research Agency did in
the last few weeks, in particular before the election, where
they focused on African American voters.
What I meant about that disinformation doesn't create
division, it amplifies it, they were trying to get African
American voters not to vote. There was a bunch of tweets to
people who followed the site that they created, called
Blacktivist, which was created, of course, from St. Petersburg,
to black voters saying, ``Don't wait in line to vote, vote at
home.'' They were trying to get black voters not to vote. They
were trying to get voters to vote for minority candidates. Joel
Stein, for example.
So they can suppress people's votes, they can increase
enthusiasm or decrease it. They are not really going to change
people's minds.
Again, the issue of disinformation is one that people have
to be aware of. The first line of defense is the fact that we
are actually talking about it now, and that people have to be
skeptical of the information that they get, and they need to
have some kind of media literacy, where they check the
information against other sources. Ultimately, that is what the
Russians try to do, not so much get people to believe their
point of view, which they don't have, but to make them doubt
the voracity of everybody else.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you. My time is up. I will yield back,
and I will now recognize the Ranking Member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Katko.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all. I
have about 30 minutes of questions, but I know I only have 5,
so I will get through as much as I can.
Ms. Badanes, a lot of questions I would like to ask you,
but first of all, on your computer laptop you have a sticker
that says, ``Protect 2020.'' Could you briefly explain what
that represents? Because I know what it does. What was
Microsoft's interaction with 2020, if anything?
Ms. Badanes. Sure. Well, I have a couple stickers here that
were actually produced by DHS with CISA. Protect 2020
represents an initiative by lots of different stakeholders. To
protect our elections we need participation from governments,
private sector, academics. It is really going to be a
collaborative effort.
So they are very generous with giving out their stickers,
so that all of us who are part of that effort can display how
much we care about this.
Mr. Katko. What is Microsoft's role in that effort?
Ms. Badanes. We have a variety of initiatives. We have some
security initiatives, obviously, for campaigns, as I mentioned
in my opening statement. But we also do work around election
security. We actually have an open source software development
kit, where we are inviting people to come in and use it in
their elections, to ensure that a voter's vote makes it all the
way through. So we have several initiatives that we are doing.
We try and identify places where Microsoft fits, where our
resources and our knowledge and people are a good fit to fill
some gaps.
Mr. Katko. It is a free tool that local election officials
can use. But is it fair to say we only have about 25 percent of
the local official agency--election agencies using that tool?
Ms. Badanes. Currently, it is not used by anyone. It is an
open source, and we want to have some pilots.
Mr. Katko. I am thinking of something else, then, I am
sorry.
Ms. Badanes. OK.
Mr. Katko. Whatever it is. But I know something with CISA,
where 25 percent of the people are not taking up with CISA's
free assistance----
Ms. Badanes. Oh----
Mr. Katko [continuing]. To give them assistance with their
local elections. That--I am concerned that--why they wouldn't
be taking up--it is a free advice, and they get free
notification updates as to security vulnerabilities, and they
are not using them. I just--for the life of me, I can't
understand why.
Ms. Badanes. I am not sure.
Mr. Katko. Yes, OK. Well, Mr. Blaze, I know we have had
some discussions with you in the past, and you have described
the election security vulnerabilities as follows. Basically, no
matter what we do, it is never going to be perfectly secure,
but there is ways you can minimize the risks.
So obviously, making sure the machines that actually do the
tabulation are off-line, and they have a separate, verifiable
way--usually it is through paper, but maybe some other ways, as
well, but generally through paper--so we have a recording of
the actual vote.
Then, you want--I think you said in your testimony, and I
have heard you say it before--the risk-limiting audit is a
great tool to go back and do. Now, the concern I have is
something General Taylor mentioned, and some others alluded to.
A lot of these local election agencies don't have the funding
to do what we need them to do. So I would like to hear from you
all as to what we should be doing in that regard, because
whether it is a risk-limiting audit or other types of audits
you can do afterward, having the paper trail and going back and
doing the spot checks, to me, is the only way to really ensure
the integrity of the numbers and the tabulations.
Some jurisdictions are better than others. But again, a lot
of them do not participate--are not able to do this. So what
can we do to fill that gap? I would like to hear from any of
you.
Mr. Blaze. So I will start off by saying that I agree with
you completely, and there is wide variance among the thousands
of election administrators throughout the country in capability
and funding and interest.
You know, one thing that we can do is, you know, infuse
funding specifically to replace voting equipment with those
that use paper ballots to conduct risk-limiting audits, to
share experience----
Mr. Katko. The problem is, I think--I don't want to
interrupt you, because we are short on time, but--a lot of
jurisdictions will get the funding, but they will choose not to
do risk-limiting audits, they will put it into hardware.
So what--just briefly, if you can, I want to give the
others an opportunity, as well--what can we do?
Mr. Blaze. Right.
Mr. Katko. What should we be doing?
Mr. Blaze. Well, we have to recognize in any funding
initiative that the audit step is at least equally important.
Mr. Katko. OK, OK.
Mr. Blaze. That is absolutely critical.
Mr. Katko. OK. Mr. Stengel, General? Anybody want to add
anything to that?
Mr. Stengel. No, go ahead.
General Taylor. You know, I think of this, Mr. Katko, as--I
look at the defense industrial base and how long it took that
organization, those organizations to really kind-of realize
what the threat is. I don't think--I think this is a long-term
strategy. I think the investment that you have made in funding
for CISA's election security is a huge step in the right
direction.
I think they have done an excellent job of getting the
confidence of the Secretaries of State. I think, over time,
that will filter down. But it is a long, tedious process. But
as we set the standards and best practices, I am confident it
will roll to the--to every level of our election
infrastructure.
Mr. Katko. OK. Anybody like to offer----
Mr. Stengel. I would only say I am the disinformation guy,
not the campaign security guy.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Stengel. While you can harden election voting systems,
it is very hard to harden anything to prevent disinformation,
in part because people welcome it. It is part of confirmation
bias.
Mr. Katko. Right. That is part of the problem here. People
have to understand that there is election interference, but
that--which we know is going on right now, and that is what you
are trying to stop.
But then we also have what we are all concerned with, is
them actually hacking into the tabulations. We haven't seen
that yet, and that is what we are trying to guard against. They
are certainly trying to do it, and that is why we need to have
these risk-auditing procedures, to make sure that those numbers
have integrity.
But I thank you all and yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Richmond. The gentleman from New York yields back. I
will now recognize the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr.
Langevin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank our
witnesses for your testimony today.
There is certainly no greater responsibility we have than
to protect our elections, if we are going to protect our
democracy. I appreciate the work you are doing in helping us to
get to a better place.
Mr. Stengel, I will start with you, if I could. In your
testimony you mentioned that--the rise of domestic
disinformation is becoming an even greater threat than external
disinformation campaigns, as we approach 2020.
So I wanted to ask you, and you can please elaborate, on
why you are saying domestic disinformation is becoming a threat
now, and why you assess it a greater threat and scope than the
external campaigns like the Russian interference that much of
the focus has been on.
Mr. Stengel. So one of the organizations that I am
affiliated with is the Digital Forensics Lab at the Atlantic
Council, and they evaluate that there has been a very large
increase in domestic disinformation.
When you think about it, even if you talk about the 100,000
items that the Internet Research Agency placed on Facebook, or
the more than 10 million tweets, it--they--it gets leverage,
and it gets virality from Americans, not from other Russians.
Yes, the Russians have a bunch of bots, but all of this is
picked up by American users, and then it is amplified, and that
creates the volume, domestically, which is actually larger than
the disinformation that is created by the Russians and other
actors.
Mr. Langevin. But was it started externally and just--are
you saying amplified it internally, or are you talking about it
is----
Mr. Stengel. Yes, so----
Mr. Langevin. Generated by some organized internal effort?
Mr. Stengel. It is--the foreign stuff is started
externally, and then it is amplified internally. But there is
plenty of domestic disinformation from all kinds of fringe
groups on the right and the left, and a lot of experts believe
that the domestic space--domestic disinformationists will
actually ultimately dwarf the foreign disinformationists.
Mr. Langevin. So in your testimony--continuing on with you,
Mr. Stengel--you testified that democracies just aren't very
good at combating disinformation. I certainly--I agree. One of
the things that I focused on, along with one of our new Members
of the subcommittee, Ms. Slotkin, is building resilience to
disinformation, much as we have built resilience to cyber
attacks or acts of terror.
So can you please elaborate on how you believe we can build
resilience? What does digital literacy education look like? How
can we teach digital literacy to Americans of all ages,
including older Americans who are already out of school?
You know, I understand the idea of, you know, debate and
discourse, but this is something different than we are talking
about. How do we build in this resilience to disinformation?
Mr. Stengel. Yes, I mean, the--I agree with the thrust of
your question.
One of the things I found in Government, as a person who
used to create content, is that countering content by us is
often counter-productive. People are not receptive to it, and
we are the enemy that they are already attacking.
I do think digital literacy and information literacy is
something that should be taught in the schools. I suggest that,
actually, the platform companies should be financing those
kinds of lesson plans. There are a number of organizations,
non-profits, that teach digital literacy and media literacy. I
think, in the future, we will look at the fact that we didn't
teach this in schools as silly as not teaching computer
programming.
So part of it is this--the resilience is to make people a
little bit more skeptical. I think the fact that we are talking
about it, about disinformation in general, is the first line of
defense because it makes people a little bit wary of the
information that they do get. That is, in fact, a good thing.
Mr. Langevin. Critical thinking is the--I think the key
here. But thank you for that perspective.
Dr. Blaze, Professor Blaze, good to see you again. You
mentioned in your testimony that hostile state actors can be
particularly formidable, because their goal may simply be to
disrupt an election or call into question its legitimacy,
instead of electing a particular candidate. I agree with that
concern.
Unfortunately, we know that Russia succeeded in causing
voters to lose confidence in the election system in 2016. What
steps can we take to maintain voters' confidence in our
elections, even in the case of disruption? How can we restore
lost confidence in our system? Are these solutions largely
technical, or are there policy or strategic communications
avenues that we should be pursuing?
Mr. Blaze. Well, certainly there are, you know, policy
components to all of this. My expertise is on the technological
things we need to do.
What I would strongly advocate is that we harden the
systems as best we can so that, by the use of things like hand-
marked paper ballots and risk-limiting audits conducted
routinely, election officials have a good answer when people
question the legitimacy of the outcome. We can say we are doing
rigorous techniques that give us high assurance and high
confidence in the outcome of the election, in spite of the
inevitable weaknesses and inevitable attacks against them.
Similarly, we need to harden things like voter registration
databases, procedures for handling provisional ballots and so
forth, so that when disruptions occur, we can recover from them
quickly enough so that there is no question about whether
people were able to vote in the first place. Those are, you
know, critical technical safeguards that serve as a foundation
for the policy initiatives that you discussed.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. I know my time has expired, but
thank you all for your testimony here today. Your perspective
is very helpful.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Richmond. The gentleman from Rhode Island has yielded
back. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Taylor, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Taylor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
witnesses being here.
Professor Blaze, I really appreciated your testimony. I
just wanted to ask one question. So you are recommending that
we go to a paperless--recommend we get rid of paperless DRE
voting machines and go to precinct-counted optical scan
ballots. So that is your recommendation, right?
Mr. Blaze. That is correct. I should point out that is not
merely my recommendation.
Mr. Taylor. Oh, sure.
Mr. Blaze. A National Academies report represents the
consensus of experts on this, the foundation of that----
Mr. Taylor. If--what is a realistic projection to try to
implement that at the Federal level? I mean, is that something
we could do for the next--for the primaries in March? Is that
something we could do for the general election next fall? Is
that something that we could do over a 4-year period, 6-year
period? Do you have any projection for kind-of what would be a
reasonable time frame to get that done?
Mr. Blaze. Some States are already using the technology
that is needed, so that is great. Other States are not. There
is certainly some lead time in--for purchasing, for training,
and for ultimate deployment.
You know, I think, certainly, the primaries--for any State
not using that equipment right now, the primaries are a pretty
aggressive goal to have.
The general election is also an aggressive goal, but it is
not one that is out of the question to achieve, if we have a--
if we have, as we should, a strong interest in doing so.
Mr. Taylor. But--OK. Maybe--if you haven't put pen to
paper, I am not trying to put you in a box. Have you put pen to
paper on this, or is this just kind of a recommendation?
Mr. Blaze. Well, it is--you know, it is highly variable
from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. So it is hard to generalize
about how to deploy it----
Mr. Taylor. You are fine. Again, I am not trying to put you
in a box. Just--different people have different ideas on how
long it takes to do these--some of these things, and some of
them are really--it is a big ask, right, to do every voting
machine in America and change it over?
I appreciate that you haven't--I think it is probably fair
you don't know, which is fine. I don't know, either. But I
think I would certainly want to give it a few years to try to
do something of this magnitude.
Your comments on voter registration on page 3 of your
written testimony, there is an implicit supposition within a
voter registration--that you are saying that voter registration
is important. Is that a fair statement?
Mr. Blaze. Certainly the integrity of the voter
registration databases is absolutely critical to conducting----
Mr. Taylor. OK.
Mr. Blaze [continuing]. High-integrity elections.
Mr. Taylor. So, you know, in my home State of Texas, we
require--people can mail in voter registration, but they
actually have to vote in person and be verified that it really
is a human being, and not, you know, someone trying to steal an
election by mailing in 100 voter registrations and get 100
mail-in ballots, and then fill those back in.
So a system of voter--so we have voter registrars in Texas.
We--so we have a series of checks to try to make sure there
isn't fraud, which I assume you would believe would--fraud
undermines a belief in the election system. Is that a fair
statement?
Mr. Blaze. Absolutely. I think we are fortunate that
studies have shown that fraud at the individual voter level is,
fortunately, quite rare.
Mr. Taylor. Well, that may be your experience, but
certainly not mine.
So what I--but just going back to trying to stop fraud, so
again, in Texas we have a very--a system for trying to stop
fraud on a voter registration basis. Do you think we should
throw out that system? Should we throw out the voter
registration systems in all the States, and sort-of let people
register however they would choose?
Mr. Blaze. Well, you know, I certainly think that making it
easy for people who are authorized to vote to become part of
the voter rolls is a critical function of any election system.
Mr. Taylor. Does it make sense to have----
Mr. Blaze. And----
Mr. Taylor [continuing]. Some mechanism----
Mr. Blaze. And----
Mr. Taylor. Does it make sense to have a mechanism to make
sure that voters are really voters, and not people trying to
steal elections?
Mr. Blaze. That is certainly one of the roles of each
State, to----
Mr. Taylor. So that is a yes?
Mr. Blaze [continuing]. To perform.
Mr. Taylor. It makes sense to stop people from stealing
elections, or we should just throw open--get rid of the
registrar system in this country and let anybody who wants--let
anybody register anybody?
Mr. Blaze. Well, it ultimately is a risk management
question. So I think, in order to properly answer that--and it
is, you know, a bit outside of my own expertise--we would have
to, you know, weigh the expected amount of fraud, which, as I
understand it, is relatively small, but that is, again, not my
area, against the benefit of making it easier for people to
vote.
Mr. Taylor. So should we get rid of States' provisions for
protecting the voter registration system or not?
Mr. Blaze. Well, the--you know, I think----
Mr. Taylor. That is a yes-or-no question.
Mr. Blaze. I will defer to the National Academies study on
the precise recommendation----
Mr. Taylor. So you don't know?
Mr. Blaze. [continuing]. Managing voter registration
databases.
Mr. Taylor. What do you----
Mr. Blaze. I am here to discuss--and my expertise is on--
the technical protections----
Mr. Taylor. But your--you are testifying in writing that
you think that voter registration is important to protect,
right?
Mr. Blaze. Absolutely.
Mr. Taylor. OK. Should we have laws to protect that, or
not?
Mr. Blaze. Well, of course, we should have laws to protect
that.
Mr. Taylor. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Richmond. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms. Underwood.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am really excited
to take part in this committee's third hearing this Congress
centered on election security. I greatly appreciate the
commitment and leadership shown by both Chairman Thompson and
Chairman Richmond, who recognize the present and growing threat
foreign adversaries pose to our most sacred democratic
institutions.
On-line disinformation is one of those growing threats as
we approach the 2020 election. Last year, for the first time
ever, more Americans got their news from social media than they
did from print newspapers.
So to Mr. Stengel, what should social media companies be
doing to prevent attempts to sow disinformation on their
platforms, and are they doing it?
Mr. Stengel. Yes, I would just note that you can get news
from the New York Times and the Washington Post on your phone,
as well.
But I do recommend--and I wasn't explicit about it in my
testimony, but I think amending the Communications Decency Act,
particularly section 230, to give the platform companies
liability for the content that they publish.
Right now they are not considered publishers. They have
complete immunity from everything that they have. As I say,
they can't have the same liability that a newspaper has, or a
magazine, just in part because of the volume. But they need to
make a good-faith effort, a reasonable effort, to take off
different types of content that violate their terms of service.
I would argue hate speech, demonstrably false speech, deep
fakes don't have a role in our elections.
Ms. Underwood. And----
Mr. Stengel. They need to have liability for taking that
stuff down.
Ms. Underwood. OK. So my constituents, like many others in
the country, want to learn more about how they can increase
their social media literacy. So could you answer this question
that was submitted by one of my constituents?
Can you clearly describe the difference between
misinformation and disinformation?
Mr. Stengel. Yes. I would define the difference as follows:
Disinformation is deliberately false information meant to
deceive; misinformation can be just a mistake. It is not
necessarily deliberate, although it can be. Disinformation is
the much more dangerous and damaging version of that.
Ms. Underwood. From your point of view, it is the
disinformation that is being used by the foreign adversaries on
the social media platforms.
Mr. Stengel. Yes, the Russian disinformation, which we are
very familiar with, was false information designed to deceive.
Part of the reason disinformation is effective is it often has
a kernel of truth in it. It is not completely made up out of
whole cloth, it is a combination of fact and fiction.
Ms. Underwood. Mr. Blaze, thank you and DEFCON Voting
Village for organizing the informational briefing last month
for Members of Congress. I appreciate your efforts to call
attention to the security gaps present in way too many of our
voting machines used across the country.
What more do you believe voting equipment vendors need to
be doing to reduce vulnerabilities?
Mr. Blaze. Well, first of all, thank you so much for having
us.
The--you know, ultimately, vendors have 2 roles here. First
is it is critically important that they be responsive, and
welcome reports of vulnerabilities and reports of bugs and
problems in their system, and rapidly turn that around into
defenses against those well-known vulnerabilities. We have seen
the--since 2007, the same vulnerabilities present in deployed
systems used for live elections, and there is really no reason
that those cannot have been fixed by now.
But second, vendors--I would urge vendors to produce
systems in accordance with the recommendations of the National
Academies study, which very firmly reject DRE technology that
is still being produced, still being sold by the major voting
vendors, even though we understand that it cannot be adequately
secured, and we cannot perform risk-limiting audits on it.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you.
Mr. Stengel, as a former senior State Department official,
you have been on the front lines of dissecting and analyzing
how foreign governments and other non-state actors are
weaponizing information. We also just heard the Ranking Member
inquire about the appropriations, and how much money the
Federal Government is appropriating.
In a field hearing in my district last month we had an
expert sitting on a panel like this testify that the United
States would need to spend $2.2 billion in order to properly
secure Federal elections ahead of 2020, and we have seen news
reports of Senator McConnell being willing to appropriate 10
percent of that, $250 million.
Based on your expertise, do you feel this administration's
response and preparations for the upcoming 2020 election are
sufficient? If not, what improvements would need to be made?
Mr. Stengel. Again, I am not an expert in election
security, but from--even from the premise of your question, I
think we don't spend nearly enough on election security. In
fact, we don't make elections easy for people to vote in,
whether that is changing the date to a weekend, whether that is
opening several days.
I do think it is quite extraordinary, when you think of
the--you know, the marketing budget of a company like Proctor
and Gamble, it is probably $25 billion, and we spend less than
$1 billion on our own election, it shows what we value and what
we don't value.
Ms. Underwood. Sure. The 2020 election is now less than a
year away, and we must not be caught off guard. I appreciate
all the witnesses for being here today to offer your
recommendations and work to ensure elections are secure.
I yield back.
Mr. Richmond. The gentlelady from Illinois has now yielded
back. I will now recognize the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms.
Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
the full committee Chair, Ranking Member, subcommittee Ranking
Member. This is a very important hearing.
It is good to see you again, Mr. Stengel, and thank all of
you for your work here in the--here at the--in the Government,
Federal Government, that some of you have worked in in the
past.
Let me say how serious this hearing is. Probably to ensure
that democracy thrives, we probably need to have these meetings
almost every other day.
Let me frame my questions from the perspective of 2 points
that I want to make. It is general knowledge, and in the recent
impeachment investigations even stated, that Russia intends to
investigate--excuse me, to interfere with the 2020 elections.
Mr. Stengel, I just want to go to you, having experience in
the State Department, and being an avid expert on international
issues. Do you have any knowledge of Ukraine's involvement in
the 2016 election?
Mr. Stengel. I do not.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Do you have knowledge of the--in the
general arena of information--that the intelligence community
documented that Russia interfered in the 2016 election?
Mr. Stengel. Yes. I mean that is absolutely indisputable,
and we saw that both from Classified sources and non-Classified
sources.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So let me go to General Taylor. Thank you
very much. Let me go to General Taylor.
Thank you, welcome. It is good to see you again. I have
been on this committee since the heinous act of 9/11. I have
seen superior [sic] and consistent Secretaries of Homeland
Security. We may have had a policy difference here and there,
but I have seen the Department take its rightful role in
securing the Nation.
Certainly we know that we can improve from 2016, but tell
me what the state of DHS is as we go into the 2020 elections,
in terms of its capability, staffing, leadership on this very
vital issue of election security, in your opinion.
General Taylor. In my opinion, Congresswoman, the most
heartening thing I see in DHS around this issue of election
security is CISA, and the investment that this committee has
made in making CISA more capable of addressing this issue, and
the work that CISA has done to build confidence in the
secretaries of state, and down to the State and local election
officials. So----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Do we have the staffing and the
orderliness that we need, going into 2020, in this Department
now?
General Taylor. I think we have a huge start. But as you
have mentioned, this is--to me, this is the same issue we face
as we left 9/11. This is not going to happen overnight. It is
going to happen with consistent investment over time, and
confidence-building in our State and local officials that the
Federal Government is here to help, not necessarily to get in
the way.
We have done that on counterterrorism. It has taken 15
years. We can do it on election security. I think CISA is well
on its way to getting that----
Ms. Jackson Lee. You feel the staffing presently--I don't
know if you have access to----
General Taylor. I do not.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So you cannot comment on the staffing that
we presently have in DHS----
General Taylor. I can only comment on the investment this
committee----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Right.
General Taylor [continuing]. Has made----
Ms. Jackson Lee. But not on the implementation.
General Taylor. Correct.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Let me--thank you very much.
Let me--Dr. Blaze, your expertise in what could happen, let
me ask you whether you feel comfortable as to whether or not we
are actually prepared for a disruption that we might not
expect.
I am introducing something called the failsafe elections
bill that deals with paper ballots and other issues. But, in
particular, it is to secure the technology, the attentiveness
to the question of what could happen that were not expected. If
you would--if I could yield to you on that question.
Mr. Blaze. Well, I will say that, of course, we don't know
what we don't know.
But I will say that one thing we do know is that if there
has not been a large-scale disruption or attack against our
election infrastructure that has been successful, it is not
because our systems are robust, but rather because nobody has
seriously tried to do it.
I think it is only a matter of time before our national
adversaries turn their resources in earnest on us, and----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Give us one thing--and so 2020 might be
the year. We don't know. Give us your 1 or 2 that we really
need to deal with in this short period of time, as we move to
2020.
Mr. Blaze. Vastly increased resources to protect State and
local election infrastructure, rapid deployment of paper ballot
voting machines, and risk-limiting audits.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Stengel, my last point on the
disinformation, I just want to be clear on what you said,
because, as you well know, in past elections African Americans
have been told that the election day is on Saturday, and in
actuality it was on Tuesday. Absolutely disinformation to
oppress, suppress the vote.
Did you say that disinformation, the provider's obligation
to take it down, they should be liable for it? Was that what
you were saying, or----
Mr. Stengel. I think disinformation----
Mr. Richmond. The gentlelady is out of time. I will permit
you to answer the question.
Mr. Stengel. I think disinformation, which is deliberately
false information that is meant to deceive, if it is proven
false, if it is indisputably false and meant to deceive, yes,
the platform company should take that down.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much. I yield back.
Mr. Richmond. The gentlelady yields back. We will do a
second round of questioning, and I will yield 5 minutes to
myself.
General Taylor, Congresswoman Underwood asked the question
of if we are doing enough, or if the administration and the
Federal Government is doing enough on election security. Would
you like to weigh in on that?
General Taylor. As I said in answering Ms. Jackson Lee's
question, I think we have begun a process that is going to take
time to build the confidence in State and local election
officials that we can benchmark each other and improve the
cybersecurity status of our election systems.
I have a great deal of confidence in Mr. Masterson over at
CISA, and the work that he has done since he has been leading
the election security effort there. I think it is developing
good fruit. It is not--nowhere near where it needs to be over
time.
I don't think this is one--again, I think of it from a war
on terrorism point of view, and it took us almost 15 years to
develop the capacity to do what we have done here since 9/11.
So I see it in that vein.
Mr. Richmond. Ms. Badanes, let me ask you. In October
Microsoft reported significant cyber activity by a threat group
you called Phosphorous, which targeted a U.S. Presidential
campaign. Can you tell us more about that cyber activity? No.
1, how Microsoft found out about it, and No. 2, what did you do
with that information?
Ms. Badanes. Sure. There is a group at Microsoft called
Microsoft Threat Intelligence Center. We call them MSTIC. For
the last 10 years they have been, essentially, hunting nation-
state adversaries. They track a lot of their behavior and
identify if they are attempting to target any of our customers.
So recently they noticed that a group that we call
Phosphorous, as you noted, who operates out of Iran, was
targeting the individual personal consumer accounts of a lot of
very interesting targets. They were current and former
Government officials, members of the media, and, as you
mentioned, a staffer for a Presidential campaign.
Once they were able to confirm that information, and make
sure that what they were seeing checked out with a few other
sources, they then started notifying. So we notified the
individuals who had been attacked, provided them with
actionable information--in many cases, things that they could
do to check their own logs themselves. Then we notified our
friends and colleagues in Government to let them know the
activity we were seeing.
Then, the final step we took was actually talk about it
publicly. We put out a blog post, where we described the action
we were seeing, because we thought it was very important to be
transparent when we see that kind of activity, especially the
kinds of customers they were targeting.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you. Let me ask the panel just some
general questions. If you could just say yes or no, it would be
very helpful.
No. 1, it is universally agreed without much contradiction
that Russia did, in fact, meddle in the 2016 Presidential
election. Would you agree?
General Taylor. Yes, sir.
Ms. Badanes. Yes.
Mr. Blaze. Yes.
Mr. Stengel. They didn't meddle; they attacked our
infrastructure and the core of our democracy.
Mr. Richmond. Agreed. Second, and there are nation-state
actors, and there are a lot of people out there that are trying
to affect the 2020 election, from infrastructure to
disinformation to our very voting machines. Would you agree
with that?
General Taylor. Yes.
Mr. Blaze. Undoubtedly.
Ms. Badanes. Yes.
Mr. Stengel. Yes, and the Senate Intelligence Committee
report said the Russians have done more since 2016 than they
did leading up to 2016.
Mr. Richmond. Would you also universally agree that the
Federal Government has not put the resources there to combat
and protect our very democracy that depends on fair, free
elections, where every vote matters?
Mr. Stengel. Yes.
General Taylor. Yes.
Mr. Blaze. Yes.
Ms. Badanes. More could certainly be done.
Mr. Richmond. Then let me ask you another question, because
it always comes up from people about this rampant action by
individual citizens to go vote who are not voters, and that
there is some alleged rampant election fraud perpetrated by
individuals.
Has anyone seen or aware of a rampant effort by U.S.
citizens to vote who may not be qualified to vote, or election
fraud?
Mr. Stengel. No.
General Taylor. Not that I have seen.
Mr. Blaze. Not that I am aware of.
Ms. Badanes. It is not my area of expertise, but no.
Mr. Richmond. I will just close with this. It is very
important for the people in this country to believe in the
elections that we have, and that the person who wins is the
person who was supposed to win, and received the most votes in
the regular election, or, in the case of a President, did in
fact win the State so that they could win the electoral
college.
I want to thank you all for what you all are doing, the
effort that you are putting forward, to make sure that you
offer your subject-matter expertise to how we protect our
elections, how to make sure they are fair, how to make sure the
winner is the winner. So I just want to thank you all for
coming.
With that I will yield back and yield to the Ranking Member
of the full committee, Mr. Katko.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Richmond. Those are great
questions, I think, and they establish how serious the
predicament we are in right now.
A couple of quick questions for Mr. Blaze. If you can keep
your answers really short, then I got a question for everybody.
Mr. Blaze, just a point of clarification. About what percentage
of voters in the United States have a paper ballot to--back-up
system?
Mr. Blaze. That number has, fortunately, been increasing. I
don't have the precise number at my fingertips. I believe there
are something like 19 States, currently, that don't use any
form of paper.
Mr. Katko. OK, all right. I wanted to just have you briefly
explain what a risk-limiting audit is, and what the costs are
involved in a risk-limiting audit.
Mr. Blaze. All right. I will be as brief as I can.
Essentially, a risk-limiting audit is a statistical technique
for sampling ballots and comparing, by a human observation----
Mr. Katko. After the election----
Mr. Blaze. After the election, comparing by human
observation what is printed on the ballot with what was
recorded.
To the--as you see more ballots that match, you gain more
confidence that the machine tally showed you the correct
election outcome. If you see mismatches you have to look at
more ballots and compare them.
Mr. Katko. The risk, of course--the problem is a lot of the
local election districts simply don't have the manpower or the
funds to do that. Correct?
Mr. Blaze. That is right. Manpower, funds, experience, and
mandate.
Mr. Katko. OK. Now I want to ask a question for all of you,
and I think I will start with Mr. Stengel, because you kind-of
alluded to this a little bit, that Russia is, in particular, is
refining their efforts in this regard.
How has Russia's strategies evolved with respect to
election interference in 2016, and what should we be most
concerned with with what they are doing now that they didn't do
in 2016?
Mr. Stengel. Yes, I don't know the answer to the question
of how--of what--of how the Russian strategy has evolved. What
I do know is that the platform companies have taken down
extraordinary amounts of content.
There was an extraordinary story this past week that
Facebook had eliminated 5.4 billion--that is B, with a B--fake
accounts. I don't know how many of those were Russians, but
certainly a significant number.
The reporting that I have read about this--and I don't have
access to the same intelligence I used to have--is that they
are doing more microtargeting this time. They are looking at
voters where there is already existing divisions, and trying to
widen them and, again, sowing doubt about the integrity of the
election. That is their ultimate goal.
Mr. Katko. OK. Anybody else want to add to that?
General.
General Taylor. I agree. I think the one thing I learned in
40 years of intelligence, if something works well, keep at it
and get better at it. I think that is what the Russians learned
in 2016, and they have--their efforts have continued to evolve
to get more sophisticated and more effective.
Mr. Katko. OK. Ms. Badanes, anything you want to add to
that, or----
Ms. Badanes. All I would add is it is important to note
that they are likely not the only player in the game this time
around. So, while the strategies of one adversary are
important, from the protection standpoint the tactics are a lot
of what we look at, how campaigns and election officials
protect themselves regardless of who is coming after them.
Mr. Katko. OK. So what have we done better that we didn't
do in 2016? What have we done--we, being the election officials
in the Federal Government--to help with the election officials?
What have we done better?
What--and then, last, what else can we do? So you can add
that----
General Taylor. I will start. When Secretary Johnson
indicated that the election infrastructure would be part of
our--critical infrastructure was the first step. I think the
investment that Congress has made in CISA and CISA's
activities, and the confidence that they built among state--
secretaries of state has been a huge step forward from where we
started.
I think you will recall when Secretary Johnson first
designated elections as critical infrastructure, the pushback
from the States was pretty significant. I think we have built a
lot more confidence that the Federal Government is truly here
to help, not to dictate how elections are run.
Mr. Katko. Anybody else want to add to that?
Ms. Badanes. I would just add that the communication
amongst all the stakeholders has vastly improved. We recognize
that in 2016, a lot of time, if something happened in a
municipality, they didn't know who to call. They didn't know
who to call at the FBI, DHS. If it was a platform company or a
tech company, they weren't sure who to reach out to.
Those communication lines are much stronger. There have
been many tabletop exercises and other activities to ensure
that people know how to respond if and when something does
occur.
Mr. Blaze. I will add to that that there is now consensus
from technical experts on precisely what to do that didn't
exist at the time the Help America Vote Act was passed. We
are--have the benefit of pretty clear guidance from the
National Academies report, for example, on precisely how to
introduce new resources to better protect our elections.
Mr. Stengel. I would only say that, in combating
disinformation, which is different than what we are talking
about here, I am not aware of anything that Congress or the
Federal Government has done to combat disinformation.
Mr. Katko. OK. I would yield back the balance of my time.
Thank you.
Mr. Richmond. The gentleman from New York yields back. I
now recognize the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms. Underwood, for
5 minutes.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In Dr. Blaze's written testimony, you outlined a series of
technical observations about the election infrastructure that
we have in our country. I just wanted to just drill down on
this point.
Which do you think is the most vulnerable, ahead of 2020?
Mr. Blaze. Well----
Ms. Underwood. For a cyber attack.
Mr. Blaze. Right. So I think the--aside from the voting
machines, which have been discussed quite a bit, the protection
of back-end infrastructure, particularly the voter registration
databases that are used to produce the poll books that voters
check in with on Election Day, are utterly critical to protect,
and we have, literally, thousands of different election
administrators all protecting them in slightly different ways.
Ms. Underwood. That is so alarming to me. I am from
Illinois. I represent a community in northern Illinois. That
was exactly what got hacked for us in 2016. It was the on-line
voter registration systems and some 76,000 Illinois voters,
whose information was compromised.
OK. So in General Taylor's written testimony, you went into
some minimum standards for campaign cybersecurity. In your
written testimony you said that there should be an incentive to
spend certain dollars across the board amongst campaigns to
incentivize each campaign to make those investments.
I am just wondering if you wanted to expand for the
committee about what you think that type of incentive should
look like, or what those campaigns should be investing in, more
specifically.
General Taylor. Well, specifically, what I am referring to
there is the fact that campaigns, by and large, are start-ups,
and don't have the expertise or--to do sophisticated
cybersecurity against the adversaries that they face.
Ms. Underwood. Right.
General Taylor. So the encouragement would be for them to
work with a company or an organization like U.S. CyberDome to
provide that expertise in a systematic way with funding from
donors to our 401--501(c)(4) organization.
So it is the investment in organizations like Microsoft or
CyberDome that will provide those services free of charge to
the campaigns that will raise the level of security that they
will have, moving forward.
Ms. Underwood. OK. Then also in your testimony, sir, your
written testimony, you described how there is a bit of a
shortage in qualified workers that have the experience required
to do this type of sophisticated cyber defense on behalf of the
United States electoral process. Just wondering if you wanted
to comment on that.
General Taylor. Certainly. It takes years of expertise to
build the understanding of how the adversary works, and how to
apply the tools of cybersecurity. A college graduate in
cybersecurity is not going to have that expertise, and that is
why we have tried to bring together folks with that kind of
expertise to apply it to individual campaigns in a systematic
way, as opposed to a haphazard way.
Ms. Underwood. With experience, then, in playing cyber
defense----
General Taylor. And----
Ms. Underwood [continuing]. Against the Russians, the
Chinese, the Iranians----
General Taylor. Exactly.
Ms. Underwood [continuing]. And the other foreign actors
that threaten our elections.
General Taylor. Who have very significant experience in the
defense area of cybersecurity and have applied those tools very
successfully over the years.
Ms. Underwood. So, with that in mind--thank you, General
Taylor--Ms. Badanes--OK, yes, Badanes--could you comment, then,
on Microsoft's ability to source that talent, given the
relative lack of availability around the country?
Do you feel that your company was able to recruit the
individuals that do have the ability to play that type of cyber
defense that the general was describing?
Ms. Badanes. Sure. Microsoft is, actually, one of the most
attacked companies in the world. So, when it comes to
cybersecurity, it is something that we have had to take
seriously for our own protection.
We have been able to take our learnings from protecting
ourselves, and also apply those to protecting our customers.
That includes recruiting the talent that we need to both
protect ourselves and also go into that front-line role of
protecting our customers.
Ms. Underwood. So those individuals, your cybersecurity
professionals, then would have had previous experience?
Ms. Badanes. In many cases. We have a lot of--real quick,
previous experience?
Ms. Underwood. Against these foreign adversaries that
General Taylor was outlining, right?
Ms. Badanes. Sure----
Ms. Underwood. The Chinese, the Iranians, the Russians that
have--are the known foreign actors that threaten----
Ms. Badanes. Yes----
Ms. Underwood [continuing]. Our election system.
Ms. Badanes. In particular, the MSTIC team that we work
with very closely recruits a lot of individuals from previous
Government experience, where they faced similar threats.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you. So, I mean, it is clear to me
that if large technology companies like Microsoft have to go
out and recruit these types of very experienced, talented
individuals, that campaigns are not going to be able to do
that. Certainly, States that barely have an IT person to manage
the whole system dedicated to their board of elections or
whatever, a secretary of state, they are not going to be able
to recruit those people, too.
So it sounds to me like we have a real work force issue, in
addition to a lack of some standards and requirements.
General Taylor. I think there is a work force issue across
the board, in terms of cybersecurity, for the country. But more
specifically, from our perspective, we believe that we can
harness the expertise of the cybersecurity community, focus on
campaigns----
Ms. Underwood. Right.
General Taylor [continuing]. And do so in a systematic way,
which will provide better protection than hiring a--you know, a
college graduate to be your cybersecurity person trying to take
on the Russians.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you for your testimony. I yield back.
Mr. Richmond. The gentlelady from Illinois yields back. The
gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me--again, let me thank the witnesses,
and let me share with you these points if you can listen to
this fact--points, and then I will raise some questions.
The Russian General Staff Main Intelligence Director, GRU,
is suspected by our intelligence agencies of having begun cyber
operations targeting United States elections as early as March
2016. They took on the persona of Guccifer 2.0, DCLeaks.com,
and Wikileaks as the identities that would be reported as
having involvement in the work that they had undertaken to
undermine our Nation's Presidential election.
Russia is blamed for breaching 21 local and State election
systems, which they have studied extensively. In February 2018
Special Counsel Robert Mueller released indictments of 13
Russians, at least one of whom has direct ties to Russian
President Vladimir Putin. The 37-page indictment details the
actions taken to interfere with the U.S. political system,
including the 2016 U.S. Presidential election.
Among the charges, which include charges for obstruction of
justice, are several especially notable details. The indictment
states that 13 defendants posed as U.S. persons and created
false U.S. personas and operated social media pages and groups
designed to attract U.S. audiences.
Dr. Blaze, are we better off now than we were pre-2016 and
into 2016, as it relates to the operatives that we might
expect--Iran, Russia, China?
Mr. Blaze. Well, I think, in some sense, we are better off
because we are discussing it, the fact that we are having these
hearings. But on the other hand, 2016 could be seen as a
demonstration of how successful this approach can be with very
limited resources.
So I think, in particular, this is--the experience of 2016
provides great encouragement to even smaller National
adversaries than the--those with the GRU at their disposal.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Do you believe, when information counters
documented intelligence reports that Russia was the entity that
interfered in 2016, and representations from government
officials keep utilizing Ukraine as having a server, or having
been involved, does that give a sign of victory to our
adversaries, when that kind of dialog is still going on?
Mr. Blaze. If you are asking me, I think it is, you know,
very important that our intelligence services be fully
utilized, and their expertise listened to in building our
defenses. So to the extent that we are distracted about these
things, that only weakens us.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Do you still maintain that we need to ramp
up the monetary investment quickly to be able to be prepared
for what we may not suspect might happen in 2020?
Mr. Blaze. I think this is an urgent priority.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Your comment, I think, 19 or 20 States
don't have paper ballots?
Mr. Blaze. That is right. I don't have the precise numbers
at my disposal, but there are voters in a large number of
States who still don't use paper----
Ms. Jackson Lee. I count that as a crisis. That is about
one-third of the 50 States that don't have paper ballots, that
something disruptive could occur and they have no record.
Mr. Blaze. I think we are--we have been very fortunate if
something hasn't occurred yet.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Secretary Stengel, again, we have, I
think, operatives that think they are successful because, in
the public sphere, there is a comment that Ukraine may have had
a server, may have had something to do with 2016. Do you count
that as disinformation at its paramount level? What else could
be said, going into 2020?
Mr. Stengel. Yes, Congresswoman, I think that is an example
of disinformation. To go to your previous question, I think our
adversaries regard it as a victory when they can get that kind
of information in the digital bloodstream of the United States,
and you have people in the Government not believing what our
intelligence sources say is absolutely indisputable, and
going--having recourse to some of this disinformation and
strange theories that is--are not proven at all. I think our
adversaries see that as a victory.
Ms. Jackson Lee. With that in mind, let me just say--and
let me thank the witness from Microsoft. Let me just quickly
ask.
You continue to shore up your system to protect against
those who want to attack Microsoft, right? It is a daily,
everyday basis.
Ms. Badanes. Absolutely. It is a race without a finish
line.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So let me just say I think CISA is a very
important new entity. But listening to all of the witnesses, I
am almost saying that we should declare a war room. We are a
couple of months out from the major Presidential primaries,
with one party having any number of candidates. That is the
crux of our democracy for the highest office in the land.
I appreciate Dr. Krebs and his work, but I really believe
that we need an effective war room working on behalf of the
Federal Government and working with all the States. This is--
stakes are high, and this is going to be serious in 2020.
I thank you all for the contribution you have made today.
I yield back.
Mr. Richmond. The gentlelady from Texas yields back. I will
now recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Roy--Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. I love Ohio, but I am from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Richmond. Oh, I am sorry.
Mr. Joyce. That is all right.
Ms. Badanes, I think it is important that you, representing
Microsoft, are here today. You discuss the work on protecting
campaigns. But in your written testimony you mentioned that you
work on election integrity. Can you elaborate on that work,
please?
Ms. Badanes. Yes, sure. Thank you for the question. So, as
I mentioned in the testimony, our program is focused on 3
pillars, which are actually quite similar to the hearing today.
We focus on campaign security, disinformation defense, and
election security.
So when we approach that space, as I said earlier, one of
the things we were looking for was identifying ways that our
company uniquely could fit in and make a contribution. One
thing that we have done is to encourage the work of Dr. Josh
Benaloh, who actually contributed to the National Academies
report, and is well-known in the election security community.
He is a senior cryptographer in Microsoft Research, and he has
created a concept called end-to-end verifiability in elections.
So we have built out the code for that. It is now
available, open-source, on what is called GitHub, which is a
site where open source code lives, and we have invited vendors
new and old to take that code and use it to make their system
stronger. We are working with them actively to identify pilots
where we can test that kind of application.
Mr. Joyce. You also mentioned Account Guard and Microsoft
365 for campaigns. Can you tell us about Election Guard,
please?
Ms. Badanes. Sure. So I actually didn't reference that the
open-source software development kit is called Election Guard.
Mr. Joyce. It is called Election Guard.
Ms. Badanes. Yes, yes.
Mr. Joyce. Can you go into some more details of how you can
see that impacting the 2020 elections?
Ms. Badanes. It will be difficult for it to be rolled out
in time for the 2020 election in any notable way, other than a
few pilots. However, the way that it impacts voters--and that
is what we are really focused on--it comes down to that
question of was my vote counted, can I trust that my vote made
it all the way through?
What end-to-end verifiability enables is a voter to cast
their vote, take a tracking number back with them. That vote is
now encrypted. Whether it is through a ballot marking device,
or whether it is through hand-marked paper ballots into a
scanner, it can be applied in lots of different ways.
But the voter, at the end of the election, can check and
make sure that their vote actually made it into the final
tally. So it really is, ultimately, about voter confidence.
Mr. Joyce. Can you elaborate on research and development at
Microsoft? Do you consider this to be a field of development
that Microsoft is committed to?
Ms. Badanes. So, interestingly, where Dr. Benaloh sits
within the company is within Microsoft Research. So, as a team,
the Defending Democracy Program, we are actually quite small.
But what we are able to do is work across the company, in
particular, with our researchers, identify projects they are
working on that could be applicable in the election and
campaign space, and where there is a good fit we can then work
with them to make that research real and be part of the
commercial offerings.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. My next questions are for Dr. Blaze.
Pennsylvania recently launched a risk-limiting audit pilot
project. Can you speak of how that project has been perceived,
and how that was rolled out in 2 different communities in
Pennsylvania?
Mr. Blaze. Right. If I understand, Philadelphia, my former
home town, was one of those cities. You know, it is vitally
important that States and local jurisdictions get experience
with risk-limiting audits.
You know, I think the--Pennsylvania needs to be applauded
for doing this. The experience from Pennsylvania is going to be
extremely valuable to both Pennsylvania and other
jurisdictions, looking forward. So this is, you know, a very
positive thing, in my view.
Mr. Joyce. Conversely, Dr. Blaze, do you see any potential
disadvantages utilizing risk-limiting audits?
Mr. Blaze. No. We simply have to do them. I think the
biggest disadvantage we face is that if there isn't a National
standard for doing them, they are being rolled out very slowly
and, you know, this needs to be accelerated with things like
the Pennsylvania pilot project.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, and I thank all of the witnesses for
being here today. I yield my time.
Mr. Richmond. The gentleman yields back. I just want to
echo the sentiment of my colleague from Pennsylvania and thank
you all for being here and covering such an important topic. I
believe that it is bipartisan, that we want to protect our
elections and protect our democracy, and make sure that every
vote matters.
So, with that, the Members of the committee may have
additional questions for the witnesses. We ask that you respond
expeditiously in writing to those questions.
Without objection, the committee record shall be kept open
for 10 days.
Hearing no further business, the committee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:24 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Questions From Chairman Cedric L. Richmond for Francis X. Taylor
Question 1. Political campaigns, with their limited resources and
staff, are a rich target for adversaries. Are political campaigns doing
enough to defend themselves from cyber attack? What more is needed?
Answer. Generally, campaigns are not doing enough to defend
themselves from cyber attack. Campaigns are not adequately resourced to
defend against many expert, persistent, and well-funded threat actors
such as nation-states. Most campaigns do not have enough technical
expertise or historical experience against the myriad threats they
face. Simply put, if they have not previously detected and responded to
sophisticated threat actors, they will not be able to. Even campaigns
with a very knowledgeable cybersecurity professional on-staff are
hindered. One person alone cannot repel the Korean People's Army or the
Armed Forces of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Congress should consider specifying minimum cybersecurity standards
for Federal candidate committees. Campaigns may have greater incentive
to spend effort and funds on cyber protections if they know their
competitors are obligated to the same expenditures. Today, a campaign's
singular focus is to get elected. Any effort not directly in support of
getting elected, is not funded or underfunded. For election campaigns,
every dollar spent on services like cybersecurity is a dollar that is
not being spent on their core mission. Even proactive candidates may
think twice about spending effort and money on cybersecurity, for fear
this diversion of resources will result in less votes than their
competitors. This results in a lack of incentive for campaigns to
address cybersecurity more fully, despite the imminent threat.
A minimum standard would ``level the playing field'' and also
ensure foundational cybersecurity safeguards are implemented across
committees. The specific cybersecurity standards need not be authored
from scratch. A large catalog of U.S. Federal cybersecurity
publications exists now and might be adapted specifically for political
campaigns. Finally, given the relationship between Federal candidate
committees and National party committees, Congress should also consider
specifying minimum cybersecurity standards for National party
committees.
Congress should consider mandating that all U.S. Government cyber
threat intelligence be disseminated in computer-readable formats, in
addition to prose. This simple requirement would go along way to
ensuring that action can be taken swiftly once cyber threat
intelligence information is received. Today, cyber threat information
is mainly conveyed in formats that cannot be automatically processed by
computers. In cyber space, the pace of engagement is extremely fast. It
far outpaces the rate of re-formatting threat intelligence. We are
fighting an asymmetrical war on the cyber front, and we must adjust. I
do not espouse a specific format. I would leave that up to the experts.
Expressing all threat information in computer-readable formats will be
a big step forward.
Congress should consider funding efforts to automate de-
classification. De-classification processes also cost cyber defenders
critical time. However, these challenges are more complex to solve.
Over-classification is something that intelligence organizations should
evaluate for themselves. In other words, is it possible that certain
aspects of the threat information never needed to be classified to
begin with? Accelerating de-classification should also be considered.
We are living in an age where machine learning is broadly applied, and
artificial intelligence is starting to be well-understood. These
technologies hold significant promise to automate large portions of the
de-classification process.
It's noteworthy that computer-readable formats and de-
classification of cyber threat intelligence are also big challenges to
the U.S. Federal Government sharing information with private sector,
whether in the interest of protecting critical infrastructure or for
other reasons. I urge careful consideration of these topics, given
their importance at-large.
Question 2. Recent reports suggest that foreign governments like
Russia are ramping up influence operations in places with fledgling
democracies or more fragile economies, such as Africa, and using
increasingly aggressive tactics.
What is the next frontier of foreign influence operations, and how
might it matter for U.S. National security?
Answer. A RAND blog from June 2019 does a very good job in
summarizing what I believe to be the next frontier in foreign influence
operations. The author states what many of us have been seeing for some
time, ``nation-state cyber wars are already well under way.'' The lack
of international norms means that cyber attacks fall into gray areas
below total war. Nation-state actors (e.g. Russia, Iran, and China)
exploit that uncertainty and pose serious risks to U.S. National
security. Their exploits threaten critical infrastructure, including
transportation, food delivery, utilities, and commerce in general.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has provided solid
guidance (published May 15, 2018) toward developing a more robust
cybersecurity strategy for the homeland that focuses on better
defenses. DHS proposed that the United States seek to build deeper
partnerships with industry to foster an aligned cybersecurity ecosystem
to enable more effective collaboration and information sharing.
DHS has encouraged the accelerated use of innovative and emerging
technologies such as artificial intelligence and machine learning, with
an eye toward protecting critical infrastructure. DHS has determined
that the effects of cyber attacks against critical infrastructure could
be better mitigated through the creation of comprehensive playbooks to
unify Government actions across defense, homeland security, law
enforcement, intelligence, and State agencies. This could drive
uniformity in action across the National security enterprise for
defensive measures.
Question 3. The Obama administration filled the position of
National Security Council's cybersecurity coordinator, who coordinated
Federal efforts related to cybersecurity. Do you believe such a role is
necessary in the coordination of the various agencies' responses to
election security?
Answer. The increasing reliance of our Nation on technology means
the cybersecurity coordinator role has never been more important. Not
only is the cybersecurity coordinator critical for coordination of
Federal efforts related to cybersecurity, but this role must also
oversee alignment of Federal efforts with those of private sector and
other levels of government. This alignment is vital for areas such as
critical infrastructure, to include election security, where the
majority of our critical infrastructure exists outside of the Federal
Government.
Questions From Chairman Cedric L. Richmond for Richard Stengel
Question 1. Political campaigns, with their limited resources and
staff, are a rich target for adversaries. Are political campaigns doing
enough to defend themselves from cyber attack? What more is needed?
Answer. While I am not an expert on cybersecurity and I do not have
any data on what the political campaigns are doing, I would suspect
that they are not doing nearly enough. They are ripe targets. We saw
that in 2016; it will be even more true in 2020. Moreover, there are
new methods that have been developed since 2016 that make campaigns
more vulnerable. Deep fakes and the manipulation of data, in addition
to cyber hacking and disinformation are now among the many things
campaigns need to be concerned about. In information war, offensive
weapons are more sophisticated than defensive weapons. Campaigns should
have full-time teams dedicated to defending themselves in the cyber
realm.
Question 2. Recent reports suggest that foreign governments like
Russia are ramping up influence operations in places with fledgling
democracies or more fragile economies, such as Africa, and using
increasingly aggressive tactics.
What is the next frontier of foreign influence operations, and how
might it matter for U.S. National security?
Answer. The recent New York Times story about Russian influence
operations in Madagascar (Nov. 11, 2019) illustrates the concerns
contained in the question. In that story, the Russians were trying to
sway a political campaign to help Russian business. Their interests are
always unscrupulous: To help Russian interests and to undermine
democracy. The Russians, especially outside the United States, combine
political influence operations with commercial ones. The Chinese tend
to concentrate only on commercial ones. In the case of the Chinese,
they believe commercial ties will lead to political ones. In both
cases, they seek to erode the strength of American alliances abroad--
and that is a long-term threat to U.S. National security.
Question 3. What do you mean when you say that the primary weapons
in the global information war are ``weaponized information and
grievance?'' How were these weapons used in the 2016 Presidential
election?
Answer. The weaponization of information and the weaponization of
grievance are two different things. The former is a description of
global information war, in which bad actors both steal information and
distort it to influence and deceive their targets. The weaponization of
grievance is a fancy way of saying that some politicians and leaders
magnify and exploit voters' frustrations and unhappiness instead of
proposing solutions and policy. In the case of weaponizing information,
the Internet Research Agency in St. Petersburg created false narratives
about U.S. Presidential candidates. The Russians also stoked resentment
among both white conservative voters and African-American voters with
false claims and deceptive advice.
Questions From Chairman Cedric L. Richmond for Matt Blaze
Question 1. Political campaigns, with their limited resources and
staff, are a rich target for adversaries. Are political campaigns doing
enough to defend themselves from cyber attack? What more is needed?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Recent reports suggest that foreign governments like
Russia are ramping up influence operations in places with fledgling
democracies or more fragile economies, such as Africa, and using
increasingly aggressive tactics.
What is the next frontier of foreign influence operations, and how
might it matter for U.S. National security?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. As one of the organizers of the DEFCON voting village,
you have been able to hack voting machines, vote scanners, and ballot
marking devices. What do you see as the greatest strength and weakness
in our election infrastructure?
What technical threats to election infrastructure are most
concerning to you in 2020?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. This month, The Brennan Center for Justice issued a
report calling on Congress to establish a framework for Federal
certification of election vendors, the private companies that
manufacture voting equipment and maintain voter registration databases,
which would include the establishment of Federal standards and the
ability for Federal officials to monitor compliance and address
violations.
Are vendors doing enough to defend voting systems? What more is
needed?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. Although you have disclosed these vulnerabilities to
vendors, many of these devices will still be in use for the 2020
National election. How have vendors responded to your disclosures?
And do jurisdictions that use these machines face a high risk of
being compromised?
Do you believe that election vendors are well-situated to withstand
attacks from nation-state actors?
Are there supply chain security certifications that must met for
vendors to be able to participate in National elections?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Cedric L. Richmond for Ginny Badanes
Question 1. Political campaigns, with their limited resources and
staff, are a rich target for adversaries. Are political campaigns doing
enough to defend themselves from cyber attack? What more is needed?
Answer. Political campaigns in the United States range from a small
thousand-dollar budget operation with a single staff member to a large
multi-million-dollar budget organization with hundreds of staff. No
matter their size or resources, all face the potential threat of attack
from well-funded adversaries. Many campaigns are taking fundamental
steps to protect themselves, but more can always be done.
The most impactful thing a political campaign can do to protect
itself is to train members of the team on the importance of basic cyber
hygiene. These trainings should promote practices such as using a
password management tool, turning two-factor authentication on all
their accounts, and using a secure communications platform for
sensitive messages.
Such trainings will not alter the behavior of staff unless campaign
leadership first creates a culture of cybersecurity awareness within
the organization. When the candidate, campaign manager, and other
prominent officials demonstrate a commitment to cybersecurity with
their own devices and accounts, prioritize trainings, and provide
secure software for the team to use, they demonstrate that
cybersecurity is something everyone on the team is expected to care
about.
However, campaigns can only do so much to protect themselves. There
is a role for the private sector to play in supporting these efforts as
well. For example, at Microsoft we have made top-tier communications
and productivity tools (M365 for Campaigns) available at non-profit
pricing so that campaigns can access the security features they need at
a price that is reflective of their budget reality. Similar initiatives
being spear-headed by organizations such as Defending Digital Campaigns
and CyberDome will continue to provide campaigns with the kind of
support they need to defend themselves against sophisticated
adversaries.
Question 2. Recent reports suggest that foreign governments like
Russia are ramping up influence operations in places with fledgling
democracies or more fragile economies, such as Africa, and using
increasingly aggressive tactics.
What is the next frontier of foreign influence operations, and how
might it matter for U.S. National security?
Answer. Identifying the kind of influence operations our
adversaries will try next is a challenge that many in both the private
and public sector are aggressively investigating. There has emerged
consensus on a few things, specifically: (1) Adversaries have already
begun and will continue influence operations targeting the 2020 U.S.
elections, and (2) adversaries will not follow the same playbook they
ran in 2016.
While a multi-stakeholder approach is under way to identify and
combat these operations, it should be noted that key participants in
that process are the voters themselves. An informed public is one of
the best defenses that can be used against such operations. A good
example of arming citizens with information that is helpful to this
effort is the recent infographic created by the Cyber & Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA) within the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS). This infographic clearly demonstrates how disinformation is
constructed and spread by adversaries, using the clever topic of
whether pineapple belongs on pizza.\1\ Additional engagement with the
public using tools like this is a helpful step toward preparing the
public for these on-going influence operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ CISA Disinformation Infographic--https://www.dhs.gov/sites/
default/files/publications/19_0717_cisa_the-war-on-pineapple-
understanding-foreign-interference-in-5-steps.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As researchers look into what other tactics might be used in future
influence operations, one emerging threat that is gaining attention is
the increased potential for bad actors to use artificial intelligence
to create malicious synthetic media, better known as ``Deepfakes''.
While advances in synthetic media have clear benefits (such as
synthetic voice used to improve accessibility technology), the
increased access to synthetic media technology also leads to the risk
of exploitation.
Stakeholders from academia, civil society, and industry are
currently working together to advance best practices for the ethical
use of AI. One such effort includes a recent ``Deepfakes Detection
Challenge'' Microsoft helped launch together with Facebook and the
Partnership on AI, a technology industry consortium focused on best
practices for AI systems, which invites researchers to build new
technologies that can help detect deepfakes and manipulated media.
The emergence of deepfakes is just one possible avenue our
adversaries will pursue in their efforts to disrupt the 2020 U.S.
elections, and there is more to be done to combat this possible threat
as well as others. Microsoft remains committed to working with other
stakeholders to contribute to solutions as these and other threats
emerge.
[all]