- EXAMINING THE U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
EXAMINING THE U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE INTERIOR, ENERGY, AND ENVIRONMENT
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MARCH 6, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-71
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://oversight.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-940 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
Trey Gowdy, South Carolina, Chairman
John J. Duncan, Jr., Tennessee
Elijah E. Cummings, Maryland,
Darrell E. Issa, California
Ranking Minority Member
Jim Jordan, Ohio
Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Mark Sanford, South Carolina
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Justin Amash, Michigan
Columbia
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Scott DesJarlais, Tennessee
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Blake Farenthold, Texas
Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Mark Meadows, North Carolina
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Ron DeSantis, Florida
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Dennis A. Ross, Florida
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Rod Blum, Iowa
Jimmy Gomez, Maryland
Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Peter Welch, Vermont
Steve Russell, Oklahoma
Matt Cartwright, Pennsylvania
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Will Hurd, Texas
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Gary J. Palmer, Alabama
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland
James Comer, Kentucky
Paul Mitchell, Michigan
Greg Gianforte, Montana
Sheria Clarke, Staff Director
Robert Borden, Deputy Staff Director
William McKenna, General Counsel
Becca Brown, Counsel
Kiley Bidelman, Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
------
Subcommittee on the Interior, Energy and Environment
Blake Farenthold, Texas Chairman
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona, Vice Chair
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Dennis Ross, Florida
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Gary J. Palmer, Alabama
Jimmy Gomez, California
James Comer, Kentucky
(Vacancy)
Greg Gianforte, Montana
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on March 6, 2018....................................
1
WITNESSES
James C. Dalton, SES Director of Civil Works, U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers
Oral Statement...............................................
4
Written Statement............................................
6
Mr. Sean Strawbridge, Chief Executive Officer, Port of Corpus
Christi Authority
Oral Statement...............................................
9
Written Statement............................................
11
Ms. Kirsten Mickelsen, Executive Director, Upper Mississippi
River Basin Association
Oral Statement...............................................
18
Written Statement............................................
21
Mr. Jim Weakley, President, Lake Carriers' Association
Oral Statement...............................................
27
Written Statement............................................
29
APPENDIX
Statement for the Record of The Honorable John R. Moolenaar,
submitted by Chairman Farenthold...............................
56
Letter from the South Florida Water Management District Executive
Director, submitted by Mr. DeSantis............................
58
Questions for the Record for Mr. James C. Dalton, submitted by
Members of the Committee.......................................
63
EXAMINING THE U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS
----------
Tuesday, March 6, 2018
House of Representatives
Subcommittee on the Interior, Energy, and
Environment
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
Washington, DC
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Blake Farenthold
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Farenthold, Ross, Palmer, Comer,
Gianforte, Plaskett, and Raskin.
Also present: Representatives DeSantis and Mitchell.
Mr. Farenthold. The Subcommittee on Interior, Energy, and
Environment will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
We are going to start with my opening statement.
Good morning. Today the Subcommittee on the Interior,
Energy, and Environment will examine the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, which plays a critical role in the development and
execution of engineering projects across the nation. Today we
will discuss ways in which communications and interactions
between the Corps, localities, and the public can be improved,
and project delivery can be streamlined.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is one of the largest
engineering agencies in the world. They manage a wide range of
projects that affect our constituents on a daily basis, from
dredging to flood protection to construction at our military
bases. America relies on the Corps' ability to complete
projects that keep their communities safe and keep vital
transportation lanes open to grow our economy.
For example, in the district I represent in Texas, we have
been working with the Corps of Engineers for three decades on
the Corpus Christi Ship Channel Improvement Project. This
project would allow larger ships that can now transit the wider
and deeper Panama Canal to access the Port of Corpus Christi
Channel from the Gulf of Mexico, lowering transportation costs
and making U.S. energy more competitive. While many dredging
projects facilitate imports from foreign countries, this
project will result in roughly $7 billion in increased exports
from U.S.-produced energy products.
With the recent announcement of the President's budget, we
received the good news that the Trump Administration proposed
$4.8 billion for the Corps' civil works budget, which includes
$13 million in funding for the Corpus Christi Ship Channel
Expansion Project in Fiscal Year 2019. This was not an easy win
for our district. Despite having been authorized by Congress
three times, this project has been continuously delayed by
bureaucracy and what I believe to be the prior Administration's
hostility to oil and gas.
This project is not alone in that manner. The Army Corps of
Engineers currently has a stunningly large backlog for their
projects. Approximately $96 billion worth of projects are being
bogged down in red tape and, quite frankly, Congress' broken
appropriations process.
Recent flooding in the Houston area during Hurricane Harvey
can also be linked to long overdue public works projects that
the Corps is involved with to update, improve, and add
reservoirs and levees.
Corps delays and congressional hurdles to funding are
costing billions of dollars in lost economic benefits and
increased cost, and in areas with flood control issues are
costing lives. In talking to my colleagues here in Congress, it
seems like almost every member of Congress has a Corps issue.
In fact, we have quite a few members who do not serve on this
committee who have asked to participate because they see a
problem in their district. We expect to see some of them today.
We need to ensure that the Army Corps of Engineers is doing
what it can to get these projects done in a timely, cost
effective, and safe manner.
I look forward to hearing ideas and suggestions from our
panel today and am hopeful this committee can help create
solutions to improve the working relationship between the Corps
and our localities, our businesses, and the American people.
With that, I will now recognize the Ranking Member of the
subcommittee, Ms. Plaskett, from the Virgin Islands for her
opening statement.
Ms. Plaskett. Mr. Chairman, thank you for calling this
important hearing regarding the work of the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers.
I would also like to thank the witnesses from the Army
Corps and local organizations who will provide valuable
insights and ideas.
The Army Corps performs a very important role throughout
our country, from issuing permits that balance economic
development and environmental protection to assisting with the
Federal Government's response to natural disasters. This past
fall, the 103 American citizens living in my territory, the
U.S. Virgin Islands, were hit by two devastating hurricanes.
Today, they are still struggling to recover.
Unfortunately, the Army Corps was extremely slow in the
support for this recovery. First, the Army Corps is responsible
for overseeing the removal of 1 million cubic yards of debris
from the islands of St. Thomas and St. John. I have heard
serious concerns from my constituents that the Army Corps acted
much more slowly than the local Department of Public Works,
which completed debris removal on St. Croix.
Second, the Army Corps were staggeringly slow in installing
the blue tarp roofs on houses that were seriously damaged by
hurricanes. According to reporting in the St. Croix Source, a
local paper, weeks after the hurricanes devastated the Virgin
Islands, the Army Corps had only installed 282 of these
temporary roofs.
The U.S. Virgin Islands is, unfortunately, accustomed to
the slow pace of assistance from agencies such as the Army
Corps. For seven years, Coral World Ocean Park on St. Thomas
waited for the Army Corps to conclude the Section 4.404
permitting process in order for the park to obtain the permit
it needed to continue with an expansion project that would
enhance tourism. This delay nearly caused the project to be
abandoned. Such a setback by Coral World Ocean Park would have
been truly devastating given that the park is a major tourist
attraction that employs local Virgin Islanders at a time when
people are working hard to get back on their feet.
But let's be clear, and I really want this to be clear: I
am not questioning the dedication of the hard-working people of
the Army Corps. I believe that you all are doing what you can
to serve the American people. What I am questioning is whether
the Corps is hurting from being significantly understaffed and
underfunded, and I would like to know what we, not as
Democrats, not as Republicans, but as members of Congress, can
do to help.
Today we need to have an important discussion. We need to
hear what the Army Corps will do differently in the future to
address challenges. We especially need to hear from the Army
Corps what it needs from Congress in order to perform its work
better for the American people. Through oversight and
accountability, hearings like these will cause the Army Corps
to serve the American people with the speed and the
effectiveness they deserve.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
Now I am pleased to introduce our witnesses.
We have Mr. James Dalton, who is the Director of Civil
Works for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
We have my constituent, Mr. Sean Strawbridge, the Chief
Executive Officer of the Port of Corpus Christi Authority.
We have Ms. Kirsten Mickelsen, the Executive Director of
the Upper Mississippi River Basin Association; and Mr. Jim
Weakley, the President of the Lake Carriers' Association.
Welcome to you all.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn in
before they testify. Would you all please stand and raise your
right hand?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Farenthold. Let the record reflect all the witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
You may be seated.
In order to allow for discussion, we would like you to
limit your oral testimony to 5 minutes. Your entire written
statement will be made a part of the record.
If you will take a look in front of you, you will see you
have a clock that will count down the time. It has a red light,
a yellow light, and a green light. It works just like the
traffic lights. The green light means go, the yellow light
means hurry up, and the red light means stop.
Please also remember to press the button to turn on your
microphone, and the closer you are to the microphone, the
better we can hear you and the better you will sound.
So we will start with Mr. Dalton. We will give you the
first 5 minutes, sir.
WITNESS STATEMENTS
STATEMENT OF JAMES C. DALTON, SES
Mr. Dalton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member Plaskett and distinguished members of the
committee, on behalf of the Honorable R.D. James, Assistant
Secretary of the Army for Civil Works, and General Semonite,
Chief of Engineers, I would like to thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
Again, I am James Dalton, and I currently serve as the
Director of Civil Works for the Corps. Previously I served as
the Chief of Engineering and Construction for the Corps'
headquarters, and I have also served at the district and
division levels.
Since Congress first authorized our navigation mission in
1824, the Corps has worked hard to develop and implement
solutions to our nation's water resource challenges. We were
able to do this because we have a world-class workforce of
talented and dedicated professionals who are passionate about
what they do. None of our work is done alone, however, but with
the full participation and hard work of many others. We
appreciate the value and depend upon the support of the
Administration, the Congress, and all of our partners to
succeed in our mission.
I am very proud of the work that the Corps accomplishes,
but I am equally aware that the organization can improve, and I
have been and remain committed to instituting changes to the
Corps' delivery process in order to become more efficient and
effective.
The Corps faces a multitude of challenges, some old and
some new. Much of our infrastructure is well beyond its design
and economic life, yet the requirements have never been
greater. The demands on the Federal budget continue to grow as
our infrastructure ages, and we find more and more annual
appropriations going to O&M at the expense of both
investigations and construction.
Today we have $96 billion in construction requirements,
representing the Federal share on a multitude of projects. We
have close to 100 ongoing feasibility studies, which, if
authorized, will simply add to the Federal budget requirement.
Our feasibility studies are formulated with the assumption of
efficient funding, and all of them are multi-year projects, yet
we budget on an annual basis with no assurance that the
adequate funding will be available from year to year. This
certainly creates frustration and uncertainty with our non-
Federal sponsors.
Together we must remove the barriers to develop and improve
our water resources infrastructure. We must encourage and
incentivize alternative project delivery, streamline Federal
procedures for delivering projects, and reduce unnecessary
Federal oversight to facilitate timely delivery of projects. We
recognize the Corps' role in the future may be different than
it has been in the past and that our level of involvement in
project delivery may vary from project to project.
The Corps is fully engaged in support of multiple efforts
aimed at streamlining our regulatory processes. Currently, the
Corps is addressing topics such as establishing discipline and
accountability in the environmental and permitting review for
infrastructure, reviewing the nationwide permitting program to
identify modifications that will increase the efficiency of
decision-making, and working with the EPA in reviewing the 2015
Waters of the U.S. rule. Our goal is simply to simplify the
process for gaining infrastructure permits.
The Corps continues to work on policy and administrative
changes that can improve infrastructure delivery. We are
flattening the organization by delegating decision-making
authorities and other responsibilities from the Washington
level to the division and district levels. We are also
transitioning to a more risk-informed decision-making
organization because we often find our technical experts that
are close to the issues can make the decisions based on their
experience, knowledge, and competence in an area.
We are also looking at how best to capture the total value
of a project and working with most communities that have
massive plans for their areas. We are also reviewing existing
authorities that may leverage non-Federal financing such as
WRDA 1986 Section 203 and Section 204. Section 203 authorizes
the non-Federal to undertake a feasibility study.
The Corps simply wants to be part of the solution, not part
of the problem. We recognize the need to address internal
policies, regulations and processes, and cultural impediments
in order to remain relevant in the future. We want to be value-
added to delivering solutions, whatever role we may have in
that endeavor.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee.
This concludes my testimony, and I look forward to answering
any questions you might have. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Dalton follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, Mr. Dalton. We appreciate your
being here.
Mr. Strawbridge, you are recognized now for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF SEAN STRAWBRIDGE
Mr. Strawbridge. Chairman Farenthold, Ranking Member
Plaskett, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
honor of appearing before the subcommittee and participating in
this distinguished panel on such an important topic.
My name is Sean Strawbridge, and I am testifying before
this committee in my capacity as the Chief Executive Officer
for the Port of Corpus Christi Authority. I also bring to you a
perspective shaped by over 25 years of experience working on
energy, transportation, and trade-related issues.
There are 926 seaports in the United States, accounting for
approximately 26 percent of the national GDP. My port, the Port
of Corpus Christi, is currently the fourth largest port in the
United States in total revenue tons, and the largest energy
export gateway in the nation in market value. It is also a
national strategic military seaport in support of the American
war-fighter overseas.
Recently, the Energy Information Administration accelerated
its forecast for when the United States would become a net
exporter of its energy production from 2026 to 2022. The last
time the United States was a net exporter of its energy
production was 1953, nearly 70 years ago. The Port of Corpus
Christi is at the apex of this energy renaissance as the global
gateway for American energy.
In describing our experience with the United States Army
Corps of Engineers, one has to go back 28 years to 1990 when
Congress mandated the commencement of a feasibility study to
determine costs and impacts of deepening and widening the
Corpus Christi Ship Channel from 45 feet to 54 feet. It has
been a long and at times painstakingly slow and bureaucratic
process to move this project to fruition.
The feasibility study was completed in 2003. The OMB
approval came for the project in 2007. Congress authorized the
project in WRDA in 2007, and again reauthorized in WRDA 2014,
and in WIN 2016 there was clarifying guidance language that was
provided for the Corps to follow.
During this lengthy approval process, the project costs
grew enormously. At the time of the initial authorization, the
Corps' chief report estimated costs of construction at $188
million. In the 10 years it took to finally execute the project
partnership agreement with the Corps, that cost estimate had
ballooned to $327 million.
The Port of Corpus Christi could be handling more energy
exports. Our project alone is forecasted to increase exports by
an estimated $36 billion annually, or one-tenth of the current
trade deficit with China. Estimated transportation cost savings
for our customers are in excess of $300 million. We are
extremely pleased that the President recently recommended the
project in its Fiscal Year 2019 budget, yet we remain
understandably concerned about how long it took to reach this
point and how long it will likely take for the Federal
Government under the current process to execute their mandated
scope and cost share for this urgently needed energy
infrastructure project.
The Port of Corpus Christi's cost share for this project is
$102 million, and we are pleased to report we have our cost
share in the bank ready to go. In fact, we have already funded
the first construction contract completely and transferred $32
million of port money to the Corps last September to commence
construction, yet construction has yet to begin and we continue
to wait for the Corps to secure that first dredging contract.
At the current Federal funding levels and Corps' estimated
timeline for construction, this project could conceivably take
another decade to complete. Yet, we believe we can execute on
the project much faster and much more cost effective. If we
apply the same inflationary formula that increased the project
cost over the past decade, the estimated project cost could
conceivably be over $525 million, or more, and continue to
frustrate America's energy exports.
I want to emphasize that overall the Port of Corpus Christi
enjoys an excellent working relationship with the dedicated and
professional women and men of the Army Corps of Engineers. But
recognizing their, at times, strained capability to execute on
projects and the significantly underfunded project
appropriations there is only one step towards solving some of
these issues.
I believe I can speak for most ports in the nation and
certainly for the Port of Corpus Christi when I share the
belief that interactions with the Corps of Engineers work best
when there is alignment on project importance, greater
transparency and sharing of information between the parties,
and a willingness to collaborate in the spirit of reaching
consensus.
The time for policy and structural changes which expedite
completion of infrastructure projects across the nation is upon
us. We have been and continue to be a good partner to the
Federal Government. Thus, one suggested solution is to grant
more authority for ports to execute on Corps construction
projects. Ports are already in the construction and dredging
business today. We are responsible for dredging from the
Federally-authorized channels to our docks. We can execute on
these projects much faster and with less expense if given that
opportunity. Giving the Corps the ability to delegate its
authority to states and port authorities to manage certain
projects is a model already followed by the United States
Department of Transportation. The Federal Highway
Administration grants similar authority to states to build
surface transportation projects.
In closing, the Port of Corpus Christi takes very seriously
its role serving as a trustworthy steward of the Corpus Christi
Ship Channel and the significant economic impact it provides to
the region, the state, and the nation. And it is in this spirt
of supporting our highest national interests that I have
offered this testimony.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify in front of
this subcommittee.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Strawbridge follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, Mr. Strawbridge.
Ms. Mickelsen, you are recognized now for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF KIRSTEN MICKELSEN
Ms. Mickelsen. Thank you, and thank you, Chair Farenthold,
Ranking Member Plaskett, and members of the subcommittee. I
appreciate today's opportunity to talk with you all about our
experiences working with the Corps and how we might improve our
working relationship with the agency.
My name is Kirsten Mickelsen. I am the Executive Director
of the Upper Mississippi River Basin Association. We represent
the five states that border the Upper Mississippi River from
where the Ohio River confluence comes in, all the way up to the
Twin Cities and the Illinois River.
We were formed in 1981 by the governors of those states to
serve as an advocate, provide a forum for coordination and
information sharing and collaborating with Federal agencies
that have responsibilities for managing the river, such as the
Corps. So our board members are made up of governor-appointed
liaisons, and we represent Departments of Transportation,
Agriculture, DNR, Economic Development, and those with water
quality responsibilities. So, what that allows us to do is to
take a step back and really think about how we manage a large
ecosystem like the Upper Mississippi River in an integrated and
a comprehensive lens and context.
The Upper Mississippi River, I just want to talk about it
for a second for those of you who are unfamiliar with it. It is
a very significant national resource. It generates $584 billion
annually, supporting only nine sectors, and only two counties
bordering the river. It is very important to our states for
transportation, water supply, whether for manufacturing or
drinking water, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation and
economic development. Congress recognized this in 1981 by
declaring the Upper Mississippi River a nationally significant
ecosystem and a nationally significant navigation system, and
has remained committed to this.
The river is highly complex, and it is very challenging to
manage. There are a lot of uses that depend on it, and if you
do one management action it could have implications for others.
So the Corps has really been a strong partner for the states
and our local partners and how we think about best managing
that river. And maybe given that we have three districts
managing the Upper Mississippi River, including St. Paul, Rock
Island, and St. Louis, and we have five states and a lot of
local governments and parties that are interested in the river,
we are almost forced to coordinate and collaborate and discuss.
And we really appreciate the Corps and the staff of the
districts that are committed to managing the river in ways that
support all uses and are supported by collaborative, knowledge-
based solutions, and we look forward to that remaining.
There are a few reasons why we do this well. One is that we
have these communication forums with well-defined decision-
making processes that are inclusive of the states and all of
our stakeholders, and we make a collective effort to share
information that turns into knowledge and that informs
decision-making. Through that flow and deliberative dialogue
and planning, we are able to find solutions that are effective,
efficient, and sustainable to address water resource
challenges.
With specific construction projects, whether they are
structural or non-structural measures that our states and our
non-profit partners want to partner on and to advance
collectively, we find that achieving these shared solutions are
challenged by constraining budgets and policies.
I wanted to just pick today--I could talk all day long
about policies that affect our ways of implementing these
projects, but I wanted to focus in on the Corps' cost-share
agreement, project partnership agreements, and the way that
they are structured. I am sure several of you in the room are
maybe stakeholders that have alluded to these challenges, but
they are really structured in a way that protects the Federal
Government and requires a non-Federal sponsor, whether that is
the state or a non-profit or a port authority, potentially, to
assume all liability and to assume O&M in perpetuity.
Our state attorneys general are unable to execute these
agreements, constitutions don't allow for it, or tort law, and
we would like to see that addressed. In the testimony I offer
language that we are hoping to seek through WRDA. But
basically, it is a directive that I think the Corps needs to
realign these agreements.
What our states are asking for is not to step away from
liability but to examine any legal challenges in context. So
that is what this language hopes to do. Again, we hope to seek
it in WRDA. There is an explanation as to why the language as
it currently is in the cost-share agreements conflicts with our
state constitutions and tort law, and I hope you will take a
look at that.
Also, to pick on the piece of O&M, these projects are
designed to be 50 years. The Corps used to have a 50-year term
limit in the agreement and took that away. So now the states
and non-profits are, in perpetuity, forever, assigned to take
care of the O&M as prescribed by the Corps.
And one other reason that I just want to talk about this
being problematic is that the Corps has the ultimate decision
for planning, for materials that are used, for the construction
and design. They are the only point of contact with the
constructor, but yet you are asking the non-Federal sponsor to
assume all liability, regardless of context and only for fault
and negligence, which is hard to prove.
So again, we are hoping to get that addressed in WRDA. We
think that will allow us to partner. We think as the Federal
Government continues to want to involve non-Federal sponsors on
these cost-share projects, and we find a way to address this so
that the cost-share agreements reflect the Corps' attitude to
really partner on addressing the water resource issues.
One other thing I just wanted to mention while I was here
is that our non-profit partners in WRDA 2007 classified them as
a non-Federal cost-share sponsor, and we think that that
provides a lot of great opportunities, particularly for
ecosystem restoration projects. But right now, the Corps does
not accept gifts that were donated to the non-Federal sponsor,
like rock or something like that, that maybe a private entity
would want to donate to the Corps, because they don't account
for the value of that good. They only account for the cost that
it was for that agency. We think that would also have maybe
implications to port authorities or maybe to the states that
receive donated goods. So we hope that that also is changed so
that it enables our non-Federal partners to stand forward and
get the credit that they deserve for bringing resources to the
table.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Mickelsen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
Mr. Weakley?
STATEMENT OF JIM WEAKLEY
Mr. Weakley. Good morning. I represent 13 American
companies operating 45 vessels. We employ 1,600 people and move
100 million tons of cargo, generating 103,000 jobs, with an
economic impact of $20 billion. I will describe the Great Lakes
Navigation System and focus my testimony on how a gap in Corps
policy, combined with flawed assumptions and illogical
conclusions, risks 11 million jobs.
The Great Lakes Navigation System, including the Soo Locks
in Michigan, is a transportation network for iron ore and other
commodities that enable the manufacturing of steel,
automobiles, appliances, ships, and other products in the U.S.
We depend on the Army Corps to maintain this marine highway.
Without the locks connecting Lake Superior to the lower locks,
we could not do our job.
Our decade-plus quest for a valid benefit-to-cost ratio for
a replacement Soo Lock project has been stymied by the Corps'
resistance to common sense.
The cargo, if there was a lock outage, the Corps assumed
could move by rail. We immediately pointed out that the rail
connections don't exist and that the Great Lakes steel mills
can't receive ore by rail. A Department of Homeland Security
study confirmed this. DHS concluded that a six-month outage of
a larger lock would cause 11 million Americans to be
unemployed, more than 800,000 unemployed in each of Michigan,
Texas, and Ohio. A recession would result.
It took congressional intervention to force the Corps to
re-look at their assumptions. The Corps admitted to us that the
lack of a rail alternative is new to them, and that their
policies don't say how a BCR should account for this.
We engaged with the Corps at the beginning and at every
step of this $2 million, more than 2-year economic
reevaluation. We included rail, mining, steel, and vessel
experts, and the Corps' report should be drafted soon. Within
the past six weeks, however, we learned of two new fatal flaws
that will reduce the BCR to less than half of what it should
be.
According to the Corps economists, a rail transportation
alternative at the lock would cost between $4 and $10 billion,
with the Corps' contractor estimate of $6.5 billion. That cost
should be compared to the cost of building a new lock, but that
is not what the Corps is doing. They are using an unsuitable
averaging model to set the cost of the rail alternative at $2
billion. Averaging makes sense when you can rent capacity from
an existing railroad, but not when you have to build rail
infrastructure. That is like building a 900-foot lock instead
of a 1,200-foot lock because the average size of the vessel is
smaller than the maximum size of the vessel. If you only paid
30 percent of the cost of building the railroad capacity in
need, it doesn't mean that you get to use the needed capacity
30 percent of the time; it means that you never get to use that
capacity because 30 percent is not enough to complete the rail
connection.
The Corps is also unnecessarily adding part of the cost of
the rail connection to the cost of building the new lock in the
BCR calculation.
Despite our efforts to engage the Corps, we fear that $2
million of taxpayer funding will again result in a
significantly flawed BCR that will under-count the project's
transportation savings. This risks failure of Great Lakes iron
ore transportation and a substantial portion of our
manufacturing economy. Eleven million jobs are at risk, not
because the Corps has to but because they choose to.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Weakley follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
I note the presence of my colleague, the gentleman from
Florida, Mr. DeSantis, and at this point I would like to ask
unanimous consent that he be allowed to participate fully in
this hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
We also have a statement for the record from Mr. Moolenaar.
We will include that in the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Farenthold. I usually wait until the end to ask my
questions, but I am going to go ahead and take the Chairman's
prerogative and go first, because this is an issue that I have
been working on since Day 1 here in Congress. I am going to
start with Mr. Strawbridge.
You have been working 25 years in transportation logistics
and trade, and in your testimony you talk about lack of
transparency, lack of communication, lack of funding as some of
the challenges. Is that within individual Corps districts, or
is it more of the Corps as a whole? Can you talk a little bit
more about the effects of that?
Mr. Strawbridge. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I guess the short
answer is it depends. In our particular case, depending upon
what the issue is, we will have disagreements between our Corps
district on interpretations, disagreements with their own
division, and perhaps disagreements with headquarters.
We had a recent disagreement at the division level. It took
one email that I wrote to senior counsel at headquarters to
have it resolved. But the point is, why does the sponsor, why
does the partner have to navigate all the various silos within
the Corps to get an answer?
I think that things can improve. I think we have seen some
improvement, particularly in a post-Harvey environment. It is
disappointing to have to see a major catastrophic event kind of
bring us all together. In a post-Harvey environment, we have
seen some improvement. But frankly, we are a little battle
weary. It should not take 28 years for us to get a dredging
project to the point where it is now. So there is certainly
room for improvement.
Mr. Farenthold. So you got a delay widening and deepening
and dredging project. The Port of Brownsville has some shoaling
issues that were put out for bid and got zero bids back. Have
we reached the capacity where we can't do some of these
projects, Mr. Dalton? Is there a problem with capacity and
getting these done?
Mr. Dalton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't think we have
reached a problem with capacity here that we can't get things
done. A lot of it is based on timing, just when we actually
solicit for these projects. We have a concern also about some
of the prices that we are getting as compared to our government
reasonable prices. But when we meet with industry, we don't get
the impression that they are tapped out.
Mr. Farenthold. Okay.
Mr. Dalton. So I think we have the capacity.
Mr. Farenthold. Mr. Strawbridge, you talked a little bit
about the non-Federal sponsors taking more control of the
projects. Ms. Mickelsen talked about the Corps almost entirely
being in charge, the liability potentially being with the non-
Federal sponsor.
Mr. Strawbridge, could you tell us a little bit about what
you think, how we could fix that or some of the concerns
associated with that and what some of the legal issues are?
Mr. Strawbridge. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman. I can't agree more
with Ms. Mickelsen and her position that the non-Federal
sponsor is put in a--I think when we talk about these project
partnership agreements, the term ``partnership'' is one that we
have to really question, because a lot of the liability and
responsibility is put on the non-Federal sponsor, including
funding.
In our particular case, we do dredging. We dredge between
the Federal channel and the docks. We believe that we can
execute on those projects faster and likely cheaper than the
Army Corps of Engineers, and so we like to advocate that we
give an opportunity for those construction projects to be able
to execute on those projects without having a lengthy Section
404, 408, or Section 10 permitting process, just essentially
have the Corps delegate its 204 authority to its non-Federal
sponsor to be able to execute on those projects.
Mr. Farenthold. Mr. Dalton, can we do that under current
law, or do we need to do something to--it seems like if you can
get somebody else to take on some of the workload and you just
supervise, that sounds like a pretty good idea.
Mr. Dalton. Yes, Mr. Chairman. So, a couple of responses to
that.
One, I agree with Mr. Strawbridge that in some cases, maybe
in many cases, the non-Federal entity might be able to get a
project done faster and at lower cost, primarily because, in
the cases that we have observed, they have gotten funding up
front. So that means that contractors can commit to a schedule.
They can control and manage their risk.
So we are looking at different authorities that we
currently already have that allow us to do this. As I mentioned
in my oral statement, WRDA 1986 has the Section 203 authority
that allows a non-Federal to conduct a feasibility study, and
Section 204 allows a non-Federal to actually construct a
project. So we are looking at--in fact, we are exercising those
authorities. I don't think in the past we have used those
authorities as much as we perhaps could have.
The second part of the comment from him and Ms. Mickelsen
refers to actually something written in law that says that the
Federal Government is to identify the non-Federal sponsors
responsible for O&M for that project, and it went from 50 years
to perpetuity because our projects don't stop at 50 years. They
are still ongoing. And also there are liability requirements in
the WRDA.
I apologize for not having that in front of me to tell you
exactly which one that is. I can certainly provide that to you
as a matter of record. But that is a law that we are abiding
by, in response to that.
Mr. Farenthold. We do want to get the job done and, of
course, we frequently do the WRDA bills, so the things that you
need to be fixed and feel like would be helpful is something
that we need to know about up here.
I see my time has expired. I will now recognize Ms.
Plaskett for 5 minutes--5-and-a-half, since I went over.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you.
I have heard the concerns that you all have raised, as well
as local concerns that are in the Virgin Islands as well,
regarding different issues, whether it is stretching the
permitting process, et cetera.
One of the ones that stood out and is most recent in the
Virgin Islands has been the debris removal that was put to the
Army Corps of Engineers. Major General Ed Jackson, in written
testimony before the House Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure, stated as of October 31st, 2017--this is after
the hurricane of September 6th--only 141 cubic yards of the
estimated 1 million cubic yards of debris had been removed.
Mr. Dalton, can you give some light as to this failure to
remove almost 90 percent of the debris more than a month,
almost two months after the hurricane, and why the Army Corps
was slow in performing this function?
Mr. Dalton. So, I am not real sure that I can provide you
all the details of what happened in the past. I know that the
status as of today is I think 94 percent or so of that debris
has been removed, collected I should say, and we are in the
process of looking for disposal methods to ensure we have those
on the contract. The information I have before me says that 94
percent of the 870,000 cubic yards of debris have been
collected. We anticipate a WRDDA renew vegetative
transportation disposal contract in April to include disposal
options and criteria.
Ms. Plaskett. But do you understand, when you say in the
past, you make it sound like it was two years ago when it was
actually just a couple of months ago. But I wanted to know--I
have heard the concern and I wanted to know, do you have any
reasoning why it was slower in St. Thomas and St. John, where
the Army Corps was responsible for it, as compared with the
island of St. Croix, where the local government was
responsible?
Mr. Dalton. I would have to look into that and get back
with you. I don't know at this point.
Ms. Plaskett. You are unaware of why that is?
A second one would be during the same hurricane recovery,
when the Army Corps was put in charge of the installation of
your blue roof program which installs the temporary tarps over
homes of hurricane victims. At the time, almost well over a
month that the hurricane had struck, we had about 14,000 homes
that were affected. And after almost two months, only 282 of
the temporary roofs had been installed, recognizing that this
was still the rainy season, and so individuals' homes were
still being rained on during this time.
Can you explain what were the issues that the Army Corps
had in the slowness of the installation of those?
Mr. Dalton. One of the reasons, I believe, that we couldn't
move as fast as we had planned to do is that the blue roof
design that we had had to be modified because some of the
houses didn't really have enough structure left to actually
attach the roof.
Ms. Plaskett. Got it. So you were used to installing blue
roofs on homes that had portions of the roof removed, as
opposed to, in the Virgin Islands after a category 5, the
entire roof structure was gone.
Mr. Dalton. That's correct, Congresswoman.
Ms. Plaskett. And then when you made this assessment that
this was the problem, how was that information then sent back
to the Army Corps in real time, and how were they able to make
modifications and changes? Is there a process for that, a
formal process for that?
Mr. Dalton. Well, the formal process in times of disasters
and emergency recovery are things that we probably do a lot
more direct than we would following a normal process. The
normal process for making changes like that would actually
include a design modification that has to be reviewed and
approved, et cetera. So there is a lot more bureaucracy there
than we would normally do in an emergency situation.
There, the authority was with the folks that were on the
ground, and the changes were made immediate.
Ms. Plaskett. So you used your creative engineering
ingenuity to just make the changes in real time.
Mr. Dalton. Yes, Congresswoman. What I would say is that we
are trying to get to a point where we allow professional
judgment and engineering judgment to govern.
Ms. Plaskett. And does Congress give you the wherewithal in
the law to do that?
Mr. Dalton. We do, yes.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay, great. Thank you.
I am also concerned--and I recognize the work, and I saw
how much the Army Corps was right in the thick of things and
really being supportive, even in terms of what I mentioned
earlier, with Coral World and the length of processing of those
permits.
Ms. Mickelsen, in your written testimony you voiced concern
about the Corps' ability to manage your area, the Upper
Mississippi. Do you think that understaffing and underfunding
of the Corps is at the root of your concerns?
Ms. Mickelsen. I certainly think it is an underfunding
issue. It is also, I think, an issue of getting priorities in
the budget and getting past cost/benefit as the criteria as
currently assumed or used in OMB and the Corps, and how that
differentiates.
For channel maintenance and our lock infrastructure, we
have over $1 billion in backlog, and we are not able to take
care of it. Also for channel maintenance, the Corps is in a
very reactive position because of funding. They have not been
able to take care of sediment as it is filling in the river and
keep the 9-foot navigation channel open and safe and reliable.
What that does to our states is, when you get a flood to
drought or a drought to flood or whatever and sediment drops
quickly, the Corps has been behind, and they classify that as
an emergency situation.
Ms. Plaskett. Ms. Mickelsen, you have to quickly--I am well
past my time.
Ms. Mickelsen. Oh, I am sorry. Anyway, they are in an
emergency situation and the states are in-between closing the
navigation channel for business or streamlining permitting and
not doing their legal obligations to do that.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you. And that shouldn't be counted
against me. Sorry.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Farenthold. All right. We will recognize now the
gentleman from Kentucky for 5 minutes.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My first question is for Mr. Dalton. As you know, most of
our nation's locks and dams are now over 50 years old.
Unsurprisingly, we are experiencing breakdowns across the
Inland Waterway System that caused costly and unnecessary wait
times for barges on these rivers. A prime example of this are
the recent failures at locks and dams 52 and 53 on the Ohio
River, which have caused several shutdowns on this busy
commercial navigation route over the past year.
Thankfully, this outdated infrastructure will soon be
replaced by the Olmsted Lock and Dam which is scheduled to open
later this year after nearly 30 years of delays. My question to
you is, what lessons has the Corps learned from the Olmsted
project, and how can we improve the process for pending and
future projects?
Mr. Dalton. Thank you, Congressman. I think our biggest
lesson learned from Olmsted is that funding is a major
component of that, because if we had funded that project to
full funding, then we would be able to assign contracts, award
contractors, hold contractors to a schedule, hold ourselves to
a schedule rather than piecemeal the project as we did with
Olmsted.
Also, a pretty important lesson learned was the way we
actually constructed Olmsted, and using the modeling that we
did before to decide to construct is probably something we
would take a look at for future projects.
Mr. Comer. Okay. Thank you.
And for the rest of the witnesses, I would like to hear
your thoughts about the importance of community involvement and
input with regard to Corps-managed projects. Do you have any
specific recommendations on how to improve communication and
interaction between different stakeholders and the Corps?
Anyone?
Ms. Mickelsen. Well, yes. I will give a prime example. In
Pool 4 at the navigation channel, the Corps has a dredge
material plan, and I think there are some conflicts with
lawyers and how to present plans. Basically, just one example
of an instance, rather than having a community approach around
dredge material disposal and what to do with that, there was a
proposal that the Corps wanted to do to do eminent domain to a
third-generation farmer, and basically the lawyer said that the
Corps could not consult with or notify that public landowner in
advance. So they dropped that plan on their doorstep literally,
as well as their neighbors, and that created an uproar.
But what it did show also is that our local communities and
our farmers and all those throughout the whole region are
removed from the river and why it is managed and how it is
managed, and we need to have these continual conversations so
we know why we need to invest and what kind of measures the
Federal Government needs to do to take care of our navigation
channel.
Mr. Comer. Great.
Anyone else?
Mr. Strawbridge. Congressman, we at the Port of Corpus
Christi have to run interference between the community and the
Corps often, and what happens is we get phone calls where
applications for Corps permits or adjustments will sit fallow
for months or even years, and without somebody else to turn to,
they will turn to the Port Authority to assist them with that,
and we are happy to do that. Again, we do value the
relationship that we have with the Corps at the district, the
division, and HQ. But certainly there is room for improvement
with the user-friendliness of the Corps with the community.
Mr. Comer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Weakley. Congressman, in my written testimony I talk
about a success story when we dealt with our dredging crisis.
It took us 10 years, and we spent a lot of time communicating
at the district, the division, and the headquarters level, but
we have turned the page on that.
In the Soo Lock project, we invoked the same process to try
and engage frequently at multiple levels, and we met
disappointing results in the same process.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from Alabama for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Listening to Mr. Strawbridge's testimony about the
frustration over the length of time to get action on dredging
the Corpus Christi Channel brings up a number of issues that
other members, not necessarily this committee, have brought up
about the lack of action from the Corps.
You said in your testimony, Mr. Dalton, that there are more
than 100 feasibility studies underway. Is that correct?
Mr. Dalton. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Palmer. How many of those are over five years old?
Mr. Dalton. I would have to look and see. The majority of
those are probably over five years old, without a doubt,
because if ----
Mr. Palmer. I would like for you to give us a list of
feasibility studies and how long they have been underway, if
you could do that in writing. I would also like to know what
are you spending on those studies.
Mr. Dalton. If I could, Mr. Congressman, those studies, we
characterize those as legacy, a lot of those as legacy studies.
AS you probably know, a few years ago we revised our process to
complete feasibility studies within three years and $3 million,
as opposed to longer. So most of those 100 feasibility studies
were started long before the 3/3/3 requirement that is now law,
but we will certainly provide you with a list of those. As to
how much we are spending on those, I will have to look at that
and provide it. Today's standard is $3 million for a
feasibility study.
Mr. Palmer. Well, my problem with this is that there are
various reports indicating that taxpayers would save anywhere
from $3 to $8 for every $1 invested in flood mitigation, for
example, and similar types of investments. If you are just
going to study the projects or only going to build small parts
of it, you are really not helping out there. There is no
benefit to the taxpayers.
I will give you an example. There are several examples
here, but I am going to give you a few examples of where the
Corps spent tens of millions of dollars and has taken decades
without actually building anything.
The Corps spent over $80 million on the Morganza Project in
Southwest New Orleans and has not yet put a shovel in the
ground.
The West Shore Project was in study phase for 42 years--I
want to emphasize that, Mr. Chairman--42 years, before the
Corps finally issued a project recommendation that authorized
construction for 2016. I don't know what they have done as of
now.
The impact of the August 2016 flood in Baton Rouge, which
this committee addressed, could have been significantly reduced
if the Comite Diversion had been built. That is the canal
between that river and a deeper, wider channel. That had been
proposed for 30 years, and it cost the taxpayers billions of
dollars, and the people who were affected by that flood are
never going to get over it.
These are just a few examples. The reality is that our
nation has approximately 215 disasters that have cost the
taxpayers over a billion dollars, and that is just since 1980.
When you include the 2017 hurricanes, it will cost our nation
nearly $1.5 trillion to pick up the pieces and try to respond
to these, where a lot of the problems could have been avoided,
could have been mitigated if the Corps would quit studying and
start working. How do you respond to that?
Mr. Dalton. So, Mr. Congressman, that goes really to the
heart of some of the things that we are trying to change within
the organization right now.
First of all, what we did in the past with those
approximately I will say 100 studies, some of those that you
are referring to, we can't go back and recover that. What we
are trying to do is make sure in the future that we don't do
the same thing and spend that kind of money on studies.
So what we are doing is we are trying to become a more
risk--make decisions more based on risk and uncertainty rather
than try to model everything until we get to a 99 percent
solution, and we believe that that will certainly help us to
get studies done faster and for lower cost.
Mr. Palmer. Let me go back to Mr. Strawbridge and the Port
of Corpus Christi. The United States is in a position to
dominate the world in energy. It is absolutely critical that
our ports be able to handle the shipping that is going to be
necessary to do that. It is absolutely critical for our
economy.
So my suggestion is, for the good of the country and to
conclude my part of this hearing, is that the Corps implement
the three-year strategy and that we begin immediately to work.
I really think it is a good idea to delegate a lot of these
projects down to the state and local level. I think that we
will see projects implemented much more expeditiously, and I
think it will save us a boatload of money, not to use that
metaphor lightly.
I thank the Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
We will now go to the gentleman from Montana, Mr.
Gianforte.
Mr. Gianforte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Dalton, thank you for being here today. I
appreciate the hard work that the Corps does across the country
managing a large, diverse set of projects, and in some cases,
like the Houston Shipping Channel, you have done your job to
get ready for the project, and Congress has not done our job in
giving you the resources. In other cases you have done your job
and Congress has given you the money, and other problems come
up.
This is the case with the Lower Yellowstone Intake Project
in my home state of Montana. The Lower Yellowstone Intake
Project has provided a dependable supply of irrigation water to
58,000 acres and over 400 family farms in Montana and North
Dakota for over 100 years. To protect the endangered palette
sturgeon, Congress funded a bypass channel and improvement to
let the fish circumvent the intake dam and access 165 miles of
additional river.
A Federal District Court has granted an injunction against
the project, saying it does not do enough for the sturgeon.
Certainly, doing nothing does nothing for the fish. I
appreciate the Corps' willingness to continue to pursue the
project and want to commend your staff in the Omaha district
for their level of engagement.
That is what this hearing is about, improving
communications. I know that several towns in Montana are also
working with the Corps to update their levee systems,
particularly the towns of Glasgow and Mile City, and navigating
the confusing maze of Federal requirements and funding
opportunities, and they need timely feedback from the Corps.
What can we do to improve the process to ensure folks that
are trying to get these permits and projects moved along get
the necessary feedback they need in a timely way from the
Corps?
Mr. Dalton. Thank you, Mr. Congressman. So, we are
committed to trying to communicate better with our public so
that, in fact, they do have information faster than what we
have done in the past. We are looking at different ways to
communicate, perhaps using more social media just for general
public information. But certainly for those that are working on
projects that need our input, we are glad to step up and help
them as much as possible.
I commend Mr. Strawbridge. He said that he didn't really
think it was necessary to go straight to the headquarters to
get a solution. But oftentimes what happens, until we are able
to change the culture from what we have, we don't know that
problems exist. We don't know that people are not getting
feedback that they need until they tell us.
So we would prefer to find out sooner rather than later.
Certainly we would say to you and your constituencies that if
there is a problem with lack of feedback, we would like to know
about that.
Mr. Gianforte. Okay, good. And just to follow on a question
that the Chairman asked about this Section 203 and 204
delegation authority that you have to allow you to use private-
sector firms to do either feasibility or construction, you
mentioned that maybe you haven't used it quite as much as you
could have.
When can you use it? Is it applicable--is it your
understanding that Congress has given you the authority to use
Section 203 and 204 for all potential Corps projects?
Mr. Dalton. Yes, sir. I am not aware of any restrictions
that would say we cannot use it on certain types of projects.
It is just one of the things that we are looking at now, trying
to use non-Federal entities to carry out some of the work that
the Chairman mentioned that could take place that we started
looking at this.
So we have a handful of 203 studies that the non-Federals
have taken on, as well as some 204s.
Mr. Gianforte. And we have talked about the backlog of
feasibility projects that have kind of gone on for decades.
What criteria should the Corps be using to determine when to
use private-sector firms? Because by your own testimony, you
said that using this Section 203 and 204 would lower the cost
for taxpayers and allow us to get projects done faster. That
seems like something we all should be working towards. When
should you be using 203 and 204?
Mr. Dalton. What we wait for is a non-Federal to actually
request or say that they have an interest in taking on a
project like that. So the complexity associated with it is
still the environmental requirements, because a 203 is provided
to our Assistant Secretary for Civil Works, and if a decision
is made to move forward with that project, now it becomes a
Federal action.
Mr. Gianforte. So I understand that if there is a private-
sector entity willing to take on that delegation from the
Corps, you are game.
Mr. Dalton. For a feasibility study and construction.
Mr. Gianforte. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
We will now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Ross.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Chairman; and I thank the witnesses
for being here and appreciate your testimony and presentations
today.
I happen to be one of the seven House members who represent
the Tampa Bay area. Mr. Dalton, I want to say thank you to you
and the Corps for, over the past few months, helping to secure
new start funding for the Port of Tampa to embark on the Big
Bend Project. I hope that when this is completed expeditiously,
that it will be an example of a good example of a partnership.
The Tampa Bay Port Authority has expanded tremendously, and
in addition to cruise ports, cargo ports are doing containers,
we have expanded with complementary ancillary rail for
distribution of cargo. It is coming along. However, this has
been going on for more than 15 years.
I guess my first question to you, Mr. Dalton, is what can
we do to advance the President's goal of finding ways to get
project to construction faster? I know this is kind of
piggybacking on Mr. Gianforte's question earlier.
Mr. Dalton. There may be a number of things that we could
do to move those projects along faster. The first is that we
have to make sure that we have a completed design for those. So
we are looking at the incentives. The Administration has
introduced incentives and grants as perhaps ways that we could
look to move projects along faster. We don't know what the
fruits of that will be yet because it is something not yet
tested with us, but we are looking at different means of
financing projects because we think that is part of the key to
move projects along faster than they have been.
Mr. Ross. And, Mr. Strawbridge, how would you feel about
that? Do you have any suggestions in addition to that to move
these construction projects faster?
Mr. Strawbridge. Well, one of the challenges that we face,
Congressman, is when we advocate for us to execute on the work,
the Corps says that is fine, but then we are responsible for
the entire cost of the project. We don't think that is fair.
What we are trying to do is help out the Corps in our district
in the post-Harvey recovery environment. The Corps district,
appropriately so, is focused on flood risk mitigation and flood
control projects. Those are life-saving projects. We are saying
let us focus on those projects that create more livelihoods,
like the deepening and widening of the Corpus Christi Ship
Channel, without us having to bear the entire cost of the
project.
Mr. Ross. There appears to be a lot of time spent in the
planning and development stage, too much time. I guess my
question is, is there a duplication of engineering and
studying, and can that be consolidated in an effort to try to
save time?
Mr. Strawbridge. I believe it can be, sir, absolutely, I
think through a separation or a division, a divide and conquer
approach. Let the Corps be a regulatory and oversight
permitting agency. Let us do the design, let us do the ----
Mr. Ross. I mean, there are protocols. There are standards
in the industry, and I think what is important is that
technology has advanced to such a degree that we ought to be
able to do these preliminary development and engineering
studies a lot quicker and be accepted from one agency to the
next.
Would anybody else like to comment on that?
Ms. Mickelsen. We found that the Army Corps in the
districts on the Upper Mississippi have been doing that now
with ecosystem restoration projects, thinking the way you are
doing, can we move parts of the design forward while we are on
this planning part that we have kind of figured out, and it is
going really well when they are doing that. They don't always
do that, but if they could apply that metric to other projects,
I am sure that would go well.
Mr. Ross. I appreciate that.
Back to you, Mr. Dalton. I also represent an area, or have
in the past, of the phosphate industry. The last vestige of
this industry is just right south of my district. Quite
frankly, we are in a competing global market with this, and
phosphate feeds America. I mean, it feeds the world with
fertilizer. There is an issue about a CWA 404 permit, that it
takes six to eight years for the Corps to issue it, but yet the
state can do the same thing in three to four years. Is there
any explanation for that, and is that something that could be
resolved or expedited by consolidation of efforts in studies?
Mr. Dalton. Congressman, I am not familiar with that
particular issue and that permit. I will certainly go back and
try to find out ----
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
Mr. Dalton.--what is taking so long.
One thing I would say here is that we would like to
implement things like, for instance, design build, and you can
add studies into those, as Ms. Mickelsen said. But the way we
currently authorize projects, they are authorized in different
phases. When we were down in New Orleans with the post-Katrina
work, we issued the largest design build contract that Civil
Works had ever issued. That was because we had funding up
front, which means that you could actually start that project
while you are actually designing it, or maybe in some cases
finishing the study associated with it. You can't do that the
way we are currently authorized for our projects.
Mr. Ross. So it sounds like we can consolidate the design
and engineering, but it all comes down to a function of funding
to get it started.
Mr. Dalton. In our case, it is also the authorizations.
Mr. Ross. Right.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
I notice the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Mitchell, has
arrived. He is a full committee member but not a subcommittee
member. Therefore, I would like to ask unanimous consent that
he be allowed to participate in this hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize the other gentleman from Florida, Mr.
DeSantis, for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In Florida we have a really significant problem with Lake
Okeechobee. There is a dike surrounding the lake that is at
risk for failing, which obviously impacts the people who are
close to there; but then also the fact that the Army Corps has
sent billions of gallons of polluted water to both coasts of
Florida. That has degraded the local environment and harmed the
local economies. In fact, in 2016, there was a major algae
bloom. It shut down some of the beaches for a time, really
knee-capped the fishing industry and tourism.
So we really want to solve that problem in Florida, and we
have something now called the EAA Reservoir Project, and this
is something that the officials in Florida have been working
with the Army Corps on now for several years. In July of 2016,
we had the Assistant Secretary of the Army say that the Corps
was ready to start the project as soon as the non-Federal local
sponsor was ready. So in the following legislative session, the
Florida legislature passed legislation directing the local
sponsor to expedite the project, setting aside $800 million for
the state share of the cost, signed into law May of 2017, and
the Corps obviously was aware of the state legislation because
it was invited to participate in a committee hearing. It
actually provided state legislators with information during
that hearing.
So non-Federal local sponsor notified the Corps of its
desire to move forward with the project on June 26, 2017. At
the Corps' request, the non-Federal local sponsor utilized the
203 process, which was authorized in WRDA from 2014, and it
allows the non-Federal local sponsor to prepare a feasibility
study on its own and obtain technical assistance from the
Corps. They pay for it.
The state of Florida tried to do that, but for months the
Corps dragged its feet and would not identify the areas for
which it would provide technical assistance. It was only within
the past few weeks that the Corps has finally agreed to a scope
of work, but the large majority of the project planning was
done without the requested assistance from the Corps.
What I would like to do is I have a letter from the South
Florida Water Management District Executive Director, Ernie
Marks. It has the timeline of the correspondence with the
Corps. Without objection, I would like to enter this into the
record.
Mr. Farenthold. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. DeSantis. So my question for you, Mr. Dalton, is given
the significance of this project to Florida, are you satisfied
that the Corps has acted with the deliberate speed necessary so
that we can forestall another season with these harmful
discharges as soon as possible?
Mr. Dalton. So, Mr. Congressman, Section 203 was not
something, as I mentioned before, that we had utilized a lot in
the past. So the guidance that we created was almost done at
the same time the South Florida Water Management District
submitted the request to do the 203. Our initial response back,
I think, had more things identified that we could not do as
opposed to what we could do. We have since looked at that and
tried to turn that around. So it has been a learning process
for us. I think we are on a good path now to implement Section
203, and we certainly are sensitive to the releases from the
Herbert Hoover dike going out to the estuaries as not something
certainly desired by anyone.
Mr. DeSantis. So you think that the Corps now is in a
position with 203 that you will be able to move more quickly in
dealing with these projects?
Mr. Dalton. I absolutely do. Yes, sir.
Mr. DeSantis. Okay. Now, is the Corps prepared to act
quickly upon receipt of the report on the EAA Reservoir from
the South Florida Water Management District and get it to
Congress within the 2018 WRDA cycle? We think it is very
important that that be teed up for WRDA this year. If it is, I
think that will be very beneficial to what we are fighting for
down in Florida.
Mr. Dalton. With that, I would have to look at the schedule
and get back with you. The reason I say that is because the
project goes from the non-Federal over to our ASA to make a
decision before it gets to Congress. I haven't looked at that
schedule yet to say whether it meets the WRDA 2018 schedule,
but I certainly will do that.
Mr. DeSantis. Well, I would request that you do that. And I
would also request that if it doesn't, that we take some steps
to get that done, because if we can get it in 2018 WRDA, I
think we are going to be in a much better position to be able
to solve this problem, which I know you guys are interested in
solving because you are sick of hearing us talk about it, and I
know people down in Florida want to solve it. So if you can
look at it, figure out where we are, and if we are not where we
need to be, let's get it to where we need to be so we can get
it in this cycle. I think that would be very, very important
for Florida, and I thank you for your consideration.
I yield back.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Michigan for 5
minutes.
Mr. Mitchell. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to thank the committee members for their acceptance
of my participation here today.
The reason I came for this hearing is a significant issue
in Michigan in my area and in this country is the Soo Locks.
The reality is that the extent of the cargo that goes through
the Soo Locks, the economic impact on this country is huge. At
this point in time, 90 percent of the tonnage that transits the
Soo Lock goes to the Poe Lock. I would have to look here. The
Poe Lock was opened in 1969.
In 1986, Congress authorized the building of a new, an
additional 1,200-foot lock for redundancy and some resiliency
to avoid the issues that are created should the Poe Lock have
an issue. Thus far, surprisingly, or I guess disappointingly,
nothing has happened on that.
Mr. Weakley, you expressed some concerns in your testimony
about the economic analysis being done by the Army Corps. Could
you highlight for me just the key components of that briefly so
we can continue on with questions, sir?
Mr. Weakley. Yes, sir. Briefly, I will break it down into
two areas. One is what I call comparison of the construction
costs, and the other is the lock inflation.
So what the Corps is doing in their analysis is they are
comparing the full lock costs to one-third of the rail
construction costs. What they should do is compare the full
cost of constructing a lock with the full cost of constructing
a rail alternative.
Mr. Mitchell. Well, my understanding is a rail alternative
is somewhere between $6 and $10 billion, depending on how much
we have to project in terms of being carried on a rail line,
because there isn't adequate rail coverage in that area. Is
that correct?
Mr. Weakley. Yes, sir. We have heard an estimate range from
$4 to $10 billion from the Corps' economist, but the Corps has
a contractor that estimated the cost at $6.5 billion for the
rail alternative.
Mr. Mitchell. Let me stop you there real quick.
Mr. Dalton, could you explain this to me? I mean, my
background is economics and public policy. Why is it that the
Army Corps would say we are only going to consider a third of
what the acknowledged numbers are as we compare the economic
viability of building another lock? Could you explain that to
me?
Mr. Dalton. Probably, sir, not to your satisfaction,
because it is one of those areas, quite honestly, talking with
the economist, that I have a similar question to try and
understand. We recognize to replace the lock it is somewhere
between $4 and $10 billion. And the $2 billion that is
currently being used, my understanding of that is looking to
see if, in fact, you had to use transportation to move, in the
absence of the lock, that part of this cost would be accepted
by or handled by what you have in reserve at storage yards,
spare capacity I would say.
Mr. Mitchell. Let me stop you, Mr. Dalton. Have you ever
been to the Soo Locks?
Mr. Dalton. I have. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mitchell. Have you looked to see if any storage
capacity is there? I am from Michigan, as you know, and I am
trying to figure out how they think we are going to stack up--
let me stop for a second.
Mr. Weakley, between the two of you, have you looked at the
economic impact should the Poe Lock go down for any period of
time? What is the economic impact?
Mr. Weakley. Eleven million Americans will be unemployed,
and those layoffs will begin within two weeks of a long-term
outage.
Mr. Mitchell. Mr. Dalton, how have you considered that in
your economic analysis, or the Army Corps? How is that computed
into the economic analysis?
Mr. Dalton. I will have to take a look to give you a more
complete answer on the economics associated with it and how we
are doing the economic analysis. What I would say is that the
questions that Mr. Weakley are bringing up is something that we
are also questioning within the Corps of Engineers, taking a
look at that economics. A validation report is actually being
done.
I think you mentioned that you just found out a couple of
weeks ago or so that, in his words, there is a fatal flaw. So
we will take a look at that. I will take a look at that.
Mr. Mitchell. I suggest that considering a third of the
cost of putting in the rail infrastructure, never mind the
delay in doing that because it does not currently exist--if you
look at the DHS report, they indicate the Office of Cyber and
Infrastructure Analysis in the case that there is not
sufficient rail infrastructure at the Soo Locks to address the
issue if the Poe Lock fails, if it shuts down for any period of
time.
As Mr. Weakley says, the reality is we will lose 11 million
jobs within two weeks, or start losing them within two weeks of
the Soo Locks coming down. So I am trying to figure out how--I
would like to ask, if you would, sir, that you gather some of
your economists who think that they have done a good job here.
I would ask my staff to get with you. I want them to wander
over. Please tell them I am an economist. I would love to talk
to them about what the numbers are, because I think they fall
far short of addressing the economic impact of Soo Locks, and
the delay is now unacceptable to get the lock, an additional
1,200-foot lock built. We have now reached a point where we can
no longer tolerate this kind of risk.
Mr. Dalton. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mitchell. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you.
I have a few more questions, so we will do a second round
of questions, but it doesn't look like it is going to take too
long.
I want to start off and talk a little bit about the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund. Years ago, Congress set up a user fee
for funding the maintenance of our harbors, rivers, and the
like. Unfortunately, that money does not all go to harbor
maintenance. In fact, our appropriations committee has taken
quite a bit of that back and is spending it on other things.
Mr. Weakley, I have heard from folks within your industry
that they would even be willing to see an increase in that user
fee if the money were actually devoted for what they were told
it was going to be devoted for in the beginning. Is that
accurate within the industry?
Mr. Weakley. Yes, sir, not just from the Great Lakes
perspective but nationwide. We led a coalition called the RAMP
Coalition, Restore America's Maritime Progress, to free up some
of that trust fund, to set our trust fund free. Since 1986,
that trust fund has accumulated over $9 billion in excess
collections. It spends about half of what it takes in, although
I will say within the past couple of years, thanks to
congressional intervention, more of that is being spent,
although we are still significantly less than the revenues it
takes in on an annual basis.
Mr. Farenthold. Do any of the other members of the panel
have any suggestions for ways the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund
can be improved or better used?
Mr. Strawbridge. Certainly, Congressman, a mandate that it
be used for what it is collected for would be a good start. I
know the American Association of Port Authorities, of which the
Port of Corpus Christi Authority is a member, has taken a
formal position in that regard, and we support the AAPA's
position on the HMT.
Mr. Farenthold. So, when I came into Congress, one of the
things we did was ban earmarks. In the past, a lot of these big
projects were actually funded with congressional earmarks. What
sort of change have you seen, Mr. Strawbridge-- and I will ask
Ms. Mickelsen the same question-- since the earmark ban? Has it
been good? Bad? Indifferent?
Mr. Strawbridge. Certainly, Mr. Chairman, infrastructure in
this country, for the most part, prior to the abolition of
earmarks in 2010, much of the infrastructure in this country
was built on earmarks. And in the absence of earmarks, I think
the unintended consequence is that infrastructure projects take
much longer and have much less funding associated with them. We
certainly see that at the Port of Corpus Christi. Twenty-eight
years to get us to where we are today, and we still have not
turned ----
Mr. Farenthold. Is it a dollars and cents or timing issue,
or both? I notice you have the Federal share on the Port of
Corpus Christi is over $100 million. You have about 10 percent
of it this year, and basically you are just hoping you continue
to get that stream.
Mr. Strawbridge. Well, it is actually over $200 million.
The Federal portion today is $225 million. Our portion is $102
million. We have worked hard to raise our money. We have our
money ready to go, and it has only been in the last month that
we were included in the President's budget. That still is not
an approved budget, so we don't know what the actual
appropriation will be.
But if it goes in that same drips and drabs, this project
will take over another decade to execute on. That would be
nearly 40 years from the time Congress mandated we first study
this project to actual execution.
Mr. Farenthold. I am not a dredging expert, but I would
imagine to dredge the--how long is the ship channel?
Mr. Strawbridge. We have 29 miles of ship channel that are
----
Mr. Farenthold. I imagine it doesn't take 10 years to
dredge that. So you have cost associated with getting the
dredge out there, dredging a few miles of it, and see you next
year.
Mr. Strawbridge. That is exactly right. In the absence of
those targeted funds, the Corps will only contract for what has
been appropriated. We believe that this contract, unconstrained
by funding, we could execute on the entire project in four
years or less.
Mr. Farenthold. Do you think it would be cheaper?
Mr. Strawbridge. Certainly.
Mr. Farenthold. Ms. Mickelsen, do you have anything to
weigh in on the topic?
Ms. Mickelsen. Yes, I do. I agree completely that it would
be less expensive. I think the ban on earmarks has had the
opposite effect on what we wanted. Maybe it is taking a re-look
at earmarks. But it has prevented us from doing really
important work. For example, the navigation ecosystem
sustainability program, we have it authorized, we have it
ready, but it depends on a congressional earmark. And instead
of having a public forum on what our nation's priorities for
funding are, we are depending on biases within the
administration, within OMB or the Corps, and you have to try to
inform all those levels, whether it is the districts, the
division headquarters and OMB, and then you are relying on
these cost/benefit analyses that are not reflective of the
actual infrastructure needs.
So it is a big problem, and it is affecting the Corps'
budget. The Corps is set up as a line item. Any line item
budget, whether it is going to a district or whether it is a
completely regional program with national benefits.
Mr. Farenthold. Great.
Ms. Plaskett, do you have some more questions?
Ms. Plaskett. Sure.
One of the things I wanted to go back to, Mr. Dalton, when
we talked about the responses and some of the projects that you
are working on, can you talk with me a little bit about the
hurricane season that is going to be coming up on us? It is
less than three months away. Almost all climate scientists
agree that this change is happening. I have seen reports that
say that this hurricane season is going to be as severe or more
severe than last year's.
Has the Army Corps had meetings with other Federal agencies
to coordinate plans and make other preparations for the
possibility of what the season may look like?
Mr. Dalton. Yes, Congresswoman. What typically happens with
us as hurricane season approaches is we have tabletop exercises
with other Federal agencies. FEMA is often the lead for this
collaboration. We talk about what we think, the possibilities
of what could happen. We look at resources. One of the things
that the Corps typically does is ensure that we include all of
our districts or divisions and not just those that might be in
affected areas, probably for the obvious reasons, because those
in affected areas are not ones that we can count on immediately
following an event.
Ms. Plaskett. But when you have the tabletops to go through
how you respond, do you include those people from those areas?
Mr. Dalton. We include local, like flood control ----
Ms. Plaskett. I don't know, because I know one of your
problems with the blue roof was that you didn't know how to
find addresses in the Virgin Islands, and that is why you
couldn't get to them. So are people involved who can present to
you the issues that may be unique to an area so that you can
address those on the tabletop?
Mr. Dalton. We do include some members of the community,
mostly from the emergency offices, EOCs. But I will certainly
take a look to see if we should have done more than what we
did, obviously, from what you are saying.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. Thank you.
And, Mr. Weakley, in your testimony, I wanted to know how
you experienced communication issues working with the Army
Corps division and headquarters.
Mr. Weakley. Well, I will tell you that at the district
level it has been outstanding. At the division level it hasn't
been as good as the districts. To Mr. Dalton's credit, we met
with him personally. In fact, he set up the dispute resolution
meeting, and that is where we discovered the two fatal flaws.
What I have learned through my experience is that it is
kind of incumbent on us to knock on the door, and to the Corps'
credit the door is usually opened and answered.
Ms. Plaskett. And is that door open at the local level, or
is it at the regional or headquarters? Where do you find that
it is easier to get that done?
Mr. Weakley. To be frank, it is open at all levels, but the
closer we are to Sault St. Marie, Michigan, the better they
understand it, the more supportive they are. At the division
level there is a significant drop-off. At the headquarters
level there is a marginal drop-off.
Ms. Plaskett. Sure.
Mr. Strawbridge, what has been your experience?
Mr. Strawbridge. At the district level I think our
relationship is good. We also have Corps personnel in Corpus
Christi itself.
One of the challenges we see, though, is the billet for the
commander at the district, it is a three-year billet, and
usually the commanders that are put in that, it is their last
billet before retirement. We see that that three years is
probably not enough, not a long enough billet to get the things
done that we need done. We need more leadership, consistent
leadership at the district level.
We have seen a marked improvement in our relationship at
headquarters, and frankly we have had to go to headquarters to
get guidance because we just don't get the responsiveness that
we need at the local or regional level.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you.
Ms. Mickelsen, you were shaking your head yes. So you would
agree as well?
Ms. Mickelsen. I would agree as well that we often have to
go to headquarters to get resolution on issues, and I think
most of that is because, from our perspective, that is where
the decision-making happens, and that influences what districts
are able to do.
We have also seen that rivers are complicated and these
issues are complicated, and once we get district commanders and
division commanders that are two to three years in that get it
and understand the need for it ----
Ms. Plaskett. When they finally get it, then they have to
go.
Ms. Mickelsen.--then they have to go.
Ms. Plaskett. And then the indemnification, I know you had
concerns with that.
Ms. Mickelsen. Yes, substantial concerns with that. Our
states will not sign on to agreements if that indemnification
clause is in there. I think it is an additive to also being in
perpetuity, which is not in law; that was a Corps decision.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you. And you were talking about
disaster relief, Ms. Plaskett. I do have a couple more
questions along those lines. I think you might find these
useful for your situation in the USVI as well.
Mr. Dalton, in your opinion, should fully authorized Corps
projects located in disaster-prone areas be prioritized and
fully funded to have the work begin immediately?
Mr. Dalton. I think any time we identify a risk to the
public, and in most cases those projects you are referring to
would be risk to the public, I think, yes, they should be fully
funded and prioritized to reduce public risk.
Mr. Farenthold. And do you think the $96 billion backlog of
Corps projects, not including the disaster recovery projects
like Harvey, Irma and Maria, affect the Corps' ability to
assist Texas, Florida, the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico in
their recovery efforts? I mean, do you all just have too much
on your plate?
Mr. Dalton. I don't know each one of those $96 billion
projects, but I would say most of those projects are projects
that affect, or at least at one time, when they were
authorized, affected the public safety. We are looking at those
projects to determine which ones of those we should actually
probably de-authorize, if any, because of the age of them, and
maybe circumstances have changed. But I would say the majority
of those projects are life safety related.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. And along those same lines,
during Hurricane Harvey there was a great deal of flooding in
Houston, and there has been quite a bit of publicity associated
with the releases of water from the Addicks and Barker
reservoirs that the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is involved
with. We have talked about it a lot in the media, but could you
give us a brief synopsis from the Corps perspective of what
happened there?
Mr. Dalton. Addicks and Barker are a couple of dams that
were put in place to reduce the risk to Houston, downstream
Houston. So when those projects were first, I believe,
constructed, there was not the development upstream of the
projects that exists today. So we have identified or had
identified real estate that was in the flood pool of Addicks
and Barker, but over time the development occurred. I believe
that people were not notified properly that they were in an
area that would be inundated depending on what the flood risk
situation was, or the flooding was within the Addicks and
Barker reservoirs.
So in many cases, I don't think people knew that they were
living ----
Mr. Farenthold. Do you know whose responsibility it was to
notify them?
Mr. Dalton. I think it was the real estate agent's
responsibility to notify them, that they sold the homes and
they were at one time identified as being in a flood pool.
Mr. Farenthold. When you all decided you were going to have
to release the water, how did you all communicate that to the
folks beforehand? How long, and can you talk about that
process? This hearing is about communications. From what I hear
from my friends in Houston, my colleagues who represent
Houston, they were not given a lot of notice about that and it
really caused some problems.
Mr. Dalton. So, Mr. Chairman, as you know, that whole issue
right now is in litigation. So ----
Mr. Farenthold. You have to be careful what you say, I
guess.
Mr. Dalton. Absolutely. But from what I understand, and we
have had conversations with our folks locally, is that there
had been communications with the local emergency management
officials, not necessarily directly with the public, but that
is who we normally communicate with.
Mr. Farenthold. I have about a minute left, Mr. Dalton.
What would you like the public specifically in Houston to
understand about the decision the Corps made with respect to
those water releases and the choices the Corps made about
communicating with them?
Mr. Dalton. Right now, the Corps was in a place to where in
order to operate those projects to do what they were intended
to do, which was to reduce flood risk to Houston, we actually
held water within the operations requirements of those dams,
and you get to a point where you start having overflow going
around through the spillway. If we didn't release water to
Houston or contained it, the water would be released anyway. So
at that point, those projects, the capacity of those projects
was probably just simply exceeded.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. Thank you very much.
Did you have anything else, Ms. Plaskett?
[No response.]
Mr. Farenthold. I would like to thank our witnesses for
being here. I think we had a very productive conversation. You
have given us some thoughts on ways we can reform the process.
This is the Oversight and Reform Committee. Several of us
on this committee, or subcommittee, also serve on the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, which is also
involved in this project, and we will make sure the appropriate
folks on that committee are able to review the testimony and
the transcript of today, and hopefully we will be able to make
a difference from this hearing.
Again, thank you all for being here.
The hearing record will remain open for two weeks for any
members to submit written opening statements or questions for
the record. I would appreciate you all responding to any of the
questions we forward your way.
If there is no further business, the subcommittee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:34 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX
----------
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]