- DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[Senate Hearing 115-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
WEDNESDAY, MAY 16, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 9:34 a.m., in room SD-124, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa Murkowski (Chairman)
presiding.
Present: Senators Murkowski, Capito, Daines, Hyde-Smith,
Udall, Leahy, Tester, Merkley, and Van Hollen.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE SCOTT PRUITT, ADMINISTRATOR
ACCOMPANIED BY HON. HOLLY GREAVES, CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR LISA MURKOWSKI
Senator Murkowski. Good morning, everyone. We are here to
review the fiscal year 2019 budget request for the
Environmental Protection Agency. I'd like to begin by welcoming
our witnesses today. We welcome back to the subcommittee
Administrator Pruitt. He is accompanied by Holly Greaves, who
is the Chief Financial Officer for the Agency. Thank you both
for coming back before the subcommittee.
Just a reminder to colleagues, we'll follow the ``early
bird rule'' here. We will have 6-minute rounds of questions. I
anticipate that there will be substantial interest in the
hearing this morning, so I would ask Members to try to stick
with the time limit. We can do multiple rounds, but the
Administrator has a hard stop at noon, so we will be working to
meet that. We also have a couple votes at noon as well.
Each year, this subcommittee holds a hearing to examine the
EPA's budget request. In some years, the budget is the focus of
the hearing, appropriately so. In other years, Agency actions
draw the majority of the questions. I would suggest that the
size of the audience this morning is an indicator of
substantial interest in this year's hearing, so I look forward
to the dialogue.
Administrator Pruitt, when you were before the subcommittee
last year, you said that you would work to return the EPA to
its core mission of ensuring clean water, clean air, and clean
land, something that we all encourage and support. You also
stated a desire to treat States as equal partners rather than
as adversaries, and to promote a cooperative Federalism
approach in your actions.
As you have worked through this past year, I have seen many
steps that demonstrate that commitment to those goals with
regards to Waters of the United States, WOTUS, a significant
issue for a State like mine, where approximately two-thirds of
the State of Alaska are considered wetlands. So for us, this
has very real implications. Your commitment to work with me on
issues like the use of small remote incinerators. Your efforts
to avoid duplicative financial assurance requirements on
hardrock mining. These are areas where we have had an
opportunity to engage, and I think advance some common goals
here.
Unfortunately, I am concerned that many of the important
policy efforts that you are engaged in are being overshadowed
because of a series of issues related to you and your
management of the Agency. Instead of being asked about the work
that you are doing on WOTUS or the Clean Power Plan or the
Superfund program, I am being asked to comment on security, on
housing, and on travel. Instead of seeing articles about your
efforts to return the Agency to its core mission, I'm reading
about your interactions with representatives of the industries
that you regulate.
Now, some of this undoubtedly is a result of the ``gotcha''
age that we live in that dominates the politics of today, but I
do think that there are legitimate questions that need to be
answered. I know you had an opportunity to speak before the
House Committees last week and get some of this information out
on the record, and we will have an opportunity to do that
today.
A series of investigations are now underway. I would hope
that you can fully answer the questions of members that they
will pose this morning.
Turning briefly to the fiscal year 2019 budget request,
there was some effort in the fiscal year 2019 budget proposal
to reflect the budget deal that raised spending caps. The
administration's decision to use only portions of available
funds guarantees that the fiscal year 2019 budget cannot fully
match the final funding levels of the fiscal year 2018 omnibus.
I recognize you've made an effort to propose robust funding
for programs that have broad support in a challenging budget
environment. Although the request makes large reductions to
State grant programs, you do propose $27 million for
multipurpose grants to help States meet statutory duties, which
is important. The President's budget also maintains funding for
the Clean Water and Drinking Water State Revolving Funds, as
well as keeping the Superfund program at the fiscal year 2017
enacted level.
Some of the Alaska specific concerns that I will share with
you, I see some on-the-ground examples of some good programs
that your budget is proposing to either substantially reduce or
has proposed to eliminate. In the community of Fairbanks, we've
had an opportunity to talk about their air quality issues.
Fairbanks will have cleaner air because of the Agency's use of
Targeted Airshed Grants. We funded this at its highest level
ever in fiscal year 2018, and you have proposed a reduction
there. Our villages will have cleaner water because of the
Alaska Native Villages water program as well as a new program
authorized in the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the
Nation Act (WIIN Act) that we funded in the fiscal year 2018
omnibus to help communities that need basic water
infrastructure. And your proposal eliminates or reduces these
programs greatly. These are cuts that I can't support. I want
to, in full disclosure, highlight those.
As I mentioned in last year's appropriations hearing, and
as played out in fiscal year 2018, the Agency's final budget
will not look a whole lot like this proposal. While the
administration proposes a budget, Congress will use its power
of the purse to reflect its spending priorities. While there is
a need to closely examine every budget line to ensure that we
responsibly spend taxpayer dollars, many of the large cuts
proposed in this budget I believe are unsustainable and would
make it difficult for the Agency and its State partners to
carry out their work.
I am going to focus my efforts on restoring proposed cuts
to State grant programs and to programs like the Alaska Native
Villages water program, the Targeted Airshed Grants program,
and the radon program, all of which have a direct impact on
cleaning up the environment and ensuring human health.
Last year, you committed to work with the subcommittee to
implement the budget that Congress provides, and we would
certainly anticipate that you would do so again in fiscal year
2019. As a close, I again want to thank you for the work that
you have committed to us on some notably lower profile issues
that only affect Alaska. My poor colleague from New Mexico here
has to listen to me talk about fish waste grinding and small
remote incinerators and PM2.5. These are areas that
are a great concern to a State like mine. I know my colleagues
have many other issues that you will hear raised this morning.
Again, I thank you for appearing before the subcommittee.
And I now turn to my Ranking Member, Senator Udall, for his
comments.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR TOM UDALL
Senator Udall. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
And, Administrator Pruitt, it's hard to know where to begin
this morning. Every day, there seems to be a new scandal, and
you at dead center. It's clear that I've had policy
disagreements with you from the beginning and that I opposed
your nomination. So it should come as no surprise when I called
on you to resign.
What is surprising, however, is the breadth of voices who
agree with me that your leadership at the EPA is disastrous. I
think it is extraordinary that so many previous administrators
of the EPA, including Republicans, have lambasted your
leadership.
The very first EPA Administrator, a Republican appointed by
President Nixon and reappointed by President Reagan, described
your actions as the EPA, and I quote here, taking a meat ax to
the protections of public health and the environment, end
quote. He went on to say that you and your top staff, quote,
don't fundamentally agree with the mission of the Agency, end
quote.
Another Republican former EPA Administrator, Christine Todd
Whitman, said, and I quote here, Scott Pruitt is unfit to run
the EPA because he lacks ethical integrity, a quality that is
of the utmost importance when entrusted with protecting the
environment and public health, end quote.
There is nothing I can say here today that would come close
to having such esteemed former officials chastise you publicly
like that, but I will do my best because it needs to be said,
that your tenure at the EPA is a betrayal of the American
people. You have used your office to enrich yourself at the
expense of the American taxpayer and public health, and such
abuses have led to several investigations. The EPA inspector
general is investigating your luxury travel, your trips back to
Oklahoma for football games, your cut-rate condo rental from a
lobbyist, your extensive use of clean drinking water programs
to promote your political advisers, and how one of your closest
advisers was paid despite not showing up for work for 3 months.
The Government's nonpartisan watchdog, the Government
Accountability Office, or the GAO, is investigating your
questionable policies to stack EPA's science advisory
committees with industry as well as lobbying--as well as a
lobbying video you starred in urging political action. Even
your own White House is reviewing your sweetheart condo deal
and your spending on your soundproof privacy booth. I can only
wonder if more investigations will start based on your fast-
tracking a new Superfund site at the behest of a conservative
media personality and other reports that EPA has taken quick
actions to help political donors and lobbyists.
One investigation has already been completed, one I
personally requested. The GAO found that you broke the law by
hiding taxpayer spending on the privacy booth. I have a lot of
questions for you today on this topic because 1 month later you
haven't followed the law by reporting to Congress or the
President, your boss, how you let this happen and how you plan
to fix it. And now you haven't submitted to this subcommittee
the statutorily required reports on all your other office
spending as we sit here today trying to get to the bottom of
your reckless spending.
I'm announcing this morning that I just requested a new GAO
investigation, this one to determine if EPA violated the
appropriations law banning taxpayer spending on publicity and
propaganda by engaging in political speech via social media.
The Office of Special Counsel is also examining whether EPA's
April 13 tweet violated the Hatch Act, which governs the ethics
of political speech by public employees. These two
investigations into EPA's single tweet encapsulate a running
theme: your disregard for ethics and your disregard for
taxpayer dollars.
Administrator Pruitt, I am tempted to say your scandals are
a mere sideshow distracting us from the long-lasting
devastation your leadership is making on human health and the
environment. Indeed, while your scandals splash from front
pages and clog up digital media, you've been hard at work
dismantling scores of important protections. You've taken steps
to roll back clean air and clean water protections, walked away
from our historic global commitment to reduce the impacts of
climate change, you've even managed to distort and unravel
toxics reform, which was recently enacted on a bipartisan
basis.
Several of your attempts to halt progress on these and
other public health efforts have been rejected by the courts
for violating basic legal requirements for altering existing
standards, requirements that you should be familiar with after
decades of losing lawsuits against the EPA before you took its
helm.
But ultimately, Administrator Pruitt, I just can't separate
your scandals from the shameless efforts to dismantle EPA. They
are one and the same. Both your scandals and your policy
decisions abuse your position of public trust and make a
mockery of your responsibilities as head of EPA. You show the
same disregard for our ethical standards and fiscal controls as
you show for the air we breathe and the water we drink. Using
your office to enrich yourself and your friends at the expense
of the American taxpayer and the public health is a disgrace.
The fiscal year 2019 budget proposal is yet another giant
blinking sign that you don't take your responsibility to this
country seriously. The budget proposes to slash EPA's research
programs in half, gutting the ability of the Agency to identify
threats to public health and the environment as well as
solutions to those threats. The request also cuts nearly 50
percent of funds sent directly to the States. For example, the
budget proposes to eliminate State funding for radon poisoning
prevention, childhood lead poisoning prevention, hazardous
waste disposal, and even drinking water monitoring. This isn't
cooperative Federalism; it's flat-out abandonment.
The request proposes to cut off our multiyear effort to
support independent monitoring of the contaminated water still
flowing from the Gold King Mine into areas of New Mexico and
the Navajo Nation. The $4 million program is barely more than
your reported spending on your security detail. And your
promises in this very room a year ago to make sure the Navajo
and others harmed by the Gold King Mine spill are properly
compensated have fallen completely flat. Not one payment has
been made.
The budget also proposes to give polluters a pass by
cutting criminal and civil enforcement by a quarter. The budget
backs off entirely from virtually all climate programs,
including voluntary coordination, international partnerships,
and basic monitoring. I'm not surprised to see that you even
propose to cut EPA's inspector general by 10 percent. I suppose
slowing down their work might sound appealing.
Administrator Pruitt, the budget request before us today is
dead on arrival because it would pull out the rug from
underneath every single State in our country and decimate
critical public health and environmental programs.
This budget request is also dead on arrival because it is
completely tone-deaf to reality. This bipartisan Congress has
maintained steady funding for EPA for the last 2 years running,
and even boosted water infrastructure investments and lead
reduction programs, despite the administration's draconian
proposals to shrink the Agency into oblivion.
So I'm not worried about this--I'm not worried that this
Congress will accept drastic cuts to EPA's operating budget or
the cutoff--or that we are going to cut off support that we
send to the States. What I am worried about, Administrator
Pruitt, is that you have been treating your position of public
trust as a golden ticket for extravagant travel and fine dining
and as a platform to cozy up to media personalities, political
donors, and polluters. I am worried you are spending all your
time enriching yourself and your friends while betraying your
mission to protect human health and the environment.
I look forward to our discussion today. I'm glad to see
that Senator Leahy has joined us, the Ranking Member on our
Appropriations Committee.?
And thank you, Madam Chairman.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Udall.
Senator Leahy, as the Ranking Member of the full Committee,
you're certainly welcome to make an opening statement.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR PATRICK J. LEAHY
Senator Leahy. Thank you very much. I appreciate the
courtesy. And I appreciate what Senator Udall has said. As you
know, Senator Shelby and I have now issued a joint statement.
We're trying very much to bring the Appropriations Committee
back to what both of you have known it in the past, and we've
issued a schedule now, markups, so we can finish every one of
these bills markup in the committee by the end of June.
And this is obviously an important hearing to review the
budget. I have to agree with what Senator Udall said when I
came in about this being a reckless and an unrealistic budget,
but I think what it does, it shows total contempt by you,
Administrator, and the administration for bedrock environmental
safeguards and for the work of EPA and the people in there,
nonpartisan, hard-working people, to monitor, protect, and
conserve our environment and the health of all Americans.
If you attack the core mission of the role of EPA, you
attack human health. The work of the EPA is essential to
ensuring that air and water are clean, our land, our treasured
resources, our health, to protect it from pollutants, toxic
chemicals, the effects of climate change.
Administrator, I hear constantly from Vermonters,
Republicans and Democrats alike, about a seemingly endless
stream of controversies at the EPA. It's troubling enough that
your personal fundamental mission seems to be undermining the
very mission of the Agency you are appointed to lead, but the
embarrassments these scandals have brought continue a pattern
of putting personal and special interests ahead of the well-
being of the American people. Your toxic agenda makes the
United States more polluted and less safe, has extended beyond
environmental policy, and actually affected the confidence the
American people should have in their Government.
I think of Vermonters in places like Bennington, Vermont,
when they're seeing a problem with toxic water. Now, they find
that you have sought to block the publication of a public
health study on a class of toxic chemicals that threaten water
supplies around the country, including in Bennington. That's
unconscionable. How about to be a parent of a child and waiting
for that report and finding that you blocked it. And it's
incomprehensible to the people in Bennington and Vermont why an
agency that works for them, their tax dollars are paying for
it, whose charge is to protect their health, turns their back
on them and tries to hide health dangers.
You've been given a lot of credit for cutting regulations,
but the more we study your work to circumvent the law and
overturn delay regulations, we find you're causing far more
uncertainty for these industries with countless lawsuits that
cost the taxpayers dollars and impede critical environmental
work. You claim that rolling back and delaying what you've
called ``costly regulations'' could save Americans $1 billion,
but if you remove protections for public health and the
environment, you are costing the American people far more each
year in near- and long-term health costs.
Let's extrapolate the course you set for the EPA. You
flipped the mission of the Environmental Protection Agency on
its head. You've done that to protect big polluters instead of
the people; by insinuating an anti-science agenda into the
vital work of your science-based Agency; by working to
eviscerate the very marrow of the EPA, the American people are
the ones forced to pay the bills, with their health, with their
wallets, and some with their lives and their children's lives.
The mission of the EPA is simple. It's ``to protect human
health and the environment'', not to protect industry friends,
or to give friends from Oklahoma tens of thousands of dollars
in pay raises in defiance of the White House. Not to put
polluters first, or to travel first class around the world.
Incidentally, a Vermonter said what a silly reason you had to
fly first class because of a danger to you unless you flew
first class. He said nobody would even know who you are. And
you go in there, well, somebody might criticize you. You've got
security people that were never seen before, but you have to
fly first class. Oh, come on. Or to use your public office for
private gain. It's an ego run amuck. And certainly your job is
not to weaken or unravel the bedrock environmental laws that
were put in place by both Republicans and Democrats alike.
Now, you're coming before the subcommittee with an
indefensible budget proposal. You're trailing a string of
ethical lapses and controversies that are an embarrassment to
the Agency and an embarrassment to Republicans and Democrats
alike. We want and deserve environmental protections that work,
not money to interests buying off those willing to sell the
public health to the highest bidder.
Let's have something that works. Forget about the--forget
about your own ego and your first-class travel and your special
phone booths and all these things just make you a laughing
stock and your Agency a laughing stock.
Thank you, Madam Chair. A strong message to follow.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Leahy.
Administrator Pruitt, this is your time before the
subcommittee. We welcome your comments, your review of the
budget that we have in front of us. Thank you for being here.
SUMMARY STATEMENT OF HON. SCOTT PRUITT
Mr. Pruitt. Well, good morning, Chairman Murkowski, Ranking
Member Udall, Vice Chairman Leahy. It is good to be with you
this morning. I look forward to the questions and the dialogue
this morning.
There is consequential and important work being done at the
EPA since the beginning of the Trump administration, both in
terms of improved environmental outcomes as well as substantial
regulatory reform. We are stripping burdensome costs from the
American economy at an unprecedented pace, and we are doing
this while inspiring confidence in the American people that
their Government will work with them, not against them, in
achieving harmony between economic growth and environmental
stewardship.
In the short time of the Trump administration, we've made
enormous progress as far as improving environmental outcomes.
In 2017, we removed over three times the number of polluted
sites of contaminated communities across the country, as
compared to the previous administration, and in 2018, we are on
pace to remove as many as 10 times the number.
With regard to States, we are working with them to improve
air quality through the approval and the review of 350 State
environmental plans, and with regard to water, we are leading a
multiagency approach to eradicate lead from our drinking water
within 10 years, largely through the utilization of a tool that
you provided, the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation
Act (WIFIA). It is my goal to prioritize applications to the
WIFIA process to hopefully seize as much as $4 billion a year
going to replacement of lead service lines across the country.
The President has set a very ambitious agenda with respect to
the EPA under his administration, and we are achieving those
objectives.
The President not only tasked us with the purpose of
accomplishing our core mission more efficiently and more
effectively than ever before, he also demanded that we approach
comprehensive regulatory reform. That transformational change
is, in fact, happening. In just 1 year, the Trump
administration has saved the American people approximately 8
billion in regulatory costs, and the EPA alone has saved 1
billion of those--1 billion of that 8 billion. These actions
provide America's job creators with the regulatory clarity they
deserve by repealing and replacing the so-called Clean Power
Plan. We are ending a one-size-fits-all regulation of energy
providers and restoring rule of law, and by rescinding and
rewriting the 2015 Waters of the United States rule, we are
ending Washington's power grab over land use decisions across
the country.
It is indisputable that we have made enormous progress in
advancing the President's reform agenda while also at the same
time achieving better outcomes to the environment, pruning back
decades of regulatory overreach that was unnecessary,
burdensome, and ultimately harmful to the hard-working
Americans across the country.
The important work continues. The Chairman mentioned my
appearance just in the last 3 or so weeks before the House
committee, and just in the last 3 weeks, we've done the
following. We've issued a proposed rule to strengthen the
science used in regulations issued by the EPA. The rule will
ensure that the regulatory science underlying Agency action is
fully transparent and that underlying scientific information is
publicly available in a manner sufficient to independently
validate the science.
We have created a new Office of Continuous Improvement
within EPA to implement the Lean Management System, otherwise
known as ELMS at the Agency. ELMS and the Office of Continuous
Improvement will enable the Agency for the first time to track
important Agency actions to ensure we respond and resolve the
challenge quickly and thoroughly.
Prior to this administration, the EPA was not
systematically or regularly tracking key actions such as
permitting, meeting legal deadlines, or correcting
environmental violations. With ELMS and this new office, all
parts of the EPA will set ambitious and achievable targets for
their work, measure those results, and improve the processes to
bridge the gap between targets and results.
We forwarded to OMB recently a proposed rule prohibiting
consumer and commercial paint-stripping uses for methylene
chloride, following through on EPA's January 2017 proposal that
methylene chloride be banned from products. That happened
recently.
We have issued a memorandum outlining a back-to-basics
agenda for reviewing the National Ambient Air Quality Standards
program under the Clean Air Act to ensure that the EPA and its
independent science advisers follow transparent, timely, and
efficient processes in reviewing and revising public health and
welfare-based National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS)
program. This will bring the EPA and its advisers back on track
with Clean Air Act requirements, statutory deadlines, and the
issuance of timely implementation rules.
Finally, highlighting our commitment to collaborating with
the States, Tribes, and localities to protect air quality. We
have taken the next step in the Clean Air Act process to
implement the National Air Quality Standards for ozone from
2015. After designating most of the United States as meeting
the standards in November of 2017, the Agency has now completed
nearly all remaining area designations. And we have good news,
we now have 10 percent more counties meeting ozone quality
across the country than we did before.
I emphasize again that these actions, which will improve
the efficiency of the EPA and the lives of countless Americans,
are only highlights of the EPA's achievements in the last month
alone. President Trump has set a clear and very ambitious
agenda for the EPA, and we are focused on getting those results
to the American people. And make no mistake, we will achieve
those results and serve the American people effectively with
our agenda.
I look forward to your questions, Chairwoman.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Scott Pruitt
Good morning, Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members
of the subcommittee. I am joined by Holly Greaves, EPA's Chief
Financial Officer, and we are here today to discuss the Environmental
Protection Agency's (EPA) proposed fiscal year 2019 budget, which
supports the goals and objectives in the Fiscal Year 2018-Fiscal Year
2022 EPA Strategic Plan.
As the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, I am a
firm believer in EPA's mission to protect human health and the
environment, and I am committed to helping provide future generations
with a cleaner and healthier environment. We made great progress in
year one. I laid out my vision for EPA's continued progress in the
Agency's Strategic Plan. Under this Plan, our first goal is to
``Deliver real results to provide Americans with clean air, land, and
water, and ensure chemical safety.'' This is the Agency's Core Mission,
and this budget enables progress on the most important priorities of
this mission. The second goal of the Strategic Plan is to ``Rebalance
the power between Washington and the States to create tangible
environmental results for the American people.'' Through this
Cooperative Federalism approach, we will enhance shared accountability
with our partners and increase transparency. The third goal of the
Strategic Plan is to ``Administer the law, as Congress intended, to
refocus the Agency on its statutory obligations under the law.'' By
refocusing on the Rule of Law and Process, the Agency will enhance
compliance with the law, create greater consistency and certainty for
the regulated community, prioritize robust science, streamline and
modernize the Agency, and improve efficiency and effectiveness. Through
this vision of a more effective government that administers the law as
Congress intends and cooperatively engages with our Nation's States and
Tribes, EPA will continue to make real progress in achieving its
mission.
Over the past year as Administrator, I've witnessed firsthand the
tremendous advances this Agency, and our partners, have made to address
the Nation's environmental challenges and fulfill our mission. The
proposed budget continues this progress by supporting EPA's highest
priorities with Federal funding for core work in air and water quality,
contaminated land cleanups, ensuring the safety of chemicals in the
marketplace, and compliance with the law. The President's budget aims
to create a more efficient and effective EPA by reducing redundancies
and improving operations.
As Administrator of EPA my top priorities include: infrastructure
improvements to our Nation's drinking water and wastewater systems;
accelerating the remediation and revitalization of the most
contaminated land in our communities; improving air quality through
significant reductions in the number of areas not in attainment with
the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS); and meeting all the
statutory deadlines outlined in the amended Toxic Substances Control
Act (TSCA). In my testimony, I will highlight how the budget directly
supports these top priorities.
I firmly believe that EPA can accomplish far more when the Agency
focuses on working cooperatively with the States and Tribes to improve
public health and the environment. It is essential for the Federal,
State, Territorial, and Tribal governments to work together to provide
the environmental protection that our laws demand and that the American
people deserve. This budget supports cooperative Federalism through
activities such as the Multipurpose Grant program, which is included in
this budget. This program will support the implementation of statutory
obligations delegated by EPA under pertinent environmental laws and
provide States, Tribes, and Territories with increased flexibility to
apply the funds toward their highest priorities.
We will continue to work collaboratively with State, Tribal, and
local governments to provide flexibility to address important
priorities. I personally look forward to working with you all, and
other Members of Congress, to ensure we meet the environmental needs of
your communities.
In my testimony today, I will highlight how the budget advances the
Strategic Plan's three goals: Core Mission, Cooperative Federalism, and
Rule of Law and Process. I will focus on key objectives to improve air
quality, provide for clean and safe water, revitalize land and prevent
contamination, ensure the safety of chemicals in the marketplace,
assure compliance with the law, and improve efficiency and
effectiveness.
improving america's air quality
By funding air quality work at $410 million, EPA will continue to
perform key activities in support of protecting human health and the
environment through improving the quality of the Nation's air with a
focus on States and localities achieving greater levels of NAAQS
attainment.
States have made tremendous progress and significant investment in
improving air quality. Since 1970, total emissions of the six criteria
air pollutants regulated under the NAAQS program have dropped by 73
percent, while gross domestic product grew by over 252 percent. Despite
this progress, much work remains to increase attainment levels across
the country. We are focused on working in partnership with State,
Tribal, and local governments to design and implement air quality
standards and programs.
Areas designated as being in nonattainment of the standard face
consequences, including increased regulatory burdens, restrictions on
infrastructure investment, and increased costs to businesses. The
Agency is looking to bring these areas into attainment by aggressively
tackling the current backlog of State/Tribal Implementation Plans (SIP/
TIP), more effectively mapping the SIP process, focusing on data
integrity, and applying process improvements to EPA's own review
process.
We are also seeking additional authority from Congress to fee-fund
the ENERGY STAR program by establishing user fees for entities that
participate in the program. ENERGY STAR has proven to be an effective
partner in helping consumers and businesses save money and reduce
energy use. On the mobile source side, the Federal Vehicle and Fuels
Standards and Certification program will focus its efforts on
certification decisions. The Agency will conduct activities supporting
pre- certification confirmatory testing for emissions and fuel economy
for passenger cars.
providing for clean and safe water
The President has emphasized that maintaining and improving
infrastructure is critical to the foundation of this country's economy
and our global competitiveness. At EPA, this means, in large part, we
will continue to make investments in drinking water and wastewater
infrastructure, provide clear and actionable permitting decisions to
the regulated community, and leverage Federal investment with non-
Federal sources.
The fiscal year 2019 budget includes $2.3 billion to capitalize the
State Revolving Funds (SRFs) to assist our implementing partners in
revitalizing and rebuilding our Nation's aging water resources. The
budget funds the SRFs equivalent to the fiscal year 2017 enacted level
in recognition of the essential role they play in renewing and
replacing infrastructure in communities all across the country. The
fiscal year 2019 budget also includes $20 million for the Water
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act (WIFIA) program to address
water infrastructure needs. The $20 million provided for WIFIA could
provide up to $2 billion in credit assistance, which, when combined
with other funding resources, could spur up to an estimated $4 billion
in total infrastructure investment. In the first round of WIFIA
funding, projects selected encompass the broad range of project types
that the WIFIA program can finance, including wastewater, drinking
water, stormwater, and water recycling projects. Taken together, these
projects demonstrate how WIFIA complements the SRF programs as an
additional innovative and flexible source of low-cost capital for
communities of all sizes.
EPA will continue to partner with States, drinking water utilities,
and other stakeholders to identify and address current and potential
sources of drinking water contamination, particularly in areas of
significant regional and national importance. These actions are
integral to infrastructure efforts because source water protection can
reduce the need for additional drinking water treatment and avoid the
associated costs. To assure the American people that their water is
safe to drink, EPA's drinking water regulatory program monitors for a
broad array of contaminants, evaluates whether contaminants are of
public health concern, and regulates contaminants when there is a
meaningful opportunity for health risk reduction for persons served by
public water systems.
The Agency is focused on reducing lead exposure in the Nation's
water supply. EPA will work to advance progress in this area through
revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) as well as regulations to
implement the Water Infrastructure Improvement for the Nation (WIIN)
Act and the Reduction of Lead in Drinking Water Act. Lead exposure,
particularly at higher doses, continues to pose a significant health
and safety threat to our children, robbing them of the fullest
potential of their health, intellect, and future. EPA and our Federal
partners are committed to taking action to address this threat and
improve health outcomes for our Nation's most vulnerable citizens--our
children. This budget maintains funding for the Drinking Water State
Revolving Fund (DWSRF) which may be used to help communities replace
lead service lines by providing principal forgiveness and low interest
loans in addition to maximizing the use of the DWSRF set-asides to fund
corrosion control studies when an action level exceedance is triggered.
The maintained funding for the Drinking Water SRF, and the efforts of
the President's Task Force on Environmental Health Risks and Safety
Risks to Children, which I recently convened at EPA headquarters, will
ensure we are focused on reducing lead exposure nationwide.
EPA will continue to provide scientific water quality criteria
information to our partners and the public, review and approve State
water quality standards, and review and approve State lists of impaired
waters. In fiscal year 2019, the Agency will work with States and other
partners on Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs) as required by the Clean
Water Act, as well as on other waterbody restoration plans for listed
impaired waterbodies. The fiscal year 2019 budget includes funding for
the Chesapeake Bay and Great Lakes geographic programs to support our
State and local partners that monitor and protect these water bodies of
national significance. EPA also will continue to implement and support
core water quality programs that control point-source discharges
through permitting and pre-treatment programs.
revitalizing land and preventing contamination
During my time as Administrator, I have heard from families,
community members, elected officials, and business leaders that the
remediation of contaminated sites takes too long. Approximately 53
million, or 16 percent, of all Americans, live within three miles of a
Superfund site. Ensuring that the Superfund program is efficiently and
effectively managed, and contaminated land is returned to a safe and
productive use, is one of my top priorities. The fiscal year 2019
budget funds the Superfund account at the full fiscal year 2017 enacted
level to accelerate our progress in revitalizing land. Additionally,
last year I established the Superfund Task Force, which identified 42
recommendations under 5 overarching goals for revamping EPA's Superfund
work. These goals are Expediting Cleanup and Remediation; Re-
Invigorating Responsible Party Cleanup and Reuse; Encouraging Private
Investment; Promoting Redevelopment and Community Revitalization; and
Engaging Partners and Stakeholders.
Work to prioritize and reinvigorate the program is well underway
and will continue into the future. One example of the changes we are
implementing is the identification of Superfund sites for immediate and
intense action. I personally monitor and engage with our Regional
offices to accelerate work at these sites, such as at the West Lake
site, where we recently released a Proposed Plan after years of
inaction. At these sites and others across the country, the EPA is
actively engaged with increasing the pace of remediation progress at
Superfund sites on a continuous basis.
In fiscal year 2019, the Superfund program request is $1.089
billion, which will provide support to States, local communities, and
Tribes in their efforts to assess and cleanup many of the worst
contaminated sites in the U.S. and return them to productive use. In
addition to Superfund, over $109 million is requested for Brownfields
programs that will cleanup and restore contaminated land so it can be
available for redevelopment and provide economic productivity. EPA's
Brownfields programs are a successful model where the Agency works
cooperatively with States, Tribes, local governments, and other
agencies to help communities oversee, plan, assess, and clean up
Brownfield properties. These activities not only return land to
productive use but also help spur economic development and job
creation. Brownfields grants have a community-driven approach, with
over 69,200 acres of idle land made ready for productive use and over
129,240 jobs and $24.7 billion leveraged to date.
When it comes to cleaning up contaminated sites, I believe that the
steps we have put in place will accelerate the pace of cleanups across
the country.
ensuring the safety of chemicals in commerce
Ensuring the safety of chemicals used in commerce and sold in the
marketplace is a top priority. Resources are needed to support efforts
to minimize Americans' exposure to pesticides, help maintain a healthy
food supply, and address public health concerns.
In fiscal year 2019, $59 million is requested for the Toxic
Substances Control Act (TSCA) Chemical Risk Review and Reduction
Program to support the Agency's significant ongoing and new
responsibilities for ensuring that new and existing chemicals in
commerce do not present unreasonable risks to human health or the
environment. The Act authorized a new TSCA Service Fee to help provide
funding for EPA to carry out its new responsibilities. The Agency
recently released a proposed TSCA User Fee rule and anticipates
collecting fees in fiscal year 2019. The new fee will help defray cost
of carrying out new sections of the law and better support pre-
manufacture notice reviews.
In fiscal year 2019, the Agency expects to review over one thousand
new chemical submissions, take appropriate testing and risk management
actions--including orders and Significant New Use Rules (SNURS) where
appropriate, and make affirmative determinations. New chemicals will be
evaluated and decisions will be based on the best available science and
the weight of evidence.
Under my leadership, we have eliminated a backlog of more than 300
new chemical submissions that required re-review under the new law;
completed reviews under the new law of more than 1,150 new chemical
notifications; and commenced risk evaluations for an initial set of 10
priority chemicals and are issuing scoping documents on schedule. The
Agency is also increasing transparency for the public and regulated
community about these chemicals.
We are working with companies to gather all the relevant
information early in the process to inform safety reviews for new
chemicals. Reviewing new chemicals quickly will enable those deemed
safe to enter the marketplace to support jobs and our economy. The
reduction in the backlog is the result of prioritizing and implementing
process efficiencies. EPA will continue to work with all stakeholders
to identify additional changes to improve the quality, efficiency, and
transparency of the new chemical review program.
For chemicals in commerce, EPA will maintain an ambitious schedule
for initiating and completing chemical risk evaluations and, where
risks are identified, for initiating and completing regulatory actions
to address those risks. EPA also will implement the new mandates
related to determinations on claims for confidentiality for chemical
identities.
Chemical and biological pesticides help meet national and global
demands for food. They provide effective pest control for homes,
schools, gardens, highways, utility lines, hospitals, and drinking
water treatment facilities, while also controlling vectors of disease.
Identifying, assessing, and reducing the risks presented by the
pesticides on which our society and economy rely is integral to
ensuring environmental and human safety. EPA's pesticide licensing
program evaluates new pesticides before they reach the market and
ensures that pesticides already in commerce are safe when used in
accordance with the label as directed by the Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (FFDCA), and the Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA). The
program ensures that the pesticides available in the U.S. are safe when
used as directed. EPA will continue to review and register new
pesticides, new uses for existing pesticides, and other registration
requests in accordance with all statutory requirements. In addition,
the program is increasing the focus on pollinator health and working
with other Federal partners, States, and private stakeholder groups to
stem pollinator declines and increase pollinator habitat.
In fiscal year 2019, EPA will invest resources to improve the
compliance of pesticide registrations with the Endangered Species Act.
A portion of the funding also will ensure that pesticides are correctly
registered and applied in a manner that protects water quality.
assuring compliance with the law
For decades, the protections mandated by Federal environmental laws
have been essential to the growth of American prosperity and
improvements to public health and environmental quality. EPA remains
focused on assisting the regulated community in attaining and
maintaining compliance with our Nation's environmental laws and, where
necessary, punishing bad actors who shirk those laws. This means
providing effective compliance assistance to our industry partners and
enforcing civil and criminal cases in areas that address substantial
impacts to human health and the environment. EPA's enforcement efforts
to date have produced billions of dollars in cleanup commitments from
violators and billions of pounds of pollution prevented and cleaned up
as a result of those commitments.
As an example of providing increased compliance assistance, the
budget includes a proposal for new voluntary oil and chemical facility
compliance assistance fees. For interested parties, EPA would conduct a
walk-through and provide recommendations on ways the facility could
come into or remain in compliance with EPA regulations. This is one
example of how the Agency is advancing compliance assistance.
As States are the primary implementers of many enforcement action
programs, we will focus Agency resources on non-delegated programs. We
will rely on our State partners to achieve compliance and enforcement
goals, and we will focus resources on our direct implementation
responsibilities and oversight, emphasizing violations with public
health and environmental impacts.
improving efficiency and effectiveness
The budget includes EPA's Reform Plan to implement the goals of the
President's Executive Order 13781: Comprehensive Plan for Reorganizing
the Executive Branch. The plan includes a series of projects focused on
improving how EPA provides services and engages customers. Projects
include streamlining EPA's permit review processes, deploying a Lean
Management System, and reducing unnecessary reporting burden on the
regulated community. We will build on business process improvements by
partnering with States, Tribes, and local governments to expand and
support approaches across all our programs. The Agency will work with
States and use Lean techniques to streamline the review of State-issued
permits.
This budget does not include plans to close Regional offices, but
we will continue to prioritize efforts that save taxpayer dollars
through space consolidation and essential renovations to reduce and
optimize our physical footprint. We will work with States and Tribes to
target resources to core statutory work and provide flexibility to
address particular priorities and concerns. As careful stewards of
taxpayer resources, we will examine our programs for those that are
unnecessary, redundant, or that have served their purpose and
accomplished their mission or are outside EPA's statutory mandates. The
fiscal year 2019 President's budget identifies and eliminates programs
to save taxpayers approximately $620 million relative to the fiscal
year 2018 enacted budget.
With this budget, we are committed to fulfilling our mission of
protecting public health and the environment. With support from our
State and local partners, and by working with each of you and your
colleagues in Congress, we can make a real difference for communities
across America.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. I look
forward to answering your questions.
GENERAL CRITICISMS
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Administrator. I appreciate
you outlining the issues that you have undertaken as an Agency
to work again towards the goals that I think we all recognize
are the mission set within the EPA: clean air and clean water.
You have heard the very direct comments from my Ranking
Member and from the Ranking Member of the full Committee. As I
mentioned in my opening, you had an opportunity to field
similar criticism in the House hearing just last week or so.
That is part of that record. I think we all have had an
opportunity to review that, but I would ask you at this point
in time if you have anything that you would like to add to that
in response to some of the issues that either Senator Udall or
Senator Leahy have raised, or if you choose, you may just
handle them directly as those questions come from them. But I
wanted to give you the opportunity to supplement anything at
the outset before I move to the more budget-specific questions
that I have.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. Chairman Murkowski, thank you for the
opportunity. Let me say first and foremost, I understand the
concern that has been raised by the Ranking Member, as well as
Senator Leahy, and in your comments as well, Chairman
Murkowski. I knew that as I began this process over 16 months
ago to lead this Agency that the issues would be competitive.
There are world views that drive the decisions that we make at
the Agency, and over the last several years, we've seen a
competition with respect to how we should approach our
business. First and foremost, we have had some advice in agenda
that true environmentalism, environmental protectionist
prohibition, and not stewardship. One of the things that we
have tried to focus upon at the Agency, and what I've tried to
focus upon, is restoring a commitment of recognition that we,
as a country, can be about management of our natural resources,
that we can truly feed the world and power the world and do so
with stewardship principles in mind as we advance the agenda.
We've made some very important decisions, Chairman, as you
know, with respect to the Pebble Mine situation in Alaska. That
was a very controversial decision that was made. We made the
decision based upon the data, the science, and the feedback
that was provided by citizens in your State, and did what was
right there.
Recently, as I mentioned in my comments, the methylene
chloride decision was an Obama era regulation issued in January
of 2017. I recently met with individuals impacted by methylene
chloride and made the decision to proceed with that by
forwarding it to OMB. We are making the tough decisions with
respect to environmental protection while at the same time
restoring confidence in the American people that we can engage
in regulations and not pick winners and losers and not engage
in coercion with our actions. Now, that has brought competition
and criticism, and I understood that from the very beginning.
There have been decisions over the last 16 or so months that,
as I look back on those decisions, I would not make the same
decisions again. I'm sure we're going to talk about some of
those.
Some of the areas of criticism are frankly areas where
processes at the Agency were not properly instituted to prevent
certain abuses from happening. One, as an example, the decision
with respect to the phone booth. You mentioned the secure phone
line. That was a process that there were not proper controls in
place early to ensure a legal review of the obligation of the
Agency to inform Congress and GAO. I started a process shortly
after I found out about it that we investigate that and
institute those controls to ensure that does not happen again.
We're going to talk about a number of those, and as the
leader of the Agency, it's my responsibility to take steps. In
fact, one of the things I did shortly after the House meeting,
Chairman, is institute a memo for the entire Agency that any
expenditure over $5,000 that impacts my official duties has to
be approved by the CFO, the Deputy, and the Chief of Staff to
ensure that all processes are being checked and there are
proper controls in place.
So I share your concerns about some of these decisions. I
want to rectify those going forward. I also want to highlight
for you that some of the criticism is unfounded and I think
exaggerated I think it feeds this division that we've seen
around very important issues affecting the environment. We can
achieve both, good environmental outcomes and pro-growth
policies, and it's our commitment and my commitment to achieve
that. I look forward to the discussion.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES--WOTUS
Senator Murkowski. Well, thank you for that, sir. And let
me move then to a policy initiative. I mentioned in my opening
statement the issue related to the Waters of the United States,
WOTUS, as we call it around here. I believe very strongly that
what we saw under the previous administration with the
interpretation was overly expansive. I mentioned that when two-
thirds of your State is considered wetlands, it would have put
even the most routine project in my State to EPA scrutiny and
delay advancement. I have been encouraged by the plans to
reexamine the regulation and to come up with a more sensible
proposal.
What is the status of updating the rule? I've heard rumbles
out there that the timeframe for completion may be slipping on
this. Can you provide me any updates here?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, as far as the timing, there are actually
two or three actions that we are engaged in as an Agency. There
was a proposed withdrawal and a replacement of the WOTUS rule
that we've talked about, Chairman, as well as a rule dealing
with the compliance dates for the Waters of the United States
from 2015. So the proposed withdrawal of the Waters of the
United States rule from 2015 has not been issued yet.
There was a supplemental notice that we're likely going to
be providing to the marketplace to provide additional
opportunity for comment. But the plan is to actually finalize
the proposed withdrawal sometime in the third quarter of this
year, and then have a replacement of the Waters of the United
States rule by the end of the year as far as the actual
finalization. I anticipate by the end of this month that we'll
actually have a proposed definition of replacement of the 2015
rule that will go out for a proposal for people to comment
upon, and that will begin either late this month or early next
month.
Senator Murkowski. Great.
Mr. Pruitt. On that matter, though, Chairman, if I might
for a second, the Waters of the United States rule, the purpose
behind it, as far as what we heard in 2015, was to provide
certainty, that folks across the country needed clarity on
where Federal jurisdiction began and ended. As we look at what
happened in 2015, that actually did not occur. There was more
uncertainty after the publication of the rule as opposed to
certainty. So we have a job to do. The job is to provide that
clarity and that certainty to the American people. It's not
just the withdrawal, it's also the replacement that matters
there.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you for that.
Senator Udall.
ETHICAL AND SPENDING PROBLEMS
Senator Udall. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Administrator Pruitt, there has been a deluge of reports
about ethical and spending problems in your office. I would
like to give you an opportunity to go on the record confirming
or denying some of these reports. In the limited time we have,
the public deserves real answers.
Do you know how many investigations into your ethics and
spending are ongoing as of today?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, there are inquiries by the inspector
general, as you know, Ranking Member Udall. There's interaction
with the GAO as well. So as far as the total number, I don't
know, but I know that those agencies and those individuals or
offices are involved.
Senator Udall. By my count, there are 14, including the
inquiry I requested today. And I'm confident the GAO will
accept. And it's 16 if you include the two ongoing reviews by
your bosses at the White House and the OMB.
And, Madam Chair, I would ask consent to submit that list
for the record.
Senator Murkowski. It will be included.
[The information follows:]
List of Scott Pruitt Investigations
(As of May 16, 2018)
COMPLETED (#1)
GAO Ruled Pruitt Broke Law By Installing $43,000 Phone Booth.
According to the New York Times, ``The Environmental Protection Agency
violated the law when it installed a soundproof phone booth for the
administrator, Scott Pruitt, at a cost of roughly $43,000, a
congressional watchdog agency ruled on Monday. The congressional
agency, the Government Accountability Office, said in a report that the
EPA had not notified Congress as required before spending more than
$5,000 on office equipment.'' [New York Times, 4/16/18]
ONGOING (#16 Total, Including #2 White House/OMB)
EPA INSPECTOR GENERAL
1.
EPA IG Investigation To Explore Frequency, Cost, And Extent Of
Pruitt Travel. According to Reuters, ``The Office of Inspector General
said it would look into the `frequency, cost and extent' of Pruitt's
travels to Oklahoma through July 31, and whether travel policies and
procedures were followed. It said the investigation will also aim to
determine `whether EPA policies and procedures are sufficiently
designed to prevent fraud, waste and abuse with the Administrator's
travel that included trips to Oklahoma.' '' [Reuters, 8/28/17]
-- EPA IG Expanded Investigation To Include $40,000 Spent On Trip
To Morocco. According to the Washington Examiner, ``EPA's
inspector general said Wednesday it will investigate
Administrator Scott Pruitt's recent trip to Morocco to promote
natural gas. Senator Tom Carper, D-Delaware, who requested the
probe, says Pruitt's four-day trip to Morocco last month was
inappropriate because the EPA plays no formal role in
overseeing natural gas exports, which falls under the
jurisdiction of the Energy Department or Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission. The EPA inspector general already is
investigating Pruitt for his use of private and military
flights and his frequent travel as administrator to his home
State of Oklahoma, where he served as attorney general. The
inspector general's office expanded the probe to include
Pruitt's travels through the end of the year, including the
Morocco trip, which cost $40,000.'' [Washington Examiner, 1/10/
18]
2.
EPA IG To Investigate Pruitt Meeting With Industry Group.
According to The Hill, ``The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA)
inspector general said this week it will investigate Administrator
Scott Pruitt's April meeting with a coal mining industry group.
Democrats on the House Energy and Commerce Committee released a letter
Wednesday from Inspector General Arthur Elkins Jr. that confirmed the
office `will review the single meeting between EPA Administrator Scott
Pruitt and the National Mining Association in April 2017.' '' [The
Hill, 12/6/17]
3.
EPA IG Investigating Use Of SDWA Hiring Practices By
Administrator. According to the EPA Inspector General, ``The Office of
Inspector General (OIG) for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) plans to begin preliminary research on the Office of the
Administrator's use of its authority to fill administratively
determined positions created pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act
Amendment of 1978. This assignment is self-initiated based, in part, on
a congressional request. Our objective will be to determine how the
agency has used its authority under the Safe Drinking Water Act to fill
up to 30 administratively determined positions. To accomplish this
objective, we will collect and compare information on the
administratively determined positions filled by the agency under this
authority. Applicable generally accepted government auditing standards
will be used in conducting our work. The anticipated benefit of this
project is to strengthen agency policies and procedures related to
filling administratively determined positions.'' [EPA Inspector
General, 1/8/10]
4.
EPA IG Investigating Questionable Spending Of Security Detail.
According to the New York Times, ``EPA Inspector General Arthur Elkins
is now conducting at least five investigative audits related to Pruitt,
including a previously undisclosed probe into questionable spending by
his swollen security detail. The Associated Press reported Friday that
the 20-member team tasked with providing day-and-night protection for
Pruitt had racked up salary, overtime and travel expenses approaching
$3 million.'' [New York Times, 4/9/18]
-- Members Of Pruitt Detail Were Improperly Paid Overtime Wages.
According to the New York Times, ``The broader probe launched
by EPA's inspector general into Pruitt's security spending grew
out of a 2016 audit into whether members of the administrator's
protective detail were improperly paid overtime wages. A
separate investigation was launched in November into whether
members of EPA's internal law enforcement arm actually worked
hours reflected on their timesheets.'' [New York Times, 4/9/18]
5.
EPA IG To Audit Compliance With Trump's 2-For-1 Order. According
to EE News, ``EPA's internal watchdog will investigate the agency's
compliance with President Trump's executive order directing agencies to
kill two regulations for each new one issued. The Office of Inspector
General will conduct preliminary research on the Office of Policy's
compliance with Executive Order 13771, according to a memo dated
yesterday. Trump also asked agencies to develop regulatory budgets and
submit them to the White House Office of Management and Budget, with
the annual cost of all new rules `no greater than zero.' EPA has been
at the forefront of Trump's push for deregulation, taking more than 22
actions to ease rules during his first year in office.'' [EE News, 4/
11/18]
6.
EPA IG Opened Separate Investigation Into Pruitt Use Of Security
During Trips To Disneyland And Rose Bowl. According to an article in
The Hill, ``The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) inspector
general will investigate Administrator Scott Pruitt's use of a security
detail on personal trips, in response to a Democratic Senator's request
for the probe. Senator Sheldon Whitehouse (D-Rhode Island) announced
Thursday that EPA Inspector General Arthur Elkins has responded to his
request by agreeing to open a separate investigation into Pruitt's use
of a taxpayer-funded security detail during travel to Disneyland, the
Rose Bowl and other personal trips. OIG spokeswoman Tia Elbaum
confirmed to The Hill that the office is taking up the review.'' [The
Hill, 4/19/18]
7.
EPA IG Reviewing Pruitt's Condo Rental. According to Politico,
``EPA's inspector general is reviewing Administrator Scott Pruitt's
$50-a-night lease agreement, a spokesman confirmed today. Democrats
from the House and Senate this week called on the IG to review Pruitt's
rental of a room in a condo co-owned by the wife of a lobbyist with
energy clients. This is at least the fourth IG investigation into
Pruitt's specific activities at EPA. The IG is also investigating his
travel, his use of a special Safe Drinking Water Act hiring authority
and his spending on a soundproof phone booth for his office.''
[Politico, 4/5/18]
-- EPA IG Agreed To Take On Investigation. According to the New
York Times, ``Federal officials will investigate the
circumstances around the rental of a condominium last year by
Scott Pruitt, the administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency, from the wife of an energy lobbyist for $50-a-night,
Members of Congress announced Friday. A letter from the EPA's
inspector general notifying Representatives Don Beyer of
Virginia and Ted Lieu of California that inspectors intended to
take up the inquiry was dated Wednesday but released to
lawmakers on Friday.'' [New York Times, 4/18/18]
-- EPA IG Opened Investigation In Pruitt's Conduct In Office.
According to a press release, ``Congressmen Ted W. Lieu (D-Los
Angeles County) and Don Beyer (D-Virginia) released the
Environmental Protection Agency Inspector General's letter
confirming that the IG is reviewing Administrator Scott
Pruitt's conduct in office. The letter was a response to calls
by Mr. Lieu and Mr. Beyer for an IG investigation into
Administrator Pruitt's below-market condo lease, as well as an
after-the-fact ethics justification for the arrangement.''
[Congressman Don Beyer, Press Release, 4/27/18]
8.
EPA IG Reviewing Official Samantha Dravis' Employment Records.
According to the Washington Post, ``Separately on Monday, EPA Inspector
General Arthur A. Elkins Jr. confirmed that he would open a review into
whether Samantha Dravis, the Office of Policy's departing associate
administrator, had failed to work for much of the time between last
November and January while still receiving compensation as a full-time
employee.'' [Washington Post, 4/9/18]
9.
EPA IG Reviewing Pruitt's Nonpublic Email Accounts. According to
an article in The Hill, ``The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA)
inspector general said it is investigating EPA Administrator Scott
Pruitt's use of nonpublic email accounts, the latest in a series of
Federal investigations into the agency chief. The inspector general, an
independent office within the EPA, will look into whether Pruitt is
keeping a record of his emails, as he is mandated to by Federal law,
and whether the EPA is searching all his accounts when fulfilling
public records requests. Members of the Senate Environment and Public
Works Committee--Ranking Member Tom Carper (D-Delaware) and Senator
Jeff Merkley (D-Oregon)--released a letter dated May 2 that confirmed
the investigation.'' [The Hill, 5/15/18]
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE (GAO)
10.
GAO Investigating Pruitt Involvement In National Cattlemen's Beef
Association Video. According to The Hill, ``Congress's watchdog agency
is examining whether the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) violated
legal provisions prohibiting lobbying and propaganda using agency
resources. At issue is a video produced by the National Cattlemen's
Beef Association, in which EPA head Scott Pruitt participated. The
video told NCBA members to file comments with the agency on its
proposal to revise former President Obama's controversial Clean Water
Rule.'' [The Hill, 11/6/17]
11.
GAO Investigating Pruitt's Role In Picking Members Of Science
Advisory Boards. According to an article in The Hill, ``Congress's
watchdog agency is looking into the role that political appointees at
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) played in picking new
scientists and other agency advisory committee members. In a letter
that Senate Democrats made public Tuesday, a Government Accountability
Office (GAO) official accepted the request last month by Senators Tom
Carper (D-Delaware) and Sheldon Whitehouse (D-Rhode Island) to add the
matter to an existing review the agency is conducting. The GAO agreed
last year to examine EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt's actions and
policies regarding the agency's 22 advisory committees, which advise
the EPA on matters like science, health and air quality.'' [The Hill,
3/7/18]
12.
*PENDING GAO ACCEPTANCE* GAO Reviewing April 13th Tweet from EPA's
Official Twitter Account. Senator Tom Udall wrote to the GAO on May 15,
2018, ``I write to request a legal opinion from the U.S. Government
Accountability Office concerning whether the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) violated the annual governmentwide statutory prohibition
on the use of funds for publicity or propaganda and the Antideficiency
Act when the U.S. EPA's official twitter account, @EPA, tweeted the
following statement at 6 am on April 13, 2018: `The Senate does its
duty: Andrew Wheeler confirmed by Senate as deputy administrator of
@EPA. The Democrats couldn't block the confirmation of environmental
policy expert and former EPA staffer under both a Republican and a
Democrat president.' ''
HOUSE OVERSIGHT & GOV'T REFORM
13.
House Oversight Committee Investigating Pruitt First Class Flights
And Spending. According to The Hill, ``In February, Gowdy began
investigating Pruitt over numerous first-class flights funded by
taxpayers. But so far, the retiring GOP chairman has not acted on calls
by his Democratic counterpart, Rep. Elijah Cummings of Maryland, to
bring Pruitt before his committee to personally answer lawmakers
questions.'' [The Hill, 4/6/18]
-- House Oversight Committee Expanded Probe To Include $50-A-Night
Rental Of A Capitol Hill Condo Tied To A Fossil Fuels Lobbyist.
According to the New York Times, ``Staff for the Republican-led
House Oversight committee confirmed Monday that it has expanded
its review of Pruitt's travel spending to now include ethical
questions surrounding his bargain $50-a-night rental of a
Capitol Hill condo tied to a fossil fuels lobbyist.'' [New York
Times, 4/9/18]
OFFICE OF SPECIAL COUNSEL
14.
Office of Special Counsel Investigating EPA Tweet. According to
the Washington Post, ``The U.S. Office of Special Counsel, a Federal
agency that enforces the limits on political speech by Federal
employees under the Hatch Act, is investigating an official EPA tweet
that appeared to ding the Democratic Party. That's according to AFGE
Council 238, a union that represents EPA employees, which filed a
complaint about the tweet. The message in question--sent on April 13
from @EPA, the agency's main Twitter account--went out shortly after
former coal and nuclear lobbyist Andrew Wheeler was confirmed last
month by the Senate to be the EPA's deputy administrator. Wheeler was
voted through on a 53-to-45 vote, with the vast majority of Senate
Democrats opposing his nomination.'' [Washington Post 5/2/18]
WHITE HOUSE
15.
White House Conducting Internal Investigation Of Pruitt Behavior.
According to the Wall Street Journal, ``The White House is conducting a
review of Environmental Protection Agency chief Scott Pruitt's
activities after reports that he had rented accommodations in
Washington at below-market rates from the family of an energy lobbyist,
a White House official said Monday.'' [Wall Street Journal, 4/2/18]
16.
Office Of Management And Budget Investigating Soundproof Phone
Booth. According to The Hill, ``The White House's Office of Management
and Budget (OMB) is planning to investigate the Environmental
Protection Agency's (EPA) decision to spend more than $43,000 for a
soundproof booth for Administrator Scott Pruitt. OMB Director Mick
Mulvaney told lawmakers on the House Appropriations Committee about the
plans to probe the booth at a Wednesday hearing of the committee's
subpanel that oversees the OMB. Mulvaney said that since the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) ruled Monday that the spending on the booth
was a violation of the Antideficiency Act, OMB will investigate.'' [The
Hill, 4/18/18]
SPECIAL COUNSEL MUELLER'S INVESTIGATION
Senator Udall. Administrator Pruitt, as a former attorney
general, and, you know, you and I share that responsibility. We
didn't serve at the same time, but--and you're also a law
enforcement official at the EPA. Do you support Special Counsel
Mueller completing his investigation?
Mr. Pruitt. I'm sorry, Ranking Member Udall. Investigation
into----
Senator Udall. Do you support Special Counsel Mueller
completing his investigation?
Mr. Pruitt. I think the process is continuing----
Senator Udall. It's a simple yes or no.
Mr. Pruitt. That's not something I'm aware of.
Senator Udall. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Senator Udall. Do you support him completing his
investigation?
Mr. Pruitt. I don't belong in the process.
Senator Udall. You're a law enforcement official. You've
had investigations before. Do you support it?
Mr. Pruitt. I think as attorney general, it's important for
law enforcement, those investigators that serve prosecutors, to
be able to provide adequate information to them to make
informed decisions about whether to proceed as a prosecutor.
Senator Udall. So----
Mr. Pruitt. I did that as attorney general, and I would
trust that would happen at the Federal level as well.
Senator Udall. As you know, the right answer is yes.
Whenever there's an investigation ongoing, a President or
Rudolph Giuliani or anybody else shouldn't be interfering with
that investigation, putting time limits on it or anything else,
and that's the reality.
Mr. Pruitt. I also----
TWEET MOCKING DEMOCRATIC SENATORS
Senator Udall. Yesterday--I haven't asked a question, sir.
Yesterday, I requested a GAO inquiry into the April 13 tweet
from your EPA's official account, which you mocked Democratic
Senators for their votes opposing the confirmation of an EPA
official. Are you aware appropriations law prohibits Federal
spending on publicity and propaganda?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I was unaware of the tweet, and that
shouldn't have occurred.
Senator Udall. You were unaware of it. So you didn't
authorize it.
Mr. Pruitt. I was unaware of the tweet, and that shouldn't
have occurred. There should have been no mocking that took
place.
Senator Udall. Do you apologize for it?
Mr. Pruitt. The Agency should not have done that.
Senator Udall. Okay. And you apologize for it.
Mr. Pruitt. The Agency should not have done that.
Senator Udall. Well, do you apologize to the Democratic
Senators that you were mocking?
Mr. Pruitt. The Agency should not have engaged in that
process.
ANTI-DEFICIENCY ACT VIOLATION
Senator Udall. And you agree, I guess, that--well, let me
go on to the privacy booth.
Today marks 1 month since GAO announced that the EPA
violated the Anti-Deficiency Act by hiding a $43,000
expenditure on a privacy booth. The law requires agencies to
immediately report to the President and Congress on how the
violation happened and what you plan to do to fix it, but we
have no report in hand. When do you plan to comply with the law
by properly reporting this violation, including what EPA plans
to do to make sure it doesn't happen again, and to your boss,
the President, and the Congress?
Mr. Pruitt. As I mentioned to the Chairman in the comments
I just provided, one of the things that I've learned with
respect to this particular process is there were not proper
controls in place. When I say ``proper controls,'' there was no
legal review that took place contemporaneous to approving the
contract on whether notification should occur to Congress or
whether it fell within the $5,000 threshold----
Senator Udall. But you're----
Mr. Pruitt. That was not----
Senator Udall [continuing]. You're required now to report
it. You were required then.
Mr. Pruitt. That is----
Senator Udall. We do not have that report.
Mr. Pruitt. That's not my understanding.
Senator Udall. As far as I know, the President doesn't have
that report. Are you going to report to us?
Mr. Pruitt. It's my understanding that Congress has been,
in fact, informed about the $43,000 expenditure.
Senator Udall. I--no, you have not issued the report that
is required and tell us how you are going to fix this. So will
you commit----
Mr. Pruitt. There's an ongoing investigation----
Senator Udall [continuing]. Today to do that?
Mr. Pruitt. There's an ongoing investigation internally----
Senator Udall. Will you commit today to do that?
Mr. Pruitt. To do what, Ranking Member Udall?
Senator Udall. Submit the report you're required to submit
by law.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. Once the information is collected, we will
provide that report. It's my understanding we have, in fact,
advised Congress about the $43,000 expenditure. Now, if there's
additional information that's needed, we will collect that
information and get it to Congress.
Senator Udall. There--there is additional information
needed because the GAO found you violated the law----
Mr. Pruitt. The Agency violated----
Senator Udall [continuing]. And they find you violated the
law, you are required to make a report to the President and to
the Congress. You have not done so. And then all additional
expenditures after that are also required to be reported, and
we haven't had a report on that either.
Let me ask about this behavior with the sirens around town.
You know, we've heard of your protective detail. Eric Weese
told the New York Times that when traveling, you wanted to use
lights and sirens, which are supposed to be reserved for
emergencies because you often ran late. And he said that 2
weeks after he protested and tried to stop the practice, he was
removed from his position.
Let's get the record straight. Did your security detail use
sirens while you were in the car for nonemergencies? Yes or no.
Mr. Pruitt. Let's do this----
Senator Udall. Yes or no.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. There are policies in place that
governs the use of lights. Those policies were followed to the
best of my knowledge by each of the agents that serve me.
Senator Udall. Did--okay. Here we go.
[Laughter.]
Senator Udall. There have been reports that you encouraged
the use of lights and sirens on your motorcade even though
there wasn't an emergency. Is that true?
Mr. Pruitt. I don't recall that. I don't recall that
happening, Ranking Member Udall.
Senator Udall. You went shopping----
Mr. Pruitt. There are policies----
Senator Udall [continuing]. You went--you also----
Mr. Pruitt. There are policies that the Agency follows, the
agents follow, and to my knowledge, they followed it in all
instances.
Senator Udall. Well, and you personally requested that the
sirens and the flashing lights occur, is that right?
Mr. Pruitt. I think I just indicated that the Agency has
followed those policies to the best of my knowledge, and that's
what----
Senator Udall. You personally requested that on a number of
trips.
Mr. Pruitt. I don't recall that.
Senator Udall. Yes. Well, I'm going to submit for the
record, Madam Chair, an email that was released this morning by
your Pasquale Perrotta. He sent an email, and he says, By the
way, Administrator Pruitt encourages the use. So I'd like to
submit that for the record.
Senator Murkowski. That will be included as part of the
record.
[The information follows:]
Senator Udall. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Murkowski. Let's go to Senator Hyde-Smith.
SUPERFUND CLEANUP--MISSISSIPPI GULF COAST
Senator Hyde-Smith. Chairwoman Murkowski, thank you for
convening this important hearing to review the Environmental
Protection Agency's fiscal year 2019 budget request. I am
honored to have the opportunity to serve on the Interior
Appropriations Subcommittee, and I look forward to working with
you, Ranking Member Udall, and the distinguished Members of
this subcommittee on crafting responsible funding legislation
that provides adequate resources to the many important agencies
and programs under the subcommittee's jurisdiction.
Administrator Pruitt, thank you for appearing before the
subcommittee today and all your very good leadership as head of
the EPA. You have taken a commonsense approach to the
environmental regulatory process. For that, I am truly
grateful, and I have been most impressed.
I do have a couple of questions. Over the past year, the
EPA has taken many important steps to expedite the cleanup of
Mississippi phosphate Superfund site in Pascagoula,
Mississippi. I appreciate you making this a priority, and I
certainly commend you for your commitment to ensuring the
Superfund program is managed very efficiently and very
effectively. This effort will not only benefit the city of
Pascagoula and citizens of the Mississippi Gulf Coast, but it
also protects some of the most productive nurseries for aquatic
species that our fishing and recreational communities rely on.
The Action Memorandum that you signed last month calls for
$71.6 million in cleanup to take place from 2018 through 2020,
plus 36 million for ongoing wastewater treatment during a 3-
year period. Mississippi constituents are very encouraged by
the EPA's plan for action.
Will you please elaborate or share your thoughts on the
positive impacts for the Superfund effort you will have on the
Mississippi Gulf Coast, citizens, and ecosystem should the
cleanup go as planned?
Mr. Pruitt. Senator, thank you for your comments and the
question. The mayor actually was in town at the time that we
did that, and, as you indicated, we added the site to the list
in January of 2018. I think the Superfund impact, the approach
we're taking to making sure that we prioritize action and get
results, sometimes from an early remediation perspective, is
making a substantial difference. I think this site is an
example of that.
It's also exemplary of how we should be partnering with
those at the local level. What we have endeavored to do is work
with mayors in the localities of where these sites are located,
along with Governors, and make sure that our program, both at
the Federal--in Washington, but also in the region, are trying
to find answers with those partners. I think, again, this is
demonstrative of that.
SUPERFUND RESOURCES--ORPHAN SITES
Senator Hyde-Smith. Does EPA's budget request for fiscal
year 2019 include adequate resources for EPA to carry out its
Action Memorandum?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I think the omnibus that was just adopted
increased Superfund allocation, which is helpful. As you know,
there are a series of orphan sites that make up our Superfund
portfolio, sites meaning that there is no responsible party.
Now, they are the minority of sites, but they are very
expensive, and we have to use resources, obviously, of the
Agency to achieve that.
So I think a continued emphasis on funding and the budget
with respect to Superfund is very, very important to address
those orphan sites. Another approach we're taking is to get
accountability with those responsible parties to make sure that
the companies that have polluted the sites are held accountable
and that they actually pay for remediation in a timely fashion.
So I think both are very important, both funding from a
Federal level, but also the accountability through the
enforcement process.
OFFICE OF CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT
Senator Hyde-Smith. Thank you. And also the previous
administrations have made the process of pesticide
registrations less predictable, and the sound science that has
traditionally supported a risk-based approach to regulating
pesticides has given way to politics and emotions. As a former
commissioner of agriculture for our State, this is very
important to us, that farmers in Mississippi and throughout the
Southeast rely heavily on pesticide products to protect the
investment they make every year to provide food and fiber to
the world.
I would like to personally thank you, Mr. Administrator,
for visiting Mississippi and several small farms last year in
the fall. I further commend your leadership at EPA in resetting
the intent for the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and
Rodenticide Act's risk-based approach to regulating pesticides
and reestablishing a predictable regulatory process for the
registration of these very critical products to farmers and
ranchers and everyone else. You've brought true commonsense
policy to the Agency, and I look forward to working more with
you in the future as we're enjoying this leadership.
I was interested to see your announcement this week
establishing the new Office of Continuous Improvement at EPA.
Will this new Agency-wide effort to improve the time it takes
EPA to complete many of its core functions benefit pesticide
registration and the overall regulation of important
agricultural products?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. That's actually the focus, Senator, of the
Office of Continuous Improvement. There are many statutory
deadlines that Congress imposes upon the Agency, whether it's a
NAAQS review process or the 15-year cycle on pesticides, and
routinely those statutory time periods are not complied with.
And we didn't keep track of it before.
So whether it's permitting, as I indicated, the time
between the violation and enforcement, actually fixing the
violation, this issue of statutory deadlines, those were not
tracked, nor was there accountability in those areas. So the
Office of Continuous Improvement is set up to address each of
those, and also to actually establish metrics and objectives.
We spent some time last year, the third and fourth quarter,
talking to each of our program offices and had them identify on
air attainment, as an example, under NAAQS. What is the
objective that they want to achieve in the next 3- to 5-year
period in actually setting those goals in place and tracking
those on a daily basis?
So I'm very encouraged by that process, and I'm hopeful
that it will yield results as we go forward.
OFFICE OF CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT--REGULATORY PROCESS
Senator Hyde-Smith. And one other is, What are some other
key areas under EPA's jurisdiction in which this new office
will streamline and improve the regulatory process?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I mentioned permitting. We didn't even
track the time period it took to grant or deny permits before
we arrived. We marshaled that data together last year. I know
this will not be terribly surprising to Members of the
subcommittee, but it takes us a while to get to that permitting
process. We are setting goals and objectives to actually finish
that within a certain time period. By the end of 2018, we will
have processes in place to ensure decisions are made within 6
months on the permits that we--that we review.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Very refreshing. Thank you very much.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Tester.
SUPERFUND CLEANUP ACTIONS
Senator Tester. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member
Udall.
Thank you for being here, Administrator Pruitt. I want to
talk a little bit about a few parochial issues for me.
Last year, you committed to working with Superfund
communities in Montana, increase transparency, and solicit
additional public input. I applaud that. I am glad to hear that
EPA and BP-ARCO are finally moving forward with a framework
agreement to cleaning up Butte, and hopefully can move forward
soon with Anaconda. But due to court orders sealing consent
decree negotiations, the people in these communities don't know
the broad scopes of what the cleanup is going to look like, so
the transparency hasn't happened, and the public input hasn't
happened. Are you willing to ask the court permission to share
at least an overview of the proposed cleanup actions with the
public?
Mr. Pruitt. Absolutely. Senator, if I might, with respect
to Butte particularly, I think we--I think there with the
January action this year as you know, there is some delisting
that's occurring. We're making progress, but there's work left
to be done----
Senator Tester. Yes. Okay.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. But I'm encouraged where we are.
Senator Tester. One of the key things is, is that the Butte
community, and the Anaconda community also to an extent, have
not had input on this. The stuff has been done, sealed up,
secret, nontransparent at all. You will ask the court for
permission to open that up and you will share it with the
public?
Mr. Pruitt. Justice would have to do that, so we would have
to work through Justice to achieve that, but we will make that
request. And--but let me say this as well, we've had people on
the ground, as you know, in Butte and other places soliciting
and trying to get comments. So we don't----
Senator Tester. Yes. Yes. I got it, but do you understand?
I mean, this has been going on for a long, long time in Butte--
--
Mr. Pruitt. I know.
Senator Tester [continuing]. In the community. And I think
you agree, by your statements last year. I just want to make
sure we follow up and do that. The community needs to have
input, so they need to know what's going on. They can't--they
can give input, but it's like--you know what I mean? You've got
to know what's going on with the decrees in order to be able to
give adequate input on how to move forward. And that's all I'm
asking for you----
Mr. Pruitt. It's been a point--absolutely. It's been a
point of emphasis in each of these areas that we have focused
upon. The community involvement is----
Senator Tester. Yes. And with that goes the opportunity to
potentially listen to that input and change those decrees to
meet the needs of the community.
Mr. Pruitt. As we negotiate the enforcement, yes.
BUTTE CLEANUP
Senator Tester. Okay. The OIG September report--thank you
for that--the OIG September report on Superfund staffing issues
cited that a lack of even remedial investigations on the West
Side Soils Operable Unit in Butte is a prime example of how
understaffing can delay efforts for decades. We don't even know
if people and water are at risk, but we know, at least we think
we know, that there is arsenic, cadmium, copper, lead, zinc.
You know all the impacts of that. This is a human health and
safety issue that's been in place for decades on one of the
largest Superfund sites in the Nation there in Butte, a site
that EPA has recently flagged for immediate intense action,
your Agency, and yet there is still only one employee on the
ground there on the site. And I understand in between him and
your regional director, they're working to engage people on the
ground to get the ball rolling, but haven't given them any
additional resources or staff to get that ball rolling.
Now, how are these sites going to get cleaned up? Even
high-priority sites like Butte, which have real threats to
human health and water, if they can't get the resources they
need for even basic risk assessment?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. So we have sent individuals from
headquarters and also the region to engage with Butte. I made
the comment in response to the question just a minute ago.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt. I mean, the funding from Congress with respect
to Superfund is important.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt. It's something that we want to encourage
increasing. I'm thankful that in the omnibus that was
increased----
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. But those monies, Senator, largely
go toward those orphan sites that don't have a responsible
party. So the personnel side of things, we will work with the
regions to achieve better coordination to make sure there's an
allocation of resources to address these high-priority areas. I
think what you're referencing is the administrator's list that
put Butte on.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt. And it is absolutely a point of emphasis as far
as engagement and getting people onsite to help.
Senator Tester. I got that, Administrator Pruitt, but it
takes more than just putting them on a list.
Mr. Pruitt. I understand.
Senator Tester. They've got to have the manpower, they've
got to have the resources, or it doesn't happen. They get on a
list, and that's as far as it goes. And I'm just asking you to
make sure that they do have the resources and the manpower
because it's--it's--you know, it's not going away unless we
deal with it.
Mr. Pruitt. I agree.
Senator Tester. Okay. So let me ask you this. I don't think
Butte is singular in the problem. I think there are 1,700
sites, I believe?
Mr. Pruitt. 1,340-plus.
Senator Tester. 1,340-plus.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Senator Tester. Okay, we'll take your numbers, that have
been--yet the OIG says that the staff--the offices are
understaffed, and yet we get the proposal that the Superfund
budget is being cut. Did I read that wrong in the budget?
Mr. Pruitt. The proposed budget actually proposed a cut,
yes.
Senator Tester. So, I mean, you've got--we just had the
conversation about evaluation. We just had the--and----
Mr. Pruitt. Sometimes I'm not as persuasive as I want to be
with OMB.
LIBBY, MONTANA--ASBESTOS
Senator Tester. Okay. All right. I pick up what you're
laying down. Okay. Thank you.
The community of Libby has struggled with asbestos, the
highest rate of asbestos-related diseases--yes, go ahead.
Mr. Pruitt. But it is important, Senator, with respect to
these levels of funding for things like Superfund.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt. Leadership of this program is important----
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. Funding is equally important, and
focusing on getting results. And what's happened for a number
of years, the reason we have a Butte situation is a lack of
awareness, our leadership, and accountability to achieve
outcomes. So we are committed to making sure that's happening.
Senator Tester. There are plenty of things in this EPA
under your administration that I could be critical of, trust
me, but you have made a commitment to clean up Superfund sites.
We happen to have three of them in the State of Montana. I just
want to make sure that we get on the same page and actually
work together to clean those Superfund sites up. Because I
agree with you on that, and I think it's really, really
important. But talk is cheap, and people and resources are
important because these things don't go away unless we spend
what we need, whether it's in manpower or whether it's in
actual dollars, to get them cleaned up.
Mr. Pruitt. I agree.
Senator Tester. So I thank you for that.
Mr. Pruitt. Action and results matter.
Senator Tester. You better believe it. It does.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Senator Tester. Thank you. I will put the asbestos question
for the record because I'm out of time. Thank you.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Tester.
Senator Capito.
CLEAN POWER PLAN
Senator Capito. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you, Administrator, for being here today.
I want to kind of set the scene. You and I have talked
about what happened to the State of West Virginia over the last
8 years in Appalachia, as a general region. But now our
unemployment rate is lower, our GDP growth is some of the
fastest in the country, and I think a lot of that is increased
productivity, and though we have a lot more work to do, I think
some of the good work that you are doing to take the regulatory
boot off of American workers is certainly appreciated where I
live.
I want to ask you about the Clean Power Plan. That
regulation, I think, had potential, some very downside risk,
for the State of West Virginia. You did host a public meeting
in our State over a 2-day period. I appreciate that. It's the
first time the EPA has held an open meeting in our State for a
very long time. And I'd like to know, given what I've described
as West Virginia's present economic situation, you know,
recovering, what--can you provide us with an update on your
plans to replace the Clean Power Plan and how you intend to
incorporate that public input that you've received from
different stakeholders?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, Senator, we'll approach the public input
much like we did with respect to the discussion around the
Clean Power Plan. It's important that we hear from
stakeholders. We were not only in West Virginia, we were in
other places across the country, Wyoming, as I recall, and
California as well. So that process will continue. We actually
have an advance notice of proposed rulemaking out in the
marketplace soliciting comment and input on the potential
replacement to the Clean Power Plan.
So we actually have a two-step process going on. One is the
repeal, rescission of the Clean Power Plan is a proposal, and
then also a consideration of what replacements would occur. And
that will be a rulemaking process, it will be a collaborative
process, it will be a stakeholder process. We will hear from
folks across the country on that very issue.
Senator Capito. Do you have any idea of what the timing of
that might be?
Mr. Pruitt. We anticipate that in 2018.
Senator Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Pruitt. All of that occurring in 2018.
Senator Capito. Okay.
Mr. Pruitt. And I think it's really important, with respect
to the Clean Power Plan specifically, that the U.S. Supreme
Court stay against the Clean Power Plan, it obviously never
went into existence.
Senator Capito. Right.
Mr. Pruitt. Largely the reason it didn't go into existence
is because the Agency tried at least twice to regulate these--
the GHG under the Section 111 Clean Air Act. It's questionable
what authority exists, which is why we're soliciting comment in
the marketplace on the extent of our authority.
PERFLUORINATED COMPOUNDS
Senator Capito. Thank you for that. As you know, two
communities in West Virginia, Parkersburg and Martinsburg, have
been particularly impacted by the releases of perfluorinated
compounds into the environment. In recent days, there have been
press reports that the release of an HHS study into the risks
associated and safe maximum exposure limits of these chemicals
has been delayed by stakeholder agencies over staff concerns
that its findings may pose a public relations challenge or
demonstrate that in some cases the Federal Government has an
obligation to assist with remediation.
We have a real vested interest in this, and I want to give
you--I want to hear your view on this. This is something that
for those of us who are most directly impacted, we've already
had a drinking water incident in my hometown that was very
devastating several years ago with a chemical release. Could
you talk about this, please?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, and Ranking Member Udall, I think this may
have been something that you made reference to as well. So I
want to make sure that I provide clarity on this issue with
respect to Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) and
Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA). We actually have a stakeholder
meeting, a summit, that's occurring next week with over 200
participants--State, Federal, interagency focus--on addressing
both PFOA, PFOS, and GenX.
As you know, we have a health advisory with respect to PFOA
and PFOS, but we don't have a maximum contaminant level (MCL).
We haven't taken action with respect to 107 under the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), where it would be a hazardous
substance that would allow us to go in and require cleanup by
responsible parties. So that's something that I am considering
we'll discuss at that summit next week with those stakeholders.
We need to take more concrete action with respect to PFOA and
PFOS.
We'll have toxicity standards established this summer with
respect to GenX, which is a subsequent iteration of PFOA and
PFOS. PFOA and PFOS have not been in the marketplace since the
early 2000s, but, nonetheless, we need to take concrete steps,
perhaps establish an MCL, perhaps listing it as a hazardous
substance under 107, and doing more than just simply having a
health advisory with respect to PFOA and PFOS.
Senator Capito. So what is your response--and that is good
news, and I'm glad that's ongoing. Obviously, that's ongoing
before these press reports came out about this HHS report. What
is your response to the question on this report? Will it be
published? Will we see it before your stakeholder meeting next
week?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, again, HHS is a participant in that
summit next week. I was not aware that there have been some
holding back of the report. I think it's important to have all
information in the marketplace as we evaluate this.
Senator Capito. Absolutely.
Mr. Pruitt. What's most important to me is not just
studies. I mean, as you know, I think the health advisory is 70
parts per trillion----
Senator Capito. Right.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. Which is a very strong standard.
But we need to make sure that if there's an MCL, maximum
contaminant level, or a 107 approach, that it's based on a
record, and that's what we would proceed post the summit next
week. So as far as information, we need more information, not
less, and we need to take concrete action to address these
things.
Senator Capito. Well, I think you're in a position to
really--with your strong statement here today, to encourage
this information to come forward to see, and then look at it in
the larger context of your meeting for next week. And I
appreciate the fact that you are trying to reach the scientific
limit that would impact any kind of--any kind of health impacts
in our areas, regardless of who has to remediate and what the
remediation costs are going to be.
Mr. Pruitt. This issue is different. But from the Superfund
discussion that we just had with Senator Tester, there has been
a lot of discussion about PFOA and PFOS for a number of years,
but not much action. There needs to be concrete action taken by
the respective agencies to address it. And I think the two most
important that we need to evaluate is the setting of an MCL and
also a 107 listing under CERCLA to focus on remediation.
Senator Capito. Thank you.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Capito.
Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Administrator.
Mr. Pruitt. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Van Hollen. And you're right. In your testimony,
you indicated that there were some policy positions that you've
taken that have stirred lots of controversy. And I believe that
a lot of the positions you've taken are contrary to the mission
and mandate of EPA to protect the public health and protect our
environment. You take a look at your budget, proposes massive
cuts to the Chesapeake Bay program from 73 million a year,
which has been a bipartisan commitment, to one-tenth of that
amount in your budget. There's no way we can meet the health
and environmental protection needs of the bay with that kind of
budget.
But this morning I don't want to focus on those issues
because there are sort of a higher duty in a sense. Regardless
of our positions on issues, we have a duty to uphold the public
trust and protect the taxpayer dollar. You agree with that,
don't you?
Mr. Pruitt. I do.
LEGAL DEFENSE FUND
Senator Van Hollen. And the reality is that there are
strong policy differences with lots of agency heads. I mean, I
disagree with the positions taken by now Secretary Pompeo when
he was the Director of Intelligence. But you are the only
agency head, to my knowledge, to have anything close to whether
it's 11 ongoing investigations or 16 investigations at the
Federal level. And so when you responded to Senator Murkowski's
question about, you know, giving you an opportunity to respond,
and you started by saying, well, your taking on a lot of these
tough issues and these allegations of violation of public trust
are really primarily in response to that, I really don't think
you're taking this issue of public trust seriously.
Here's my question, With about 11 or 16 pending
investigations, whatever it is, there have been reports that
you intend to establish a legal defense fund. Is that true?
Mr. Pruitt. I understand that that's being set up, yes.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay. So you're in the process of
setting that up.
Mr. Pruitt. It's been set up.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay. So I want to make sure that
however that works, you're not subject to more allegations or
complaints that you are violating the public trust. So I have a
question----
Mr. Pruitt. If I might there----
Senator Van Hollen. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. We've actually worked with GAO. My
attorney here, who has done this for a number of years, has
worked with GAO to----
Senator Van Hollen. Okay.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. To make sure that it's done
properly and that's----
Senator Van Hollen. Just a couple questions on the--or the
commitments you can make today.
Will all donations to that defense fund be public?
Mr. Pruitt. They will be published, yes.
Senator Van Hollen. Public.
Mr. Pruitt. Pursuant to the requirements of--of--of
disclosures, yes.
Senator Van Hollen. Will you commit today to not accept any
donations from lobbyists or corporations that have business
before the EPA?
Mr. Pruitt. Absolutely. Yes.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay. Will you agree not to accept
anonymous donations?
Mr. Pruitt. Let me clarify, I don't--I don't accept
donations. I don't solicit----
Senator Van Hollen. Well, let me ask you this. Okay. So let
me ask this.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. Donations. That's done by
attorneys and others outside----
Senator Van Hollen. Let me ask you this: Will you print on
the, you know, structure of your legal defense fund, the rules,
will you make it clear that you will not accept anonymous
donations? The Office of Legal Counsel at the White House, as
you know, recommends strongly against any of these legal
defense funds having anonymous donations. I'm asking if you
will--as part of the rules of your legal defense fund, you will
say that you're not going to accept anonymous donations.
Mr. Pruitt. Whatever the discussions with GAO, White House
Counsel's Office yields in that regard, we will follow.
Senator Van Hollen. So will you accept the recommendation
of the White House Office of Legal Counsel with respect to the
trust fund?
Mr. Pruitt. They already are.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
SECURITY DETAIL
Senator Van Hollen. Well, then you won't be accepting
anonymous donations, or the rules won't allow that.
Now, what's also troubled me, Mr. Administrator, is this
sort of pattern of information that comes to light about
violations of the public trust or misuse of taxpayer dollars,
and then sort of your finger-pointing at others in the Agency,
it was really their fault. Mr. Udall asked you about a tweet,
if the tweet was you, somebody else did it. I understand that.
But here's a recent, you know, headline about the large salary
increases you gave to some of your top people. Headline,
``Government Executive Pruitt and Chief of Staff Personally
Approved Pay Raises of Up to 72 Percent for Top Aides, IG
Finds.'' It goes on to point out that having denied it at one
point, in a hearing before Congress, you later had to
acknowledge that you signed off on that.
My question relates to something that just came up in
response to a letter to Senators Carper and Whitehouse with
respect to the security detail, because it's been your position
that you are essentially accepting the security that was
recommended to you by the folks who are responsible for
security, right? That's the position you've taken.
Mr. Pruitt. Those decisions are made by current law
enforcement officials at the Agency.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay. Have you seen the response from
the IG's office? It's a----
Mr. Pruitt. I have. In fact, I have it right here before
me.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay. So what it says is that, in fact,
you made the request for 24/7 protection on the day you were
confirmed as Administrator. Is that true?
Mr. Pruitt. On page 5 of the report, Senator, it says the
decision to provide 24/7 was made by the Office of Criminal
Enforcement, OCEFT, at the Agency.
Senator Van Hollen. I'm reading in response to question
number 5, it says--this is the response from the IG at the EPA.
Mr. Pruitt. I'm reading from the same language.
Senator Van Hollen. ``The EPA Office of Criminal
Enforcement, Forensics and Training has informed the OIG that
EPA's Protective Service detail began providing 24/7 coverage
of the Administrator the first day he arrived at the EPA. The
decision was made by the Office of Criminal Enforcement,
Forensics and Training after being informed that Mr. Pruitt
recommended 24/7 protection once he was confirmed back in
February.'' Is that true? Didn't you request it once you were--
right when you were----
Mr. Pruitt. I was aware of communications taking place. I
was not at the Agency at the time. I was actually--that was
before confirmation. The decision to provide 24/7 security was
made, as indicated by this report, by law enforcement career
officials at the Agency.
Senator Van Hollen. Yes. Mr. Pruitt, what this letter says,
the plain language of this letter, I read it, was that you
requested it. And there have been lots of hearings, as the
Chairman and Ranking Member now, in the House, in the Senate,
where you've been pointing to an August 2017 report, document,
by the Inspector General, which they make very clear was not a
threat assessment, but that it was a report, you've been
pointing to that as justification----
Mr. Pruitt. That's not the case----
Senator Van Hollen [continuing]. For this increased--in
this
24/7 security----
Mr. Pruitt. That's not the case.
Senator Van Hollen [continuing]. When, in fact, it turns
out you requested it the first day back in February----
Mr. Pruitt. You are mixing issues here.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay.
Mr. Pruitt. The inspector general investigates threats. The
Protective Service detail provides threat assessment. So that's
the distinction. And the Protective Service detail at the
Agency----
Senator Van Hollen. I'm not confused at all.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. Made the decision about the 24/7
coverage. The inspector general report you're talking about in
August is simply a compilation of threats----
Senator Van Hollen. Right.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. That exist at the time where
they're investigating the types of threats at that moment.
Senator Van Hollen. I'm not confused at all, Mr.
Administrator. The whole argument you made over time is that
you have faced all these additional threats when, in fact, it
turns out, at least according to this IG report, that you made
the request for 20/7--24/7 security the first day that you were
in office. Is that true or not true?
Mr. Pruitt. I read----
Senator Murkowski. Senator, your time has expired. We will
have an opportunity for a second round. Thank you.
Senator Daines.
AGENCY FOR TOXIC SUBSTANCES AND DISEASE REGISTRY
Senator Daines. Mr. Pruitt, the EPA budget request reflects
your commitment to refocusing EPA on its core mission to
protect human health and to protect the environment. Montana is
home to the most expansive Superfund sites in the country. I
think it was shared earlier in this hearing that Montana has
three Superfund sites on the National Priority List. We
actually have 17 Superfund sites on the National Priority List.
I want to thank you for the work that your EPA has done to
make real progress on Montana's sites. It's been a long time
coming, and I'm grateful for your heeding my call to do so. One
of our first meetings we had, you talked about refocusing the
EPA and starting to get back on a results focus instead of an
activity focus, and I thank you for that. But I'll tell you,
we've still got a lot of work to do.
I want to talk about Anaconda for a moment, which is just--
it's near Butte. People hear a lot about Butte and then the
Superfund site there, but I want to talk about Anaconda first.
The local leadership and greater community of Anaconda have
requested that a health study be conducted to evaluate the
lasting impacts of the former smelter now turned Superfund
site. I understand the first steps are underway. My question
is, are you working with the Agency for Toxic Substances and
Disease Registry to seek appropriate public comments of the
health study?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. In fact, we're working not only with the
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), but
also with the State of Montana in that regard. There's been one
community listening session, and there are others that are
going to occur. But this is very important for this
partnership. I mentioned earlier to Senator Capito, I believe,
that the local input, the State input, and the Federal input,
should be cohesive in trying to determine the best path forward
in these Superfund sites, and I think this is demonstrative of
that.
Senator Daines. Well, the communities want to be heard. And
I've also good feedback. We've had folks on the ground that are
listening to what the community has to say. My follow-up
question though is, When will the results of that health
assessment be made public?
Mr. Pruitt. The listening session I show here occurred on
May 10, and it's scheduled to be completed in March of 2019.
Senator Daines. Okay.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Senator Daines. Thank you. I think it's very important that
we have a commitment to that date.
What about the local Anaconda schools? I know the Anaconda
school district and the county have requested soil and dust
sampling. Could you provide an update on the EPA's efforts to
meet those demands?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. The ARCO is actually conducting ongoing
sampling now through the spring with respect to those school
sites, and I think the results will be made available at the
end of the school year----
Senator Daines. Okay.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. As that--as that sampling has
occurred. Any additional cleanups will be conducted over the
summer to address post the kids leaving school.
SILVER BOW--BUTTE SUPERFUND SITE
Senator Daines. So I appreciate your commitments and the
diligence regarding the Anaconda site. It's been a long time
coming. It's crucial that we put the health of Montanans first
in undertaking the site cleanup and--and this is very
important--we do this with the utmost transparency, and thank
you for that.
I want to shift gears now and talk about Butte. As you
know, the Atlantic Richfield Company (ARCO), EPA, and the State
and local leadership in Butte reached a conceptual agreement on
a consent decree to address future cleanup at the Silver Bow-
Butte area Superfund site. This was an important first step
toward a long-term remedy. What the residents of Butte want to
know is exactly what is in that agreement, and so do I, for
that matter.
I know that you committed earlier in this hearing that you
would work to lift that court gag order that is currently
keeping the agreement in the dark, and I want to thank you for
that commitment. But once the gag order is lifted, can I get
your assurance that your team will get to Butte quickly to take
community input on the details of that agreement?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. And, in fact, we've had many members of
our team head to Butte, and in addition, with the regional
representation as well. I can't emphasize enough the importance
of community stakeholders having a voice in the process. We've
got sites all over the country where that process has been
revived, and I think there is much optimism with respect to
stakeholders having more say at the local level. That's
something we're definitely committed to and we'll make sure
happens in Butte.
Senator Daines. So I'm encouraged by the responses, I'm
encouraged by the commitments. Having Montana input and local
input on the Superfund cleanup process is absolutely essential.
I want to also provide just some feedback from the troops
on the ground, Montanans, regarding your Region 8
Administrator, Doug Benevento. He's had a very proactive
approach to carrying out the mission of the EPA. He's building
relationships with local leaders, and he's working to address
the community concerns. There's still a lot of anxiety and
concern, because there's still a long path in front of us that
we've got to walk. But he's been a pleasure to work with. I
look forward to continue doing so with him and with you.
And I want to ask you, keep your eyes on Butte and Anaconda
as well as our other Superfund sites on the National Priority
List as we make additional headway in bringing these Montana
Superfund sites back to clean, productive reuse.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, Doug is doing a great job. I appreciate
those comments. He's working diligently to bring these
stakeholders together, and we're seeing results, not only in
Montana, but across the region as a whole. We will definitely
keep our eye on the ball.
Senator Daines. Thank you.
FAIRBANKS NORTH STAR BOROUGH
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator.
We will now begin a second round here. As both Senators
from Montana have asked you to keep an eye on Butte and
Anaconda, I'm going to ask you to keep an eye on Fairbanks.
We've had an opportunity again to speak to the challenges that
the Fairbanks North Star Borough has with regards to meeting
EPA air quality requirements. I've worked hard to ensure that
the borough was eligible to apply for a grant under the
Targeted Airshed Grant program. I was very pleased that we were
able to deliver good news with your help to that community for
additional resources to help them take actions like a woodstove
change-out that can have an impact, a positive impact, on the
air quality.
As you are likely aware, EPA has reclassified Fairbanks as
a serious nonattainment air for the fine particulate air
pollution, requiring the State to formulate a plan of
attainment no later than December 31. We've had an opportunity
to speak about this issue and the very specific challenges that
Fairbanks has at this point. Access to alternative energy
sources are limited. They don't have natural gas that comes
into the community yet. We've been talking for years about
various proposals, everything from trucking to the hopes that
we will see the ability to have gas piped, but our reality is
that we are very, very limited with the options.
The complex situation is made more complicated because of
Fairbanks' geography, sitting in a valley with low temperatures
in the winter. I need to hear from you again the commitment
that you will provide me, as well as your team, to really work
with the communities and the borough, to address the challenges
that they face. Some of them are immovable; you can't change
the geography. But we must find a way for residents to have
cleaner air without the timeline breathing down their neck that
perhaps might not be attainable. Your comments are appreciated.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. So the designation that you refer to,
Chairman, actually provided additional time, and that was
important. We have been working diligently internal to the Air
Office at the EPA to address these matters. I think at some
point it may just simply require rulemaking to address the
standards that have been set previously. I've actually been
engaged in conversations with Bill Wehrum and others in the
office about steps and alternatives there.
But ultimately, we want certainty and clarity, and we want
to make sure that the standards that have been set are-- are
fair and that they actually achieve what they're supposed to
achieve, but also take into consideration the exceptional
circumstances that's represented by Fairbanks.
Senator Murkowski. I appreciate that recognition; we have
to do more that provides for that level of certainty. As you
know, we were able to include additional funding in the 2018
omnibus for the Targeted Airshed Grant program. I would imagine
that Fairbanks would apply again, and hopefully they would be
considered favorably, given the situation there. But I
appreciate the multipronged approach that you are taking to a
very, very serious challenge in this region.
Mr. Pruitt. I think the Airshed Grants, the Targeted
Grants, were 4 million or so, if I recall correctly.
Senator Murkowski. Yes, 4 million to Fairbanks.
Mr. Pruitt. Okay. Yes. Both in 2017 and I think recently in
2018.
DIESEL GENERATORS
Senator Murkowski. Yes, which helps that community a great
deal.
Let me again speak to a more parochial issue as it relates
to us up north: the diesel generators in our remote villages.
In the omnibus bill that we just passed, we included language
that requires EPA to reexamine this regulation related to
diesel generators that are used to generate power in our rural
Alaskan communities. So many of our communities unfortunately
are still diesel-powered. They don't have access to any kind of
a grid.
Under this regulation, the generators that are purchased
after model year 2014 must have a diesel particulate filter if
they're going to use it as the primary power generator. The
problem is that these filters have an extraordinarily high
failure rate, and even simple upgrades can be difficult. That's
compounded then with the fact that these upgrades can only be
done by specific technicians. These technicians don't exist in
these villages. And so it just--it continues to compound and
complicate an issue.
I know that we've just put this directive in place about a
month ago, so I don't expect it to be complete at this stage. I
do hope, however, that you can provide me with a status on the
review, and, again, your commitment to helping us find a
workable solution for these remote Alaska microgrids in a
timely manner. I just received a communication from Tanana
Chiefs Conference, which is the Tribal organization leadership
in the region, and very specific to this point, they outlined
their very immediate concerns and asked for that level of help.
[The information follows:]
diesel generators
EPA's Air and Radiation Program is continuing to work with the
Alaska Energy Authority to collect information and plans to begin the
process of notice and comment rulemaking to address this concern.
Mr. Pruitt. Well, there's a categorical, as you indicated,
prohibition against any monies being used to address or enforce
the existing standards. So what we're committed to is working
with the coalition locally to try to find answers and make sure
that we comply with the language from the omnibus bill.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you.
Let me turn to Senator Udall.
24/7 PROTECTION
Senator Udall. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Administrator, Senator Van Hollen asked the question,
and he didn't get a yes-or-no answer, and that's all I'm asking
for here. Did you personally, on your first day, ask for 24/7
protection for yourself?
Mr. Pruitt. Personally, on the first day, the 24/7 had been
determined by the Criminal Enforcement office to provide. So I
did not----
Senator Udall. You did not personally request----
Mr. Pruitt. I did not direct that. I didn't direct that on
the first day.
Senator Udall. So your answer is no. Is----
Mr. Pruitt. My answer is I did not direct that on the first
day----
Senator Udall. Okay. Well, all the documents dispute that,
so----
Mr. Pruitt. That Senator, if I may----
Senator Udall. No, no. It's just the documents dispute that
here. And the--this is a statement, not a question. But my
understanding from the reporting on this is that you have never
had a security assessment to determine whether 24/7 was
required, and that's been reported yesterday in the Washington
Post.
Now, when we sat in this room together in June of last
year, I asked you to confirm that you would respond to all
questions, including written correspondence, from both majority
and minority Members of this subcommittee as quickly as
possible, and your answer was, quote, Yes, without question.
Does that commitment still stand?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Senator Udall. Now, why then have you still not answered my
April 4 letter and my May 9 follow-up letter requesting
information related to your condo rental here in DC?
Mr. Pruitt. I'll check. But I want to----
Senator Udall. Will you respond to my two letters?
Mr. Pruitt. Senator, I want to read specifically from the
section that you made reference to a minute ago because it's
important that there's clarity around this issue on 24/7. The
OIG, in the letter to the Senate----
Senator Udall. We have all the documents, sir.
Mr. Pruitt. I understand, but it's important----
Senator Udall. We have all the documents. I did----
Mr. Pruitt. It's important that I--the Office of Criminal
Enforcement began providing 24/7 coverage, and the decision was
made by the Office of Criminal Enforcement.
Senator Udall. I--I understand that.
Mr. Pruitt. That was done prior to my arrival at the EPA.
Senator Udall. I understand that. I have limited time.
We'll put all the documents in the record, and you can make
your arguments to the----
Senator Murkowski. We will include the documents----
Senator Udall. Yes, all the documents----
Senator Murkowski [continuing]. That you are seeking to
read, Administrator, in the record.
CONDO RENTAL
Senator Udall. Senator Van Hollen has all the documents.
We'll put them all into the record. I have several of them
right here. And thank you, Madam Chair, for that.
[The information follows:]
LOBBYIST TIED TO PRUITT'S CONDO RENTAL PUSHED FOR EPA TO HIRE FAMILY
FRIEND, EMAILS SHOW
EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt testifies before a Senate subcommittee
hearing on Capitol Hill on May 16. (Al Drago/Reuters)
by Juliet Eilperin and Brady Dennis, June 24, 2018
The lobbyist whose wife rented Environmental Protection Agency
Administrator Scott Pruitt a room in a Capitol Hill condo at a
discounted rate lobbied Pruitt's chief of staff to hire a family
friend, according to recently released agency emails.
The exchange is among several previously undisclosed interactions
that show how J. Steven Hart, who served as chairman of the law firm
Williams & Jensen until earlier this year, sought to exert influence
over decisions at the agency even as his spouse was renting Pruitt a
$50-a-night room in an upscale condo blocks from the Capitol. The
communications, released as part of a public records lawsuit filed by
the Sierra Club, an environmental advocacy group, also appear to
undermine initial arguments that Hart had not lobbied the EPA during
Pruitt's tenure.
The emails show both Hart and his wife, Vicki--who rented Pruitt
the condo under an agreement that he pay only for the nights he stayed
there--pushed for the EPA to hire Jimmy Guilliano, a recent college
graduate.
``I seldom talk to Scott but Vicki does,'' Hart wrote to Pruitt's
chief of staff Ryan Jackson on April 14, 2017. ``She has talked to
Scott about this kid who is important to us. He told Vicki to talk to
you about how to handle this. I am not sure personally that this is a
good idea for Jimmy unless he is working near you. Sticking him down in
the bowels is death at EPA. His family is all Naval Academy by the
way.''
In an email Sunday, EPA spokesman Jahan Wilcox said the agency did
not hire Guilliano and the agency stands by its previous statement that
Hart did not lobby the agency.
``The Agency accepts career recommendations from a number of
acquaintances. Ultimately, Mr. Guilliano was not hired,'' Wilcox wrote,
adding that when it came to Hart's other correspondence with Jackson,
``Many of these emails were unsolicited and did not impact any Agency
policy outcomes.''
In a statement Sunday, Hart said, ``I never received any special
treatment from Administrator Pruitt or had any undue influence over the
Environmental Protection Agency. Ryan Jackson is an old friend whom I
have known for many years prior to his service with the EPA.'' He
added, ``We have discussed numerous issues and topics during his tenure
as chief of staff, but he has never performed a special favor on my
behalf.''
This spring, Hart said in interview with the Washington Post and
other outlets that he did no EPA lobbying during 2017 or 2018. But his
former firm amended his lobbying disclosure documents this month to
reflect he worked on behalf of Coca-Cola, the Financial Oversight and
Management Control Board of Puerto Rico, and Smithfield Foods--contacts
that are borne out in the newly released emails.
Hart and Jackson, both Oklahomans, knew each other before Pruitt
took the helm of the EPA. The emails, first reported Sunday afternoon
by the New York Times, show the lobbyist repeatedly contacted Jackson
on a range of topics, asking him to arrange meetings for his clients
and place allies of his in different EPA jobs.
``I unfortunately represent the Puerto Rico Financial Control
Board,'' Hart wrote to Jackson one day in October, offering to bring
the board's executive director by for an introduction while she was in
Washington. ``I do not need a meeting but might be good optics for you
to be concerned about the water infrastructure. The electric grid is
our first concern but there are going to be huge health issues related
to the water treatment facility.''
Earlier that August, Hart contacted Jackson to discuss a court
ruling regarding the phasing out of hydrofluorocarbons, or HFCs--
greenhouse gases that can be hundreds to thousands of times as potent
as carbon dioxide.
``Some large U.S. companies like Coca Cola have to make long term
investment decisions relating to their refrigerated beverage
machines,'' Hart wrote. ``I think this might be a good topic for you
guys to reach out on to the manufacturers. There are all sorts of
technical issues that arise when you get rid of HFC's.''
That month, the emails show, Hart worked to place candidates on the
agency's Scientific Advisory Board, which helps guide the EPA's
research, though those efforts did not appear to bear fruit. Pruitt
revamped the membership of several EPA advisory panels in the fall,
adding officials allied with industry groups while barring any
researchers from serving if they were simultaneously receiving EPA
grants.
At one point, for example, Hart wrote Jackson that he wanted ``to
highlight three candidates for the Science Advisory Board, who were
nominated by our client, Dennis Treacy, the President of the Smithfield
Foundation.''
Wilcox said the candidates Hart had suggested ``were not
considered. Because their names are redacted, they were not selected.''
At other point, while emailing Jackson on the issue, Hart wrote,
``We need to smoke a cigar soon.'' Hart hosted cigar parties in the
same condo apartment complex where Pruitt stayed between February and
August 2017.
On Nov. 27, Hart wrote to Jackson offering help of a different
kind. ``Having dinner with [Sen. Richard] Burr [R-N.C.] tonight--should
I try to move him or want to just give up?'' he wrote, referring to the
contentious confirmation battle over Michael Dourson, a University of
Cincinnati toxicologist who had been tapped as the EPA's top chemical
safety official. Dourson withdrew from consideration weeks later after
it became clear that the Senate was unlikely to confirm him.
At least on one occasion, even when Hart did not contact the agency
directly, those he represented did.
``We are a client of Steve Hart's and he's traveling today but
suggested I reach out to you,'' the head of government affairs for HSBC
North America wrote to Jackson on May 5, 2017, in an email about where
the EPA stood on whether the United States should withdraw from the
international Paris climate accord. ``Do you have a couple of minutes
for me to call you on the subject of the agreement[?] I am interested
in better understanding the EPA view.''
Jackson asked whether the following Monday would work.
Pruitt's rental arrangement with Vicki Hart remains under scrutiny
by the House Oversight and Government Relations Committee, as well as
the EPA's Office of Inspector General.
Andrew Ba Tran contributed to this report.
On this condo, I want to ask you, Are you going to respond
to my letters? Do you see a conflict of interest in accepting a
pretty good housing deal from a lobbyist couple that has
business before the EPA?
Mr. Pruitt. Senator, the ethics officials at the Agency
actually--actually performed two ethics reviews saying that the
lease terms are consistent with comparable rates in the
marketplace. So--so--now, at the time----
Senator Udall. That was done after the fact.
Mr. Pruitt. It was, but Steve Hart is someone that was not
registered as a lobbyist in 2017. He's a long-time associated
friend, and--and before----
Senator Udall. No, no, no. Okay, well, let's just stop
there. Steve--if Steve Hart was not registered as a lobbyist,
here's his firm. Here's his firm, email, answer to question,
Williams & Jensen told the Hill in an email, quote, An
independent review of the firm's lobbying activity in advance
of the quarterly filing deadline concluded that Mr. Hart had
lobbying contact with the Environmental Protection Agency in
the first quarter of 2018, period, end quote.
Mr. Pruitt. And the period in question----
Senator Udall. Now, do you think--do you think that's
acceptable to have this individual, Mr. Hart, who's a lobbyist,
and then you rent a room from him at a pretty good deal, yes or
no? It's a simple question.
Mr. Pruitt. The filing that you're referring to was for the
first quarter of 2018, and it was for the firm, and Mr. Hart
was not listed on that disclosure.
SWAMPY BEHAVIOR--HOUSE HUNTING
Senator Udall. Well, Mr. Hart was a lobbyist, and you
rented a room from him, and you had issues pending before your
Agency at the time that Hart's firm were working on, which is,
to me, that is the exact swamp that President Trump was trying
to get rid of. And all of these questions I've been asking
about is this swampy behavior that's going on here. I mean,
consistently over and over and over again, whether it's sirens,
whether it's, you know, perks for you and your friends, for
your staff.
Let me move here to your--it's been reported that a member
of your staff, one who got a 33 percent raise to over $114,000
earlier this year, house hunted for you during work hours. This
would be a violation of Federal rules as well as a misuse of
taxpayer dollars. Did your staff contact realtors and arrange
tours for you during working hours, yes or no? It's a simple
question.
Mr. Pruitt. It's my understanding that all activity there
was on personal time.
Senator Udall. Yes or no, sir? Yes or no?
Mr. Pruitt. As I indicated, it's my understanding that all
activity there was on personal time. The individual that you're
referring to is a long-time friend of my wife and myself----
Senator Udall. So did you----
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. And to link any type of review----
Senator Udall. Did you----
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. On a pay increase is just simply
not substantiated.
Senator Udall. Well, it----
Mr. Pruitt. It's just not related at all.
Senator Udall. Let me--let me--you know, you're an attorney
general, were an attorney general, you're a law enforcement
official. The Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) prohibits
directing a subordinate to do personal work for you. And if
they volunteer, that is a gift. Services must be paid for at
fair market value. So it doesn't cut it that they're a friend
or that kind of thing. Did you pay them at the time for doing
that work?
Mr. Pruitt. All activity that I'm aware of that was engaged
in by the individual you're speaking about----
Senator Udall. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. Occurred on personal time.
Senator Udall. And did you pay them for it?
Mr. Pruitt. No, I did not.
SAMANTHA DRAVIS
Senator Udall. Then that's a gift. That's in violation of
Federal law.
Now, Mr. Pruitt, regarding Samantha Dravis, your former
Director of your Office of Policy. The Inspector General is now
investigating if Ms. Dravis came to the office most or all of
the months of November, December, and January. Until she
resigned last month, she was your director of your Office of
Policy, your top policy adviser, was she not, yes or no?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, she was the head of Policy at the EPA.
Senator Udall. Ys. And you don't--you know, we up here, we
try to make sure these people come to work. Were you making
sure that she came----
Mr. Pruitt. We do as well.
Senator Udall [continuing]. To work for 3 months?
Mr. Pruitt. In fact, I interacted with her multiple times
through that process.
Senator Udall. Those 3 months: November, December, and
January----
Mr. Pruitt. The schedule was----
Senator Udall [continuing]. She was in work.
Mr. Pruitt. The schedule shows that she was attending
meetings, not just with me, but others in the Agency.
Senator Udall. And she was--she worked the whole time.
That's your testimony.
Mr. Pruitt. No, that's not what I said, Senator.
Senator Udall. Well, did she----
Mr. Pruitt. I said I interacted with her during that time--
--
Senator Udall. Yes. Did she----
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. Timeframe, and she was providing
other services during that timeframe as well.
Senator Udall. Sir, during the months of November,
December, and January, was she working for you?
Mr. Pruitt. She was employed at the Agency, and there's a
review of that process ongoing. The record will bear that out.
Senator Udall. Well, thank you, Madam Chair. My time is up.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Udall.
Senator Van Hollen.
24/7 PROTECTION--OFFICE OF CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT DECISION
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Madam Chair. I just want to
follow up on a few things, Mr. Administrator. One is, and we
will put the documents in the record, but it's very clear what
they say here. It says that the Office of Criminal Enforcement,
Forensics and Training--let me back up--the decision, the
decision to provide 24/7, was made by the Office of Criminal
Enforcement, Forensics and Training after being informed that
Mr. Pruitt requested 24/7 protection.
So I know you keep trying to say this says that it was
their idea. This says they made that decision after you
requested it.
Mr. Pruitt. I can only say, Senator, I did not direct that
decision to be made. That was made by the Office of Criminal
Enforcement.
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Administrator, all I know is----
Mr. Pruitt. I was aware of the process taking place prior
to my arrival. You remember my confirmation process, Senator.
It was fairly--fairly competitive and intense, and there was an
ongoing process.
Senator Van Hollen. I'm just--I'm just reading. I'm just--
we're all trying to figure out what the facts are here. I'm
simply reading----
Mr. Pruitt. And I am as well.
Senator Van Hollen [continuing]. From the IG report, and
the IG report says their decision was made after you requested
24/7 protection, not that it was made because they concluded
that there was a need for 24/7 protection.
Mr. Pruitt. The inspector general, in my view, was simply
trying to clarify that they don't engage in assessments. That's
the Protective Service detail that does that. The document that
was referred to earlier--I think Ranking Member Udall mentioned
it--of August, that's just simply a snapshot in time of the
types of threats that were being investigated by the Agency----
Senator Van Hollen. Right.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. With the death threats and the
rest. But it was not an assessment. No one ever said it was an
assessment.
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Administrator, I'm not at all
confused between the fact that the IG's office is to document
things that have happened. It's not their job, obviously, to
prevent--to prevent--to present the threat assessment and
recommend what security. What the IG is saying is that when
they asked the folks who were responsible for providing
security, which is the Office of Criminal Enforcement,
Forensics and Training, that that office told them that they
provided you 24/7 protection after you requested it, not
because they did some assessment that justified the need for
24/7. So we'll put this document in the record. We can all talk
about it.
[The information follows:]
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Washington, D.C. 20460
May 14, 2018
The Honorable Tom Carper, Ranking Member
Committee on Environment and Public Works
United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510
Dear Ranking Member Carper:
You wrote to me on May 2, 2018, asking 10 questions, which I answer
below. You note that the overall context for your questions was the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA's) use of and citation to
certain work by the Office of Inspector General (OIG) to justify
specific actions decided upon and taken by EPA management. The concern
you put forth in your letter is that if the OIG ``has formally signed
off on spending it is now investigating,'' the OIG would lack the
requisite impartiality to review the agency's actions.
In our answers below, we show specifically that the OIG does not
exercise such a role, and specifically with regard to the matters you
question did not do so in those instances. We also address below your
questions about adequate and appropriate separation of functions
between the OIG and the agency, and preservation of independence to
allow oversight (the OIG role) of programmatic execution (the agency
role):
1.
What is OIG's statutory or regulatory basis for producing reports
like the August 16 report? Has this sort of a summary threat report
been authored by OIG in the past or since? If so, please provide us
with copies of all such similar reports from the last ten years, and
explain differences, if any, in how the August 16 Report was prepared
compared with earlier reports. If the August 16 Report was not one
produced in the ordinary course of business by OIG, please explain who
requested the report and the reasons why OIG provided it.
There is no statutory or regulatory requirement for producing such
reports. It was a discretionary choice for the OIG Office of
Investigations, under the general authority set forth in the Inspector
General Act, Section 2(1), to conduct and supervise investigations
relating to the programs and operations of the EPA The OIG interprets
that authority to permit, but not require, investigating threats of
physical harm directed toward EPA employees that would hinder the
employees' ability to carry out their duties, or would harm the ability
of the agency to carry out its mission.
The term ``threat investigation'' is a generic term that the OIG uses
to classify the type of investigation in the OIG's case management
system. It does not necessarily mean that every case opened as ``threat
investigation'' reveals evidence of an actual threat. Similarly, in the
OIG case management system, we open investigations based upon
allegations of fraud, and these are called ``fraud investigations''
even though the investigations often do not uncover any evidence of
fraud.
The OIG has never conducted a ``threat assessment'' for the
Administrator. The OIG investigates threats, or potential threats,
directed against EPA employees, including the Administrator. An OIG
investigative report is a factual account of a given investigation.
These reports are not threat assessments. A ``threat assessment'' is a
guide usually used by decision-makers in determining the type and
amount of security needed to address the protection of a person, event
or facility. It includes all available information, including the
results of threat investigations, but also other factors, such as
notoriety, history of threats or violence directed against the person
or event, other dangers or potential dangers that may be associated
with the person or event, and location, to name a few. The OIG is not a
decision-maker for the EPA.
In February 2017, the EPA's Front Office asked the OIG to provide a
``threat assessment'' for the Administrator. The OIG declined and
informed EPA management that it is not the role of the OIG to provide a
threat assessment, but rather the OIG is limited to the role of
investigating threats and reporting back the facts.
The August 16, 2017, ``Summary of Pending and Recent Threat
Investigations'' (Summary Report) is the first and only one ever
produced. The Administrator's Protective Service Detail was in the
process of preparing a threat assessment and requested information from
OIG about the various threat investigations we had done. The OIG's
Office of Investigations prepared the August 16 Summary Report to
respond to that request. The document was prepared for the Special
Agent in Charge of the EPA Administrator's Protective Service Detail
and contained law enforcement-sensitive information. It was marked
``For Official Use Only'' and was not to be distributed to anyone
outside of the EPA.
2.
EPA's talking points for Administrator Pruitt say the August 16
Report lists 13 threats made against the Administrator and his family.
The report actually lists 14 threats. The tally at the end of the
report says 16 threats. Furthermore, several of the incidents listed in
the report were determined not to be threats by OIG, but they
nevertheless appear to have been included in the Report's final tally,
which has been used to support claims that this Administrator had seen
a 400% increase in threats. What is the correct number of actual
threats in the August 16 Report? Please explain the criteria you use to
determine what a threat is. And please explain any discrepancy between
that number, and the 16 threats in the tally at the end of the Report.
All OIG special agents are trained to recognize the Constitutional
rights of citizens, particularly in dealing with First Amendment
issues. The OIG does not investigate protected speech. We investigate
threats or potential threats. The OIG Office of Counsel has provided
the OIG Office of Investigations with the following criteria for
addressing potential threats:
``Threats versus First Amendment Protected Speech
Threats have no First Amendment protection. In contrast, however, the
First Amendment protects a wide variety of speech that can seem in
their literal sense as threatening, harassing or intimidating.
The Constitution, Amendment 1, states:
-- Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of
religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or
abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right
of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the
government for a redress of grievances.
The courts have held that the First Amendment protects a wide variety
of speech--even speech that many would find vulgar, rude, caustic or
deeply offensive. It protects statements that, even if taken literally,
appear to be threats but are actually just exaggerated statements
(e.g., political hyperbole). Importantly, it protects statements that
are vehement, caustic, discourteous or sharp attacks on government or
public officials.
How do you distinguish threats from protected speech?
Threats are statements that are a serious expression of an intent to
physically harm someone. The Supreme Court's most recent decision in
this arena was in 2015, Elonis v. United States, 135 S.Ct. 2001 (2015),
set forth two criteria for assessing whether a statement is a ``true
threat'':
-- A statement which a reasonable person would realize would be
interpreted by his audience as a serious expression of an
intention to inflict bodily harm; AND
-- The defendant must have made the statement intending it to be a
threat, or with the knowledge that the statement would be
viewed as a threat.
How do we determine if a reasonable person would perceive the
statement as a true threat?
-- The context or setting in which the statement is made is
important.
-- The ``audience'' that the statement is made to (and its reaction
to the statement) is important.
-- The type of statement (e.g. qualified or conditional) must be
considered. See below for examples.
The speaker has to be more than just negligent or careless in making
the threat.
-- The government must show that the speaker made the statement
intending it to be a threat, or with the knowledge that the
statement would be viewed as a threat.
However:
-- It is not necessary to prove that the speaker actually intended
to inflict harm or carry out the threat.
-- It is not necessary to prove that the speaker had the ability to
actually carry out the threat.''
The August 16 Summary Report lists three different types of threat
investigations/complaints that the EPA worked:
a.
The first section listed threats directed against EPA
Administrator Scott Pruitt and/or his family, which accounted for 13
cases and one complaint, for a total of 14. A ``case'' is opened when
there are facts or circumstances that reasonably indicate that activity
constituting a federal crime within the jurisdiction of the OIG has
been, is being or will be committed. A ``complaint'' is opened where
there is an indication of a serious violation of law but may lack some
of the pertinent details. Number 1, COMP-2017-75, was a complaint and
did not rise to an actual case. The remaining 13 were actual cases, for
a total of 14 threats directed at Administrator Pruitt.
b.
The second section listed Threats Directed Against Former
Administrator Gina McCarthy. There were two threat cases directed
against Administrator McCarthy.
c.
The third section listed threats directed against EPA employees
other than the Administrator or facilities. There was a total of 14 in
this category.
3.
We understand that many of the threats in the August 16 Report
were referred to a United States Attorney's Office (USAO). Please
explain your process for referring matters to a USAO, including the
criteria you use to determine whether to refer a matter to that office.
Have the USAOs prosecuted any of the threats that your office referred?
Inspector General Act Section 4(d) requires that the OIG ``report
expeditiously to the Attorney General whenever the Inspector General
has reasonable grounds to believe there has been a violation of Federal
criminal law.'' Thus, the OIG would not report to the Department of
Justice every incipient matter that the OIG reviewed, but where we
concluded there were no ``reasonable grounds'' to believe a criminal
violation has occurred. When we do see such ``reasonable grounds,'' we
coordinate with and refer our investigations to the appropriate USAO or
prosecutor. If the investigator is not dealing with exigent
circumstance, the prosecutor must be consulted at an early stage to
determine whether the prosecutor believes the potential criminal
violation we have identified is in fact a violation of the law and
whether the allegation, if proven, would be prosecuted. The USAO has
prosecuted the following cases that were referred by the OIG:
FY18:
OI-HQ-2016-CAC-0032 (rearrested)
FY17:
OI-HQ-2016-CAC-0032 (arrested and dismissed)
OI-AT-2017-CAC-0064
OI-HQ-2017-CAC-0043
FY15:
OI-AR-2014-CAC-0096
4.
The August 16 Report purports to summarize threat data from fiscal
year 2017 (FYl7), but it is dated August 16, 2017, a month and a half
before the end of the fiscal year. Further, the FY17 report includes
threat data for Administrator McCarthy. Why was FY17 chosen to be the
period of analysis? Have there been any subsequent updates to this
report? Has OIG provided any other reports or analysis related to
Administrator Pruitt's security?
As noted in answer to question 1, the August 16, 2017, Summary Report
was the first and only one ever produced; there were none before or
since. The August 16 report was a summary of threat information up to
that date. The Administrator's Protective Service Detail was in the
process of preparing a threat analysis for the Administrator and
requested information on our threat investigations. We included
information on threats regarding Administrator McCarthy where the
subject of the investigation was threatening whoever holds the position
of Administrator, rather than an individual Administrator. FYI7 was
chosen because it was most current. There have not been any updates to
that report, nor has the OIG provided any other reports or analysis on
Administrator Pruitt's security. However, we have continued to provide
written updates on individual cases to PSD and other internal EPA
stakeholders, for both new and pending threat investigations. These are
not summaries of all cases, and again, are not threat analyses. This is
usually done via email to the EPA Threat Coordination Group.
5.
On July 5, 2017, E&E News ran a story detailing the fact that
Administrator Pruitt's security spending in his first months in office
was nearly double that of his two predecessors. The timing of the
August 16 Report suggests it may have been produced to justify
Administrator Pruitt's unprecedented security spending. Why was the
report issued when it was? Who are the points of contact between OIG
and EPA on these issues? Did EPA request OIG prepare this or any other
report, or request that OIG engage in any other activities or
assessments, related to the Administrator's security?
The OIG's Office of Investigations prepared the August 16 OIG Summary
Report for the Administrator's Protective Service Detail, which was
doing a threat assessment. The points of contact were the OIG's
Assistant Inspector General for Investigations and Pasquale Perrotta,
the acting Special Agent in Charge of the EPA Protective Service
Detail.
The EPA Office of Criminal Enforcement, Forensics and Training has
informed the OIG that the EPA's Protective Service Detail began
providing 24/7 coverage of the Administrator the first day he arrived
at the EPA. The decision was made by the Office of Criminal
Enforcement, Forensics and Training after being informed that Mr.
Pruitt requested 24/7 protection once he was confirmed as
Administrator. The OIG played no role in this decision.
6.
Four of the 14 alleged threats against Administrator Pruitt in the
August 16 Report involve postings on social media. The report says the
OIG learned of these alleged social media threats in the following
manner: OIG received an ``investigative referral'' for threat one; OIG
agents ``discovered'' threat three; OIG received an ``investigative
notification'' of threat five; and OIG ``found'' threat nine. Please
explain how OIG investigates potential threats posted on the internet
and social media. Does OIG affirmatively search for threats against
Administrator Pruitt posted on the internet or social media? Has OIG
ever affirmatively searched for internet or social media threats
against previous administrators? If the answer to any of these
questions is yes, please explain the rationale for conducting these
searches and what safeguards are in place to protect First Amendment
rights of individuals who post messages on social media.
Normally the OIG does not proactively search social media or other
sources for threats or potential threats directed at the Administrator
or other EPA employees. The OIG usually receives reports of threatening
posts on social media from outside sources, such as agency officials or
other law enforcement agencies. In case three in the Summary Report, an
OIG special agent was searching a social media site for another,
unrelated investigation and discovered the threat by accident in the
course of that other search. Because the post also threatened a member
of the U.S. Senate, the OIG immediately contacted the U.S. Capitol
Police, as well as the FBI. In case nine in the Summary Report, a
threatening post on Twitter had already been referred to the OIG from
the Administrator's office, and the OIG investigated the matter
referred. After that case was opened, an OIG special agent, while
reviewing the public Twitter page for the subject of that
investigation, discovered an additional, serious threat from that
subject. Although it is possible, we can find no records indicating
that the OIG affirmatively searched the internet or social media for
threats against previous Administrators.
The OIG treats all threat information the same, whether it is
directed to an Administrator, other employee, contractor or facility.
We set forth in answer to question two the OIG criteria for protecting
First Amendment rights of individuals to communicate their opinions,
whether via social media or otherwise.
7.
Is it part of OIG's mission to advise the Administrator as to the
appropriate levels/he should have?
No, and the OIG does not do so.
8.
Has the Administrator or his staff consulted with you or your
staff on the appropriateness of relying on OIG's statements to increase
his spending or award raises to his staff? Specifically, did anyone at
EPA speak with OIG about the Administrator's talking points for his
April 26 hearings? What steps has and will OIG take to ensure going
forward that any reports or assessments it may produce are not
improperly represented as justification for programmatic decisions by
the agency?
The OIG plays no role in determining how the agency protects the
Administrator or other employees or facilities. Nor does the OIG have
any role in determining how much money the agency spends on protection
or the manner in which it spends funds. Neither the Administrator nor
his staff consulted with the OIG on the appropriateness of relying on
the OIG's statements to justify increasing spending or award raises to
his staff. No one from the EPA spoke with the OIG about the
Administrator's talking points prior to his April 26, 2018, hearing.
The OIG does have a statutory obligation to keep both Congress and
the head of the agency fully and currently informed. We do this by
issuing reports and through other means. We cannot dictate what use the
agency or the Congress makes of the information the OIG provides.
However, if the agency states that work produced by the OIG stands for
a certain proposition, and the OIG is asked by Congress whether that is
an accurate statement and whether the agency has asserted an improper
justification using that OIG material, the OIG will answer whether the
OIG material stands for the asserted proposition.
9.
What steps are being taken by OIG to create a firewall between OIG
employees who have assessed or investigated threats against
Administrator Pruitt and those tasked with conducting audits of his
security spending?
OIG employees who have assessed or investigated threats against
Administrator Pruitt are assigned to the Office of Investigations. OIG
employees who are tasked with conducting the audits of his security
spending are assigned to the Office of Audit and Evaluation. This is a
practical firewall, not a legal one, such as when a law firm isolates a
``tainted'' partner. The investigators do not participate in audits,
and have not participated in any of the audits the OIG has announced
regarding Administrator Pruitt's travel, security detail or
``administratively determined'' hiring. Following is the EPA OIG's
organization chart.
To ensure independence, objectivity and impartiality of staff members
who participate in a given investigation or audit, the OIG employs and
adheres to professional standards governing each discipline.
The EPA OIG Office of Investigations adheres to the Council of the
Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency's Quality Standards for
Investigations. Specifically, Standard B states in part: ``In all
matters relating to investigative work, the investigative organization
must be free, both in fact and appearance, from impairments to
independence; must be organizationally independent; and must maintain
an independent attitude.'' This standard places upon our agency the
responsibility for maintaining independence so that decisions used in
obtaining evidence, conducting interviews, and making recommendations
will be impartial and be viewed as impartial by third parties.
The Office of Audit and Evaluation staff adhere to internal policies
and procedures, including OIG Policy and Procedure 102, OIG
Independence. The policy and procedure require all OIG employees to:
-- Conduct themselves in a professional manner consistent with
generally accepted government auditing standards and Council of
the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency's Quality
Standards for Investigations.
-- Inform their supervisor of any perceived threats to independence
as they occur.
-- Sign a Personal Impairment Form upon joining OIG and annually as
performance agreements are established.
-- If required, annually complete OGE Form 450, Confidential
Financial Disclosure Report, or SF 278, Public Financial
Disclosure Report (Senior Executive Service members).
-- Request permission to engage in outside employment.
-- Obtain approval to publish articles and give speeches.
-- Inform his/her supervisor and the Office of Counsel prior to
accepting employment at an entity they are auditing or may
expect to be auditing.
-- Submit updated forms to alert their supervisor of any changes
relating to the Personal Impairment Forms as they occur.
OIG supervisors and managers must consider each threat to
independence on its own and in light of other previous or current
services. When considered in isolation, each threat may not be deemed
significant or material, but when considered cumulatively could impair
organizational and/or individual independence. Supervisors and managers
will also consider potential or actual impairments as staffing
decisions are made.
Several of the questions in your letter specifically address the
relationship between Patrick Sullivan, the OIG Assistant Inspector
General for Investigations, and Pasquale Perrotta, the acting Special
Agent in Charge of the EPA Protective Service Detail. On February 23,
2018, upon receipt of an anonymous complaint from the EPA Office of
Criminal Enforcement, Forensics and Training alleging misconduct on the
part of Mr. Perrotta, Mr. Sullivan determined that certain of the other
allegations were administrative in nature and not criminal. He returned
the alleged administrative violations to the EPA Office of Criminal
Enforcement, Forensics and Training for a management inquiry, which is
the OIG's standard practice. Mr. Sullivan assigned the remaining
portion of the complaint to the Washington Field Office within the OIG
Office of Investigations, and informed the head of that unit that he
was recusing himself from any involvement with the subsequent
investigation. Mr. Sullivan has had no involvement with any subsequent
OIG investigation of Mr. Perrotta.
Although he does not believe any conflict of interest exists, or that
his impartiality is impaired, Mr. Sullivan recused himself from
involvement with any investigation of Mr. Perrotta out of the abundance
of caution because of his professional relationship with Mr. Perrotta.
Mr. Sullivan considers Mr. Perrotta a professional friend and
colleague, not a personal friend. The recusal is in place to preclude
even a potential appearance of a conflict of interest or impairment to
impartiality allowing anyone to question the results of the OIG Office
of Investigations investigation. This recusal extended to any case in
which Mr. Perrotta is, or may become, the subject.
On May 3, Mr. Sullivan decided to recuse himself from any future OIG
Office of Investigations cases in which Mr. Perrotta is even
interviewed as a witness. Again, this extension of the scope of the
recusal is not because Mr. Sullivan believes that he has a real
conflict of interest or impairment to impartiality, but rather out of
an abundance of caution to preclude questioning the results of any OIG
investigation.
10.
In our prior conversations with your office, OIG staff have
differentiated between investigations, audits, and assessments when
describing the work your office does and the output it delivers to the
public. Please explain the differences between these types of projects,
including the standards used in conducting such projects, the types of
conclusions the IG is permitted to draw from this work, and how those
different OIG public products may be relevant here.
The OIG's Office of Audit and Evaluation (OA&E) does not perform
investigations (or threat assessments). OA&E is the only office in the
OIG to perform audits. OA&E plans and conducts complex audits of EPA
programs, systems and operations using the generally accepted
government auditing standards promulgated by the U.S. Government
Accountability Office. OA&E serves as OIG national technical experts
for assigned areas of responsibility, advising OIG personnel and others
concerning program operations and audit approaches. OA&E prepares
publicly available reports of audit with findings and recommendations
to improve EPA operations and help EPA look after the environment and
improve public health. OA&E conducts research on, and stays abreast of,
methods that can be used for audit, both within and outside the OIG.
OA&E's directorates are responsible for independent oversight of EPA
programs--as well as programs of the U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard
Investigation Board (CSB), for which Congress designated the EPA OIG to
also serve as its OIG--and recommending improvements to programs and
operations. Following is listed each OIG directorate and its role.
-- Air. Conducts performance audits to assess the EPA's programs and
activities to protect human health and the environment through
progress toward air quality and climate change goals.
-- Contract and Assistance Agreement. Conducts performance audits of
the EPA's management of contracts, grants, cooperative
agreements and interagency agreements.
-- Efficiency. Through performance audits, identifies ways for EPA
and CSB programs and operations to improve processes and
realize cost savings, thus freeing resources for high-priority
environmental projects.
-- Environmental Research Programs. Conducts performance audits of
the EPA's research and development programs; particular focus
is given to areas that support human health and environmental
protection.
-- Financial. Conducts financial audits to render opinions on
financial statements produced by the EPA and CSB, and supports
financial and performance audits in the Forensic Directorate.
-- Forensic. Conducts financial and performance audits of EPA
assistance agreements and contracts to identify potentially
fraudulent actions, and also determine the acceptability of
costs claimed under specific financial instruments.
-- Information Resources Management. Conducts performance audits to
determine the economy, efficiency and effectiveness of the
agency's investments in information technology for achieving
environmental goals and integrity of data used for decision-
making.
-- Land Cleanup and Waste Management. Conducts performance audits to
assess EPA programs, activities and initiatives to protect
human health and the environment through cleanup and waste
management, accident prevention and emergency response.
-- Toxics, Chemical Management and Pollution Prevention. Conducts
performance audits to assess the EPA's management of chemical
risks and programs to prevent pollution.
-- Water. Conducts performance audits to assess the EPA's protection
and restoration of healthy aquatic communities and waters that
sustain human health.
As explained in answer to question 1, the term ``threat
investigation'' is a generic term the OIG uses to classify the type of
investigation in the OIG's case management system. It does not
necessarily mean that every case opened as ``threat investigation''
reveals evidence of an actual threat. A ``threat assessment'' is a
guide usually used by decision makers in determining the type and
amount of security needed to address the protection of a person, event
or facility. It includes all available information, including the
results of threat investigations, but also other factors, such as
notoriety, history of threats or violence directed against the person
or event, other dangers or potential dangers that may be associated
with the person or event, and location, to name a few.
The OIG has never conducted a ``threat assessment'' for the
Administrator. The OIG investigates threats, or potential threats,
directed against EPA employees, including the Administrator. An OIG
investigative report is a factual account of a given investigation.
These reports are not threat assessments.
We appreciate your interest in the work of the OIG. A similar
letter is being sent to Senator Whitehouse. If you have any questions
about this or any other matter, please contact Alan Larsen, Counsel to
the Inspector General, at (202) 566-2391.
Sincerely,
Arthur A. Elkins Jr.
Senator Van Hollen. I want to ask you about allegations----
Mr. Pruitt. But they're the individuals that made the
decision according to the same document you're referring to.
Senator Van Hollen. They made the decision--look if a new
Administrator comes in and says, ``Hey, I want 24/7
protection,'' and they provide it, you're right. They----
Mr. Pruitt. That's not been my experience historically.
Senator Van Hollen. Well, that's what this says.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
FIRING OF MR. CHMIELEWSKI
Senator Van Hollen. That's what this says. The chronology
here is that they made that decision after your request for it.
And this is an IG report. I mean, I assume that they take this
job seriously.
Let me ask you about statements made by somebody who used
to work for you, one of your deputy chiefs of staff, Mr.
Chmielewski. Is that how you pronounce this name, Mr.
Chmielewski?
Mr. Pruitt. Sounds right.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay. Are you aware of the allegations
that he's made? He says he was fired by you because he brought
to your attention some of these issues regarding misspending
and violations of the public trust. In fact, in an interview
with some of the members of the Environment and Public Works
Committee, he said, and I'm quoting from their record, quote,
Every time you tried to find out about something, you got into
trouble, unquote. And they go on to detail lots of statements
that he made, your former deputy chief of staff, about your
conduct and decisions. These are documented in a letter of
April 12, 2018, from Senator Carper, Whitehouse, and Elijah
Cummings, a Congressman. Are you familiar with this letter?
Mr. Pruitt. I'm familiar with the letter, not all of its
contents, but----
Senator Van Hollen. Okay. Have you had a chance to review
it?
Mr. Pruitt. It's been some time.
POLICY DIFFERENCES
Senator Van Hollen. Okay. So my question is that
suggestions have been made through your testimony that people
who have policy differences with you would be somehow motivated
to make more out of these things than is justified. This is
coming from somebody who strongly supports the President's
agenda, has no differences with you on the policy agenda. He
was on the Trump campaign. President Trump has given him a
shout-out. He says to this day that he supports the President's
agenda and doesn't have an issue with the policy agenda you're
pursuing. Do you have any reason why he would be making these
statements other than if they're truthful?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I had limited interaction with Kevin. In
fact, the most interaction I had with him was in the field. He
was effectively the head of Advance, and I can say to you that
I'm not aware of any personnel decision being made with respect
to the person you're referring to with respect to any policy
issues or budget issues or spending issues. I just simply
didn't have that kind of interaction with Kevin.
Senator Van Hollen. And do you----
Mr. Pruitt. So I don't know what he's referring to.
Senator Van Hollen. Well, okay, because he's got a lot in
here. I really urge the subcommittee to take a look at this.
And at the end of this letter there's a request for documents.
My question is, Will you provide the documents requested in
this April 12----
Mr. Pruitt. I'm sure that's in process.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay. So that's a yes?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
[The information follows:]
response to april 12 letter
EPA is conducting centralized searches for documents responsive to
the April 12 request from Senators Carper and Whitehouse and
Representatives Cummings, Connolly, and Beyer. We have delivered
responsive documents on May 4, June 21, and July 16, and we expect to
deliver additional documents to the committees as they become
available.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Madam.
Thank you, Administrator.
WATER INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT FOR THE NATION ACT--WIIN ACT
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator.
Let me speak to you about some of the water programs,
again, areas that you and I agree that there is much work that
needs to be done with aging water infrastructure around the
country. In places like rural Alaska, infrastructure for the
very first time.
In the fiscal year 2018 omnibus, I included $20 million to
help small and disadvantaged communities obtain basic water and
sewer infrastructure. This is through the program that was
created a couple years ago, the WIIN Act, also known as the
Water Infrastructure Improvement for the Nation Act. This is
the first time the program has received funding. What is it
going to take for you to get this program up and running? We
are looking at it as an opportunity, really an extraordinary
opportunity, to help facilitate a level of public safety that
has been lacking for a long time. When you don't have clean
drinking water or sewer and wastewater systems, the disease
that we deal with and all of the health conditions that we
worry about, are greater amplified.
Can you give me a little sense as to how you anticipate
moving forward with this program?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, let me say generally that rural
communities, in addition to heavily dense urban markets, with
respect to lead in our drinking water, that's the reason I
mentioned that in my opening comments, that we need to be much
more intentional about replacing those lead service lines
across the country. You've highlighted something that I think
is often missed, which is those rural communities have as great
a challenge, and sometimes not the resources, bonding capacity
or otherwise to address it.
So one of the things we're actually looking at is using a
regionalization approach that will allow regional water systems
to kind of band together to submit applications under WIFIA to
achieve access to funds to help them in improving their--their
systems. So we're looking at a regionalization approach there.
The 30 million that you referred to, we are earnestly setting
up the process to implement that. There was also money put in
the budget, as you know, for schools around I think it's 20
million, if I'm not mistaken, with respect to assessment there
for schools and lead.
So it's very important, as part of this overall strategy,
that we implement that along with the WIFIA approach that I
made reference to earlier.
WIFIA
Senator Murkowski. Let me ask you about WIFIA. Now that
that is fully staffed and loans are being issued, should we
expect the rollout of these loans to happen relatively quickly?
We nearly doubled the size of the WIFIA program, as I
understand it. I don't know whether that means that we need to
look to additional staffing for that. What's your assessment on
the capabilities of the WIFIA program itself?
Mr. Pruitt. Some of it is awareness, Chairman Murkowski, in
the sense that a lot of communities across the country just
simply aren't aware of the opportunity.
Senator Murkowski. Right.
Mr. Pruitt. So I think there's an effort that we should
engage in, in fact, are engaging in, to work with Governors and
others to raise the level of awareness about the opportunities
around WIFIA. We just extended or are in the process of
extending the deadline for applications to the end of July--it
was the beginning part of July--because we wanted to engage in
an aggressive posture on trying to make communities aware of
the opportunities.
So I think the program is not nascent, it's not a nascent
situation, but it's early in its development, as you know. I
think the Agency needs to do more to advance awareness, and
then to solicit the kind of applications that will make a
difference, you know, bundling together.
Indiana just submitted, as an example, an application that
impacted multiple communities in the State. It was a first of
its kind, and innovative. And we're trying to use that as an
example for the rest of the country to say these are the kind
of approaches we'd like to see to get more velocity as far as
investment in these water infrastructure systems.
SMALL REMOTE INCINERATORS
Senator Murkowski. Again, that's an area that we really
look forward to working with you on some pretty basic issues
when you think about clean water and water and sanitation.
Small remote incinerators. You hear me talk about this one
a lot. Again, going back to the omnibus, we included a
provision to limit EPA's ability to enforce the regulation
related to the small remote incinerators that are used for the
solid waste disposal. As I've explained this issue to folks,
the application in so many parts of Alaska are in very remote
areas, almost always inaccessible by road, and there aren't
many other options for solid waste disposal for the most part.
We have the option to helicopter the solid waste out. Well,
if you're really looking to reduce your levels of emissions,
having helicopter flights to move either from your remote mine
site or an oil drilling area, you're defeating your purpose
here in terms of how you are monitoring your emissions.
So we included this language in the omnibus. We recognize
that it is not a permanent solution. We've had discussions with
you. I've raised it with the Assistant Administrator, Wehrum.
We want to work with EPA to find a solution, and both of you
have committed to working with us on this. But it's one of
those where we keep thinking that we've got a resolve, and a
year later I'm still in front of the subcommittee, and the EPA
Administrator is here, whether it's you or whether it was Gina
McCarthy, and we continue to have these conversations about it
without a permanent solution. So know that we have got to
figure this one out.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, it's one of those situations that I
believe we need very much pragmatism, practical approaches, to
fix it. It is a unique situation for the community, and we need
to recognize that as such and find solutions that address that
uniqueness.
Senator Murkowski. Well, and as I say, oftentimes it's not
even a community, it's just a very remote----
Mr. Pruitt. Right.
Senator Murkowski [continuing]. Operational site, and so
how we can help facilitate that is something that we want to
continue to work with you on.
Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam Chair, I would
like to put in the lobbying disclosure forms for Steven Hart
relating to the last questions.
Senator Murkowski. Those will be part of the record.
[The information follows:]
HUPP EMAILS
Senator Udall. Thank you very much.
And related to the search for the apartment and housing,
Mr. Administrator, and this is really a simple yes or no, will
you provide copies of all emails and other documents related to
your apartment search, including any from your staff, Ms. Hupp,
H-U-P-P, from her email address?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
[The information follows:]
condo lease
We are in the process of searching, collecting, and reviewing
related documents. The Agency will deliver the documents to you once
available.
Senator Udall. Thank you very much.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Senator Udall. You've spoken a lot about----
Mr. Pruitt. With a clarification obviously. The EPA----
Senator Udall. Could you do that within 10 days?
Mr. Pruitt. It would be emails from the Agency. That's what
I trust that you're asking for.
Senator Udall. Well, I'm asking for any emails that relate
to this, but, yeah, emails from the Agency, that's included.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. I just wanted clarity. The timeframe, I
understand that there's significant FOIAs that we're responding
to, but we will respond expeditiously, yes.
Senator Udall. But you're willing to give us any of her
emails, is that correct?
Mr. Pruitt. As I indicated, from the Agency, yes.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION REQUESTS
Senator Udall. Yes. And you've spoken a lot about the rule
of law. I know you're familiar with a very important law called
the FOIA, you just mentioned, Freedom of Information. That law
requires full disclosure of information and documents
controlled by the U.S. Government. Did EPA impose a political
review process before releasing FOIA requests?
Mr. Pruitt. Not to my knowledge, no.
Senator Udall. Yes, thank you.
Mr. Pruitt. Maybe you can define that. I'm not entirely
sure what you mean by political--what was the term?
Senator Udall. Well, there are only nine exceptions to
FOIA, and none of them are for political purposes.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. I just want to make sure that I understood
your question.
Senator Udall. Our understanding is that you put in a
political review in a FOIA request by your staff at your level.
Mr. Pruitt. The Office of General Counsel at the Agency
conducts the review process, and they follow the statute as far
as what exemptions are applicable.
Senator Udall. And they don't put any political review in
it.
Mr. Pruitt. As I indicated, the OGC reviews it and follows
the statute as far as what exemptions are applicable.
Senator Udall. And you haven't asked them to put a
political review in it in addition to the nine exceptions.
Mr. Pruitt. I'm not entirely sure what I can say more than
what I've already said about that, Senator.
NEGATIVE MEDIA ATTENTION
Senator Udall. Earlier this month, multiple news reports
indicated that your press team was shopping negative stories
about Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke to take attention away from
your scandals. I have to imagine it would be embarrassing to
President Trump to have officials at one Federal agency try to
publicly smear one of his Cabinet Secretaries. Did this
actually happen? Is your staff working to undermine other
Cabinet officials to distract from your own negative media
attention?
Mr. Pruitt. Absolutely not. In fact, we investigated that
initially. In fact, my chief of staff called Ryan Zinke's chief
of staff at the very moment that came up, and addressed that
matter. It was determined that that was not happening.
Senator Udall. And you will release all emails that will--
that relate to that.
Mr. Pruitt. We've investigated that with the gentleman in
question, and spoken to Interior, and whatever documents are
relevant to that that are subject to disclosure, we'll provide.
[The information follows:]
zinke e-mails
EPA is in the process of searching, collecting, and reviewing
documents related to this event. If this search uncovers any
information, the Agency will deliver the documents to you once
available.
Senator Udall. Well, multiple reports indicate that the
White House believes this happened. Did you ask what facts they
knew to inform proper management and discipline of your staff?
Mr. Pruitt. I can only say to you, Senator, that upon
learning of this allegation, we talked to the individual in
question, and he denied that it ever took place. I had my chief
of staff call the chief of staff for Ryan Zinke and clarify and
make sure that if there were any questions, they were
addressed. So we took immediate actions internally.
Senator Udall. Yes. And since you disagree with the White
House, should the IG investigate whether EPA employees are
wasting their time shopping negative stories about other
officials?
Mr. Pruitt. Again, Senator, I don't know what else I can
offer to you other than what I've already said about what steps
we've taken internally.
CALIFORNIA SUPERFUND SITE--HUGH HEWITT
Senator Udall. EPA has developed a list of 22 Superfund
sites, some of which were talked about today, which need
immediate and intense action. At least one site was proposed
for listing as a new Superfund site and added to the elite
group of sites at the exact same time. This just happened to be
a few weeks after Hugh Hewitt, a conservative commentator, who
regularly defends your actions, asked you to meet with a
California law firm who represents a client that wants to see
that very site cleaned up faster. Yes or no, did you take
interest in that particular California site after Hugh Hewitt
brought it to your attention?
Mr. Pruitt. There were discussions around that site well
before that meeting took place. Actually, good things came out
of that meeting, and the decision. I think you're referring to
the Administrator's list with respect to special emphasis. I'm
not entirely sure why there would be criticism around us taking
concerted action to address Superfund sites and get
accountability, whomever brings that to our attention.
MOROCCO TRIP, RICHARD SMOTKIN AND FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
Senator Udall. Yes, well, the idea is that there's been
scientific analysis and thorough analysis on a list, and so
then special friends get to get on a list that has been created
by the Agency. It looks a little bit fishy to me.
As I understand it, your trip to Morocco cost taxpayers
nearly $100,000, but had little connection to the EPA's
traditional mission or activities. It is also reported that the
trip was largely organized and arranged by Richard Smotkin, a
Comcast lobbyist you have reportedly known for over a decade.
And almost immediately after the trip, Mr. Smotkin became a
registered foreign agent on behalf of the Moroccan government
with a $40,000-a-month contract. Individuals familiar with your
Morocco trip indicated that Mr. Smotkin was, quote, a near
constant presence during your trip.
But Mr. Smotkin has also been involved in other matters
with the EPA during your tenure. For example, he arranged your
meeting with Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, tried to
plan two other trips to Australia to address a Business Council
for International Understanding, and dined with you on multiple
occasions in 2017. Did you discuss official EPA matters with
Mr. Smotkin during any of your extensive interactions with him?
Mr. Pruitt. I'm so glad you've asked this question about
Morocco because it's one of those situations that we were on
the ground for 36 hours. We have an environmental chapter----
Senator Udall. Sir, I just asked you a very specific
question.
Mr. Pruitt. I feel like you, Chairwoman--Chairman, in
fact----
Senator Udall. Did you discuss--did you discuss--Madam
Chair, he's not answering my question.
Senator Murkowski. Well, you need to give him an
opportunity to answer.
Go ahead, Administrator.
Mr. Pruitt. You made a lot of statements there, Senator,
with respect to the characters--characterizing the Morocco
trip. And the Morocco trip, there was a free trade agreement.
As you know, free trade agreements have environmental chapters
that are a part of those. The free trade agreement was up in
February this year. We had staff preparing that environmental
negotiation, that chapter. I met with five or six different
individuals while in Morocco over a 36-hour period with respect
to those issues.
We've had staff, I've learned recently, in Morocco
following up on those environmental negotiations to ensure that
they remain part of the free trade agreement. So to
characterize the Morocco trip as being anything other than
about EPA business is just simply a mischaracterization.
Senator Udall. Okay. Now my question, Did you discuss
official EPA matters with Mr. Smotkin during any of your
extensive interactions with him? Pretty simple.
Mr. Pruitt. The only--the only--the only discussions we've
ever had have been as part of meetings in the office or on the
trip that you're speaking about.
Senator Udall. And you talked about the trade agreement.
Did you work with a telecommunications--why did you work with a
telecommunications lobbyist regarding such a trip as opposed to
State Department, U.S. Trade Representative, or other Federal
officials?
Mr. Pruitt. We did in fact. We worked with the U.S. Trade
Representative. In fact, the Ambassador from Morocco was in my
office requesting that we make the trip, Senator. So the trip
occurred because of the request by the Ambassador in addition
to the environmental chapter that was being negotiated as part
of the free trade agreement. The U.S. Trade Representative's
Office was in fact engaged in the process, in both before,
during, and after.
Senator Udall. Will you commit to providing this
subcommittee and others in Congress all documents related to
your trip, Mr. Smotkin, and the free trade agreement with
Morocco?
Mr. Pruitt. Absolutely.
[The information follows:]
morocco trip
We are in the process of collecting and reviewing documents related
to the Morocco trip and will deliver them to you once available.
Senator Udall. In 10 business days. Thank you. Absolutely,
right?
Mr. Pruitt. The 10 days I can't speak to, I mean, but we
will absolutely provide the documentation.
Senator Udall. Okay.
FISH GRINDING--NPDES
Senator Murkowski. Thank you.
Fish grinding. I ask every year. Every year I need to go
back into my records and find out how long it has been that we
have been working to resolve this issue, encouraging EPA to
come up with a reasonable policy related to fish grinding for
both onshore and offshore seafood processors. Our onshore
processors are allowed to grind and discharge seafood waste
under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
general permit. But even with the best available technology,
100 percent compliance with the permit requirements is not
achievable due to the nature of the waste itself.
So we have been working with you on this. Even though
offshore fish grinding remains an issue within the Agency,
there are no documented water quality issues attributed to any
such grinding. Again, I've been working on this for a number of
years. Every time we seem to get close to resolving it, it
seems that there's another roadblock that presents itself. Do
you have any updates for me on how the Agency plans to comply
with the omnibus language that we included? Can you give me
some kind of a timeframe for action that we might expect?
Mr. Pruitt. As you know, Chairman, the existing permit has
expired----
Senator Murkowski. Right.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. And it's been administratively
continued. This is something that, again, practical approaches
need to take root. You're dumping fish parts in the middle of
the ocean, as I understand it, and as you put it, there is no
documented concerns with respect to ecosystems and the rest.
And there has been some, obviously, communications by Fish and
Wildlife that they would object to removing the provision from
the permit, but, nonetheless, it's something we need to proceed
with and put the proposal in the marketplace so we can get
closure on this issue. It's something that as I've talked to my
water office, I just don't understand the length of time it's
taken to address.
Senator Murkowski. And we don't either.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Senator Murkowski. We don't either. Again, this has not
been an issue under your leadership, but it is an issue that we
have been dealing with for years now. And it does appear that
we should be able to find some resolve.
The bulk of my questions to you here today, as they relate
to policy issues, have been seemingly very parochial, whether
it's small remote incinerators or fish grinding. Over the
years, we have worked with prior EPA Administrators in
convening a senior team of folks over at EPA, usually led by
the Deputy Administrator, to work through these issues and
check in regarding the progress that is being made with many of
these very specific issues that, as you point out, there ought
to be a commonsense process for moving forward.
I think it would be helpful in averting some problems if we
are able to address it at the front end before there are
looming enforcement actions that cause concern and just get
everybody engaged in lawyering up. So I do think it would be
helpful to have a similar meeting. I would appreciate your
willingness to convene this type of a meeting later this summer
or delegate that so that we can go through these so that I
don't have to take my time in these budget hearings and go down
the checklist and say, ``Okay, where are we?'' I would like to
be able to do that with you.
Mr. Pruitt. Senator Sullivan and I have actually talked
about perhaps a time that we would spend in Alaska, maybe
during the recess in August----
Senator Murkowski. Right.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. To address some of these matters,
and I would commit that to you that perhaps that would be a
good time to set as a deadline to get some progress made in
these areas.
Senator Murkowski. I look forward to that. Thank you.
Senator Udall, I'm concluded with my questions, but do
you--you have time for one more round here.
Senator Udall. I just--yeah, I just have a couple more
here.
METHYLENE CHLORIDE
Administrator Pruitt, you mentioned methylene chloride and
meeting with the families. When are we going to see the ban?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, as you know----
Senator Udall. That's what I want to know. That's what the
families want to know. I met with some of the same families.
Mr. Pruitt. As you know, Senator, the proposed ban
withdrawal was submitted in January of 2017. And it----
Senator Udall. That's right. The last administration said
ban--ban----
Mr. Pruitt. That's right. There were comments taken that's
been pending at the Agency since probably June of this year as
far as review of those comments. When I met with those families
recently, my commitment post was to forward the proposed rule
as it currently stands. This was submitted in January of 2017
to OMB to move to finalization of that rule.
Now, there are some steps that need to be addressed.
There's a DoD issue with respect to the use of methylene
chloride and then contactors of DoD. There is some clarity that
needs to be addressed. But as you know, the rule simply says
that if you distribute methylene chloride for paint stripping,
that it has to be in a 55-gallon drum. So there are two
different sections of the rule, but we have forwarded that to
OMB for processing and to move toward with the final
clarification around the DoD issue along with contractors.
Senator Udall. You're pushing for a ban, correct? Just like
the past administration.
Mr. Pruitt. I'm pushing for the rule that was submitted in
January of 2017.
Senator Udall. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt. Senator, I think that this is one of the
solvents that made up the list of 10 under the Toxic Substances
Control Act (TSCA), and the priorities that we are reviewing.
This is a matter that we needed to act on, in my view, sooner
than what we did. I appreciate you and others bringing that to
my attention. The meeting that I had with those families helped
cement the process that we're taking.
OFFICE OF CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT
Senator Udall. Now, you've mentioned several times in the
course of questioning here about this new office called the
Office of Continuing Improvement.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, sir.
Senator Udall. The subcommittee was not notified of this
new office. Can you commit to us again today that you will heed
this subcommittee's direction on all reorganizations, closures,
and staffing changes?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, but this was not a reorganization. These
were employees that were already internal to the
Administrator's Office that was simply providing leadership
with respect to this Office of Continuous Improvement. So it
was not a reorganization.
Senator Udall. Well, I--my understanding is that kind of
activity is considered--creating a new office is considered a
reorganization. So can you commit to us again that you will
heed this subcommittee's direction on all reorganizations,
closures, and staffing changes?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, Senator.
Senator Udall. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, Senator. May I add something there? There
has been a lot of discussion with respect to regions across the
country about their status, and in labs as well, there have
been discussions about that. The previous administration began
a process to eliminate many regional labs across the country. I
have reversed that. So because the regional labs make a
substantial difference to States in the development of State
Implementation Plans, for air quality, water quality standards
that they're developing. So when we talk about reorganization,
that is very important. We seek to make you aware of that, but
we're trying to get accountability in these areas as much as
anything.
CHLORPYRIFOS AND OTHER DANGEROUS PESTICIDES
Senator Udall. And shifting very quickly here to
chlorpyrifos and agricultural worker protection, children and
farm workers continue to be exposed to chlorpyrifos and other
dangerous pesticides. Do you know how many children under the
age of 18 work in agriculture in the U.S.?
Mr. Pruitt. Do I know the number?
Senator Udall. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt. I do not know the number.
Senator Udall. Yes. It's estimated about 500,000 children
work in agriculture. And right now you're rewriting a rule that
protects those children from pesticide exposure. Time and again
we see public health and safety precautions taking a back seat
while corporate friends and donors get special attention. Do
you think it was appropriate to include supportive statements
from Dow Chemical, the maker of chlorpyrifos, in your EPA year-
end review 2017-2018 document right under the subheading
``Chemicals and Pesticides''?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, Senator, I would rather speak to the
issue around age and the Worker Protection Standard. I want you
to know that as we're evaluating that, I think there are 30-
plus States that have age requirements. We are contemplating
and considering, should there be more deference given to those
States if they set it at 16 or 18? The Worker Protection
Standard age requirements are important, but we're trying to
figure out the best way to achieve that to give reliance upon
the States and what they've already put into place.
As far as the Dow reference Chemical, I mean, the Public
Affairs Office put that together, and why they included that, I
can inquire, but I can just provide the information to you on
why that was included.
[The information follows:]
chlorpyrifos
``Throughout the EPA Year-in-Review 2017-2018 Report, the Agency
included quotes from industry, State and local governments, non-
governmental organizations, elected officials, and other stakeholders.
These are all entities who are interested in the important work of EPA
to protect public health and the environment.''
Senator Udall. Yes. Well, the additional point is, how many
supportive statements do you have from agricultural workers or
health professionals in the record on that issue?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, as you know, any changes we made to the
Worker Protection Standard, there's a comment period where
there will be a variety of comments made by stakeholders both
pro and con to lowering that or increasing that, deferring to
the States or not. It's not just the age requirement issue
either, it's the representation issue that we're addressing, so
there are multiple issues that we're speaking to there.
Senator Udall. Yes. And yet you have represented during
your testimony today a number of times that you would answer
our questions, answer our letters. We hope that you will do
that on a timely basis.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Udall.
Administrator, thank you. You've given a good portion of
your day to us this morning. As Senator Udall has indicated,
there have been some questions and requests for information
that have been directed to you this morning. We would
anticipate that you would be responsive to that.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
If Members have questions for the record, the record will
be held open so that they may submit those questions. And again
your prompt response is appreciated.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Agency for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted to Hon. Scott Pruitt
Questions Submitted by Senator Lisa Murkowski
omnibus--diesel generators
Question. The recently passed omnibus bill included a directive
that requires the EPA to reexamine a regulation related to diesel
generators that are often used to generate power in rural Alaskan
communities. Any generators purchased after Model Year 2014 are
required to have a ``Diesel Particulate Filter'' installed if they are
used as the primary power generator. These filters have a high failure
rate and even simple upgrades can be difficult.
This issue was originally raised by rural Alaskans as part of your
regulatory review panel, which was a result of Executive Order 13777.
What is the status of the review that was required by the omnibus?
Answer. EPA has begun the internal process for a notice and comment
rulemaking to address these concerns, with a proposal likely in 2019.
EPA is continuing to work with the Alaska Energy Authority and to
review information they have provided.
biomass-carbon neutrality
Question. In both fiscal year 2017 and fiscal year 2018, we
included language in the omnibus to require the Agency to work with the
Department of Energy and the Department of Agriculture to develop a
policy related to the carbon neutrality of biomass. You recently issued
a policy memo making clear that future regulatory actions will treat
biomass from managed forests as carbon neutral when used for energy
production at stationary sources.
I appreciate your efforts on this front and am hopeful that you
will enshrine the policy memo in some sort of regulation.
Do you plan to issue a regulation on this issue?
Answer. As stated in the April 23, 2018 announcement, EPA's policy
in forthcoming regulatory actions will be to treat biogenic
CO2 emission from the combustion of biomass from managed
forests at stationary sources as carbon neutral. The Agency is
currently exploring options for implementing this policy in the
relevant regulatory programs, including under the Prevention of
Significant Deterioration and Title V permitting programs.
Question. What is your timeframe for doing so?
Answer. EPA is currently considering how this policy may be
implemented; while there is currently no firm timeframe for any
forthcoming actions, the Agency will keep the committee apprised of its
progress.
tier 4: pilot boats
Question. I am submitting questions 3 and 4 on behalf of Senator
Perdue.
In a recent Energy & Commerce Committee hearing, you mentioned that
you would now be personally involved in the marine engine waiver issue
for pilot boats, after giving the commitment to look into in your
December testimony from the committee. This is a pressing issue that
could have a wide-ranging impact on our port operations and growth.
Mr. Administrator, can you please provide a breakdown of the
actions the EPA has taken to address the Tier 4 concerns?
Answer. EPA has engaged multiple stakeholders on this topic,
including meeting with the Savannah Bar Pilots and, in a separate
meeting, with the company that builds pilot vessels. After the April 26
hearing, EPA sent technical experts to meet with the pilot boat builder
to discuss relevant technical issues in detail. EPA also has met with
seven marine engine manufacturers to better understand what Tier 4
engines are available now or will be available in the near future.
Finally, EPA staff spoke with NOAA staff to discuss and better
understand the impacts that NOAA's whale strike rule has on pilot boat
operations. EPA will use the information gathered in these meetings to
develop a path forward.
Question. Please provide a timeline of what the EPA has done and
any upcoming actions that will be taken by the EPA to address this
concern.
Answer. Since October 2017, EPA staff have engaged in technical
discussions with multiple industry and government stakeholders on this
topic (see the above response for more detail). EPA is currently
reviewing this information and assessing its options under Clean Air
Act authorities and regulations.
Question. After you send technical experts to California, what will
need to be done?
Answer. EPA's technical experts have recently met with the boat
builder. EPA will use the information gathered in that meeting and
other discussions to inform any future action.
Question. Does the EPA have the authority to move forward with a
waiver system? If not, what are your legal restrictions?
Answer. EPA regulations provide limited exemptions from the Tier 4
marine engine standards for specific circumstances, such as national
security. However, the regulatory exemptions would not apply in these
circumstances. Any potential waiver process for boat operators, or
other changes to EPA's existing regulations would require a notice and
comment rulemaking.
tier 4: generators
Question. Administrator Pruitt, I have a similar concern for the
Tier 4 restrictions placed on large, 1- megawatt generators. It's my
understanding that the Tier 4 restrictions are preventing Tier-4
generators from being sold in the market due to that and the
portability restrictions. It's forecasted that there won't be a viable
solution in the market until the early 2020s.
Is this something you are working on?
Answer. EPA is not currently working to amend the standards for
nonroad engines. Engine manufacturers had nearly 10 years of lead time
before the current Tier 4 standards took effect in 2014. However,
because engine manufacturers have a low volume of sales in this power
category, they chose not to initially focus on developing Tier 4
engines of this size. Engine manufacturers have indicated that these
Tier 4 generators will be available soon.
Question. What would need to be done by the EPA to remedy this
situation and allow for the sale of currently developed generators?
Answer. The flexibilities for these nonroad emission standards
(which effectively extended the compliance deadline for Tier 4
generators in this category) ended January 1, 2018. Any revisions to
the emission standards or compliance deadline would need to go through
notice and comment rulemaking. This regulatory process likely could not
be accomplished before 1-megawatt, Tier 4 generators become available
in late 2019 (currently, Tier 4-compliant 600- kilowatt generators--
which can be paired together to provide 1.2-megawatts of power--are
available in the marketplace.) Any changes to the standards could
disrupt the market by allowing new Tier 2 generators to continue to be
sold, putting at a disadvantage those engine manufacturers who have
already invested resources to develop Tier 4 generators.
Question. Is the EPA currently reviewing this concern or working on
any changes that would remedy it?
Answer. At this time, EPA has reviewed this concern and has no
plans to change the regulations.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Lamar Alexander
methylene chloride
Question. I have heard from Tennesseans who are concerned about the
Federal regulation of methylene chloride. I have also heard from
manufactures in Tennessee about the impact of a ban on methylene
chloride. In 2016, Congress passed the Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical
Safety for the 21st Century Act, which requires the Environmental
Protection Agency to perform risk evaluations on the uses of 10
specific chemicals, including methylene chloride. Last week, you
announced that the Environmental Protection Agency will finalize the
methylene chloride rulemaking first proposed in January 2017. As the
Environmental Protection Agency considers the regulation of methylene
chloride, I encourage you to work with both advocates and manufacturers
to achieve a result. What is the timeline for finalizing the rule? Will
you keep me updated on the process as you work to finalize the rule?
Answer. On May 10, 2018, EPA announced plans to finalize its
ongoing methylene chloride rulemaking. The agency issued a proposed
rule in January 2017 under TSCA, as amended by the Frank R. Lautenberg
Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act, to regulate methylene
chloride in paint and coating removal. Specifically, EPA proposed to
prohibit the manufacture (including import), processing and
distribution in commerce of methylene chloride for all consumer and
most types of commercial paint and coating removal; to prohibit most
commercial uses of methylene chloride for paint and coating removal; to
prohibit most distribution in commerce of methylene chloride for paint
and coating removal in containers with a volume less than 55 gallons;
and to require all manufacturers, processors, and distributors of
methylene chloride to provide downstream notification of these
prohibitions and to keep limited records. EPA also proposed a time-
limited exemption from these requirements for paint and coating removal
for critical national security uses. The proposed rule and supporting
documents are in docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2016-0231, available at: https://
www.regulations.gov. EPA accepted public comments on the proposed rule
until May 19, 2017. Over 147,000 public comments were received.
The agency is currently considering information received during the
public comment period.
In addition, you may be aware that EPA is undertaking a risk
evaluation of the conditions of use of methylene chloride not covered
by the ongoing rulemaking. In December 2016, EPA published a list of 10
chemical substances that are the subject of the Agency's initial
chemical risk evaluations (81 FR 91927), as required by TSCA
Sec. 6(b)(2)(A). Methylene chloride was one of those chemicals.
TSCA Sec. 6(b)(4)(D) requires that EPA publish the scope of the
risk evaluation to be conducted, and in June 2017, EPA published the
Scope of the Risk Evaluation for methylene chloride, which includes
paint removal as one of the conditions of use. In June 2018, EPA
published the Problem Formulation of the Risk Evaluation for Methylene
Chloride ((https://www.regulations.gov/document?D=EPA-HQ-OPPT-2016-
0742-0083)). The problem formulation document refines the scope of the
risk evaluation by clarifying the chemical conditions of use that EPA
expects to evaluate and describes how EPA expects to conduct the
evaluation. Comments received on this problem formulation document will
inform development of the draft risk evaluation, which will be made
available for public comment and subjected to peer review prior to
EPA's issuance of the final risk evaluation. The problem formulation
document was available for comment until August 16, 2018 through docket
EPA-HQ-OPPT-2016-0742, available at: https://www.regulations.gov.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Steve Daines
special account funds from libby cleanup
Question. Mr. Pruitt, I know you received my letter urging EPA to
ensure the voices of local leaders are incorporated into the operation
and maintenance plan for the Libby Asbestos Superfund site. On a
separate but related matter, I would like to note that I want to work
with you to ensure that the special account money that was set aside in
the initial settlement for Libby cleanup are used to the maximum extent
to benefit Libby, rather than getting swept back up into the general
Superfund account.
Are you willing to engage with local leaders and with me on the use
of those funds?
Answer. EPA will continue to engage with Congressional offices, the
State of Montana, and local leaders on the use of these funds. As a
result of the 2008 bankruptcy settlement between W.R. Grace and the
United States, EPA received $11 million to fund operation and
maintenance (O&M) for the Libby Asbestos Site. EPA retains those funds
in the Libby Asbestos Site O&M Special Account pursuant to its
authority under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
and Liability Act's section 122(b)(3). Currently, including interest,
there is approximately $12 million available in the special account.
EPA has begun to make those funds available to the State via a
cooperative agreement. EPA anticipates all the funds in the account
will be used for future O&M at the site.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Shelley Moore Capito
integrated risk information system (iris) program
Question. Can you describe how you will make sure the IRIS program
reflects the priority needs of the program offices, including what is
the prioritization process and how will the public be informed?
Answer. The IRIS Program maintains regular engagement with EPA
program and regional offices to identify upcoming assessment needs.
These engagements include evaluating offices needs for existing
assessment products in the IRIS pipeline; the priority or urgency for
specific assessments; and any other additional considerations that
would inform assessment development.
IRIS provides routine updates and engages program and regional
offices throughout assessment development during monthly EPA-wide
calls. These calls serve two purposes: providing program and regional
offices timely information on assessment status, and providing IRIS
real-time information on EPA program priorities. This allows IRIS
Program management to be aware of changes in EPA program needs
resulting from high-priority regulatory developments, and ensures that
IRIS has the capability to respond in a timely way to emerging Agency
needs (e.g., per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances).
Information on assessments under development as well as updates to
IRIS Program activities are made available to the public on EPA's IRIS
website (www.epa.gov/iris).
Question. When can we expect the handbook to be made available for
public review and comment? Will it clearly describe the Agency's
process for evaluating and integrating scientific data?
Answer. The handbook is currently being updated based on input
received from the April 2018 report of the National Academy of Science
(NAS), ``Progress Toward Transforming the Integrated Risk Information
System (IRIS) Program'' and from public comments received on the
Systematic Review Protocol for the IRIS Chloroform Assessment
(Inhalation). The IRIS handbook is anticipated to be released following
completion of external peer review.
The IRIS handbook outlines methods used to evaluate and integrate
scientific information for IRIS assessments. Many of the methods
outlined in the handbook summarize widely-accepted practices used in
systematic review. These methods have been placed into operation on
ongoing assessments, and were presented to the EPA Science Advisory
Board and the NAS. In addition, beginning in 2018, IRIS publishes
chemical specific protocols that outline the IRIS handbook methods as
applied to specific chemicals (see, for example, the systematic review
protocol for chloroform, released in January 2018). These protocols
undergo public comment early in the stages of assessment development
(IRIS Step 1: https://www.epa.gov/iris/basic-information-about-
integrated-risk-information-system#process).
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Marco Rubio
federal-state partnership on clean water issues
Question. Can you speak to the importance of the Federal-State
partnership on clean water issues, and do you believe this budget
reflects the appropriate commitment to the Clean Water State Revolving
Fund and the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund?
Answer. Cooperative Federalism--the partnership between States,
Tribes, and EPA--is critical for implementing environmental protection
programs. EPA understands that improvements to protecting human health
and the environment cannot be achieved by any actor operating alone,
but only when the States, Tribes, and EPA, in conjunction with affected
communities, work together in a spirit of trust, collaboration, and
partnership.
The fiscal year 2019 budget requests funding for critical drinking
and wastewater infrastructure to further the President's ongoing
commitment to infrastructure repair and replacement. The request
includes $2.3 billion for the State Revolving Funds, allowing States to
finance high priority infrastructure investments. In addition, $20
million is requested for the Water Infrastructure Finance and
Innovation Act (WIFIA) program. EPA could potentially provide $2
billion in credit assistance, which when combined with other funding
sources could spur an estimated $4 billion in total water and
wastewater infrastructure investments.
wifia status
Question. As you are aware, Miami-Dade County was one of 12
entities selected to apply for a WIFIA loan in 2017. The County has a
2025 deadline to construct new injection wells and wastewater treatment
capacity to reduce its ocean outfall discharges to improve coastal
water quality and increase potential reuse of reclaimed water. What is
the status of the WIFIA program as a whole, and the 2017 applications
in particular?
Answer. Regarding the 2017 applications, EPA expects to close loans
for all projects for which we have received a full application by the
end of the 2018 calendar year. Regarding the 2018 application process,
on May 5, 2018, the Administrator announced that the deadline for
prospective borrowers to submit letters of interest for WIFIA loans has
been extended to July 31, 2018. Administrator Pruitt also sent a letter
highlighting the deadline extension to the governors of 56 States and
territories, as well as Tribal leadership. This year's WIFIA Notice of
Funding Availability highlights the importance of protecting public
health, including reducing exposure to lead and other contaminants in
drinking water systems and updating the nation's aging infrastructure.
south florida geographic program
Question. The Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan is arguably
the largest environmental restoration project that mankind has ever
attempted. The EPA has a significant role in providing funding and
technical assistance for water quality and habitat monitoring
throughout the project region. Yet, the fiscal year 2019 budget once
again cuts the South Florida Geographic Program. Can you explain to me
why it seems that you believe assisting States with environmental
monitoring is not a core mission of the Agency, and why an annual
investment of a few million dollars to help ensure the success of a $16
billion Federal-State partnership is not a prudent use of taxpayer
funds?
Answer. EPA's fiscal year 2019 budget lays out a comprehensive
back-to-basics and foundational strategy to maintain core environmental
protection with respect to statutory and regulatory obligations. EPA
will encourage Florida and local entities to continue to make progress
on the Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan, working with core
water programs, including water quality standards, industrial and
stormwater permitting and enforcement, and water quality assessment.
algae bloom outbreak
Question. The most recent ``Lost Summer'' harmful algae bloom
outbreak in the Indian River Lagoon caused millions of dollars in
economic damages, and featured several months of exposure to
environmental and human health hazards for several communities in the
area. Given that the algae outbreak actually originated in Lake
Okeechobee, and that freshwater harmful algal blooms fall under EPA's
jurisdiction, can you describe what efforts, if any, the Agency has
undertaken since that 2016 event to understand what happened and how to
prevent or mitigate the impacts of the next outbreak in South Florida?
Answer. EPA has a multifaceted approach to addressing harmful algal
blooms in freshwater systems across the country. EPA, acting as a co-
chair of the Interagency Working Group on the Harmful Algal Bloom and
Hypoxia Research and Control Act (IWG-HABHRCA), coordinates the actions
across the Federal partners that directly address the issues related to
HABs and hypoxia in the US. This Interagency Working Group has embraced
Congress' request to collaboratively address HABs by crafting strategic
plans, reports, and assessments of events. EPA, in coordination with
Federal and State partners, continues to take actions to protect public
health and local economies from HABs, including: development of health
advisories for both drinking water and recreational water, guidance
documents, recommendations, and tools; maintaining and creating new
working partnerships; and conducting critical research on effective
preventative and mitigation strategies.
Specifically, since the 2016 harmful algal bloom event in South
Florida, EPA made the following progress on research and tools to help
in such future events:
--Published draft Recreational Ambient Water Quality Criteria/
Swimming Advisories for two cyanotoxins, microcystins and
cylindrospermopsin and additional support materials for States,
Tribes, and communities to protect public health during
cyanobacterial HABs in recreational waters.
--Revised draft Recreational Ambient Water Quality Criteria/Swimming
Advisories document in response to public comment period that
ended March 2017. Revised document currently going through
internal review and comment process with the goal to release
the final document later in 2018.
--Developed new monitoring screening tools and analytical methods for
use of toxin detection in surface and finished drinking waters.
--Developed three new support tools to assist in monitoring,
treatment and communicating the risks of cyanotoxins in
drinking water to assist States, Tribes and drinking water
systems in managing cyanotoxins in drinking water.
--Began monitoring cyanotoxins in the Nation's drinking water systems
to determine the extent of its occurrence in finished drinking
water, as part of the Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring
program.
--Continued to work alongside State and utility associations, non-
governmental organizations, Federal agencies (including the
USDA) and other partners, in the national Source Water
Collaborative. This effort supports effective source water
protection strategies to reduce and prevent the occurrence of
cyanotoxins in drinking water sources, including reducing
nutrient pollution, a major driver of harmful algal blooms.
--Hosted nine separate regionally-focused harmful algal bloom
workshops across the country to develop improved algal toxin
management strategies. One of these workshops was hosted on May
14-16, 2018 for EPA Region 4 States (Alabama, Florida, Georgia,
Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and
Tennessee) at EPA Region 4's Offices. The State of Florida
health and environmental departments participated in this
meeting. Participants discussed new approaches for addressing
harmful algal blooms in States across the entire region, and
included a lesson learned session from the Lake Okeechobee
event in 2016.
citrus greening
Question. Florida citrus has been battling citrus greening for more
than a decade. I want to thank you on behalf of Florida's citrus
growers for the emergency exemptions you issued to help suppress the
continued spread and impacts of the disease. As far as I know, these
expired at the end of last year, as did a separate exemption for
dealing with Laurel Wilt, a disease killing avocados and several
related species of native trees throughout the southeast. Was there any
consideration made to extending these exemptions?
Answer. Although emergency exemptions have expiration dates, should
growers in the State of Florida need access to these tools for
additional periods of time, requests to extend the Section 18 emergency
exemption can be submitted for the EPA's consideration.
--The following section 18 emergency exemptions have been authorized
for 2018 to assist Florida growers in controlling Asian Citrus
Psyllid and Citrus Greening:
--Clothianidin (Issued 12/29/2017; Expires 10/31/2018)
--Oxytetracycline (Issued 1/17/2018; Expires 12/31/2018)
--Streptomycin (Issued 1/17/2018; Expires 12/31/2018)
--The following section 18 emergency exemption has been authorized to
assist Florida growers in controlling laurel wilt in avocadoes.
This section 18 request was first authorized in 2010.
--Propiconazole (Issued 4/3/2017; Expires 4/3/2020)
Source: Emergency Exemption Database available at: https://
iaspub.epa.gov/apex/pesticides/f?p=110:2.
Question. Citrus greening is spread by the Asian Citrus Psyllid, an
invasive insect that has proven difficult to manage. In December, EPA
released new citrus benefits assessments identifying foliar
applications of four neonicotinoids, as being critical for psyllid
control. What is the status of the final pollinator risk assessments
and proposed interim decisions for these chemicals?
Answer. In December 2017, EPA released the preliminary ecological
and human health risk assessments for the neonicotinoid insecticides,
clothianidin, thiamethoxam, and dinotefuran and a preliminary
ecological risk assessment for imidacloprid, assessing risks to birds,
mammals, non-target insects, and plants. Preliminary pollinator-only
risk assessments for these chemicals were published for comment in 2016
and 2017, and preliminary human health and ecological assessments (for
aquatic species only) for imidacloprid were also released in 2017. EPA
also released new cotton and citrus benefits assessments for foliar
applications of the neonicotinoids as well as a response to public
comments on the 2014 Benefits of Neonicotinoid Seed Treatment to
Soybean Production.
potential environmental hazards
Question. How concerned should Floridians be about potential
environmental hazards in their neighborhood that they may not know
about?
Answer. Floridians can learn more about environmental activities in
their area and generate maps of environmental information to better
identify and address potential environmental hazards in their
neighborhood through the use of several sources of information provided
by EPA and its State and local government partners.
First, Floridians can access information regarding potential
environmental hazards in their neighborhood from Envirofacts, accessed
at https://www3.epa.gov/enviro/, which is EPA's one-stop source for
Environmental Information across various EPA data systems. In addition,
EPA's MyEnvironment (https://www3.epa.gov/myem/envmap/find.html) and
EnviroMapper (https://www.epa.gov/emefdata/em4ef.home) provide
geospatial support in better understanding potential hazards using
mapping tools. Finally, for Floridians interested in understanding and
protecting services provided by ecosystems in communities, in contrast
to potential environmental hazards in their communities, EnviroAtlas
(https://www.epa.gov/enviroatlas) provides interactive tools that allow
users to discover, analyze, and download data and maps related to
ecosystem services, or the benefits people receive from nature.
Ecosystem services underpin most aspects of human well-being, including
water, security, and the economy.
Along with these resources, EPA's Region 4 office highlights and
brings awareness to key environmental issues occurring in the southeast
(https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/about-epa-region-4-southeast), and State
and local health and environmental agencies such as the Florida
Department of Environmental Protection and the Florida Department of
Health are also important resources for Floridians.
brownfields and superfund sites in florida
Question. Are the number of Brownfield and Superfund sites in
Florida increasing, decreasing, or largely unchanged?
Answer. Communities in Florida consistently apply for EPA
Brownfields competitive grants and have been successful in receiving
competitive grant funds every year since 2003. EPA funds have reached
over 100 different communities in Florida through more than 135 grants.
Since the pilot year of the program (1998), over 1,100 properties have
been assessed and 30 cleanups have been completed with EPA funds. The
State has a mapping tool \1\ that highlights all the brownfield sites
that have been enrolled in the State voluntary cleanup program. On
average, about 40 new properties are added to the State program each
year.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://ca.dep.state.fl.us/mapdirect/?focus=brnflds.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The attached chart provides a summary of the number of Florida's
proposed, final and deleted National Priorities List (NPL) Superfund
sites. There have been 80 sites added to the NPL in Florida, 26 of
which have since been deleted which leaves 54 active sites. Since 1990,
the number of sites being added and deleted in Florida has been
relatively consistent, with the cumulative total ranging from 49-54.
Question. How does EPA work with the Florida Department of
Environmental Protection to identify, assess, and clean up these sites?
Answer. For Brownfields, EPA works closely with Florida Department
of Environmental Protection (FDEP) to identify sites for assessment
and/or cleanup, often engaging them on a property-specific basis. For
example, EPA has approved and funded the development of improved
community access tools, such as the website noted above, for
communicating the success of the State program to those looking to
invest nearby and/or invest further in a specific property.
In addition, EPA and FDEP collaborate throughout the Superfund
process. As part of that process, EPA annually awards cooperative
agreement funds to FDEP to help finance the evaluation of sites
throughout Florida. Working together, EPA and FDEP prioritize sites for
assessment and, for the highest priority sites, develop the information
necessary to support a determination on whether adding the site to the
NPL is appropriate. When EPA and FDEP believe a site warrants NPL
addition, EPA requests a letter documenting the State's support prior
to proposing the site to the NPL. Once EPA receives written State
support, the Agency typically proceeds with the site's proposal, takes
public comment on the proposal, and finalizes the site for the NPL.
Although, based on public comments and other factors, EPA may determine
not to proceed with finalizing the site on the NPL. EPA collaborates
with the State throughout the remedial process, including seeking State
input on remedy decisions and seeking State concurrence on a site's NPL
deletion. For private NPL sites, the State may perform either a support
or a lead agency role for remedial activities. EPA and the State
execute a Superfund State Contract (SSC) or a cooperative agreement
prior to the State conducting a cleanup at an NPL site located in the
State. The SSC or cooperative agreement clarifies EPA's and the State's
roles in the response action, and documents other requirements and
State assurances before the response action occurs (including, as
appropriate, the State's commitment to share costs).
Question. What additional authorities or flexibilities for EPA
would improve coordination with FDEP and overall program effectiveness?
Answer. Overall, FDEP has a very robust Brownfields and State
cleanup program that addresses a wide variety and large number of
contaminated sites and allows for substantial coordination between EPA
and FDEP. EPA will continue to seek and expand opportunities to
efficiently leverage the respective resources.
ATTACHMENT
FLORIDA'S NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST ACTIONS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Removed
Proposed
from
Total on
Fiscal Year
NPL \1\
Proposed
Final NPL
Deleted NPL
NPL
NPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1983...........................................
29
...........
25
...........
25
1984...........................................
...........
...........
4
...........
29
1985...........................................
10
...........
...........
...........
29
1986...........................................
2
1
3
...........
32
1987...........................................
...........
...........
2
...........
34
1988...........................................
13
...........
...........
2
32
1989...........................................
4
1
1
1
32
1990...........................................
1
1
19
...........
51
1991...........................................
1
...........
...........
...........
51
1992...........................................
3
...........
...........
...........
51
1993...........................................
1
...........
1
1
51
1994...........................................
3
...........
3
...........
54
1995...........................................
1
1
1
3
52
1996...........................................
3
...........
...........
1
51
1997...........................................
1
1
3
2
52
1998...........................................
1
...........
2
2
52
1999...........................................
...........
...........
...........
2
50
2000...........................................
5
...........
4
2
52
2001...........................................
...........
...........
1
2
51
2002...........................................
1
...........
...........
...........
51
2003...........................................
...........
...........
1
1
51
2004...........................................
...........
...........
...........
...........
51
2005...........................................
...........
...........
...........
1
50
2006...........................................
...........
...........
...........
1
49
2007...........................................
...........
...........
...........
...........
49
2008...........................................
3
...........
1
1
49
2009...........................................
3
...........
2
1
50
2010...........................................
1
...........
4
...........
54
2011...........................................
1
...........
...........
1
53
2012...........................................
1
...........
2
...........
55
2014...........................................
...........
...........
...........
2
53
2016...........................................
1
...........
...........
...........
53
2017...........................................
...........
...........
1
...........
54
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Three sites were initially proposed for NPL addition and re-proposed later due to update in Hazard Ranking
System (HRS) scoring information (Pratt & Whitney, Stauffer Chemical--Tampa, and City Industries).
renewable fuel standards (rfs)
Question. What is the typical process and timing for biomass-to-
energy pathway registration and petition applications submitted under
the RFS? How does that compare with previous Administrations?
Answer. In the March 2010 RFS2 final rule, EPA established a number
of allowable pathways, and created a process by which entities could
petition to add new pathways to the RFS program. The petition review
process is described on EPA's website: https://www.epa.gov/renewable-
fuel-standard-program/renewable-fuel-petition-review-process. The
timing of petition reviews depends on many factors, including the
nature of the petition, making it difficult to objectively compare the
timing of petition reviews over different periods or Administrations.
Once a pathway has been approved, a company may submit a
registration request. EPA processes all registration requests as
quickly as possible on a first-in-first-out basis. The process and
timing have been consistent across Administrations.
Question. How does the Agency plan to resolve any outstanding
programmatic issues impacting biomass power in the RFS?
Answer. With regard to biomass power issues associated with
Renewable Identification Numbers generated for renewable electricity
(eRINs) under the RFS, EPA published the proposed Renewables
Enhancement and Growth Support (REGS) rule in November 2016. As part of
that proposed rulemaking, EPA sought public comment on important issues
related to designing and implementing an eRIN-generation program,
including: which of many possible parties (e.g., electric vehicle
producers, renewable electricity producers, utilities distributing
renewable electricity, owners of charging stations, electric vehicle
owners or third party aggregators) should generate eRINs; what data
should demonstrate the use of electricity as transportation fuel; and
how fraud from double-counting could best be prevented. The Agency
continues to review these issues and we believe they should be resolved
before an electric pathway is implemented.
Question. Is EPA committed to improving the rate of capture and use
of biomethane as a key factor in the long-term growth of Advanced and
Cellulosic Biofuels under the RFS? If so, how do you intend to ensure
this growth trajectory?
Answer. In projecting the cellulosic biofuel volume for each year,
EPA projects the production of renewable CNG/LNG from biogas. This
projection takes a ``neutral aim at accuracy'' as prescribed by the
D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals in API v. EPA, 706 F.3d 474 (2013). Most
renewable CNG/LNG qualifies as cellulosic biofuel, however, renewable
CNG/LNG from biogas can qualify as an advanced biofuel, and EPA takes
these sources into account in determining the advanced biofuel
standard.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Tom Udall
antidefiency act reporting
Question. During the hearing, we discussed the need for you to
provide a report to the President and Congress on your violation of the
Antideficiency Act by hiding a $43,000 expenditure on your ``privacy
booth.''
The law requires agencies to immediately report to the President
and Congress on how spending violations happened and what your plan is
to resolve them, yet we still have no report on hand. You committed to
providing that report. Please do so immediately.
Additionally, please submit a report on all additional expenditures
that have been made on your office. You are required to report on
everything once the $5,000 limit is exceeded. The following items have
not been reported yet:
--Biometric locks for $3,389.50
--Captain's Standing Desk for $2,963.05
--Sit-to-Stand Table for $2,514.73
--Executive Desk Refurnishing for $2,075
--Portraits (two) for $1,200
Please submit the report on the privacy booth and these additional
office enhancements immediately.
Answer. The Government Accountability Office has found that EPA's
failure to inform Congress of a political appointee's office expense
above the $5,000 threshold as required by Section 710 of the Financial
Services and General Government Appropriations Act of 2017 created an
Antideficiency Act (ADA) violation. EPA provided the notification for
the items listed by GAO and is currently reviewing other obligations
and expenditures that were made related to the Administrator's Office
throughout the entirety of his tenure. Going forward the Agency will
fulfill the Section 710 requirements, as required. In addition, as
required by OMB guidance, the Agency will work with OMB to prepare the
reporting for potential ADA violations.
condo lease
Question. At the hearing you reaffirmed your commitment from June
2017 before the Committee to respond to all questions, including
written correspondence, from both majority and minority members of the
subcommittee as quickly as possible. You have still not responded to my
letter, dated April 4, and my follow-up letter, dated May 9, requesting
documents and information related to your condo lease at 223 C Street.
The questions are re-printed here for the Record. Please respond to
them: Request for Information:
How did you learn about the availability of the property you rented
at 223 C Street, Northeast (``rental property'')? Does this property
advertise rooms for rent to the general public?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. What were the specific dates of the rental agreement, and
what is the total amount you paid the landlord for the use of the
rental property during that time?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Were any employees of the Office of the Administrator or
other EPA employees involved in locating the property, or otherwise
negotiating, facilitating, or executing any portion of your rental
agreement? Did any EPA employees communicate with the landlord or other
owners or representatives of owners of the property on your behalf?
Answer. The EPA cannot comment on the private arrangement between a
former employee and his landlord.
Question. What is your relationship with the landlord or other
owners of the rental property? Please describe any interactions you had
with Ms. Vicki Hart, Mr. Steven Hart, or any other owner or
representative of an owner of the property prior to the date on which
you entered into the rental agreement.
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Was the room rented to you available for your exclusive
use for the duration of your lease agreement, despite reports that you
only paid for nights when you actually used the property? Was the room
rented to other people when you were not using the rental property?
Answer. The EPA cannot comment on the private arrangement between a
former employee and his landlord.
Question. It has been reported that your daughter also lived at the
rental property for some duration of your rental agreement. How did you
secure the arrangement for your daughter to stay at the rental
property? Did the arrangement to use the rental property extend to any
other family members? If so, which members of your family? Did you have
other family or guests stay at the rental property who were not a part
of your rental agreement?
Answer. The EPA cannot comment on the private arrangement between a
former employee and his landlord.
Question. Did you set a schedule ahead of time for your usage of
the rental property? Did you pay any utilities, cleaning, or other
fees? Did you receive mail or other packages delivered to the property?
Answer. The EPA cannot comment on the private arrangement between a
former employee and his landlord.
Question. Did you attend any fundraisers or other political
functions that occurred at the rental property during your stay? If so,
on how many occasions and by whose invitation?
Answer. The EPA cannot comment on the private arrangement between a
former employee and his landlord.
Question. Did you discuss any EPA official business with the
landlord, their affiliates, or other visitors at the rental property?
If so, what topics were discussed, and with whom?
Answer. The EPA cannot comment on the private arrangement between a
former employee and his landlord.
Question. Did you agree to undertake any official actions that
benefited the landlord, their affiliates, or other visitors you met at
the rental property? If so, what actions were taken, and on whose
behalf?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Did you ever discuss your trip to Morocco to promote
liquefied natural gas with the landlord, their affiliates, or visitors
you met at the rental property? If so, what topics were discussed, and
with whom?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Who requested review of the rental agreement by EPA's
designated Agency ethics officer or related ethics staff, and on what
date was that request made? Please describe any review-- formal or
informal--of the rental agreement that occurred by EPA staff between
January 20, 2017, and the release of the Agency's March 30, 2018,
memorandum titled ``Review of Lease Agreement Under the Federal Ethics
Regulations Regarding Gifts''.
Answer. EPA follows, and is committed to following, all Federal
ethics rules and regulations, including regulations regarding gifts.
Question. The Agency's March 30, 2018, memorandum appears to
address only the narrow question of whether the rental agreement in
question constitutes a gift under Federal ethics regulations. Did
Agency ethics officials determine whether the agreement was fully in
compliance with the entire Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees
of the Executive Branch and other applicable Federal ethics statutes or
standards of conduct?
Answer. See attached memorandum from March 30, 2018, and
accompanying Clarification of and Record for Review of Lease.
Question. How did the Agency determine that the fair market value
described by the rental agreement was ``reasonable'' as cited by the
March 30, 2018 memorandum? Please provide the analysis used to reach
that conclusion, including comparable rental agreement costs used in
making that determination.
Answer. See attached memorandum from March 30, 2018, and
accompanying Clarification of and Record for Review of Lease.
Question. Were any employees of the Office of the Administrator or
other EPA employees involved in making subsequent housing arrangements
for any other property other than the rental property in question for
you or your family?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Request for Documentation:
Please provide copies of any of the following documents that may
have been developed since December 7, 2016, when President Trump
announced his intention to nominate you as EPA Administrator:
Question. A copy of the rental agreement for the rental property;
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Any communications between yourself and Ms. Vicki Hart,
any other owner of the residence, or anyone representing the owners;
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Any communications between yourself and Mr. Steven Hart,
any person employed by Williams & Jensen, and any calendar entries or
notes relating to any meetings or conversations between yourself and
Mr. Hart or any other person employed by Williams & Jensen;
Answer. We are in the process of searching, collecting and
reviewing documents related to this event. We will deliver to you once
available.
Question. Any communications between anyone working in the
Administrator's office and Mr. Hart, any other person employed by
Williams & Jensen, and any calendar entries or notes relating to any
meetings or conversations between anyone working in the Administrator's
office and Mr. Hart or any other person employed by Williams & Jensen;
and
Answer. We are in the process of searching, collecting and
reviewing documents related to this event. We will deliver to you once
available.
Question. Any communications between yourself or anyone working in
the Administrator's office and any other official or employee of EPA
regarding Mr. Hart, any other person employed by Williams & Jensen, or
any client of Williams & Jensen.
Answer. We are in the process of searching, collecting and
reviewing documents related to this event. We will deliver to you once
available.
Additionally, during the hearing you referenced two ethics reviews
of the lease that occurred by EPA ethics officials.
Question. Did you abide by the terms of the lease as they were
written?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Did you or your family, or anyone else ever use the
second bedroom in the condo? If so, please provide the dates the
bedroom was occupied and your process for notifying the Harts.
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Both Mr. Minoli and Ms. Fugh have indicated that their
ethics assessments were limited to the information they had at the
time, which has proven to be incomplete. Have you requested a
subsequent review by those officials?
Answer. A subsequent review cannot be requested by Mr. Pruitt.
Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt resigned from his
position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer an employee of
the Agency.
Question. The copy of your lease for 223 C Street that was released
to the public is undated and initially stated that the agreement was
with Steven, not Vicki Hart. Who prepared that lease for you? When was
it signed?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. You told Ed Henry on Fox News that Steven Hart, from
whose wife you leased the condo on Capitol Hill for $50/night, ``has no
client that has business before this Agency.'' It has since been
revealed that Mr. Hart arranged and attended a meeting with you
personally, along with a former executive of Smithfield Foods.\2\
Additionally, Mr. Hart wrote to your Chief of Staff and urged that you
name three candidates nominated by his client to the Science Advisory
Board.\3\ Please provide any records reflecting contact that Mr. Hart
has had with EPA since you became Administrator.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Eric Lipton, ``Scott Pruitt Met With Lobbyist Whose Wife Rented
Him a $50-a-Night Condo,'' New York Times (Apr. 21, 2018), available at
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/21/climate/
pruitt-hart-condo-epa-lobbying.html.
\3\ E.A. Crunden, ``Condo deal lobbyist pushed client's nominees
for EPA science board to Pruitt,'' Think Progress (May 2, 2018),
available at https://thinkprogress.org/pruitt-condo-lobbyist-epa-
science-board-0c7cd42d505e/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Answer. We are in the process of searching, collecting and
reviewing documents related to this event. We will deliver to you once
available.
ATTACHMENTS
EXHIBIT 1
EXHIBIT 2
EXHIBIT 3
EXHIBIT 4
morocco/smotkin
Question. During the hearing you committed to providing this
committee and others in Congress all documents related to your trip to
Morocco, Mr. Richard Smotkin and the Free Trade Agreement with Morocco.
Please ensure this is done within 2 weeks of receiving these questions.
Additionally, it has been reported that almost immediately after your
trip, Mr. Smotkin became registered foreign agent on behalf of the
Moroccan government with a $40,000 a month contract.
Did Mr. Smotkin ever contribute to any organization or campaign
you've been affiliated with? If yes, please provide a list.
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Mr. Smotkin was also participated in a number of the
meetings with you in Morocco. Did you discuss official EPA matters with
Mr. Smotkin during the trip? Please describe those discussions.
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Has Mr. Smotkin been involved in any other matters with
EPA during your tenure, including with your planned trips to Australia,
Mexico and Israel?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Were you or any members of your staff aware of Mr.
Smotkin's financial relationship with the Government of Morocco?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Will you commit to providing transparency regarding your
meetings as EPA administrator with any other lobbyist or former
political donors?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer. Acting
Administrator Wheeler is committed to providing transparency and his
calendar is published on the EPA website.
samantha dravis and other staff
Question. During the hearing you testified that the schedule shows
that your staff, Samantha Dravis, was attending meetings, not just with
you, but others in the agency.
Please provide these schedules, noting which meetings she attended
and which were on her calendar but were unattended by her, and any
relevant materials related to Ms. Dravis' whereabouts during the time
period of November 2017 through February 2018, including leave requests
and staff travel.
Answer. Effective April 20, 2018, Samantha Dravis resigned from her
position at the EPA and is no longer employed by the Agency. Due to an
ongoing review by EPA OIG, it would be inappropriate to comment at this
time.
apartment search
Question. During the hearing, you committed to providing copies of
all emails and other documents related to your apartment search and any
assistance you received from your staff. This should include official
and unofficial emails since it is against Code of Federal Regulations
to accept gifts from subordinates whether during work or personal time.
During the hearing, you expressed your understanding that Millan
Hupp's ``activity there was on personal time,'' in reference to Ms.
Hupp's assistance in your housing search. You acknowledged that you
didn't pay her for the service. Please explain how this arrangement
complies with government ethics rules concerning gifts between
employees.
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
phone booth
Question. You responded to Representative Lance at a recent hearing
that you thought the phone booth expense was inappropriate.
Specifically, you said, ``I believe that that was an amount of money
that should not have been spent and was never authorized.'' In our
hearing, you said it was an example of ``where processes at the Agency
were not properly instituted to prevent certain abuses from
happening.'' But EPA's official response to the Government
Accountability Office's investigation states that ``the Agency
determined that the expenditure of appropriated funds to procure the
privacy booth was a necessary Agency expense to support the
Administrator's ability to conduct official business.'' \4\ Did your
Agency provide a false statement to the GAO? Please clarify for the
record.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Letter from Kevin S. Minoli, EPA Principal Deputy General
Counsel, to Julie Matta, GAO Managing Associate General Counsel, at 3
n.1 (Mar. 23, 2018), available at https://www.eenews.net/assets/2018/
04/16/document_gw_09.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer. Please refer to
EPA's response to GAO submitted on March 23, 2018.
Question. When did you learn that the cost of this project would be
more than $5,000? What did you do in response to learning that
information?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Have any EPA staff been held responsible for this cost,
given your statement that you wouldn't have approved it?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. What have you done to discipline staff responsible for
the procurement?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Please explain why you needed personal privacy booth in
your office when there are two other Sensitive Compartmented
Information Facility at the EPA.
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Did you ever use your privacy booth to speak with non-
governmental officials who are regulated by the EPA, or any other non-
governmental entity? If yes, please provide a list.
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
travel
Question. You reportedly traveled to Oklahoma using a Southwest
Airlines companion pass provided to you by Kenneth Wagner, who
currently serves as EPA's senior adviser for regional and State
affairs. How many times did you travel to Oklahoma using the companion
pass, and on which dates?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. In an AP report dated April 18, 2018, Kevin Minoli stated
that EPA ethics officials were consulting with OGE to determine
``whether any additional steps needed to be taken to ensure full
compliance with the ethics requirements.'' Was it determined that any
additional steps were necessary in order to ensure that you were in
compliance with the ethics requirements? If so, what were they and when
were they taken?
Answer. As the Designated Agency Ethics Official, Mr. Minoli does
not have any investigatory authority or powers. Consistent with his
obligations under Office of Government Ethics regulations, he has
referred a number of matters reported in the press to EPA' s Inspector
General for further investigation. To the best of his knowledge, all of
the matters that he has referred are either under consideration for
acceptance or under active investigation.
Question. How did Matthew Freedman come to be involved in the
arrangement of your planned trip to Australia? Please provide any
records reflecting communications between Mr. Freedman and any EPA
employee.
Answer. We are in the process of searching, collecting and
reviewing documents related to this event. We will deliver to you once
available.
Question. How did Sheldon Adelson and Andy Abboud come to be
involved in the arrangement of your planned trip to Israel? Please
provide any records reflecting communications between Mr. Adelson, Mr.
Abboud, or any employee of Mr. Adelson, and any EPA employee.
Answer. Former Administrator Pruitt did not travel to Israel.
Question. How did Leonard Leo come to be involved in the
arrangement of your trip to Italy? Please provide any records
reflecting communications between Mr. Leo and any EPA employee.
Answer. We are in the process of searching, collecting and
reviewing documents related to this event. We will deliver to you once
available.
communications
Question. Have you ever used text messaging to conduct Agency
business? If so, are your text messages searched in response to records
requests from Congress or through the Freedom of Information Act?
Answer. The EPA Records Policy discourages the use of text
messaging on a mobile device for sending or receiving substantive (or
non-transitory) Agency records, however the Policy recognizes that some
use can and does occur in limited instances. In those limited
instances, staff must save and manage text message records like any
other Agency record. Specifically, the Policy provides that:
users of text messaging, instant messaging or other transient
messaging technologies on EPA information systems are
responsible for ensuring that messages that result in the
creation of a substantive (or non-transitory) Federal records
are saved for FRA purposes and placed in a recordkeeping
system. For example, if a text message on an EPA mobile device
is received or sent that qualifies as a substantive (or non-
transitory) Federal record, it must be saved into an approved
recordkeeping system.
Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt resigned from
his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer an employee
of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your question with
Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer. Text messages are searched in
response to records requests from Congress or through the Freedom of
Information Act through searches of Outlook email accounts to which the
messages have been forwarded.
Question. Have you ever used your personal cell phone for agency
business? If so, when and for what purpose?
Answer. The EPA's Records Policy strongly discourages the use of
non-official messaging systems. Specifically, the Agency's Records
Policy states that:
Official Agency business should first and foremost be done on
official EPA information systems. . . . . EPA strongly
discourages the use of personal email or other personal
electronic messaging systems, including text messaging on a
personal mobile device, for sending or receiving Agency
records, but to the extent such use occurs, the individual
creating or sending the record from a non-EPA electronic
messaging system must copy their EPA email account at the time
of transmission or forward that record to their EPA email
account within 20 days of creation or sending.
Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt resigned from
his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer an employee
of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your question with
Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
epa organization and workforce
Question. Please provide EPA's ``Workforce Reduction Plan'' (or if
EPA did not prepare a document with that title, any equivalent
document) that EPA prepared pursuant to the directive for such a plan
contained in the Memorandum for Heads of Executive Departments and
Agencies; Comprehensive Plan for Reforming the Federal Government and
Reducing the Federal Civilian Workforce (Apr. 12, 2017) (https://
www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/memoranda/2017/M-17-
22.pdf) from OMB Director Mulvaney, and which was referenced in
Memorandum: Reforming the Federal Government and Reducing the Workforce
(Apr. 17, 2017) from Michael P. Flynn, Acting Deputy Director, U.S.
EPA. Per Director Mulvaney's April 12 memo, the draft workforce
reduction plans were due by June 30, 2017, and final versions of these
plans were due to OMB in September along with the fiscal year 2019
budget materials.
Is this or any other plan to reduce EPA's workforce currently in
effect?
Answer. The Agency has been prudently managing staffing levels
since the issuance of the fiscal year 2018 President's budget and the
fiscal year 2018 House and Senate mark-ups, which provided policy
levels significantly lower than previous appropriations. In fiscal year
2018, EPA has focused on staffing needed to achieve results called for
in the goals and objectives of the Agency's strategic plan. Once the
fiscal year 2018 Omnibus was enacted in April, the Agency also reviewed
funding priorities included in the Omnibus, particularly new programs.
Internal guidance has established an overall end of fiscal year 2018
onboard employees target of 14,172.
Question. Please detail all steps that EPA has taken and is
currently taking to implement workforce reductions generally and the
plan in particular.
Answer. The staffing levels focused on ensuring strategic plan
objectives, and each organization is managing to the end of year
target. Changes, which may be increases or decreases over current
levels depending on the organization, are being managed through
attrition, strategic hiring, and targeted use of VERA/VSIP authorities.
Question. List the FTE reductions and deadlines for such reductions
specified in the workforce reduction plan.
Answer. The chart below shows the end of fiscal year 2018 onboard
employees target by responsible program implementation office (RPIO).
FISCAL YEAR 2018
Onboards by RPIO
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RPIO
Fiscal Year 2018 Onboards Target
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OA.................................
350.3
OAR................................
1,086.7
OARM...............................
667.4
OCFO...............................
319.9
OCSPP..............................
974.9
OECA...............................
690.1
OEI................................
377.6
OGC................................
224.9
OIG................................
270.0
OITA...............................
68.1
OLEM...............................
463.3
ORD................................
1,513.9
OW.................................
547.3
R01................................
541.8
R02................................
723.8
R03................................
724.6
R04................................
869.9
R05................................
995.7
R06................................
684.3
R07................................
455.4
R08................................
484.8
R09................................
654.5
R10................................
482.8
------------------------------------
TOTAL..........................
14,172.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question. Does EPA have any other formal or informal target levels
for FTEs?
Answer. No, there is not a separate guidance.
Question. Please provide all formal or informal target levels for
FTE reductions or caps, whether from the Workforce Reduction Plan or
other sources, by office (or at the most detailed level for which EPA
has set targets, if it has sub-office targets).
Answer. See chart, provided under iii.
Question. Please provide EPA's most current FTE totals, by office,
regional office, laboratory, or other, detailed down to the division
level.
Answer. The table provided shows onboard employees by office as of
June 18, 2018. It includes part-time and special government employees,
i.e. Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA) participants.
Question. Please provide the equivalent FTE totals, by office,
regional office, laboratory, or other, detailed down to the division
level, as of January 20, 2017.
Answer. The table provided shows onboard employees by office and
division as of January 15, 2017 and June 18, 2018. It includes part-
time and special government employees, i.e. Federal Advisory Committee
Act (FACA) participants.
EPA ONBOARDS BY OFFICE AND DIVISION
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
January 15,
June 18,
RPIO
Office
Division
2017
2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OA.................................
......................
NEPA COMPLIANCE
..............
9
DIVISION.
OA.................................
......................
PERMITTING POLICY
..............
5
DIVISION.
OA.................................
ASSOC ADMR FOR
.....................
2
6
CONGRESS&INTERGOV
RLNS.
OA.................................
ASSOC ADMR FOR
INFORMATION &
11
14
CONGRESS & INTERGOV
MANAGEMENT DIVISION.
RLNS.
OA.................................
ASSOC ADMR FOR
OFFICE OF
8
13
CONGRESS & INTERGOV
CONGRESSIONAL
RLNS.
AFFAIRS.
OA.................................
ASSOC ADMR FOR
OFFICE OF
16
15
CONGRESS & INTERGOV
INTERGOVERNMENTAL
RLNS.
RELATIONS.
OA.................................
ASSOC ADMR FOR OFFICE
Immediate Office.....
20
26
OF POLICY.
OA.................................
ASSOC ADMR FOR OFFICE
NATL CENTER FOR
31
33
OF POLICY.
ENVIRO ECONOMICS.
OA.................................
ASSOC ADMR FOR OFFICE
OFC OF REGULATORY
31
35
OF POLICY.
POLICY & MANAGEMENT.
OA.................................
ASSOC ADMR FOR OFFICE
OFC OF STRATEGIC
26
............
OF POLICY.
ENVIRO MANAGEMENT.
OA.................................
ASSOC ADMR FOR OFFICE
OFFICE OF SUSTAINABLE
27
18
OF POLICY.
COMMUNITIES.
OA.................................
OFC OF CHILDREN'S
Immediate Office.....
3
1
HEALTH PROTECTION.
OA.................................
OFC OF CHILDREN'S
PROG IMPLEMENTATION &
6
7
HEALTH PROTECTION.
COORDINATION DIV.
OA.................................
OFC OF CHILDREN'S
REGULATORY SUPPORT &
6
6
HEALTH PROTECTION.
SCIENCE POLICY DIV.
OA.................................
OFC OF PUBLIC ENGAGMNT
.....................
..............
2
&ENVRNMNTL EDUC.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF ADMIN &
ADMINISTRATIVE/MANAGE
10
7
EXECUTIVE SERVICES.
MENT STAFF.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF ADMIN &
Immediate Office.....
2
2
EXECUTIVE SERVICES.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF ADMIN &
RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
7
8
EXECUTIVE SERVICES.
STAFF.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF CIVIL RIGHTS
AFF EMPLOY ANALYS &
5
4
ACCOUNT STAFF.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF CIVIL RIGHTS
EMPLOYMENT COMPLAINTS
12
9
RESOLUTION STF.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF CIVIL RIGHTS
EXTERNAL COMPLIANCE
1
............
STAFF.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF CIVIL RIGHTS
Immediate Office.....
5
4
OA.................................
OFFICE OF
.....................
8
17
ENVIRONMENTAL
EDUCATION.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF EXECUTIVE
.....................
16
15
SECRETARIAT.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF HOMELAND
.....................
10
9
SECURITY.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF PUBLIC
Immediate Office.....
5
12
AFFAIRS.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF PUBLIC
OFFICE OF INTERNAL
3
3
AFFAIRS.
COMMUNICATIONS.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF PUBLIC
OFFICE OF MEDIA
6
4
AFFAIRS.
RELATIONS.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF PUBLIC
OFFICE OF MULTIMEDIA.
10
8
AFFAIRS.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF PUBLIC
OFFICE OF PRESS
..............
1
AFFAIRS.
SECRETARY.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF PUBLIC
OFFICE OF WEB
11
9
AFFAIRS.
COMMUNICATIONS.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF PUBLIC
.....................
5
5
ENGAGEMENT.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE
.....................
396
311
ADVISORY BOARD.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF SMALL
.....................
13
11
BUSINESS PROGRAMS.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF THE
Immediate Office.....
15
32
ADMINISTRATOR.
OA.................................
OFFICE OF
.....................
..............
21
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OA Total.......................
727
682
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OAR................................
ASST ADMR FOR AIR &
Immediate Office.....
17
22
RADIATION.
OAR................................
OFC OF AIR POLICY &
Immediate Office.....
2
2
PROGRAM SUPPORT.
OAR................................
OFC OF AIR POLICY &
POLICY GROUP.........
5
5
PROGRAM SUPPORT.
OAR................................
OFC OF AIR POLICY &
PROGRAM SUPPORT......
10
10
PROGRAM SUPPORT.
OAR................................
OFC OF AIR QUALITY
AIR QUALITY
79
76
PLANNING & STANDARDS.
ASSESSMENT DIV.
OAR................................
OFC OF AIR QUALITY
AIR QUALITY POLICY
52
51
PLANNING & STANDARDS.
DIVISION.
OAR................................
OFC OF AIR QUALITY
CENTRAL OPERATIONS &
23
21
PLANNING & STANDARDS.
RESOURCES OFFICE.
OAR................................
OFC OF AIR QUALITY
HEALTH &
54
50
PLANNING & STANDARDS.
ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACTS DIV.
OAR................................
OFC OF AIR QUALITY
Immediate Office.....
5
5
PLANNING & STANDARDS.
OAR................................
OFC OF AIR QUALITY
OUTREACH &
45
43
PLANNING & STANDARDS.
INFORMATION DIV.
OAR................................
OFC OF AIR QUALITY
POLICY ANALYSIS &
11
11
PLANNING & STANDARDS.
COMMUNICATIONS STF.
OAR................................
OFC OF AIR QUALITY
SECTOR POLICIES &
90
77
PLANNING & STANDARDS.
PROGRAMS DIV.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF ATMOSPHERIC
CLEAN AIR MARKETS
57
49
PROGRAMS.
DIVISION.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF ATMOSPHERIC
CLIMATE CHANGE
60
55
PROGRAMS.
DIVISION.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF ATMOSPHERIC
CLIMATE PROTECTION
78
70
PROGRAMS.
PARTNERSHIPS DIV.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF ATMOSPHERIC
Immediate Office.....
5
4
PROGRAMS.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF ATMOSPHERIC
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
18
13
PROGRAMS.
STAFF.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF ATMOSPHERIC
STRATOSPHERIC
18
18
PROGRAMS.
PROTECTION DIV.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF PROGRAM MGMT
ACQUISITION POLICY...
5
3
OPERATIONS.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF PROGRAM MGMT
BUDGET EXECUTION.....
3
2
OPERATIONS.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF PROGRAM MGMT
BUDGET FORMULATION...
5
3
OPERATIONS.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF PROGRAM MGMT
Immediate Office.....
4
3
OPERATIONS.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF PROGRAM MGMT
INFORMATION
1
4
OPERATIONS.
MANAGEMENT.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF PROGRAM MGMT
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT...
1
............
OPERATIONS.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF RADIATION &
Immediate Office.....
4
5
INDOOR AIR.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF RADIATION &
INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS
31
32
INDOOR AIR.
DIV.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF RADIATION &
NATL ANALYTICAL
38
39
INDOOR AIR.
RADIATION ENVIRO LAB.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF RADIATION &
NATL CENTER FOR
23
20
INDOOR AIR.
RADIATION FIELD OPS.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF RADIATION &
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
8
6
INDOOR AIR.
OFFICE.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF RADIATION &
RADIATION PROTECTION
39
39
INDOOR AIR.
DIV.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF
ASSESSMENT &
80
73
TRANSPORTATION & AIR
STANDARDS DIV.
QUALITY.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF
CENTRALIZED SERVICES
15
11
TRANSPORTATION & AIR
CENTER.
QUALITY.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF
CHIEF OF STAFF ANN
12
10
TRANSPORTATION & AIR
ARBOR.
QUALITY.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF
CHIEF OF STAFF
7
9
TRANSPORTATION & AIR
WASHINGTON.
QUALITY.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF
COMPLIANCE DIVISION..
78
74
TRANSPORTATION & AIR
QUALITY.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF
Immediate Office.....
7
6
TRANSPORTATION & AIR
QUALITY.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF
POLICY, PLANNING &
4
3
TRANSPORTATION & AIR
BUDGET STAFF.
QUALITY.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF
TESTING AND ADVANCED
93
84
TRANSPORTATION & AIR
TECHNOLOGY DIV.
QUALITY.
OAR................................
OFFICE OF
TRANSPORTATION AND
74
69
TRANSPORTATION & AIR
CLIMATE DIV.
QUALITY.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OAR Total......................
1,161
1,077
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OARM...............................
ASST ADMR FOR ADMIN &
Immediate Office.....
6
7
RESOURCES MGMT.
OARM...............................
ENVIRONMENTAL APPEALS
Immediate Office.....
14
14
BOARD.
OARM...............................
OFC OF ADMINISTRATIVE
.....................
12
11
LAW JUDGES.
OARM...............................
OFC OF HUMAN RESOURCES
DIVERSITY,
18
14
RECRUITMENT &EMPL
SRVCS DIV.
OARM...............................
OFC OF HUMAN RESOURCES
EXECUTIVE RESOURCES
8
6
DIV.
OARM...............................
OFC OF HUMAN RESOURCES
Immediate Office.....
8
5
OARM...............................
OFC OF HUMAN RESOURCES
INFORMATION
12
12
TECHNOLOGY DIV.
OARM...............................
OFC OF HUMAN RESOURCES
LABOR & EMPLOYEE
12
11
RELATIONS DIVISION.
OARM...............................
OFC OF HUMAN RESOURCES
POLICY, PLANNING &
29
25
TRAINING DIVISION.
OARM...............................
OFC OF HUMAN RESOURCES
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
4
4
STAFF.
OARM...............................
OFC OF MGMT &
.....................
5
5
ADMINISTRATION-CINC.
OARM...............................
OFC OF MGMT &
FACILITIES MGMT &
12
12
ADMINISTRATION-CINC.
SERVICES DIV.
OARM...............................
OFC OF MGMT &
HUMAN RESOURCES
33
27
ADMINISTRATION-CINC.
MANAGEMENT DIV.
OARM...............................
OFC OF MGMT &
HUMAN RESOURCES
22
13
ADMINISTRATION-CINC.
MANAGEMENT DIV--LV.
OARM...............................
OFC OF MGMT &
INFORMATION RESOURCES
14
11
ADMINISTRATION-CINC.
MGMT DIV.
OARM...............................
OFC OF MGMT &
SAFETY, HEALTH &
3
3
ADMINISTRATION-CINC.
SECURITY STAFF.
OARM...............................
OFC OF MGMT &
.....................
3
5
ADMINISTRATION-RTP.
OARM...............................
OFC OF MGMT &
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT
19
17
ADMINISTRATION-RTP.
& SUPPORT DIV.
OARM...............................
OFC OF MGMT &
HUMAN RESOURCES MGMT
63
53
ADMINISTRATION-RTP.
DIV--RTP.
OARM...............................
OFC OF MGMT &
INFORMATION RESOURCES
10
9
ADMINISTRATION-RTP.
MANAGEMENT DIV.
OARM...............................
OFC OF RESOURCES,
ADMINISTRATIVE OPER &
9
9
OPERATIONS & MGMT.
STEWARDSHIP DIV.
OARM...............................
OFC OF RESOURCES,
FEDERAL ADVISORY
11
9
OPERATIONS & MGMT.
COMMITTEE MGMT DIV.
OARM...............................
OFC OF RESOURCES,
Immediate Office.....
3
4
OPERATIONS & MGMT.
OARM...............................
OFC OF RESOURCES,
RESOURCES, ANALYSIS
8
7
OPERATIONS & MGMT.
AND PLANNING DIV.
OARM...............................
OFC OF THE CHIEF
.....................
1
1
SUSTAINABILITY
OFFICER.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF ACQUISITION
CINCINNATI
36
35
MANAGEMENT.
PROCUREMENT
OPERATIONS DIV.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF ACQUISITION
HEADQUARTERS
46
41
MANAGEMENT.
PROCUREMENT OPS DIV.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF ACQUISITION
Immediate Office.....
22
23
MANAGEMENT.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF ACQUISITION
POLICY TRAINING &
36
31
MANAGEMENT.
OVERSIGHT DIV.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF ACQUISITION
RTP PROCUREMENT
33
32
MANAGEMENT.
OPERATIONS DIV.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF ACQUISITION
SUPERFUND/RCRA/RGNL
29
18
MANAGEMENT.
PROC OPS DIV.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT
27
25
ADMINISTRATION.
& SERVICES DIV.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF
Immediate Office.....
7
6
ADMINISTRATION.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF
REAL PROPERTY
13
13
ADMINISTRATION.
SERVICES STAFF.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
9
8
ADMINISTRATION.
STAFF.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF
SAFETY &
22
22
ADMINISTRATION.
SUSTAINABILITY
DIVISION.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF
SECURITY MANAGEMENT
23
19
ADMINISTRATION.
DIV.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF GRANTS &
GRANTS&INTERAGENCY
20
19
DEBARMENT.
AGRMNTS MGMT DIV.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF GRANTS &
Immediate Office.....
10
12
DEBARMENT.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF GRANTS &
NATL
11
10
DEBARMENT.
POLICY,TRAINING&COMP
LIANCE DIV.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF GRANTS &
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
11
10
DEBARMENT.
STAFF.
OARM...............................
OFFICE OF GRANTS &
SUSPENSION &
12
9
DEBARMENT.
DEBARMENT DIVISION.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OARM Total.....................
706
627
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OCFO...............................
OFC OF E-ENTERPRISE
.....................
6
8
FOR THE ENVIRONMENT.
OCFO...............................
OFC OF PLANNING, ANLS
ANALYSIS DIVISION....
10
9
& ACCOUNTABILITY.
OCFO...............................
OFC OF PLANNING, ANLS
Immediate Office.....
7
5
& ACCOUNTABILITY.
OCFO...............................
OFC OF PLANNING, ANLS
PLANNING DIVISION....
9
8
& ACCOUNTABILITY.
OCFO...............................
OFC OF RESOURCE &
.....................
13
14
INFORMATION MGMT.
OCFO...............................
OFC OF TECHNOLOGY
APPLICATIONS
12
11
SOLUTIONS.
MANAGEMENT DIVISION.
OCFO...............................
OFC OF TECHNOLOGY
BUSINESS SUPPORT
7
10
SOLUTIONS.
DIVISION.
OCFO...............................
OFC OF TECHNOLOGY
Immediate Office.....
6
7
SOLUTIONS.
OCFO...............................
OFC OF TECHNOLOGY
INFORMATION
9
12
SOLUTIONS.
MGMT&SECURITY
DIVISION.
OCFO...............................
OFC OF TECHNOLOGY
PLANNING AND
10
11
SOLUTIONS.
EVALUATION DIVISION.
OCFO...............................
OFC OF TECHNOLOGY
SYSTEMS RESEARCH &
11
10
SOLUTIONS.
DEVELOPMENT DIVISI.
OCFO...............................
OFFICE OF BUDGET......
BUDGET FORMULATION
8
9
AND CONTROL STAFF.
OCFO...............................
OFFICE OF BUDGET......
Immediate Office.....
8
8
OCFO...............................
OFFICE OF BUDGET......
MULTI-MEDIA ANALYSIS
8
6
STAFF.
OCFO...............................
OFFICE OF BUDGET......
RESOURCE PLANNING &
8
6
REGIONAL OPS STF.
OCFO...............................
OFFICE OF BUDGET......
TRUST FUNDS & ADMIN
8
5
ANALYSIS STF.
OCFO...............................
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF
Immediate Office.....
5
7
FINANCIAL OFFICER.
OCFO...............................
OFFICE OF THE
ACCOUNTING & COST
21
20
CONTROLLER.
ANALYSIS DIVISION.
OCFO...............................
OFFICE OF THE
BUSINESS PLANNING &
18
17
CONTROLLER.
OPS DIVISION.
OCFO...............................
OFFICE OF THE
FINANCIAL SERVICES
108
94
CONTROLLER.
DIVISION.
OCFO...............................
OFFICE OF THE
Immediate Office.....
8
5
CONTROLLER.
OCFO...............................
OFFICE OF THE
POLICY,TRAINING&ACCOU
16
14
CONTROLLER.
N TABILITY DIV.
OCFO...............................
POLICY &
.....................
3
1
COMMUNICATIONS STAFF.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OCFO Total.....................
319
297
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OCSPP..............................
ASST ADMR FOR CHEM
Immediate Office.....
10
11
SAFETY&PLTN PREV.
OCSPP..............................
OFC OF POLLUTION
CHEMICAL CONTROL DIV.
45
47
PREVENTION & TOXICS.
OCSPP..............................
OFC OF POLLUTION
CHEMISTRY,ECONOMIC&SU
63
55
PREVENTION & TOXICS.
S TNBLE STRG DIV.
OCSPP..............................
OFC OF POLLUTION
ENVIRONMENTAL
36
37
PREVENTION & TOXICS.
ASSISTANCE DIV.
OCSPP..............................
OFC OF POLLUTION
Immediate Office.....
7
9
PREVENTION & TOXICS.
OCSPP..............................
OFC OF POLLUTION
INFORMATION
43
33
PREVENTION & TOXICS.
MANAGEMENT DIV.
OCSPP..............................
OFC OF POLLUTION
NATIONAL PROGRAM
29
24
PREVENTION & TOXICS.
CHEMICALS DIV.
OCSPP..............................
OFC OF POLLUTION
RISK ASSESSMENT
76
69
PREVENTION & TOXICS.
DIVISION.
OCSPP..............................
OFC OF POLLUTION
TOXIC RELEASE
26
23
PREVENTION & TOXICS.
INVENTORY PROGRAM
DIV.
OCSPP..............................
OFC OF PROGRAM
.....................
10
11
MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS.
OCSPP..............................
OFC OF PROGRAM
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
6
4
MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS.
STAFF.
OCSPP..............................
OFC OF SCIENCE
EXPOSURE ASSMT
8
7
COORDINATION & POLICY.
COORDINATION&POL DIV.
OCSPP..............................
OFC OF SCIENCE
HAZARD ASSMT
5
5
COORDINATION & POLICY.
COORDINATION&POL DIV.
OCSPP..............................
OFC OF SCIENCE
Immediate Office.....
124
148
COORDINATION & POLICY.
OCSPP..............................
OFFICE OF PESTICIDES
ANTIMICROBIALS
77
71
PROGRAMS.
DIVISION.
OCSPP..............................
OFFICE OF PESTICIDES
BIOLOGICAL & ECONOMIC
58
54
PROGRAMS.
ANALYSIS DIV.
OCSPP..............................
OFFICE OF PESTICIDES
BIOPESTICIDES&POLLUTI
55
55
PROGRAMS.
ON PREV DIV.
OCSPP..............................
OFFICE OF PESTICIDES
ENVIRONMENTAL FATE &
94
82
PROGRAMS.
EFFECTS DIV.
OCSPP..............................
OFFICE OF PESTICIDES
FIELD & EXTERNAL
39
32
PROGRAMS.
AFFAIRS DIV.
OCSPP..............................
OFFICE OF PESTICIDES
HEALTH EFFECTS
100
89
PROGRAMS.
DIVISION.
OCSPP..............................
OFFICE OF PESTICIDES
Immediate Office.....
11
12
PROGRAMS.
OCSPP..............................
OFFICE OF PESTICIDES
IT & RESOURCES MGMT
85
80
PROGRAMS.
DIV.
OCSPP..............................
OFFICE OF PESTICIDES
PESTICIDE RE-
48
48
PROGRAMS.
EVALUATION DIV.
OCSPP..............................
OFFICE OF PESTICIDES
REGISTRATION DIVISION
98
81
PROGRAMS.
OCSPP..............................
REGULATORY
.....................
7
6
COORDINATION STAFF.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OCSPP Total....................
1,160
1,093
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OECA...............................
ASST ADMR FOR ENF &
Immediate Office.....
9
8
COMPL ASSURANCE.
OECA...............................
OFC OF CRIMINAL ENF,
CRIMINAL
184
182
FORENSICS & TRNG.
INVESTIGATION DIV.
OECA...............................
OFC OF CRIMINAL ENF,
Immediate Office.....
11
5
FORENSICS & TRNG.
OECA...............................
OFC OF CRIMINAL ENF,
LEGAL COUNSEL
13
13
FORENSICS & TRNG.
DIVISION.
OECA...............................
OFC OF CRIMINAL ENF,
OFC OF NATL ENF
72
66
FORENSICS & TRNG.
INVESTIGATIONS
CENTER.
OECA...............................
OFC OF CRIMINAL
PLANNING, ANALYSIS &
3
1
ENF,FORENSICS&TRNG.
COMMUNICATIONS STF.
OECA...............................
OFC OF CRIMINAL
PROF
8
5
ENF,FORENSICS&TRNG.
INTEGRITY&QUALITY
ASSURANCE STF.
OECA...............................
OFC OF CRIMINAL ENF,
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
7
7
FORENSICS & TRNG.
STAFF.
OECA...............................
OFC OF FEDERAL
Immediate Office.....
2
3
FACILITIES ENF OFC.
OECA...............................
OFC OF FEDERAL
PLANNING, PREVENTION
2
............
FACILITIES ENF OFC.
& COMPLIANCE STF.
OECA...............................
OFC OF FEDERAL
SITE REMEDIATION &
11
9
FACILITIES ENF OFC.
ENFORCEMENT STAFF.
OECA...............................
OFC OF SITE
Immediate Office.....
5
5
REMEDIATION
ENFORCEMENT.
OECA...............................
OFC OF SITE
POLICY & PROGRAM
26
24
REMEDIATION
EVALUATION DIV.
ENFORCEMENT.
OECA...............................
OFC OF SITE
PROGRAM SUPPORT
9
9
REMEDIATION
OFFICE.
ENFORCEMENT.
OECA...............................
OFC OF SITE
REGIONAL SUPPORT
32
27
REMEDIATION
DIVISION.
ENFORCEMENT.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF
ADMINISTRATIVE
9
8
ADMINISTRATION AND
MANAGEMENT DIVISION.
POLICY.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF
BUDGET AND FINANCIAL
5
6
ADMINISTRATION AND
MANAGEMENT DIV.
POLICY.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF
Immediate Office.....
8
8
ADMINISTRATION AND
POLICY.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF
INFORMATION
8
6
ADMINISTRATION AND
TECHNOLOGY DIVISION.
POLICY.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF
POLICY & LEGISLATIVE
6
6
ADMINISTRATION AND
COORDINATION DIV.
POLICY.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF CIVIL
AIR ENFORCEMENT
45
40
ENFORCEMENT.
DIVISION.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF CIVIL
CROSS-CUTTING POLICY
8
7
ENFORCEMENT.
STAFF.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF CIVIL
Immediate Office.....
5
3
ENFORCEMENT.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF CIVIL
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
7
5
ENFORCEMENT.
BRANCH.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF CIVIL
WASTE & CHEMICAL
33
34
ENFORCEMENT.
ENFORCEMENT DIV.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF CIVIL
WATER ENFORCEMENT
36
31
ENFORCEMENT.
DIVISION.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF COMPLIANCE..
ENF PLANNING,
49
43
TARGETING & DATA DIV.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF COMPLIANCE..
Immediate Office.....
10
7
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF COMPLIANCE..
MONITORING,ASSISTANCE
45
40
& MEDIA PROGS DIV.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF COMPLIANCE..
NATIONAL ENF TRAINING
4
4
INSTITUTE.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF COMPLIANCE..
PLANNING, MEASURES &
14
14
OVERSIGHT DIV.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF COMPLIANCE..
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
6
5
STAFF.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF
.....................
23
............
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF FEDERAL
Immediate Office.....
4
............
ACTIVITIES.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF FEDERAL
INTL COMPLIANCE
7
............
ACTIVITIES.
ASSURANCE DIV.
OECA...............................
OFFICE OF FEDERAL
NEPA COMPLIANCE
13
............
ACTIVITIES.
DIVISION.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OECA Total.....................
739
631
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OEI................................
OFC OF CUST ADVO, POL
CUSTOMER ADVOCACY &
15
15
& PORTFOLIO MGT.
COMMUNICATION DIV.
OEI................................
OFC OF CUST ADVO, POL
Immediate Office.....
4
5
& PORTFOLIO MGT.
OEI................................
OFC OF CUST ADVO, POL
POLICY, PLANNING &
7
5
& PORTFOLIO MGT.
EVALUATION DIV.
OEI................................
OFC OF CUST ADVO, POL
PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
6
8
& PORTFOLIO MGT.
DIV.
OEI................................
OFC OF DIGITAL
DIGITAL SERVICES DIV.
10
8
SERVICES & TECH ARCH.
OEI................................
OFC OF DIGITAL
Immediate Office.....
7
6
SERVICES & TECH ARCH.
OEI................................
OFC OF DIGITAL
TECHNICAL
9
7
SERVICES & TECH ARCH.
ARCHITECTURE &
PLANNING DIV.
OEI................................
OFC OF INFORMATION
DATA MANAGEMENT
15
13
MANAGEMENT.
SERVICES DIV.
OEI................................
OFC OF INFORMATION
Immediate Office.....
5
6
MANAGEMENT.
OEI................................
OFC OF INFORMATION
INFO ACCESS &
13
11
MANAGEMENT.
ANALYTICAL SERVICES
DIV.
OEI................................
OFC OF INFORMATION
INFORMATION EXCHANGE
22
20
MANAGEMENT.
SERVICES DIV.
OEI................................
OFC OF INFORMATION
WEB CONTENT SERVICES
11
9
MANAGEMENT.
DIV.
OEI................................
OFC OF INFORMATION
.....................
21
18
SECURITY & PRIVACY.
OEI................................
OFC OF INFORMATION
DESKTOP SUPPORT
9
8
TECHNOLOGY OPS.
SERVICES DIV.
OEI................................
OFC OF INFORMATION
ENDPOINT & COLLAB
12
12
TECHNOLOGY OPS.
SOLUTIONS DIV.
OEI................................
OFC OF INFORMATION
ENTERPRISE HOSTING
19
20
TECHNOLOGY OPS.
DIV.
OEI................................
OFC OF INFORMATION
Immediate Office.....
8
6
TECHNOLOGY OPS.
OEI................................
OFC OF INFORMATION
NETWORK & SECURITY
18
21
TECHNOLOGY OPS.
OPERATION DIV.
OEI................................
OFC OF INFORMATION
SERVICE & BUSINESS
25
24
TECHNOLOGY OPS.
MANAGEMENT DIV.
OEI................................
OFC OF INFORMATION
WASHINGTON D.C.
10
9
TECHNOLOGY OPS.
OPERATIONS DIV.
OEI................................
OFFICE OF BUSINESS
HR&ADMINISTRATION DIV
9
7
OPERATIONS & SERVICES.
OEI................................
OFFICE OF BUSINESS
Immediate Office.....
7
5
OPERATIONS & SERVICES.
OEI................................
OFFICE OF BUSINESS
INFORMATION AND
9
10
OPERATIONS & SERVICES.
SECURITY PROGRAM DIV.
OEI................................
OFFICE OF BUSINESS
RESOURCE & PROGRAM
9
9
OPERATIONS & SERVICES.
MANAGEMENT DIV.
OEI................................
OFFICE OF ENTERPRISE
EDISCOVERY DIV.......
8
6
INFO PROGRAMS.
OEI................................
OFFICE OF ENTERPRISE
ENTERPRISE QUALITY
9
7
INFO PROGRAMS.
MANAGEMENT DIV.
OEI................................
OFFICE OF ENTERPRISE
ENTERPRISE RECORDS
7
7
INFO PROGRAMS.
MANAGEMENT DIV.
OEI................................
OFFICE OF ENTERPRISE
ERULEMAKING &
6
7
INFO PROGRAMS.
FOIAONLINE DIV.
OEI................................
OFFICE OF ENTERPRISE
FOIA, LIBRARIES &
10
6
INFO PROGRAMS.
ACCESSIBILITY DIV.
OEI................................
OFFICE OF ENTERPRISE
Immediate Office.....
6
4
INFO PROGRAMS.
OEI................................
OFFICE OF ENTERPRISE
REGULATORY SUPPORT
3
6
INFO PROGRAMS.
DIV.
OEI................................
OFFICE OF
Immediate Office.....
11
8
ENVIRONMENTAL
INFORMATION.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OEI Total......................
340
313
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OGC................................
AIR & RADIATION LAW
.....................
48
45
OFFICE.
OGC................................
ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE
.....................
7
6
RES LAW OFC.
OGC................................
CIVIL RIGHTS & FINANCE
.....................
25
22
LAW OFFICE.
OGC................................
CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES
.....................
21
19
LAW OFFICE.
OGC................................
ETHICS OFFICE.........
.....................
3
4
OGC................................
FOIA EXPERT ASSISTANCE
.....................
3
12
TEAM.
OGC................................
GENERAL LAW OFFICE....
.....................
29
26
OGC................................
OFFICE OF EXTERNAL
.....................
9
12
COMPLIANCE.
OGC................................
OFFICE OF GENERAL
Immediate Office.....
14
10
COUNSEL.
OGC................................
PESTICIDES & TOXIC
.....................
23
22
SUBSTANCES LAW OFC.
OGC................................
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
.....................
14
13
OFFICE.
OGC................................
SOLID WASTE & EMER
.....................
15
15
RESPONSE LAW OFC.
OGC................................
WATER LAW OFFICE......
.....................
19
19
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OGC Total......................
230
225
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OIG................................
OFC PF CNSL &
CONGRESSIONAL & PUB
8
9
CONGRESSIONAL & PUB
AFFAIRS DIRECTORATE.
AFFAIRS.
OIG................................
OFC PF CNSL &
Immediate Office.....
3
2
CONGRESSIONAL & PUB
AFFAIRS.
OIG................................
OFC PF CNSL &
LEGAL AFFAIRS
8
8
CONGRESSIONAL & PUB
DIRECTORATE.
AFFAIRS.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF AUDITS......
CONT & ASTNC
14
11
AGREEMENT ADTS
DIRECTORATE.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF AUDITS......
EFFICIENCY AUDITS
13
13
DIRECTORATE.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF AUDITS......
FINANCIAL AUDITS
25
26
DIRECTORATE.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF AUDITS......
FORENSIC AUDITS
12
12
DIRECTORATE.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF AUDITS......
Immediate Office.....
3
7
OIG................................
OFFICE OF AUDITS......
INFO RSRCS MGMT
16
15
AUDITS DIRECTORATE.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF AUDITS......
AIR DIRECTORATE......
..............
13
OIG................................
OFFICE OF AUDITS......
LAND CLEANUP & WASTE
..............
14
MGMT DIRECTORATE.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF AUDITS......
WATER DIRECTORATE....
..............
13
OIG................................
OFFICE OF AUDITS......
TOX CHEM MGMT & POL
..............
14
PREVNTN DIRECTORA.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF AUDITS......
SPECIAL PROGRAMS
..............
4
DIRECTORATE.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF AUDITS......
ENVIRONMENTAL
..............
11
RESEARCH DIRECTORATE.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR
Immediate Office.....
3
3
GENERAL.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF
ATLANTA FIELD OFFICE.
8
6
INVESTIGATIONS.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF
CHICAGO FIELD OFFICE.
7
8
INVESTIGATIONS.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF
ELECTRONIC CRIMES
4
5
INVESTIGATIONS.
DIVISION.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF
Immediate Office.....
4
3
INVESTIGATIONS.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF
OFFICE OF
7
7
INVESTIGATIONS.
PROFESSIONAL
RESPONSIBILITY.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF
OPERATIONS SUPPORT
6
6
INVESTIGATIONS.
DIVISION.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF
SAN FRANCISCO FIELD
7
8
INVESTIGATIONS.
OFFICE.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF
WASHINGTON FIELD
11
9
INVESTIGATIONS.
OFFICE.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT..
BUDGET, ANALYSIS &
7
10
RESULTS DIRECTORATE.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT..
HUMAN CAPITAL &
4
8
SOLUTIONS
DIRECTORATE.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT..
Immediate Office.....
..............
4
OIG................................
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT..
IT SOLUTIONS AND
22
20
SERVICES DIRECTORATE.
OIG................................
OFFICE OF PROGRAM
.....................
74
............
EVALUATION.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OIG Total......................
266
269
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OITA...............................
AMERICAN INDIAN
.....................
16
13
ENVIRONMENTAL OFFICE.
OITA...............................
ASST ADMR FOR INTL &
Immediate Office.....
5
4
TRIBAL AFFAIRS.
OITA...............................
OFC OF MGMT &
.....................
13
12
INTERNATIONAL
SERVICES.
OITA...............................
OFC OF REGIONAL AND
.....................
23
20
BILATERAL AFFAIRS.
OITA...............................
OFFICE OF GLOBAL
.....................
21
18
AFFAIRS AND POLICY.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OITA Total.....................
78
67
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OLEM...............................
ASST ADMR OFC OF LAND
Immediate Office.....
7
10
& EMER MGMT.
OLEM...............................
CENTER FOR PROGRAM
.....................
15
13
ANALYSIS.
OLEM...............................
FED FACILITIES
.....................
13
13
RESTORATION & REUSE
OFC.
OLEM...............................
OFC OF BROWNFIELDS &
.....................
19
16
LAND REV.
OLEM...............................
OFC OF RESOURCE
Immediate Office.....
5
5
CONSERVATION &
RECOVERY.
OLEM...............................
OFC OF RESOURCE
MATERIALS RECOVERY &
41
41
CONSERVATION &
WASTE MGMT DIV.
RECOVERY.
OLEM...............................
OFC OF RESOURCE
OFC OF PROG MGMT,
31
30
CONSERVATION &
COMMS & ANALYSIS.
RECOVERY.
OLEM...............................
OFC OF RESOURCE
PROGRAM
59
56
CONSERVATION &
IMPLEMENTATION &
RECOVERY.
INFO DIV.
OLEM...............................
OFC OF RESOURCE
RSRC CONSERVATION &
32
28
CONSERVATION &
SUSTAINABILITY DIV.
RECOVERY.
OLEM...............................
OFC OF SUPERFUND
ASSESSMENT &
48
43
REMTION & TECH INNOV.
REMEDIATION DIV.
OLEM...............................
OFC OF SUPERFUND
Immediate Office.....
3
4
REMTION & TECH INNOV.
OLEM...............................
OFC OF SUPERFUND
OFC OF TECH
56
57
REMTION & TECH INNOV.
INNOVATION &
FIELDSERVICES.
OLEM...............................
OFC OF SUPERFUND
RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
39
35
REMTION & TECH INNOV.
DIV.
OLEM...............................
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY
CBRN CONSEQUENCE MGMT
17
17
MANAGEMENT.
ADVISORY DIV.
OLEM...............................
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY
Immediate Office.....
3
3
MANAGEMENT.
OLEM...............................
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY
PREPAREDNESS &
19
19
MANAGEMENT.
RESPONSE OPERATIONS
DIV.
OLEM...............................
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY
REGULATIONS
14
15
MANAGEMENT.
IMPLEMENTATION
DIVISION.
OLEM...............................
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY
RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
11
15
MANAGEMENT.
DIVISION.
OLEM...............................
OFFICE OF PROGRAM
ACQUISITION &
13
10
MANAGEMENT.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
STF.
OLEM...............................
OFFICE OF PROGRAM
Immediate Office.....
4
4
MANAGEMENT.
OLEM...............................
OFFICE OF PROGRAM
INFORMATION MGMT &
6
6
MANAGEMENT.
DATA QUALITY STF.
OLEM...............................
OFFICE OF PROGRAM
POLICY ANALYSIS &
7
7
MANAGEMENT.
REGULATORY MGMT STF.
OLEM...............................
OFFICE OF UNDERGROUND
CLEANUP AND
6
6
STORAGE TANKS.
REVITALIZATION
DIVISION.
OLEM...............................
OFFICE OF UNDERGROUND
Immediate Office.....
5
5
STORAGE TANKS.
OLEM...............................
OFFICE OF UNDERGROUND
MANAGEMENT AND
8
7
STORAGE TANKS.
COMMUNICATIONS DIV.
OLEM...............................
OFFICE OF UNDERGROUND
RELEASE PREVENTION
6
6
STORAGE TANKS.
DIVISION.
OLEM...............................
ORGANIZATIONAL MGMT &
.....................
9
9
INTEGRITY STF.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OLEM Total.....................
496
480
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ORD................................
ASST ADMR FOR RESEARCH
Immediate Office.....
99
75
& DEVELOPMENT.
ORD................................
NATIONAL CENTER FOR
APPLIED SCIENCE &
13
11
ENVIRO RESEARCH.
EDUCATION DIVISION.
ORD................................
NATIONAL CENTER FOR
Immediate Office.....
12
7
ENVIRO RESEARCH.
ORD................................
NATIONAL CENTER FOR
POLICY, PLANNING, &
16
13
ENVIRO RESEARCH.
REVIEW DIVISION.
ORD................................
NATIONAL CENTER FOR
WATER, HEALTH, &
15
10
ENVIRO RESEARCH.
INNOVATION DIVISION.
ORD................................
NATL CENTER FOR ENVIRO
Immediate Office.....
18
11
ASSESSMENT.
ORD................................
NATL CENTER FOR ENVIRO
INTEGRATED RISK INFO
37
30
ASSESSMENT.
SYSTEM DIV.
ORD................................
NATL CENTER FOR ENVIRO
NCEA-CINCINNATI......
27
27
ASSESSMENT.
ORD................................
NATL CENTER FOR ENVIRO
NCEA-RTP.............
38
36
ASSESSMENT.
ORD................................
NATL CENTER FOR ENVIRO
NCEA-WASHINGTON......
44
39
ASSESSMENT.
ORD................................
NATL CENTER FOR ENVIRO
PROGRAM SUPPORT STAFF
8
9
ASSESSMENT.
ORD................................
NATL CTR FOR
.....................
31
28
COMPUTATIONAL
TOXICOLOGY.
ORD................................
NATL EXPOSURE RSCH
COMPUTATIONAL
72
63
LABORATORY--RTP.
EXPOSURE DIVISION.
ORD................................
NATL EXPOSURE RSCH
EXPOSURE METHODS &
132
121
LABORATORY--RTP.
MEASUREMENTS DIV.
ORD................................
NATL EXPOSURE RSCH
Immediate Office.....
14
11
LABORATORY--RTP.
ORD................................
NATL EXPOSURE RSCH
PROGRAM OPERATIONS
3
7
LABORATORY--RTP.
STAFF.
ORD................................
NATL EXPOSURE RSCH
RESEARCH PROG DEVELOP
8
7
LABORATORY--RTP.
& INTEGRATION STF.
ORD................................
NATL EXPOSURE RSCH
SHEM & FACILITIES
8
9
LABORATORY--RTP.
STAFF.
ORD................................
NATL EXPOSURE RSCH
SYSTEMS EXPOSURE
86
76
LABORATORY--RTP.
DIVISION.
ORD................................
NATL HLTH & ENVIRO
ATLANTIC ECOLOGY DIV--
69
67
EFFECTS RSCH LAB-RTP.
NARRAGANSETT.
ORD................................
NATL HLTH & ENVIRO
ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC
69
68
EFFECTS RSCH LAB-RTP.
HEALTH DIV.
ORD................................
NATL HLTH & ENVIRO
GULF ECOLOGY DIV--
54
46
EFFECTS RSCH LAB-RTP.
GULF BREEZE.
ORD................................
NATL HLTH & ENVIRO
Immediate Office.....
10
8
EFFECTS RSCH LAB-RTP.
ORD................................
NATL HLTH & ENVIRO
INTEGRATED SYSTM
58
49
EFFECTS RSCH LAB-RTP.
TOXICOLOGY DIV.
ORD................................
NATL HLTH & ENVIRO
MID-CONTINENT ECOLOGY
63
57
EFFECTS RSCH LAB-RTP.
DIV--DULUTH.
ORD................................
NATL HLTH & ENVIRO
PROGRAM OPERATIONS
10
12
EFFECTS RSCH LAB-RTP.
STAFF.
ORD................................
NATL HLTH & ENVIRO
RESEARCH CORES UNIT..
16
16
EFFECTS RSCH LAB-RTP.
ORD................................
NATL HLTH & ENVIRO
RESEARCH PLANNING &
9
9
EFFECTS RSCH LAB-RTP.
COORDINATION STF.
ORD................................
NATL HLTH & ENVIRO
TOXICITY ASSESSMENT
52
48
EFFECTS RSCH LAB-RTP.
DIV.
ORD................................
NATL HLTH & ENVIRO
WESTERN ECOLOGY DIV--
59
53
EFFECTS RSCH LAB-RTP.
CORVALLIS.
ORD................................
NATL HOMELAND SECURITY
DECONTAMINATION&CONSE
14
11
RESEARCH CTR.
QUENCE MGMT DIV.
ORD................................
NATL HOMELAND SECURITY
Immediate Office.....
13
10
RESEARCH CTR.
ORD................................
NATL HOMELAND SECURITY
THREAT & CONSEQUENCE
16
10
RESEARCH CTR.
ASSESSMENT DIV.
ORD................................
NATL HOMELAND SECURITY
WATER INFRASTRUCTURE
11
12
RESEARCH CTR.
PROTECTION DIV.
ORD................................
NATL RISK MGMT RSCH
AIR AND ENERGY
65
61
LAB--CINC.
MANAGEMENT DIVISION.
ORD................................
NATL RISK MGMT RSCH
ENVIRO TECH ASSMT,
5
............
LAB--CINC.
VERIFS & OUTCOMES
STF.
ORD................................
NATL RISK MGMT RSCH
GROUNDWATER,
42
38
LAB--CINC.
WATERSHED & ECO
RESTORATION DIV-ADA.
ORD................................
NATL RISK MGMT RSCH
Immediate Office.....
7
7
LAB--CINC.
ORD................................
NATL RISK MGMT RSCH
LABORATORY SUPPORT &
11
9
LAB--CINC.
ACCOUNTABILITY STF.
ORD................................
NATL RISK MGMT RSCH
LAND AND MATERIALS
..............
61
LAB--CINC.
MANAGEMENT DIV.
ORD................................
NATL RISK MGMT RSCH
LAND REMEDIATION &
36
............
LAB--CINC.
PLTN CONTROL DIV.
ORD................................
NATL RISK MGMT RSCH
PROGRAM OPERATIONS
6
7
LAB--CINC.
STAFF.
ORD................................
NATL RISK MGMT RSCH
RESEARCH PLANNING &
..............
9
LAB--CINC.
COORDINATION STF.
ORD................................
NATL RISK MGMT RSCH
SUSTAINABLE
45
............
LAB--CINC.
TECHNOLOGY DIV.
ORD................................
NATL RISK MGMT RSCH
TECHNICAL
4
............
LAB--CINC.
COMMUNICATION &
OUTREACH STF.
ORD................................
NATL RISK MGMT RSCH
WATER SYSTEMS
67
75
LAB--CINC.
DIVISION.
ORD................................
OFC OF ADMINISTRATIVE
.....................
7
7
& RSCH SUPPORT.
ORD................................
OFC OF ADMINISTRATIVE
BUDGET EXECUTION
35
33
& RSCH SUPPORT.
DIVISION.
ORD................................
OFC OF ADMINISTRATIVE
EXTRAMURAL MANAGEMENT
39
34
& RSCH SUPPORT.
DIV.
ORD................................
OFC OF ADMINISTRATIVE
HUMAN RESOURCES
25
23
& RSCH SUPPORT.
DIVISION.
ORD................................
OFC OF ADMINISTRATIVE
TRAVEL MANAGEMENT
11
12
& RSCH SUPPORT.
DIVISION.
ORD................................
OFC OF PROG
Immediate Office.....
3
6
ACCOUNTABILITY &
RSRCS MGMT.
ORD................................
OFC OF PROG
PLANNING, BUDGET &
5
7
ACCOUNTABILITY &
PERFORMANCE ANLS BR.
RSRCS MGMT.
ORD................................
OFC OF PROG
POLICY ADMIN & MGMT
11
9
ACCOUNTABILITY &
INTEGRITY DIV.
RSRCS MGMT.
ORD................................
OFC OF PROG
RESOURCE AND SYSTEM
6
5
ACCOUNTABILITY&RSRCS
ANALYSIS BRANCH.
MGMT.
ORD................................
OFC OF PROG
RSRCS, PLNG,
4
3
ACCOUNTABILITY &
PERFORMANCE & BUDGET
RSRCS MGMT.
POL DIV.
ORD................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE
APPLICATIONS SUPPORT
9
9
INFORMATION MGMT.
DIVISION.
ORD................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE
CUSTOMER SUPPORT
10
10
INFORMATION MGMT.
DIVISION.
ORD................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE
ENTERPRISE OPERATIONS
4
4
INFORMATION MGMT.
DIVISION.
ORD................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE
Immediate Office.....
7
7
INFORMATION MGMT.
ORD................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE
INFORMATION
6
5
INFORMATION MGMT.
MANAGEMENT SUPPORT
DIV.
ORD................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
6
6
INFORMATION MGMT.
SERVICES DIVISION.
ORD................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE
CROSS PROGRAM STAFF..
2
............
POLICY.
ORD................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE
Immediate Office.....
69
89
POLICY.
ORD................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE
PROGRAM SUPPORT STAFF
13
10
POLICY.
ORD................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE
REGIONAL, STATE,
13
15
POLICY.
TRIBAL SCIENCE STAFF.
ORD................................
OFFICE OF THE SCIENCE
.....................
29
21
ADVISOR.
ORD................................
SCIENCE COMMUNICATION
.....................
12
12
STAFF.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ORD Total......................
1,818
1,660
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OW.................................
ASST ADMR FOR WATER...
Immediate Office.....
10
9
OW.................................
COMMUNICATIONS STAFF..
.....................
4
5
OW.................................
MANAGEMENT &
Immediate Office.....
6
8
OPERATIONS STAFF.
OW.................................
MANAGEMENT &
ORGANIZATIONAL
5
5
OPERATIONS STAFF.
SUPPORT SERVICES.
OW.................................
MANAGEMENT &
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
10
8
OPERATIONS STAFF.
OFFICE.
OW.................................
OFC OF WETLANDS,
Immediate Office.....
5
8
OCEANS & WATERSHEDS.
OW.................................
OFC OF WETLANDS,
OCEANS & COASTAL PRT
22
............
OCEANS & WATERSHEDS.
DIV.
OW.................................
OFC OF WETLANDS,
OCEANS, WETLANDS, &
28
47
OCEANS & WATERSHEDS.
COMMUNITIES DIV.
OW.................................
OFC OF WETLANDS,
PLANNING, COMMS, &
13
10
OCEANS & WATERSHEDS.
RSRC MGMT STAFF.
OW.................................
OFC OF WETLANDS,
URBAN WATERS STAFF...
4
............
OCEANS & WATERSHEDS.
OW.................................
OFC OF WETLANDS,
WATERSHED
41
43
OCEANS & WATERSHEDS.
RESTORATION, ASSESS
& PROT DIV.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF GROUNDWATER
DRINKING WATER
64
58
& DRINKIN G WATER.
PROTECTION DIV.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF GROUNDWATER
Immediate Office.....
7
5
& DRINKIN G WATER.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF GROUNDWATER
NATL DRINKING WATER
15
10
& DRINKIN G WATER.
ADVISORY COUNCIL.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF GROUNDWATER
RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
5
6
& DRINKING WATER.
& EVALUATION STF.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF GROUNDWATER
STANDARDS & RISK
76
58
& DRINKING WATER.
MANAGEMENT DIV.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF GROUNDWATER
WATER SECURITY
27
26
& DRINKING WATER.
DIVISION.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE &
.....................
5
4
TECHNOLOGY.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE &
ENGINEERING &
29
26
TECHNOLOGY.
ANALYSIS DIV.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE &
HEALTH & ECOLOGICAL
41
33
TECHNOLOGY.
CRITERIA DIVISION.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE &
RESOURCES MGMT &
10
9
TECHNOLOGY.
INFORMATION STF.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF SCIENCE &
STANDARDS & HEALTH
35
34
TECHNOLOGY.
PROTECTION DIV.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF WASTEWATER..
.....................
4
3
OW.................................
OFFICE OF WASTEWATER..
PLANNING INFO &
10
9
RESOURCES MGMT STF.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF WASTEWATER..
WATER INFRASTRUCTURE
57
61
DIVISION.
OW.................................
OFFICE OF WASTEWATER..
WATER PERMITS
49
43
DIVISION.
OW.................................
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
.....................
15
11
STAFF.
OW.................................
WATER POLICY STAFF....
.....................
11
9
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OW Total.......................
608
548
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R01................................
CIVIL RIGHTS & URBAN
.....................
4
3
AFFAIRS.
R01................................
OFC OF ADMIN &
CONTRACTS AND
8
7
RESOURCES MGMT.
PROCUREMENT.
R01................................
OFC OF ADMIN &
CUSTOMER SERVICE AND
11
10
RESOURCES MGMT.
FACILITIES.
R01................................
OFC OF ADMIN &
GRANTS MANAGEMENT....
9
7
RESOURCES MGMT.
R01................................
OFC OF ADMIN &
HUMAN RESOURCES......
7
7
RESOURCES MGMT.
R01................................
OFC OF ADMIN &
Immediate Office.....
8
7
RESOURCES MGMT.
R01................................
OFC OF ADMIN &
INFORMATION SERVICES
24
21
RESOURCES MGMT.
BR.
R01................................
OFC OF ADMIN &
OFFICE OF THE
18
15
RESOURCES MGMT.
COMPTROLLER.
R01................................
OFC OF ENVIRO
ECOSYSTEM ASSESSMENT.
18
16
MEASUREMENT &
EVALUATION.
R01................................
OFC OF ENVIRO
Immediate Office.....
9
9
MEASUREMENT &
EVALUATION.
R01................................
OFC OF ENVIRO
INVESTIGATION &
19
17
MEASUREMENT & EVALUAT
ANALYSIS.
ION.
R01................................
OFC OF ENVIRO
QUALITY ASSURANCE....
10
10
MEASUREMENT&EVALUAT
ION.
R01................................
OFC OF SITE
Immediate Office.....
4
4
REMEDIATION &
RESTORATION.
R01................................
OFC OF SITE
OFC OF EMERGENCY
27
27
REMEDIATION &
PLANNING & RESPONSE.
RESTORATION.
R01................................
OFC OF SITE
OFFICE OF REMEDIATION
2
1
REMEDIATION &
& RESTORATION 1.
RESTORATION.
R01................................
OFC OF SITE
OFFICE OF REMEDIATION
9
9
REMEDIATION &
& RESTORATION 2.
RESTORATION.
R01................................
OFC OF SITE
OFFICE OF REMEDIATION
26
26
REMEDIATION &
& RESTORATION 3.
RESTORATION.
R01................................
OFC OF SITE
OFFICE OF REMEDIATION
17
17
REMEDIATION &
& RESTORATION 4.
RESTORATION.
R01................................
OFC OF SITE
OFFICE OF REMEDIATION
10
9
REMEDIATION &
& RESTORATION 5.
RESTORATION.
R01................................
OFC OF SITE
OFFICE OF REMEDIATION
10
7
REMEDIATION &
& RESTORATION 6.
RESTORATION.
R01................................
OFC OF SITE
OFFICE OF TECHNICAL &
33
29
REMEDIATION &
SUPPORT.
RESTORATION.
R01................................
OFFICE OF ECOSYSTEM
AIR PROGRAM BRANCH...
29
23
PROTECTION.
R01................................
OFFICE OF ECOSYSTEM
DRINKING WATER BRANCH
19
30
PROTECTION.
R01................................
OFFICE OF ECOSYSTEM
GRANTS, TRIBAL, CMTY
14
1
PROTECTION.
& MUNICIPAL ASTNC BR.
R01................................
OFFICE OF ECOSYSTEM
IMMED OCF, WATER
30
28
PROTECTION.
PERMITS BRANCH.
R01................................
OFFICE OF ECOSYSTEM
Immediate Office.....
3
3
PROTECTION.
R01................................
OFFICE OF ECOSYSTEM
SURFACE WATER BRANCH.
23
23
PROTECTION.
R01................................
OFFICE OF ECOSYSTEM
WATER QUALITY BRANCH.
6
............
PROTECTION.
R01................................
OFFICE OF ECOSYSTEM
WETLANDS &
11
15
PROTECTION.
INFORMATION BR.
R01................................
OFFICE OF
.....................
35
32
ENVIRONMENTAL
STEWARDSHIP.
R01................................
OFFICE OF
Immediate Office.....
7
6
ENVIRONMENTAL
STEWARDSHIP.
R01................................
OFFICE OF
OFC OF ASSISTANCE &
16
15
ENVIRONMENTAL
POLLUTION PREV.
STEWARDSHIP.
R01................................
OFFICE OF
OFFICE OF LEGAL
5
6
ENVIRONMENTAL
ENFORCEMENT.
STEWARDSHIP.
R01................................
OFFICE OF
OFFICE OF TECHNICAL
55
49
ENVIRONMENTAL
ENFORCEMENT.
STEWARDSHIP.
R01................................
OFFICE OF PUBLIC
.....................
17
2
AFFAIRS.
R01................................
OFFICE OF PUBLIC
PUBLIC AFFAIRS
..............
12
AFFAIRS.
SECTION.
R01................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
.....................
16
15
COUNSEL.
R01................................
Office of the Regional
.....................
5
7
Administrator.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R01 Total......................
574
525
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R02................................
CARIBBEAN ENVIRO
Immediate Office.....
6
6
PROTECTION DIV.
R02................................
CARIBBEAN ENVIRO
MULTI-MEDIA PERMITS &
14
12
PROTECTION DIV.
COMPLIANCE BR.
R02................................
CARIBBEAN ENVIRO
MUNICIPAL WATER
11
12
PROTECTION DIV.
PROGRAM BRANCH.
R02................................
CARIBBEAN ENVIRO
RESPONSE &
14
14
PROTECTION DIV.
REMEDIATION BRANCH.
R02................................
CLEAN AIR AND
AIR PROGRAMS BRANCH..
27
26
SUSTAINABILITY DIV.
R02................................
CLEAN AIR AND
HAZARDOUS WASTE
19
23
SUSTAINABILITY DIV.
PROGRAMS BR.
R02................................
CLEAN AIR AND
Immediate Office.....
5
5
SUSTAINABILITY DIV.
R02................................
CLEAN AIR AND
RADIATION AND INDOOR
6
4
SUSTAINABILITY DIV.
AIR BR.
R02................................
CLEAN AIR AND
SUSTAINABILITY &
24
22
SUSTAINABILITY DIV.
MULTIME DIA PROGRAMS
BR.
R02................................
CLEAN WATER DIVISION..
CLEAN WATER
19
20
REGULATORY BR.
R02................................
CLEAN WATER DIVISION..
DRINKING WATER &
18
18
MUNICIPAL INFRA BR.
R02................................
CLEAN WATER DIVISION..
Immediate Office.....
6
6
R02................................
CLEAN WATER DIVISION..
WATERSHED MANAGEMENT
26
26
BR.
R02................................
DIV OF ENF &
AIR COMPLIANCE BRANCH
17
17
COMPLIANCE ASSISTANCE.
R02................................
DIV OF ENF &
COMPLIANCE ASSISTANCE
20
16
COMPLIANCE ASSISTANCE.
& PROG SUPPORT BR.
R02................................
DIV OF ENF &
Immediate Office.....
5
5
COMPLIANCE ASSISTANCE.
R02................................
DIV OF ENF &
PESTICIDES & TOXIC
22
19
COMPLIANCE ASSISTANCE.
SUBSTANCES BR.
R02................................
DIV OF ENF &
RCRA COMPLIANCE
22
20
COMPLIANCE ASSISTANCE.
BRANCH.
R02................................
DIV OF ENF &
WATER COMPLIANCE
28
27
COMPLIANCE ASSISTANCE.
BRANCH.
R02................................
DIVISION OF ENVIRO
HAZARDOUS WASTE
18
19
SCIENCE & ASSESSMENT.
SUPPORT BR.
R02................................
DIVISION OF ENVIRO
Immediate Office.....
7
6
SCIENCE & ASSESSMENT.
R02................................
DIVISION OF ENVIRO
LABORATORY BRANCH....
18
16
SCIENCE & ASSESSMENT.
R02................................
DIVISION OF ENVIRO
MONITORING &
21
21
SCIENCE & ASSESSMENT.
ASSESSMENT BR.
R02................................
EMERGENCY & REMEDIAL
Immediate Office.....
10
9
RESPONSE DIV.
R02................................
EMERGENCY & REMEDIAL
NEW JERSEY
38
33
RESPONSE DIV.
REMEDIATION BR.
R02................................
EMERGENCY & REMEDIAL
NEW YORK REMEDIATION
30
28
RESPONSE DIV.
BRANCH.
R02................................
EMERGENCY & REMEDIAL
PASSAIC/HACKENSACK/
6
6
RESPONSE DIV.
NEW ARK BAY REM BR.
R02................................
EMERGENCY & REMEDIAL
PROGRAM SUPPORT
37
36
RESPONSE DIV.
BRANCH.
R02................................
EMERGENCY & REMEDIAL
REMOVAL ACTION BRANCH
27
28
RESPONSE DIV.
R02................................
EMERGENCY & REMEDIAL
RESPONSE & PREVENTION
26
26
RESPONSE DIV.
BR.
R02................................
EMERGENCY & REMEDIAL
SPECIAL PROJECTS
27
23
RESPONSE DIV.
BRANCH.
R02................................
OFFICE OF POLICY AND
CONTRACTS MANAGEMENT
9
7
MANAGEMENT.
BR.
R02................................
OFFICE OF POLICY AND
FACILITIES &
11
10
MANAGEMENT.
ADMINISTRATIVE MGMT
BR.
R02................................
OFFICE OF POLICY AND
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
23
23
MANAGEMENT.
BRANCH.
R02................................
OFFICE OF POLICY AND
GRANTS AND AUDIT
13
13
MANAGEMENT.
MANAGEMENT BR.
R02................................
OFFICE OF POLICY AND
HUMAN RESOURCES
7
7
MANAGEMENT.
BRANCH.
R02................................
OFFICE OF POLICY AND
Immediate Office.....
6
6
MANAGEMENT.
R02................................
OFFICE OF POLICY AND
INFORMATION RESOURCES
21
22
MANAGEMENT.
MANAGEMENT BR.
R02................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
AIR BRANCH...........
9
7
COUNSEL.
R02................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
Immediate Office.....
14
14
COUNSEL.
R02................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
NEW JERSEY SUPERFUND
23
22
COUNSEL.
BRANCH.
R02................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
NEW YORK/CARIBBEAN
22
19
COUNSEL.
SUPERFUND BR.
R02................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
WASTE & TOXIC
13
13
COUNSEL.
SUBSTANCES BRANCH.
R02................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
WATER, GRANTS &
13
13
COUNSEL.
GENERAL LAW BRANCH.
R02................................
OFFICE OF STRATEGIC
Immediate Office.....
4
5
PROGRAMS.
R02................................
Office of the Regional
.....................
4
6
Administrator.
R02................................
PUBLIC AFFAIRS
Immediate Office.....
2
2
DIVISION.
R02................................
PUBLIC AFFAIRS
INTERGOV & COMMUNITY
10
10
DIVISION.
AFFAIRS BR.
R02................................
PUBLIC AFFAIRS
PUBLIC OUTREACH
9
8
DIVISION.
BRANCH.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R02 Total......................
787
756
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R03................................
AIR PROTECTION
Immediate Office.....
9
8
DIVISION.
R03................................
AIR PROTECTION
OFFICE OF AIR PROGRAM
39
38
DIVISION.
PLANNING.
R03................................
AIR PROTECTION
OFFICE OF PERMITS &
29
27
DIVISION.
STATE PROGRAMS.
R03................................
ENVIRO ASSESSMENT &
Immediate Office.....
9
6
INNOVATION DIV.
R03................................
ENVIRO ASSESSMENT &
OFC OF ANALYTICAL
25
20
INNOVATION DIV.
SVCS&QLTY ASSURANCE.
R03................................
ENVIRO ASSESSMENT &
OFC OF ENVIRO
12
11
INNOVATION DIV.
INFORMATION &
ANALYSIS.
R03................................
ENVIRO ASSESSMENT &
OFFICE OF
5
4
INNOVATION DIV.
ENVIRONMENTAL
INNOVATION.
R03................................
ENVIRO ASSESSMENT &
OFFICE OF
19
19
INNOVATION DIV.
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROGRAMS.
R03................................
ENVIRO ASSESSMENT &
OFFICE OF MONITORING
13
13
INNOVATION DIV.
AND ASSESSMENT.
R03................................
HAZARDOUS SITE CLEANUP
Immediate Office.....
7
6
DIV.
R03................................
HAZARDOUS SITE CLEANUP
OFC OF FED FAC
23
21
DIV.
REMTION&SITE ASSMT.
R03................................
HAZARDOUS SITE CLEANUP
OFC OF TECHNICAL &
31
30
DIV.
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPT.
R03................................
HAZARDOUS SITE CLEANUP
OFFICE OF BROWNFIELDS
26
24
DIV.
& OUTREACH.
R03................................
HAZARDOUS SITE CLEANUP
OFFICE OF ENFORCEMENT
30
29
DIV.
R03................................
HAZARDOUS SITE CLEANUP
OFFICE OF
39
36
DIV.
PREPAREDNESS &
RESPONSE.
R03................................
HAZARDOUS SITE CLEANUP
OFFICE OF SUPERFUND
45
41
DIV.
SITE REMEDIATION.
R03................................
LAND AND CHEMICALS
Immediate Office.....
10
10
DIVISION.
R03................................
LAND AND CHEMICALS
OFC OF PENNSYLVANIA
12
12
DIVISION.
REMEDIATION.
R03................................
LAND AND CHEMICALS
OFFICE OF OFC TOXICS
22
20
DIVISION.
& PESTICIDES.
R03................................
LAND AND CHEMICALS
OFFICE OF RCRA
28
26
DIVISION.
PROGRAMS.
R03................................
LAND AND CHEMICALS
OFFICE OF REMEDIATION
13
10
DIVISION.
R03................................
OFC OF ASST REGL ADMR
COMPUTER SERVICES
15
15
FOR POL & MGMT.
BRANCH.
R03................................
OFC OF ASST REGL ADMR
CONTRACTS BRANCH.....
10
12
FOR POL & MGMT.
R03................................
OFC OF ASST REGL ADMR
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT
12
10
FOR POL & MGMT.
& SERVICES BR.
R03................................
OFC OF ASST REGL ADMR
GRANTS & AUDIT
12
11
FOR POL & MGMT.
MANAGEMENT BRANCH.
R03................................
OFC OF ASST REGL ADMR
HUMAN RESOURCES
13
12
FOR POL & MGMT.
MANAGEMENT BRANCH.
R03................................
OFC OF ASST REGL ADMR
Immediate Office.....
5
5
FOR POL & MGMT.
R03................................
OFC OF ASST REGL ADMR
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
13
11
FOR POL & MGMT.
BRANCH.
R03................................
OFC OF ASST REGL ADMR
OFFICE OF THE
14
11
FOR POL & MGMT.
REGIONAL COMPTROLLER.
R03................................
OFC OF ASST REGL ADMR
PLANNING & ANALYSIS
5
6
FOR POL & MGMT.
BRANCH.
R03................................
OFC OF CHESAPEAKE BAY
Immediate Office.....
4
1
PROGRAM OFC.
R03................................
OFC OF CHESAPEAKE BAY
OFC OF PARTNERSHIP
9
9
PROGRAM OFC.
AND ACCOUNTABILITY.
R03................................
OFC OF CHESAPEAKE BAY
OFC OF SCIENCE,ANLS &
8
8
PROGRAM OFC.
IMPLEMENT ATION.
R03................................
OFC OF COMMUNICATIONS
.....................
18
17
& GOV'T RELATIONS.
R03................................
OFC OF ENF,COMPL &
ENF & COMPLIANCE
11
11
ENVIRO JUSTICE.
ASSISTANCE BR.
R03................................
OFC OF ENF,COMPL &
Immediate Office.....
12
11
ENVIRO JUSTICE.
R03................................
OFFICE OF CIVIL RIGHTS
.....................
2
2
R03................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
AIR BRANCH...........
9
9
COUNSEL.
R03................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
Immediate Office.....
15
11
COUNSEL.
R03................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
MULTI-MEDIA & LEGAL
6
6
COUNSEL.
SUPPORT BRANCH.
R03................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
OFFICE OF SITE
29
26
COUNSEL.
REMEDIATION.
R03................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
UST ASBESTOS, LEAD &
6
8
COUNSEL.
PESTICIDES BR.
R03................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
WASTE & CHEMICAL
6
5
COUNSEL.
BRANCH.
R03................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
WATER BRANCH.........
13
11
COUNSEL.
R03................................
Office of the Regional
.....................
4
6
Administrator.
R03................................
WATER PROTECTION
Immediate Office.....
6
6
DIVISION.
R03................................
WATER PROTECTION
OFC OF DRINKING WATER
30
30
DIVISION.
& SRC WATER PRT.
R03................................
WATER PROTECTION
OFC OF STANDARDS,
14
12
DIVISION.
ASSESSMENT & TMDLS.
R03................................
WATER PROTECTION
OFC OF STATE &
18
16
DIVISION.
WATERSHED
PARTNERSHIPS.
R03................................
WATER PROTECTION
OFFICE OF
16
13
DIVISION.
INFRASTRUCTURE &
ASSISTANCE.
R03................................
WATER PROTECTION
OFFICE OF NPDES
35
33
DIVISION.
PERMITS &
ENFORCEMENT.
R03................................
WATER PROTECTION
OFFICE OF PROGRAM
10
4
DIVISION.
SUPPORT.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R03 Total......................
826
759
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R04................................
AIR, PESTICIDES &
AIR ANALYSIS AND
32
25
TOXICS MGMT DIV.
SUPPORT BRANCH.
R04................................
AIR, PESTICIDES &
AIR ENFORCEMENT AND
30
27
TOXICS MGMT DIV.
TOXICS BR.
R04................................
AIR, PESTICIDES &
AIR PLANNING &
32
32
TOXICS MGMT DIV.
IMPLEMENTATION BR.
R04................................
AIR, PESTICIDES &
CHEMICAL SAFETY &
34
33
TOXICS MGMT DIV.
ENFORCEMENT BR.
R04................................
AIR, PESTICIDES &
Immediate Office.....
16
7
TOXICS MGMT DIV.
R04................................
AIR, PESTICIDES &
GRANTS MGMT &
..............
7
TOXICS MGMT DIV.
STRATEGIC PLANNING
OFC.
R04................................
GULF OF MEXICO PROGRAM
.....................
15
12
R04................................
OFC OF ENVIRO JUSTICE
.....................
13
12
& SUSTAINABILITY.
R04................................
OFFICE OF ARA FOR
BUSINESS OPS &
27
29
POLICY & MANAGEMENT.
FINANCIAL MGMT
BRANCH.
R04................................
OFFICE OF ARA FOR
FACILITIES, GRANTS &
33
33
POLICY & MANAGEMENT.
ACQUISTN MGMT BR.
R04................................
OFFICE OF ARA FOR
Immediate Office.....
9
10
POLICY & MANAGEMENT.
R04................................
OFFICE OF ARA FOR
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
33
29
POLICY & MANAGEMENT.
AND MGMT BRANCH.
R04................................
OFFICE OF ARA FOR
OFFICE OF CIVIL
3
2
POLICY & MANAGEMENT.
RIGHTS.
R04................................
OFFICE OF ARA FOR
OFFICE OF HUMAN
11
8
POLICY & MANAGEMENT.
CAPITAL MANAGEMENT.
R04................................
OFFICE OF ENFORCEMENT
.....................
11
10
COORDINATION.
R04................................
OFFICE OF EXTERNAL
.....................
8
6
AFFAIRS.
R04................................
OFFICE OF GOVERNMENT
.....................
4
3
RELATIONS.
R04................................
Office of Regional
.....................
14
9
Administrator.
R04................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
Immediate Office.....
6
5
COUNSEL.
R04................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
OFC OF AIR, PESTIC &
13
13
COUNSEL.
TOXICS LEGAL SUPT.
R04................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
OFC OF CERCLA LEGAL
10
9
COUNSEL.
SUPPORT.
R04................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
OFC OF CERCLA/FED FAC
12
11
COUNSEL.
LEGAL SUPPORT.
R04................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
OFC OF GEN/CRIM LAW &
9
8
COUNSEL.
CROSS-OFC SUPT.
R04................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
OFC OF RCRA/CERCLA
11
11
COUNSEL.
LEGAL SUPPORT.
R04................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
OFC OF WATER LEGAL
13
12
COUNSEL.
SUPPORT.
R04................................
RESOURCE CONSERVATION
ENFORCEMENT &
27
28
& RESTORATION DIV.
COMPLIANCE BR.
R04................................
RESOURCE CONSERVATION
Immediate Office.....
9
8
& RESTORATION DIV.
R04................................
RESOURCE CONSERVATION
MATERIALS AND WASTE
21
20
& RESTORATION DIV.
MANAGEMENT BR.
R04................................
RESOURCE CONSERVATION
NATL ENVIRONMENTAL
15
14
& RESTORATION DIV.
POLICY ACT (NEPA).
R04................................
RESOURCE CONSERVATION
RCRA CLEANUP AND
31
26
& RESTORATION DIV.
BROWNFIELDS BR.
R04................................
SCIENCE & ECOSYSTEM
ANALYTICAL SERVICES
24
23
SUPPORT DIV.
BRANCH.
R04................................
SCIENCE & ECOSYSTEM
FIELD SERVICES BRANCH
40
39
SUPPORT DIV.
R04................................
SCIENCE & ECOSYSTEM
Immediate Office.....
3
2
SUPPORT DIV.
R04................................
SCIENCE & ECOSYSTEM
QUALITY ASSURANCE&
19
20
SUPPORT DIV.
TECHNICAL SERV BR.
R04................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
EMERGENCY RESP.,
37
35
REMVL. & PREV. BR.
R04................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
ENFORCEMENT & COMM
32
32
ENGMT BRANCH.
R04................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
Immediate Office.....
5
5
R04................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
RESOURCE & SCIENTIFIC
30
28
INTEGRITY BR.
R04................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
RESTORATION & SITE
32
30
EVALUATION BR.
R04................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
RESTORATION &
29
28
SUSTAINABILITY BR.
R04................................
WATER PROTECTION DIV..
GRANTS & DRINKING
40
37
WATER PROT. BRANCH.
R04................................
WATER PROTECTION DIV..
Immediate Office.....
9
9
R04................................
WATER PROTECTION DIV..
NPDES PERMITTING &
37
31
ENFORCEMENT BRANCH.
R04................................
WATER PROTECTION DIV..
OWS PROTECTION BRANCH
22
24
R04................................
WATER PROTECTION DIV..
SUSTAINABLE COMM. &
26
23
WATERSHEDS BRANCH.
R04................................
WATER PROTECTION DIV..
WATER QUALITY
38
33
PLANNING BR.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R04 Total......................
925
858
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R05................................
AIR & RADIATION
AIR ENF & COMPLIANCE
46
40
DIVISION.
ASSURANCE BR.
R05................................
AIR & RADIATION
AIR PROGRAMS BRANCH..
50
46
DIVISION.
R05................................
AIR & RADIATION
AIR TOXICS &
32
27
DIVISION.
ASSESSMENT BR.
R05................................
AIR & RADIATION
Immediate Office.....
5
4
DIVISION.
R05................................
LAND & CHEMICALS
CHEMICALS MANAGEMENT
33
29
DIVISION.
BRANCH.
R05................................
LAND & CHEMICALS
Immediate Office.....
5
5
DIVISION.
R05................................
LAND & CHEMICALS
MATERIALS MANAGEMENT
13
11
DIVISION.
BRANCH.
R05................................
LAND & CHEMICALS
PROGRAM SERVICES
23
21
DIVISION.
BRANCH.
R05................................
LAND & CHEMICALS
RCRA BRANCH..........
40
39
DIVISION.
R05................................
LAND & CHEMICALS
REMEDIATION AND REUSE
29
30
DIVISION.
BR.
R05................................
OFC OF ENF &
CLEVELAND SECTION....
8
8
COMPLIANCE ASSURANCE.
R05................................
OFC OF ENF &
Immediate Office.....
12
12
COMPLIANCE ASSURANCE.
R05................................
OFC OF ENF &
NEPA IMPLEMENTATION
7
7
COMPLIANCE ASSURANCE.
SECTION.
R05................................
OFC OF GREAT LAKES
FINANCIAL ASSIST,
20
19
NATIONAL PROGRAM.
OVERSIGHT & MGMT BR.
R05................................
OFC OF GREAT LAKES
GREAT LAKES REMED &
26
24
NATIONAL PROGRAM.
RESTORATION BR.
R05................................
OFC OF GREAT LAKES
Immediate Office.....
12
11
NATIONAL PROGRAM.
R05................................
OFFICE OF CIVIL RIGHTS
.....................
3
2
R05................................
OFFICE OF EXTERNAL
Immediate Office.....
1
1
COMMUNICATIONS.
R05................................
OFFICE OF EXTERNAL
MULTIMEDIA
8
8
COMMUNICATIONS.
COMMUNICATIONS
SECTION.
R05................................
OFFICE OF EXTERNAL
NEWS MEDIA
9
9
COMMUNICATIONS.
&INTERGVTMNTL
RELATNS SCTN.
R05................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
Immediate Office.....
10
8
COUNSEL.
R05................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
MULTI-MEDIA BRANCH I.
51
46
COUNSEL.
R05................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
MULTI-MEDIA BRANCH II
54
47
COUNSEL.
R05................................
Office of the Regional
.....................
5
6
Administrator.
R05................................
PLANNING & QUALITY
.....................
5
4
ASSURANCE GROUP.
R05................................
RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
ACQUISITION &
35
34
DIV.
ASSISTANCE BR.
R05................................
RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
COMPTROLLER BRANCH...
27
24
DIV.
R05................................
RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
EMPLOYEE SERVICES
19
19
DIV.
BRANCH.
R05................................
RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
HUMAN CAPITAL BRANCH.
15
13
DIV.
R05................................
RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
Immediate Office.....
4
4
DIV.
R05................................
RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
INFORMATION
30
32
DIV.
MANAGEMENT BRANCH.
R05................................
RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
LAB QA CORE..........
23
21
DIV.
R05................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
EMERGENCY RESPONSE BR
41
36
#1.
R05................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
EMERGENCY RESPONSE BR
37
31
#2.
R05................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
Immediate Office.....
6
5
R05................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
LAND REVITALIZATION
28
28
BR.
R05................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
44
41
BRANCH.
R05................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
REMEDIAL RESPONSE
44
42
BRANCH #1.
R05................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
REMEDIAL RESPONSE
45
41
BRANCH #2.
R05................................
TRIBAL AND
.....................
7
8
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
OFC.
R05................................
WATER DIVISION........
GROUND WATER AND
28
26
DRINKING WATER BR.
R05................................
WATER DIVISION........
Immediate Office.....
7
5
R05................................
WATER DIVISION........
NPDES PROGRAMS BRANCH
22
21
R05................................
WATER DIVISION........
STATE AND TRIBAL
19
18
PROGRAMS BRANCH.
R05................................
WATER DIVISION........
UNDERGROUND INJECTION
18
15
CONTROL BRANCH.
R05................................
WATER DIVISION........
WATER ENF &
31
30
COMPLIANCE ASSURANCE
BR.
R05................................
WATER DIVISION........
WATER QUALITY BRANCH.
24
20
R05................................
WATER DIVISION........
WATERSHEDS AND
28
25
WETLANDS BRANCH.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R05 Total......................
1,089
1,003
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R06................................
COMPLIANCE ASSURANCE &
AIR ENFORCEMENT
35
34
ENFRC DIV.
BRANCH.
R06................................
COMPLIANCE ASSURANCE &
Immediate Office.....
6
6
ENFRC DIV.
R06................................
COMPLIANCE ASSURANCE &
WASTE ENFORCEMENT
32
28
ENFRC DIV.
BRANCH.
R06................................
COMPLIANCE ASSURANCE &
WATER ENFORCEMENT
59
52
ENFRC DIV.
BRANCH.
R06................................
MANAGEMENT DIVISION...
ENTERPRISE OPERATIONS
21
24
& SUPPORT BR.
R06................................
MANAGEMENT DIVISION...
ENVIRONMENTAL
32
29
SERVICES BR.
R06................................
MANAGEMENT DIVISION...
HUMAN RESOURCES
8
7
BRANCH.
R06................................
MANAGEMENT DIVISION...
Immediate Office.....
10
7
R06................................
MANAGEMENT DIVISION...
OFFICE OF THE
32
33
REGIONAL COMPTROLLER.
R06................................
MULTIMEDIA DIVISION...
AIR BRANCH...........
53
49
R06................................
MULTIMEDIA DIVISION...
HAZARDOUS WASTE
39
33
BRANCH.
R06................................
MULTIMEDIA DIVISION...
Immediate Office.....
6
6
R06................................
MULTIMEDIA DIVISION...
PEST/TOXICS/UNDER
38
34
STORAGE TANKS BR.
R06................................
OFC ENVIRO JUSTICE,
.....................
21
20
TRIBAL & INTL AFFAIR.
R06................................
OFFICE OF EXTERNAL
COMMUNICATION AND
13
11
AFFAIRS.
EDUCATION SECTION.
R06................................
OFFICE OF EXTERNAL
Immediate Office.....
5
3
AFFAIRS.
R06................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
DEP RGNL CNSL/GEN LAW
11
12
COUNSEL.
CNSLING BR.
R06................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
DEPUTY REGIONAL
33
29
COUNSEL.
COUNSEL FOR ENF.
R06................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
Immediate Office.....
2
3
COUNSEL.
R06................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
MULTIMEDIA COUNSELING
13
11
COUNSEL.
BRANCH.
R06................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
SUPERFUND BRANCH.....
13
13
COUNSEL.
R06................................
Office of the Regional
.....................
4
6
Administrator.
R06................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
31
29
BRANCH.
R06................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
Immediate Office.....
5
5
R06................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
REMEDIAL BRANCH......
29
26
R06................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
REVITALIZATION &
36
28
RESOURCES BRANCH.
R06................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
TECHNICAL &
25
25
ENFORCEMENT BR.
R06................................
WATER DIVISION........
ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS
31
29
BRANCH.
R06................................
WATER DIVISION........
ECOSYSTEMS PROTECTION
35
31
BR.
R06................................
WATER DIVISION........
Immediate Office.....
13
10
R06................................
WATER DIVISION........
NPDES PERMITS & TMDLS
34
32
BR.
R06................................
WATER DIVISION........
SAFE DRINKING WATER
29
26
BRANCH.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R06 Total......................
754
691
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R07................................
AIR & WASTE MANAGEMENT
AIR PERMITTING &
22
18
DIV.
COMPLIANCE BR.
R07................................
AIR & WASTE MANAGEMENT
AIR PLANNING &
19
19
DIV.
DEVELOPMENT BR.
R07................................
AIR & WASTE MANAGEMENT
CHEMICAL & OIL
17
15
DIV.
RELEASE PREVENTION
BR.
R07................................
AIR & WASTE MANAGEMENT
Immediate Office.....
5
6
DIV.
R07................................
AIR & WASTE MANAGEMENT
WASTE ENF & MATERIALS
23
16
DIV.
MGMT BR.
R07................................
AIR & WASTE MANAGEMENT
WASTE REMEDIATION AND
15
13
DIV.
PERMITTING BR.
R07................................
ENFORCEMENT
.....................
14
12
COORDINATION OFFICE.
R07................................
ENVIRO SCIENCES &
ENVIRO DATA &
13
11
TECHNOLOGY DIV.
ASSESSMENT BRANCH.
R07................................
ENVIRO SCIENCES &
ENVIRONMENTAL FIELD
15
14
TECHNOLOGY DIV.
COMPLIANCE BRANCH.
R07................................
ENVIRO SCIENCES &
Immediate Office.....
14
12
TECHNOLOGY DIV.
R07................................
ENVIRO SCIENCES &
LABORATORY TECHNOLOGY
21
21
TECHNOLOGY DIV.
& ANALYSIS BR.
R07................................
ENVIRO SCIENCES &
MONITORING & ENVIRO
16
13
TECHNOLOGY DIV.
SAMPLING BRANCH.
R07................................
OFFICE OF POLICY &
ACQUISITION
13
11
MANAGEMENT.
MANAGEMENT BR.
R07................................
OFFICE OF POLICY &
HUMAN CAPITAL
6
5
MANAGEMENT.
MANAGEMENT BR.
R07................................
OFFICE OF POLICY &
Immediate Office.....
7
5
MANAGEMENT.
R07................................
OFFICE OF POLICY &
INFORMATION
6
7
MANAGEMENT.
TECHNOLOGY BR.
R07................................
OFFICE OF POLICY &
PROGRAM OPERATIONS &
12
9
MANAGEMENT.
INTEGRATION BR.
R07................................
OFFICE OF POLICY &
RESOURCES & FINANCIAL
20
20
MANAGEMENT.
MANAGEMENT BR.
R07................................
OFFICE OF POLICY &
SECURITY, SAFETY,
11
11
MANAGEMENT.
&FACILITIES MGMT BR.
R07................................
OFFICE OF PUBLIC
.....................
18
14
AFFAIRS.
R07................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
AIR BRANCH...........
7
7
COUNSEL.
R07................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
CHEMICAL MANAGEMENT
8
6
COUNSEL.
BRANCH.
R07................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
Immediate Office.....
9
9
COUNSEL.
R07................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
SUPERFUND BRANCH.....
14
9
COUNSEL.
R07................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
WATER BRANCH.........
10
8
COUNSEL.
R07................................
Office of the Regional
.....................
4
3
Administrator.
R07................................
OFFICE OF TRIBAL
.....................
4
3
AFFAIRS.
R07................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
ASSESSMENT, EMERGENCY
28
27
RESP & REMOVAL.
R07................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
BROWNFIELDS & LAND
10
8
REVITALIZATION BR.
R07................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
Immediate Office.....
9
9
R07................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
LEAD, MINING AND
13
13
SPECIAL EMPHASIS BR.
R07................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
PROGRAM SUPPORT AND
7
6
MANAGEMENT SCTN.
R07................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
SITE REMEDIATION
19
20
BRANCH.
R07................................
WATER, WETLANDS &
DRINKING WATER
15
14
PESTICIDES DIV.
MANAGEMENT BRANCH.
R07................................
WATER, WETLANDS &
Immediate Office.....
9
7
PESTICIDES DIV.
R07................................
WATER, WETLANDS &
TOXICS AND PESTICIDES
15
13
PESTICIDES DIV.
BR.
R07................................
WATER, WETLANDS &
WASTE WATER &
15
14
PESTICIDES DIV.
INFRASTRUCTURE MGMT
BR.
R07................................
WATER, WETLANDS &
WATER ENFORCEMENT
15
13
PESTICIDES DIV.
BRANCH.
R07................................
WATER, WETLANDS &
WATER QUALITY
8
5
PESTICIDES DIV.
MANAGEMENT BRANCH.
R07................................
WATER, WETLANDS &
WATERSHED PLANNING &
20
11
PESTICIDES DIV.
IMPLEMENTATION BR.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R07 Total......................
526
457
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R08................................
OFC OF COMMS&PUBLIC
Immediate Office.....
10
8
INVOLVEMENT.
R08................................
OFC OF COMMS&PUBLIC
PUBLIC AFFAIRS AND
8
8
INVOLVEMENT.
INVOLVEMENT.
R08................................
OFC OF ECO
ASSESSMENT AND
15
13
PROTECTION&REMEDIATIO
REVITALIZATION
N.
PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF ECO PROTECTION
EMER RESPONSE &
26
27
& REMEDIATION.
PREPAREDNESS PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF ECO PROTECTION
Immediate Office.....
6
5
& REMEDIATION.
R08................................
OFC OF ECO PROTECTION
NEPA COMPLIANCE AND
12
11
& REMEDIATION.
REVIEW PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF ECO PROTECTION
SUPERFUND REM & FED
43
41
& REMEDIATION.
FACILITIES PROG.
R08................................
OFC OF ECO PROTECTION
SUPPORT PROGRAM......
20
20
& REMEDIATION.
R08................................
OFC OF ENF, COMPLIANCE
AIR & TOXICS
17
16
& ENVIRO JUSTICE.
TECHNICAL ENF
PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF ENF, COMPLIANCE
Immediate Office.....
4
4
& ENVIRO JUSTICE.
R08................................
OFC OF ENF, COMPLIANCE
LEGAL ENFORCEMENT
29
25
& ENVIRO JUSTICE.
PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF ENF, COMPLIANCE
POLICY, INFO
10
9
& ENVIRO JUSTICE.
MGMT&ENVIRO JUSTICE
PROG.
R08................................
OFC OF ENF, COMPLIANCE
RCRA/CERCLA TECHNICAL
11
10
& ENVIRO JUSTICE.
ENF PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF ENF, COMPLIANCE
WATER TECHNICAL
23
22
& ENVIRO JUSTICE.
PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF PARTNERSHIPS &
AIR PROGRAM..........
36
33
REGULATORY ASTNC.
R08................................
OFC OF PARTNERSHIPS &
Immediate Office.....
4
4
REGULATORY ASTNC.
R08................................
OFC OF PARTNERSHIPS &
PARTNERSHIPS & ENVIRO
13
13
REGULATORY ASTNC.
STEWARD PROG.
R08................................
OFC OF PARTNERSHIPS &
RESOURCE CONSERVATION
16
16
REGULATORY ASTNC.
& RECOVERY PROG.
R08................................
OFC OF PARTNERSHIPS &
TRIBAL ASSISTANCE
8
6
REGULATORY ASTNC.
PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF TECHNICAL &
FISCAL MANAGEMENT &
21
22
MGMT SERVICES.
PLANNING PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF TECHNICAL &
GRANTS, AUDITS,
15
7
MGMT SERVICES.
PROCUREMENT PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF TECHNICAL &
HUMAN RESOURCES
3
4
MGMT SERVICES.
PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF TECHNICAL &
Immediate Office.....
8
7
MGMT SERVICES.
R08................................
OFC OF TECHNICAL &
INFORMATION
20
17
MGMT SERVICES.
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF TECHNICAL &
INFRASTRUCTURE
8
8
MGMT SERVICES.
PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF TECHNICAL &
LABORATORY SERVICES
15
14
MGMT SERVICES.
PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFC OF TECHNICAL &
MONTANA OPERATIONS
4
3
MGMT SERVICES.
UNIT.
R08................................
OFC OF TECHNICAL &
QUALITY ASSURANCE
7
6
MGMT SERVICES.
PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
.....................
19
19
COUNSEL.
R08................................
Office of the Regional
.....................
8
7
Administrator.
R08................................
OFFICE OF WATER
AQUIFER & AQUATIC
11
10
PROTECTION.
RESOURCES PROT UNIT.
R08................................
OFFICE OF WATER
CLEAN WATER PROGRAM..
29
30
PROTECTION.
R08................................
OFFICE OF WATER
Immediate Office.....
2
4
PROTECTION.
R08................................
OFFICE OF WATER
SAFE DRINKING WATER
27
30
PROTECTION.
PROGRAM.
R08................................
OFFICE OF WATER
TECHNICAL AND
11
11
PROTECTION.
FINANCIAL SERVICES
UNIT.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R08 Total......................
519
490
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R09................................
AIR DIVISION..........
AIR QUALITY ANALYSIS
12
12
OFFICE.
R09................................
AIR DIVISION..........
AIR TOXICS, RADIATION
7
7
& COMPL ASSUR OFC.
R09................................
AIR DIVISION..........
CLEAN ENERGY &
7
8
CLIMATE CHANGE
OFFICE.
R09................................
AIR DIVISION..........
GRANTS & PROGRAM
9
7
INTEGRATION OFFICE.
R09................................
AIR DIVISION..........
Immediate Office.....
13
11
R09................................
AIR DIVISION..........
PERMITS OFFICE.......
10
10
R09................................
AIR DIVISION..........
PLANNING OFFICE......
16
12
R09................................
AIR DIVISION..........
RULES OFFICE.........
8
9
R09................................
ENFORCEMENT DIVISION..
AIR, WASTE, AND
25
24
TOXICS BR.
R09................................
ENFORCEMENT DIVISION..
ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
18
16
SECTION.
R09................................
ENFORCEMENT DIVISION..
Immediate Office.....
8
8
R09................................
ENFORCEMENT DIVISION..
INFORMATION
9
9
MANAGEMENT SECTION.
R09................................
ENFORCEMENT DIVISION..
STRATEGIC PLANNING
4
3
BRANCH.
R09................................
ENFORCEMENT DIVISION..
WATER AND PESTICIDES
32
30
BRANCH.
R09................................
ENVIRONMENTAL
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
12
12
MANAGEMENT DIVISION.
BRANCH.
R09................................
ENVIRONMENTAL
GRANTS & CONTRACTS
25
24
MANAGEMENT DIVISION.
BRANCH.
R09................................
ENVIRONMENTAL
HUMAN CAPITAL &
5
7
MANAGEMENT DIVISION.
PLANNING OFFICE.
R09................................
ENVIRONMENTAL
Immediate Office.....
8
5
MANAGEMENT DIVISION.
R09................................
ENVIRONMENTAL
INFRASTRUCTURE
29
28
MANAGEMENT DIVISION.
SERVICES BRANCH.
R09................................
ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCE SERVICES
22
21
MANAGEMENT DIVISION.
BRANCH.
R09................................
LAND DIVISION.........
COMMUNITIES BRANCH...
31
27
R09................................
LAND DIVISION.........
Immediate Office.....
5
5
R09................................
LAND DIVISION.........
PLANNING & STATE
9
8
DEVELOPMENT SECTION.
R09................................
LAND DIVISION.........
POLLUTION PREVENTION
27
26
BRANCH.
R09................................
LAND DIVISION.........
RCRA BRANCH..........
26
23
R09................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
AIR, TOXICS, WATER &
33
33
COUNSEL.
GENERAL LAW BR.
R09................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
HAZARDOUS WASTE
30
26
COUNSEL.
BRANCH.
R09................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
Immediate Office.....
15
11
COUNSEL.
R09................................
Office of the Regional
.....................
5
5
Administrator.
R09................................
PUBLIC AFFAIRS OFFICE.
Immediate Office.....
1
1
R09................................
PUBLIC AFFAIRS OFFICE.
PRESS & CONGRESSIONAL
7
7
AFFAIRS OFFICE.
R09................................
PUBLIC AFFAIRS OFFICE.
WEB & INTERNAL
9
8
COMMUNICATION OFFICE.
R09................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
CA SITE CLEANUP &
42
37
ENFORCEMENT BRANCH.
R09................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
EMER RESP,
38
34
PREPAREDNESS &
PREVENTION BR.
R09................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
FED FACILITIES & SITE
25
24
CLEANUP BR.
R09................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
Immediate Office.....
4
4
R09................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
PARTNERSHIPS, LAND
40
36
REV & CLEANUP BR.
R09................................
SUPERFUND DIVISION....
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
8
9
OFFICE.
R09................................
WATER DIVISION........
ECOSYSTEMS BRANCH....
57
50
R09................................
WATER DIVISION........
Immediate Office.....
10
8
R09................................
WATER DIVISION........
TRIBAL & STATE
48
46
ASSISTANCE BRANCH.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R09 Total......................
749
691
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R10................................
ALASKA OPERATIONS
.....................
9
7
OFFICE.
R10................................
IDAHO OPERATIONS
.....................
5
4
OFFICE.
R10................................
OFC OF ECO PROTECTION
D ECOSYSTEMS
1
1
& REMEDIATION.
PROTECTION PROGRAM.
R10................................
OFC OF TECHNICAL &
GRANTS, AUDITS,
..............
6
MGMT SERVICES.
PROCUREMENT PROGRAM.
R10................................
OFFICE OF AIR & WASTE.
AIR PLANNING UNIT....
14
14
R10................................
OFFICE OF AIR & WASTE.
Immediate Office.....
7
6
R10................................
OFFICE OF AIR & WASTE.
RCRA CORRECTIVE ACTN,
11
10
PERM & PCB UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF AIR & WASTE.
RCRA PRGM, MATERIALS
14
11
& POLL PREV UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF AIR & WASTE.
STATIONARY SOURCE
10
9
UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF AIR & WASTE.
TRIBAL PRGMS, DIESEL
9
8
& INDOOR AIR UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF COMPLIANCE &
AIR ENFORCEMENT &
9
7
ENFORCEMENT.
DATA MGMT UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF COMPLIANCE &
GROUND WATER UNIT....
14
11
ENFORCEMENT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF COMPLIANCE &
Immediate Office.....
8
7
ENFORCEMENT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF COMPLIANCE &
MULTIMEDIA INSPEC &
14
13
ENFORCEMENT.
RCRA ENFORC UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF COMPLIANCE &
PESTICIDES & TOXICS
15
12
ENFORCEMENT.
UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF COMPLIANCE &
WATER & WETLANDS
17
16
ENFORCEMENT.
ENFORCEMENT UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF ENVIRON
AQUATIC RESOURCES
11
8
REVIEW & ASSESSMENT.
UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF ENVIRON
ENVIRONMENTAL
12
11
REVIEW & ASSESSMENT.
CHARACTERIZATION
UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF ENVIRON
ENVIRONMENTAL REV &
11
9
REVIEW & ASSESSMENT.
SEDIMENT MGMT UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF ENVIRON
ENVIRONMENTAL
10
8
REVIEW & ASSESSMENT.
SERVICES UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF ENVIRON
Immediate Office.....
8
8
REVIEW & ASSESSMENT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF ENVIRON
MANCHESTER
18
18
REVIEW & ASSESSMENT.
ENVIRONMENTAL
LABORATORY.
R10................................
OFFICE OF ENVIRON
RISK EVALUATION UNIT.
14
15
REVIEW & ASSESSMENT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF
ASSESSMENT &
10
6
ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP.
BROWNFIELDS UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF
HANFORD PROJECT
11
10
ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP.
OFFICE.
R10................................
OFFICE OF
Immediate Office.....
6
6
ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP.
R10................................
OFFICE OF
OFC OF EMERGENCY
25
25
ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP.
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
R10................................
OFFICE OF
REMEDIAL CLEANUP
35
33
ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP.
PROGRAM.
R10................................
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT
FISCAL MANAGEMENT &
10
8
PROGRAMS.
PLANNING UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT
GRANTS UNIT..........
9
9
PROGRAMS.
R10................................
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT
HUMAN RESOURCES &
10
9
PROGRAMS.
FACILITIES UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT
Immediate Office.....
5
5
PROGRAMS.
R10................................
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT
INFORMATION SERVICES
17
17
PROGRAMS.
UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT
INTERAGENCY AGREEMENT
6
7
PROGRAMS.
UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
Immediate Office.....
8
7
COUNSEL.
R10................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
MULTI-MEDIA UNIT 1...
10
10
COUNSEL.
R10................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
MULTI-MEDIA UNIT 2...
10
10
COUNSEL.
R10................................
OFFICE OF REGIONAL
MULTI-MEDIA UNIT 3...
11
9
COUNSEL.
R10................................
Office of the Regional
.....................
5
4
Administrator.
R10................................
OFFICE OF WATER &
DRINKING WATER UNIT..
14
13
WATERSHEDS.
R10................................
OFFICE OF WATER &
Immediate Office.....
9
8
WATERSHEDS.
R10................................
OFFICE OF WATER &
NPDES PERMITS UNIT...
19
18
WATERSHEDS.
R10................................
OFFICE OF WATER &
PUGET SOUND PROGRAM..
11
7
WATERSHEDS.
R10................................
OFFICE OF WATER &
WATER QUALITY
7
8
WATERSHEDS.
STANDARDS UNIT.
R10................................
OFFICE OF WATER &
WATERSHED UNIT.......
12
10
WATERSHEDS.
R10................................
OREGON OPERATIONS
.....................
4
4
OFFICE.
R10................................
REGIONAL
Immediate Office.....
8
6
ADMINISTRATOR'S
DIVISION.
R10................................
REGIONAL
PUBLIC AFFAIRS & COMM
15
14
ADMINISTRATOR'S
ENGAGEMENT UNIT.
DIVISION.
R10................................
REGIONAL
TRIBAL TRUST &
18
17
ADMINISTRATOR'S
ASSISTANCE UNIT.
DIVISION.
R10................................
WASHINGTON OPERATIONS
.....................
3
4
OFFICE.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R10 Total......................
549
503
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grand Total........................
15,946
14,702
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question. Please provide a comparison of FTE totals currently, and
as of January 20, 2017, by general job category, such as scientist,
environmental engineer, attorney-advisor, contracting officer, budget
specialist, etc.
Answer. The table provided shows onboard employees by job category.
It includes part-time and special government employees, i.e. Federal
Advisory Committee Act (FACA) participants.
EPA'S ONBOARDS BY JOB CATEGORY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Occupational Series Description
January 2017
June 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACCOUNTING TECHNICIAN...............
5
4
ADMIN & OFFICE SUPPORT STUDENT
52
18
TRAINEE............................
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE............
3
3
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER..............
60
51
AEROSPACE ENGINEERING...............
1
................
AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING............
8
6
AGRONOMY............................
5
7
ANIMAL SCIENCE......................
5
5
ARCHITECTURE........................
8
6
AUDIOVISUAL PRODUCTION..............
6
5
AUDITING............................
95
90
BIOENGINEERING & BIOMEDICAL
1
2
ENGINEERING........................
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE STUDENT TRAINEE..
23
3
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE TECHNICIAN.......
12
7
BOTANY..............................
4
3
BUDGET ANALYSIS.....................
113
100
BUDGET CLERICAL AND ASSISTANCE......
1
1
BUILDING MANAGEMENT.................
................
8
CARTOGRAPHY.........................
2
2
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING................
106
97
CHEMISTRY...........................
467
433
CIVIL ENGINEERING...................
16
13
COMMUNITY PLANNING..................
7
5
COMPUTER CLERK AND ASSISTANT........
4
1
COMPUTER ENGINEERING................
4
4
COMPUTER SCIENCE....................
16
13
CONTRACTING.........................
265
243
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATING..............
215
207
ECOLOGY.............................
133
123
ECONOMIST...........................
177
150
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE................
1
................
EDUCATION AND TRAINING TECHNICIAN...
2
1
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING..............
9
7
ELECTRONICS TECHNICAL...............
1
1
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SPECIALIST.....
3
4
ENGINEER AND ARCH STD TRAIN.........
31
6
ENGINEERING TECHNICAL...............
28
27
ENTOMOLOGY..........................
21
16
ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING...........
1,748
1,643
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ASSISTANT..
16
12
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION SPECIALIST.
2,280
2,004
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY........
30
24
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMPLIANCE........
2
3
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY INVESTIGATOR......
1
1
EQUIPMENT OPERATOR..................
1
1
EQUIPMENT SERVICES..................
1
................
EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES, AND SERVICES.
2
2
FACILITY OPERATIONS SERVICES........
24
24
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION AND PROGRAM
132
136
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS..................
35
36
FINANCIAL CLERICAL AND ASSISTANCE...
8
6
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT................
8
9
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT STUDENT........
5
4
FIRE PROTECTION ENGINEERING.........
2
3
FISH BIOLOGY........................
6
6
GENERAL ANTHROPOLOGY................
2
2
GENERAL ARTS AND INFORMATION........
21
25
GENERAL ATTORNEY....................
1,061
999
GENERAL BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY.......
30
34
GENERAL ENGINEERING.................
47
50
GENERAL HEALTH SCIENCE..............
149
129
GENERAL INSP INVES AND COMP.........
24
19
GENERAL INVESTIGATING...............
18
15
GENERAL LEGAL AND KINDRED ADMIN.....
1
1
GENERAL MATHEMATICS AND STATISTICS..
1
3
GENERAL NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
1,246
1,199
GENERAL PHYSICAL SCIENCE............
2,186
2,088
GENERAL STUDENT TRAINEE.............
25
15
GENERAL SUPPLY......................
4
4
GENETICS............................
2
1
GEOGRAPHY...........................
11
9
GEOLOGY.............................
64
53
GEOPHYSICS..........................
1
................
GOVERNMENT INFORMATION SPECIALIST...
66
68
GRANTS MANAGEMENT...................
133
117
HEALTH PHYSICS......................
28
24
HORTICULTURE........................
................
1
HUMAN RESOURCES ASSISTANT...........
15
5
HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT..........
206
192
HYDROLOGIC TECHNICIAN...............
2
2
HYDROLOGY...........................
36
31
INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE..................
25
26
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT......
1
1
INFORMATION AND ARTS STUDENT TRAINEE
1
1
INFORMATION RECEPTIONIST............
1
................
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT...
617
577
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY STU. TRAINEE.
4
5
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT SERIES.......
29
31
INSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEMS...............
3
3
INTELLIGENCE........................
2
3
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT................
1
2
LABORING............................
1
1
LAW CLERK...........................
9
................
LEGAL ASSISTANCE....................
5
4
LEGAL INSTRUMENTS EXAMINING.........
1
1
LEGAL OCCUPATIONS STUDENT TRAINEE...
3
1
LIBRARIAN...........................
3
3
MAIL AND FILE.......................
1
1
MANAGEMENT AND PROGRAM ANALYSIS.....
1,403
1,313
MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS.............
20
14
MATHEMATICS.........................
3
3
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING..............
87
80
MEDICAL OFFICER.....................
5
3
METEOROLOGY.........................
6
6
MGMNT & PROGRAM CLERICAL &
25
14
ASSISTANCE.........................
MICROBIOLOGY........................
76
65
MISCELLANEOUS ADMIN & PROGRAM.......
535
530
MISCELLANEOUS CLERK AND ASSISTANT...
100
84
MODEL MAKING........................
1
1
MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATING.............
2
2
NUCLEAR ENGINEERING.................
3
2
NURSE...............................
2
2
OCEANOGRAPHY........................
4
4
OFFICE AUTOMATION CLERICAL & ASSIST.
17
15
OPERATIONS RESEARCH.................
3
3
PARALEGAL SPECIALIST................
37
30
PATENT ATTORNEY.....................
1
1
PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT STUDENT TRAINEE
2
1
PETROLEUM ENGINEERING...............
3
1
PHARMACOLOGY........................
19
19
PHOTOGRAPHY.........................
2
2
PHYSICAL SCIENCE STUDENT TRAINEE....
23
6
PHYSICAL SCIENCE TECHNICIAN.........
15
13
PHYSICOLOGY.........................
8
8
PHYSICS.............................
4
4
PLANT PATHOLOGY.....................
4
3
PLANT PHYSIOLOGY....................
2
2
PRINTING CLERICAL...................
1
1
PRINTING SERVICES...................
2
2
PROCUREMENT CLERICAL AND TECHNICIAN.
3
2
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT..................
233
233
PSYCHOLOGY..........................
5
4
PUBLIC AFFAIRS......................
204
192
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAM SPECIALIST....
2
1
QUALITY ASSURANCE...................
1
1
REALTY..............................
1
1
SAFETY & OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH MNGMT..
20
19
SAFETY ENGINEERING..................
1
2
SANITARIAN..........................
1
................
SECRETARY...........................
158
128
SECURITY ADMINISTRATION.............
32
28
SOCIAL SCIENCE......................
11
17
SOCIOLOGY...........................
3
2
SOIL CONSERVATION...................
1
1
SOIL SCIENCE........................
5
5
STATISTICIAN........................
55
45
SUPPLY CLERICAL AND TECHNICIAN......
2
2
SUPPORT SERVICES ADMINISTRATION.....
36
28
TECHNICAL INFORMATION SERVICES......
4
4
TECHNICAL WRITING AND EDITING.......
1
1
TELECOMMUNICATIONS..................
8
7
TOXICOLOGY..........................
228
221
TRAINING INSTRUCTION................
1
1
TRANSPORTATION SPECIALIST...........
1
2
VETERINARY MEDICAL SCIENCE..........
9
9
VISUAL INFORMATION..................
6
5
WILDLIFE BIOLOGY....................
5
5
WRITING AND EDITING.................
10
10
ZOOLOGY.............................
7
5
UNASSIGNED..........................
38
25
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grand Total.....................
15,946
14,702
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question. The April 17, 2017 memorandum from Acting Deputy Director
Michael Flynn stated that EPA was retaining an external hiring freeze.
Does EPA dispute that the external hiring freeze is still in place?
Answer. EPA does not have a hiring freeze in place. Programs and
regions are working toward achieving the fiscal year 2018 FTE Targets
by the end of the year.
Question. If so, please provide the formal document or
communication to managers lifting the freeze.
Answer. EPA does not have a hiring freeze in place. Programs and
regions are working toward achieving the fiscal year 2018 onboard
employee targets by the end of the year.
Question. If not, what is the justification for continuing the
freeze at this time?
Answer. EPA does not have a hiring freeze in place. Programs and
regions are working toward achieving the fiscal year 2018 onboard
employee targets by the end of the year.
Question. Please describe the process to obtain exceptions to the
external hiring freeze.
Who reviews exception requests?
Answer. When the freeze was in place, exceptions were reviewed by
OCFO, OARM, and the Acting Deputy Administrator. Exceptions to the past
freeze were determined by the Acting Deputy Administrator.
Question. Who approves exception requests?
Answer. When the freeze was in place, the Acting Deputy
Administrator approved requests.
Question. How many exceptions have been granted since January 20,
2017?
Answer. From January 20, 2017 through April 12, 2017 when the
Administration lifted the hiring freeze, no exceptions were granted.
Question. Please list each of the exceptions that have been granted
since January 20, 2017, by office (down to the division level) and job
type.
Answer. During the timeframe referenced, no exceptions were
granted.
Question. Please provide any analysis that EPA has prepared to
evaluate EPA's ability to carry out its statutory responsibilities
given the current number of FTEs, and with a smaller number of FTEs.
Please provide a list of each statutory and regulatory deadline
that EPA is currently failing to meet. Please include on the list each
category of actions such as FOIA responses, permit issuances, SIP
approvals, inspections, etc. where EPA commonly misses the deadlines
for individual actions.
Answer. EPA is working to meet statutory deadlines and has focused
attention on each area as outlined in the Agency's strategic plan,
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-02/documents/fy-2018-
2022-epa-strategic-plan.pdf.
Question. Would additional personnel help EPA meet each of these
deadlines, or at least reduce the delays?If not, please provide a
detailed explanation of why not for each deadline.
Answer. Fiscal year 2018 staffing targets reflect the objectives
outlined in the strategic plan. In addition, process improvements have
been implemented or are planned to assist in reducing impediments to
meeting deadlines.
The April 17, 2017 memo also required Senior Resource Official
approval for internal reassignments across NPMs or regions.
Question. Is this requirement still in place?
Answer. In the event EPA internally recruits and selects someone
from the certified list, in accordance with the Merit System Principals
guide on recruitment we do not need Senior Resource Official approval.
In the event EPA utilizes internal mechanisms for a range of career
development opportunities such as part-time projects, full-time
details, and/or a lateral reassignment, we would require Senior
Resource Official approval.
Question. Who was required to approve internal reassignments prior
to the adoption of this policy?
Answer. This was a new requirement, providing organizations the
internal control structure to manage overall staffing levels.
Question. You have suggested that EPA will continue to be
effective, despite a continually shrinking workforce, due in part to
improvements identified through your institution of the LEAN management
system.
How do the Workforce Reduction Plan, any other directives or
policies aimed at reducing the EPA workforce, and the hiring freeze
each relate to the LEAN management system?
Answer. The EPA Lean Management System (ELMS) is not being used to
reassign personnel or identify targets for shrinking or expanding
workforces for individual offices within the agency. As part of ELMS,
each EPA national program office and regional office submits a monthly
``bowling chart'' that includes measures tracking their performance on
relevant Strategic Plan measures and measures representative of the
work of the office. One of those measures does track the number of
employees currently on board in each office compared to their
allocations in order to assist the Agency in prudently managing its
workforce levels.
Question. Is the LEAN process being used to reassign personnel or
identify targets for shrinking or expanding workforces for individual
offices within the agency? If so, please explain and provide examples.
Answer. The EPA Lean Management System (ELMS) is not being used to
reassign personnel or identify targets for shrinking or expanding
workforces for individual offices within the agency. As part of ELMS,
each EPA national program office and regional office submits a monthly
``bowling chart'' that includes measures tracking their performance on
relevant Strategic Plan measures and measures representative of the
work of the office. One of those measures does track the number of
employees currently on board in each office compared to their
allocations in order to assist the Agency in prudently managing its
workforce levels.
Question. How much funding remained unspent and was subject to
rescissions in fiscal year 2016 and fiscal year 2017 due to workforce
reductions? If EPA continues the hiring freeze throughout the remainder
of fiscal year 2018, roughly how much additional funding would be
expected to remain unspent due to workforce reductions by the end of
fiscal year 2018? What is EPA's rationale for maintaining a hiring
freeze that prevents EPA from expending substantial portions of the
amounts that this Committee appropriated for workforce salaries?
Answer. EPA is not currently under a hiring freeze. Each
organization is managing to its targets and needed critical hires. Over
half of the organizations are actively working to increase overall
staffing to meet the targets. That said, the Federal recruitment
process takes time. The allocations planned for a certain level of new
staffing in June. We are actively monitoring staffing levels and will
review payroll needs in the fourth quarter.
foia process
Question. Recent reports indicate that EPA political appointees
have instructed career staff to provide for an ``awareness review'' by
senior EPA staff before releasing documents through the FOIA process,
and that employees have been chastised for releasing documents without
a senior management review.
How are FOIAs selected for a senior management ``awareness
review''?
Answer. The answer to this question and subsequent questions can be
found in the attached letter to ranking member, Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform, The Honorable Elijah Cummings, dated July 15,
2018.
Question. What is the purpose of this review? Is there a
standardized review process? If so, please provide documentation.
Answer. The answer to this question and subsequent questions can be
found in the attached letter to ranking member, Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform, The Honorable Elijah Cummings, dated July 15,
2018.
Question. Which EPA political appointees are involved in the
awareness review?
Answer. The answer to this question and subsequent questions can be
found in the attached letter to ranking member, Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform, The Honorable Elijah Cummings, dated July 15,
2018.
Question. How long does the awareness review process typically
take?
Answer. The answer to this question and subsequent questions can be
found in the attached letter to ranking member, Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform, The Honorable Elijah Cummings, dated July 15,
2018.
Question. How many FOIA requests have been completed and are ready
for release pending the senior management awareness review? Please
provide a list of these requests.
Answer. The answer to this question and subsequent questions can be
found in the attached letter to ranking member, Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform, The Honorable Elijah Cummings, dated July 15,
2018.
Question. How many FOIA requests have gone through the senior
management awareness review process to date?
Answer. The answer to this question and subsequent questions can be
found in the attached letter to ranking member, Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform, The Honorable Elijah Cummings, dated July 15,
2018.
ATTACHMENT
LETTER TO RANKING MEMBER ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS
superfund
Question. Please produce all documents related to how the EPA
developed the ``immediate, intense action'' list of Superfund sites to
the Committee.
Answer. In developing the ``immediate, intense action'' list,
senior career Superfund staff at EPA headquarters and in each region
were consulted and identified potential sites that may be worthy of
special attention now or in the future to advance those sites through
the cleanup process. The recommended sites represent EPA regions' best
professional judgment where the Administrator's involvement would
facilitate site progress. The Administrator reviewed the
recommendations and personally selected the sites for inclusion. The
list includes sites that require timely resolution of specific issues
to expedite cleanup and redevelopment efforts. The specific issue or
milestone that may benefit from the Administrator's attention is noted
for each site on the list, which can be found on EPA's website at:
https://www.epa.gov/superfund/superfund-sites-targeted-immediate-
intense-action.
The list is designed to spur action at sites where opportunities
exist to act quickly and decisively. The Administrator will receive
regular updates on each of these sites. Further, the list is intended
to be dynamic and sites will move on and off the list as appropriate.
At times, there may be more or fewer sites based on where the
Administrator's attention and focus is most needed.
Please see the August 3, 2018, press release at https://
www.epa.gov/newsreleases/acting-administrator-wheeler-updates-
administrators-superfund-emphasis-list which should prove helpful.
press availability
Question. Previous EPA Administrators and political appointees
publicly released their full, detailed schedules. In fact, your other
Cabinet-level colleagues, including Interior Secretary Zinke and
Agriculture Secretary Perdue, all release detailed schedules. Even the
very general schedules, based on your Outlook calendar, that you do
release have been found to have hidden certain details--most recently
we learned that documents intentionally deleted that you dined with a
Cardinal accused of child abuse--and often differ significantly from
actual events.
What prevents you from following the standards set by previous
administrators and by your Trump Administration counterparts?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Why can't you post a detailed schedule?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. There are often discrepancies between Outlook calendars
released to the public under FOIA and news reports detailing your
activities on those dates. Who maintains your daily schedule (the
schedule that you personally receive each day or the night before with
a complete list of events, activities, and meetings on it)?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. What prevents you from doing the public's business in
public, like your fellow Cabinet members?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Will you commit to open all of your official events to
the press?
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer. As of July 7,
2018, Acting Administrator Wheeler's calendar is posted online.
legal defense fund
Question. Please reply to the letter sent on May 21, 2018 by myself
and Senators Van Hollen, Carper and Whitehouse. Please respond within 2
weeks.
Although the EPA is not responsible for administering this legal
defense fund, the fund's purpose relates to the operation of the agency
and has the potential, at minimum, to generate the appearance of
financial conflicts of interest between the Administrator and the
fund's donors. As such, please direct your personal attorney, Cleta
Mitchell, to provide the following information to the Committee:
Provide the name of the Fund and describe its operating structure;
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. As requested in our letter of May 21, provide a copy of
the Fund's organizing documents;
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Provide the names of Fund Managers, Members and/or
Authorized Persons, the Registered Agent, and any trustees;
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Describe the purpose of the Fund, including the specific
legal issues it covers and the names of beneficiaries (ie: was it
formed to provide assistance just to Pruitt, or to other people in
addition to Pruitt);
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Describe authorized costs under the Fund;
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Describe any restrictions on distributions under the
Fund;
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Describe your process for soliciting donations to the
Fund;
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Describe any prohibited donors to the Fund;
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
Question. Describe the process for publicly disclosing donations
and disbursements, including where this information will be published.
Answer. Effective July 6, 2018, former Administrator Pruitt
resigned from his position as Administrator of the EPA and is no longer
an employee of the Agency. Therefore, EPA is not able to discuss your
question with Mr. Pruitt to provide you with an answer.
clean water rule
Question. Who at EPA directed staff to change the economic
assessment of the 2015 Clean Water Rule, which led to the agency
failing to quantify the benefits associated with wetlands protection?
Do you have any basis to believe that this approach, which has the
practical effect of valuing wetlands' benefits as zero, was more
accurate than the prior assessment?
Answer. The Department of the Army and the EPA intend to follow
relevant guidance on the development of economic analyses for the
proposed rules regarding ``Waters of the United States'', which will be
made available for public comments.
Question. Did EPA conduct any analysis of the water quality impact
of repealing the Clean Water Rule compared with implementing the Rule?
If so, please provide that to the Committee.
Answer. As part of the rulemaking process, the Department of the
Army and the EPA are developing technical support information and an
economic analysis which will be made available for public comments when
the proposed rule is published. That information is anticipated to
include information on the potential impacts of implementing a revised
definition of ``waters of the United States.''
Question. What legal authority does EPA plan to use to define
``waters of the United States'' based on a judicial opinion expressly
rejected by a majority of the justices of the Supreme Court?
Answer. The Department of the Army and the EPA intend to provide a
legal basis for the proposed rule consistent with the Constitution, the
Clean Water Act, and relevant Supreme Court rulings.
Question. Will you commit to ensure that your replacement rule will
ensure the Clean Water Act's pollution prevention and cleanup programs
apply to those categories of water bodies the science shows to have
significant impacts on downstream water quality?
Answer. The Department of the Army and the EPA intend that the
proposed rule provided for public comments will be fully consistent
with the Clean Water Act's objective to restore and maintain water
quality.
Question. Will you commit that your replacement rule will not
increase water pollution compared with the Clean Water Rule?
Answer. The Department of the Army and the EPA intend that the
proposed rule provided for public comments will be fully consistent
with the Clean Water Act's objective to restore and maintain water
quality.
Question. According to the most recent Unified Agenda of Regulatory
and Deregulatory Actions, EPA expects to propose its replacement
definition of ``waters of the United States'' in August 2018 and
finalize it in September 2019. But, in our hearing, you indicated that
it would be proposed in May or June and finalized by the end of 2018.
When EPA and the Army Corps proposed to repeal the 2015 Clean Water
Rule, the agencies said, ``[t]he scope of CWA jurisdiction is an issue
of great national importance and therefore the agencies will allow for
robust deliberations on the ultimate regulation.'' Your statement
during our hearing is completely inconsistent with the notion of
``robust deliberations.'' Will you commit to conducting at least as
much outreach to diverse stakeholders as the agency did during the
Clean Water Rule rulemaking and to providing at least as much time to
receive public input on any proposal as the agency did during the Clean
Water Rule process?
Answer. The Department of the Army and the EPA intend to continue
our extensive outreach to States, Tribes, and other stakeholders
following publication of the proposed rule.
biomass carbon policy
Question. EPA's recently announced policy to treat all biomass from
managed forests as carbon neutral disregards important science-based
distinctions made by the Scientific Advisory Board.
On what scientific studies are you basing this decision? Why is
your office ignoring the best available science when it comes to
biomass energy?
Answer. EPA's statement on the treatment of biogenic CO2
from stationary sources that use forest biomass from energy production
is not a scientific determination and does not revise or amend any
scientific determinations that EPA has previously made. Further, EPA
will continue to work through these complex issues alongside
information from our science advisors.
Question. Can you please provide a timeline for further regulatory
action that will utilize the conclusions of the memo dated 4.23.18 and
titled ``EPA's Treatment of Biogenic Carbon Dioxide (CO2)
Emissions from Stationary Sources that Use Forest Biomass for Energy
Production''?
Answer. EPA is currently considering how this policy may be
implemented in the relevant regulatory contexts; while there is
currently no firm timeframe for any forthcoming actions, the Agency
will keep the committee apprised of its progress.
pfas and pfoa
Question. You said you were ``not aware that there has been some
holding back of the [ATSDR PFAS] report. I think it's important to have
all information in the marketplace.'' Since you agree it's important to
have all information available, please immediately provide the
unaltered original report to the Committee and post it on EPA's
website.
Answer. The Agency is committed to continuing to participate in and
contribute to a coordinated approach on per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) across the Federal Government. ATSDR released the
report on June 20, 2018, after coordinating with the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and several other Federal agencies. The report
contains ATSDR toxicological profiles (or Tox Profiles) on four PFAS.
EPA looks forward to continuing to collaborate with ATSDR and all our
Federal partners as we work together to protect public
health.Thereportis currently available at: https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/
toxprofiles/tp.asp?id=1117&tid=237. A link to ATSDR's key messages and
other information on the PFAS assessments, is available on EPA's
website at: https://www.epa.gov/pfas.
Question. You told the Committee ``we haven't taken action, with
respect to 107 under CERCLA, where it would be a hazardous substance,
that would allow us to go in and require cleanup by responsible
parties.'' Please confirm for the Committee that you will take
immediate action to designate PFAS as a hazardous substance, so cleanup
can be assured under section 107 of CERCLA.
Answer. On May 22nd, Administrator Pruitt opened the National
Leadership Summit on per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) by
announcing four steps the Agency plans to take following the Summit.
This included beginning the process to determine whether to propose
designating PFOA and PFOS as ``hazardous substances'' through one of
the available statutory mechanisms, including potentially CERCLA
Section 102. Clean Water Act Section 307(a) and Section 311 are two of
the other statutory mechanisms that the Agency is evaluating, but has
not yet made a final decision on which mechanism is most appropriate.
In addition, after the meeting, the agency assembled a cross-agency
workgroup to consider current tools for identifying certain PFAS
substances as hazardous substances including eligibility for liability
under CERCLA Section 107. The workgroup will consider which tools are
most effective and will prepare options/recommendations to EPA's senior
leaders.
Question. You shared with the Committee your concern about
environmental contamination by PFASs and suggested the need for EPA to
help States address the problem. Can you commit to promptly designating
PFAS as a toxic pollutant under Clean Water Act section 307(a) and as a
hazardous substance under section 311 of that Act to ensure that water
discharges and spills of PFAS are controlled or prevented?
Answer. On May 22, 2018, Administrator Pruitt opened the National
Leadership Summit on per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) by
announcing four steps the Agency plans to take following the Summit.
This included beginning the process to propose designating PFOA and
PFOS as ``hazardous substances'' through one of the available statutory
mechanisms, including potentially CERCLA Section 102. Clean Water Act
Section 307(a) and Section 311 are two of the other statutory
mechanisms that the Agency is evaluating, but has not yet made a final
decision on which mechanism is most appropriate.
Question. States have requested that EPA develop and validate
analytical methods to detect in water and soil the full array of the
numerous PFASs commonly used in commerce. Will you commit to making
swift development and validation of such methods a top priority for the
agency?
Answer. Yes, EPA is committed to swift development and validation
of such methods. For instance, the EPA's Office of Research and
Development is currently working to establish methods for PFAS testing,
detection, identification, and validation.
EPA is committed to continuing to work with our stakeholders to
identify new PFAS chemicals of concern and to develop analytical
methods where possible.
Question. Harvard researchers, using EPA's Unregulated Contaminant
Monitoring data, estimated that more than 6 million Americans have PFAS
in their drinking water at levels in excess of EPA's safety
recommendation, based on data from 2013-2015. Will you commit to
expanded drinking water monitoring of a fuller array of PFAS beyond the
six tested for earlier under the Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring
Regulation?
Answer. In accordance with Section 1445 of the Safe Drinking Water
Act, every 5 years the agency collects drinking water occurrence data
for up to 30 unregulated contaminants under the Unregulated Contaminant
Monitoring Rule (UCMR). The agency collected occurrence data on PFOA,
PFOS and an additional four PFAs under the third UCMR from 2013 to
2015. EPA is currently working to develop a new and/or modified
drinking water method to enable laboratories across the country to
measure multiple short-chain PFAS, including GenX. We anticipate that
the new method will be completed in early 2019. Once complete EPA will
consider incorporating monitoring requirements for these analytical
methods in a future UCMR.
Question. We need to learn the lesson from the 1970s about PCBs
that when highly persistent toxic pollutants are widely spread into the
environment, they cause widespread harm and are extremely expensive and
difficult to clean up. PFAS chemicals could be entering our homes and
our environment via imported products and neither EPA nor the public
has any way of knowing about those uses and exposures. Will you agree
to issue a Significant New Use Rule to ensure EPA is aware of all new
uses of PFAs, including use in articles containing them?
Answer. On January 21, 2015, EPA proposed a Significant New Use
Rule under TSCA to require manufacturers (including importers) of PFOA
and PFOA-related chemicals, including as part of articles, to notify
EPA at least 90 days before starting or resuming new uses of these
chemicals. As a result of changes made to section 5(a) of TSCA when
TSCA was amended in June 2016, EPA is now developing a supplemental
proposed SNUR for the import of certain long-chain perfluoroalkyl
carboxylate (LCPFAC) chemical substances as part of categories of
certain articles.
Question. How many PFAS are currently on the TSCA Inventory or in
use in commerce within the United States and in what amounts?
Answer. The TSCA Inventory includes 1,223 PFAS substances, and 553
are currently designated as ``active'' (Active Inventory reporting does
not conclude until October 2018). Current production volume is not
known for many of these chemicals as they do not reach the volume
trigger for reporting under Chemical Data Reporting.
Question. How many PFAS have been cleared through the New Chemicals
Program under TSCA?
Answer. Of the 1,223 PFAS substances on the TSCA Inventory, 549
were added via the New Chemicals Program. More than 1,000 additional
PFAS substances were reviewed under the New Chemical Program but (1)
manufacturing never commenced (EPA did not receive a Notice of
Commencement (NOC)) or (2) were submitted in exemption notices (e.g.,
Low Volume) and were not added to the TSCA inventory, consistent with
procedures for such exemptions. A smaller number of these also may have
been withdrawn from review by the submitter.
Question. Will you commit to not allowing new PFASs on the market
under the TSCA New Chemicals Program?
Answer. With amended TSCA, Congress established a process requiring
EPA to thoroughly review and make affirmative determinations on new
chemical notices, including new PFAS chemicals. The goal of EPA's New
Chemicals Review program is to ensure that new chemicals do not present
unreasonable risks to human health or the environment under their
conditions of use before they are allowed to enter the market, while
providing a review process that is timely and facilitates technological
innovation and safer chemical manufacturing. In reviewing a new
chemical notice, EPA uses scientific information, technical procedures,
methods, protocols and approaches consistent with best available
science to assesses the chemical ``under the conditions of use,'' which
TSCA defines as the circumstances under which a chemical is ``intended,
known or reasonably foreseen to be manufactured, processed, distributed
in commerce, used, or disposed of.'' If EPA determines that a new PFAS
chemical substance ``presents an unreasonable risk,'' ``may present an
unreasonable risk,'' or has ``insufficient information'' under TSCA
section 5(a)(3), then EPA will issue an order to prohibit or limit the
manufacture, processing, distribution in commerce, use, or disposal of
the chemical substance to the extent necessary to protect against an
unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment. EPA
individually reviews each new chemical notice it receives to make the
determination required under section 5(a)(3).
Question. Of the PFAS in commerce, for how many does EPA have
animal studies examining reproductive toxicity, immunotoxicity, or
carcinogenicity?
Answer. EPA is currently receiving reporting data on TSCA chemicals
that have been in commerce for the past 10 years. This reporting is
required under the Active/Inactive Inventory Reporting rule finalized
in June 2017. The reporting period is almost final and to date, 553
PFAS chemicals have been reported as active.
One of EPA's databases, the Chemical Assessment Portal (CAP), has
testing information on 406 PFAS chemicals. We do not know yet how many
of these chemicals will be reported as ``active'' under the new
reporting requirement. However, of these 406 chemicals, 124 have
information on genotoxicity, 1 has information on carcinogenicity, 8
have reproductive toxicity data, and 7 have information on
developmental toxicity. CAP is just one of several databases and other
sources of possible information on PFAS chemicals. EPA supports the
need for more analyses on PFAS chemicals in commerce. We are working
diligently to review other databases to understand which PFAS chemicals
have environmental, health, and safety information. At the same time,
EPA is engaged in scientific research and partnering with others to
acquire more information about PFAS in commerce and in the environment.
censored science
Question. The recently proposed ``Strengthening Transparency in
Regulatory Science'' rule has been on the wish-list of industry for a
long time as it could lead to weaker, less-scientifically based
regulations to the detriment of public health. In the EPA Press Release
announcing the Proposed Rule, EPA implies this proposal is consistent
with recommendations on data transparency from major scientific
journals including Science, Nature, the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. However, a joint statement signed by the Editors-
in-Chief of these publications in response to the Proposed Rule said:
``It does not strengthen policies based on scientific evidence to limit
the scientific evidence that can inform them; rather, it is paramount
that the full suite of relevant science vetted through peer review,
which includes ever more rigorous features, inform the landscape of
decisionmaking. Excluding relevant studies simply because they do not
meet rigid transparency standards will adversely affect decisionmaking
processes.''
Did you consult with the leaders of the journals you cited in your
press release prior to release of the Proposed Rule?
Answer. EPA accepted public comment on the proposed rule
``Strengthening Transparency in Regulatory Science'' through August 16,
2018 and will not respond to comments and questions outside of this
formal process. The Agency values this public input and looks forward
to considering these comments in the rulemaking process.
For more information on the draft rule, visit: https://www.epa.gov/
osa/
strengthening-transparency-regulatory-science and https://
www.Federalregister.gov/documents/2018/04/30/2018-09078/strengthening-
transparency-in-regulatory-science.
Question. Please provide a list of all scientists, science-based
organizations and associations, lobbyists, industry trade associations,
and industry representatives you consulted in developing the Proposed
Rule.
Answer. EPA accepted public comment on the proposed rule
``Strengthening Transparency in Regulatory Science'' through August 16,
2018 and will not respond to comments and questions outside of this
formal process. The Agency values this public input and looks forward
to considering these comments in the rulemaking process.
For more information on the draft rule, visit: https://www.epa.gov/
osa/
strengthening-transparency-regulatory-science and https://
www.Federalregister.gov/documents/2018/04/30/2018-09078/strengthening-
transparency-in-regulatory-science.
It has been reported that EPA staff analysis of a similar policy
(HONEST Act) that governs which scientific analyses can be used by the
Agency in regulatory proceedings found the costs to EPA of implementing
such policy would be enormous--``$250 million a year for the next few
years.'' This seems to undermine your goal of making EPA ``lean.''
Question. Why did EPA opt to not release this staff analysis of
implementing a policy like the HONEST Act? Or why did EPA fail to
complete a new analysis of the costs of implementing the Proposed Rule?
Answer. EPA accepted public comment on the proposed rule
``Strengthening Transparency in Regulatory Science'' through August 16,
2018 and will not respond to comments and questions outside of this
formal process. The Agency values this public input and looks forward
to considering these comments in the rulemaking process.
For more information on the draft rule, visit: https://www.epa.gov/
osa/
strengthening-transparency-regulatory-science and https://
www.Federalregister.gov/documents/2018/04/30/2018-09078/strengthening-
transparency-in-regulatory-science.
Question. Will you commit to providing a quantitative assessment of
the estimated costs to EPA of implementing the Proposed Rule?
Answer. EPA accepted public comment on the proposed rule
``Strengthening Transparency in Regulatory Science'' through August 16,
2018 and will not respond to comments and questions outside of this
formal process. The Agency values this public input and looks forward
to considering these comments in the rulemaking process.
For more information on the draft rule, visit: https://www.epa.gov/
osa/
strengthening-transparency-regulatory-science and https://
www.Federalregister.gov/documents/2018/04/30/2018-09078/strengthening-
transparency-in-regulatory-science.
Numerous organizations and scientific experts have been
highlighting consequential human health studies that could be excluded
from consideration by EPA under the Proposed Rule. A study that looked
at the high level of neurotoxic mercury found in newborns in the Great
Lakes area, for example, would be excluded if the Proposed Rule is
finalized.
Question. Given the sensitivity of the unborn to pollution, in
particular, will EPA commit to allowing all peer-reviewed, scientific
studies that show harmful impacts to the unborn from various forms of
pollution to continue to be used in regulatory decisionmaking, as
appropriate, regardless of whether they meet the so-called
``transparency'' guidelines you are trying to establish under the
Proposed Rule? Why or why not?
Answer. EPA accepted public comment on the proposed rule
``Strengthening Transparency in Regulatory Science'' through August 16,
2018 and will not respond to comments and questions outside of this
formal process. The Agency values this public input and looks forward
to considering these comments in the rulemaking process.
For more information on the draft rule, visit: https://www.epa.gov/
osa/
strengthening-transparency-regulatory-science and https://
www.Federalregister.gov/documents/2018/04/30/2018-09078/strengthening-
transparency-in-regulatory-science.
Question. Have you prepared a list of all scientific analyses that
EPA has used in regulatory decisionmaking that would be excluded under
the requirements of the Proposed Rule? Will you commit to release that
for public review?
Answer. EPA accepted public comment on the proposed rule
``Strengthening Transparency in Regulatory Science'' through August 16,
2018 and will not respond to comments and questions outside of this
formal process. The Agency values this public input and looks forward
to considering these comments in the rulemaking process.
For more information on the draft rule, visit: https://www.epa.gov/
osa/
strengthening-transparency-regulatory-science and https://
www.Federalregister.gov/documents/2018/04/30/2018-09078/strengthening-
transparency-in-regulatory-science.
cost benefit analysis
Question. In your regulatory impact analysis (RIA) for the proposed
rule to repeal the Clean Power Plan, the EPA offers alternative
analyses to highlight ``important uncertainties'' about the
relationship between exposure to fine particles (PM2.5) and
the risk of premature death at lower concentrations. For one
alternative, the EPA assumes that the risk of premature death falls to
zero at PM2.5 levels used in key epidemiological studies.
For the second alternative, the EPA assumes that the risk of death
falls to zero below the NAAQS for annual average concentrations of
PM2.5. The World Health Organization, in contrast, concludes
the following about exposure to fine particles: ``There is no evidence
of a safe level of exposure or a threshold below which no adverse
health effects occur.''
Which scientific studies are you using to justify your assumptions
about the lack of health effects from exposure to PM2.5
below certain levels?
Answer. Methodologies used in the regulatory impact analysis (RIA)
for the proposed review of the Clean Power Plan follow well-established
practices. The alternative approaches to examining forgone PM benefits
presented in the RIA were designed to increase transparency about the
distribution of the estimated forgone benefits. Illustrating the
impacts on the total net benefits at various PM2.5 cut
points also provide information useful to the public in understanding
the uncertainty of benefits at lower ambient PM2.5 levels.
In general, EPA is more confident in the size of the risks
estimated from simulated PM2.5 concentrations that coincide
with the bulk of the observed PM concentrations in the epidemiological
studies that are used to estimate the benefits. Likewise, EPA is less
confident in the risk EPA estimates from simulated PM2.5
concentrations that fall below the bulk of the observed data in these
studies. Furthermore, when setting the 2012 PM NAAQS, the Administrator
also acknowledged greater uncertainty in specifying the ``magnitude and
significance'' of PM-related health risks at PM concentrations below
the NAAQS. As noted in the preamble to the 2012 PM NAAQS final rule,
``EPA concludes that it is not appropriate to place as much confidence
in the magnitude and significance of the associations over the lower
percentiles of the distribution in each study as at and around the
long-term mean concentration.'' (78 FR 3154, 15 January 2013). In
general, we are more confident in the size of the risks we estimate
from simulated PM2.5 concentrations that coincide with the
bulk of the observed PM concentrations in the epidemiological studies
that are used to estimate the benefits. Likewise, we are less confident
in the risk we estimate from simulated PM2.5 concentrations
that fall below the bulk of the observed data in these studies.
This greater confidence does not necessarily imply a concentration
threshold below which there are no effects. These alternative analyses
are designed to increase transparency rather than imply a specific
lower bound on the size of the health co-benefits. EPA sought and
received public comment on a variety of methodological issues in the
RIA, including: how best to treat analytically the underlying
uncertainties; how best to use empirical data to quantitatively
characterize uncertainty in PM2.5 co-benefits that accrue to
populations who live in areas with lower ambient concentrations; and
the approach to estimating and reporting PM-related foregone benefits.
As noted in the RIA as well as EPA's air quality trends resources,
the U.S. has experienced dramatic improvements in fine particulate
matter trends, which the Agency expects to continue through the period
of analysis. In this RIA, EPA continued to rely on the same
epidemiological studies related to estimating PM2.5
mortality effects, and the transparent cut points were derived from the
2012 annual fine particulate matter NAAQS, set at a level requisite to
protect public health with an adequate margin of safety, and the Lowest
Measured Level (LML) of the Krewski et al. (2009) study. We fully
expect that fewer people would be exposed to high PM2.5 concentrations
(U.S. EPA, 2011a; Fann et al. 2017). Indeed, we have projected that by
2025 most of the U.S. will attain the 2012 PM2.5 NAAQS due
to existing Federal measures and a large fraction of the U.S.
population is projected to live in locations where annual mean
PM2.5 concentrations are below the Annual PM NAAQS and above
the LML of the Krewski et al. (2009) long-term mortality study (12 mg/
m3 and 5.8 mg/m3, respectively).
Question. Who funded those studies?
Answer. EPA's analyses related to PM2.5 were based on
the Krewski et al. (2009) and Lepeule et al. (2012) long-term
epidemiological studies. Krewski et al. (2009) was a research report
from the Health Effects Institute (HEI) in which project funding
support was provided by: HEI; the National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences (NIEHS); the California Air Resources Board; and the
U.S. EPA. Lepeule et al. (2012) was supported by grants from U.S. EPA
and NIEHS.
Question. OMB Circular A-4 directs agencies to consider any
important ancillary benefits in their cost-benefit analyses of
rulemakings. In the agency's press release for the proposed Clean Power
Plan repeal, you asserted that the Obama administration ``relied
heavily on reductions in other pollutants emitted by power plants,
essentially hiding the true net cost of the CPP by claiming benefits
from reducing pollutants that had nothing to do with the rule's stated
purpose.'' On what legal basis are you asserting that the agency should
not consider co-benefits when doing a regulatory cost-benefit analysis?
Answer. EPA continues to consider costs and benefits, including
ancillary co-benefits, in a manner consistent with the Clean Air Act,
relevant executive orders, and OMB circulars. As noted in the previous
response, EPA has also transparently incorporated important sensitivity
analyses and uncertainties in its regulatory impact analyses.
Question. In April 2018, EPA submitted a draft proposal titled
``Increasing Consistency and Transparency in Considering Costs and
Benefits in the Rulemaking Process'' to OMB for review.
Please provide a list of the non-agency stakeholders with whom EPA
consulted to develop this draft proposal.
Answer. EPA regularly receives public comments regarding the
consideration of costs and benefits in agency decisionmaking. For
example, on April 13, 2017, EPA issued a broad request for comment on
regulations appropriate for repeal, replacement, or modification per
Executive Order 13777. In response, many stakeholders commented on how
EPA considers costs in developing regulations. On June 13, 2018, EPA
published an Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking seeking more
information relating to the consideration of costs and benefits. EPA
has received multiple public comments in response to that notice, and
continues to review and assess this feedback as this proposed rule
develops. Input from stakeholders is available in the docket for this
Notice, which is available at EPA-HQ-OA-2018-0107.
FreedomWorks and Rep. Bill Posey are urging OMB to waive a
requirement for the EPA to complete a RIA for the pending glider
vehicle rulemaking. They argue that a RIA isn't necessary because this
is a ``deregulatory'' action.
Question. Do you believe than a RIA is necessary for the glider
vehicle rulemaking? Why or why not?
Answer. EPA is developing a glider rule consistent with all
applicable administrative requirements, such as OMB circular A-4.
Question. Do you believe that Executive Order 12866 should apply to
deregulatory rulemakings? Why or why not?
Answer. Executive Order 12866 applies to any action that OMB
designates a ``significant regulatory action'' as defined in that
Order. Accordingly, if an EPA action is designated significant under
this Executive Order, EPA will follow the requirements of the Order.
renewable fuel standard
Question. You recently confirmed to the House Energy & Commerce
Committee that in 2017 you received 25 ``hardship exemption'' petitions
that would excuse refineries from compliance with the RFS for the
compliance year of 2016 and you have received upwards of 30 in 2018 for
compliance year 2017.
Have more petitions been submitted since then, and how many of
these exemptions have you granted to date?
Answer. EPA received a total of 20 small refinery hardship
exemption petitions for the 2016 RFS compliance year, and granted 19.
To date, EPA has received a total of 33 petitions for the 2017
compliance year, and has granted 29.
Question. By how many gallons do they reduce the amount of ethanol
or biodiesel blending that would need to occur to meet the original RVO
for 2016 and 2017?
Answer. For the 2016 compliance year, the total exempted renewable
fuel volume obligation was 790 million RINs. For the 2017 compliance
year, the total exempted renewable fuel volume obligation was 1.46
billion RINs.
Question. Last fiscal year, this Committee specifically directed
you to either follow the Department of Energy's recommendations on
small refinery exemptions or to submit a report in writing to both the
Appropriations Committee and the Secretary of Energy 10 days before
issuing an exemption explaining the Agency's position.
Has DOE made any recommendations to you to grant specific
exemptions over the last year?
Answer. Yes, DOE made recommendations that EPA grant exemptions to
specific small refineries for the 2016 and 2017 compliance year.
Question. If not, why did you not submit these statutory required
reports to this Committee prior to granting any exemptions?
Answer. EPA's decisions to grant (either partial or in full) have
been consistent with DOE recommendations; therefore, EPA did not submit
any explanatory reports because the Agency did not believe a report was
warranted based on the criteria established by the pertinent language.
Question. EPA recently claimed to the press that it did not change
the criteria for granting exemptions from past years.
If this is the case, how has this EPA been able to grant twice as
many exemptions as in the past?
Answer. This question is the subject of ongoing litigation filed in
the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit. See Advanced Biofuels
Association v. EPA, No. 18-1115 (D.C. Cir.) (May 1, 2018). EPA does not
comment on topics that are the subject of ongoing litigation.
Question. Were changes made to EPA's threshold for determining
``disproportionate economic hardship''?
Answer. This question is the subject of ongoing litigation filed in
the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit. See Advanced Biofuels
Association v. EPA, No. 18-1115 (D.C. Cir.) (May 1, 2018). EPA does not
comment on topics that are the subject of ongoing litigation.
staff disparaging other cabinet secretaries
Question. During the hearing, you stated that you took immediate
actions internally to investigate whether staff in your communications
office was shopping negative stories about other cabinet officials,
namely Secretary Zinke.
Answer. EPA's Chief of Staff inquired into this matter, including
speaking with EPA personnel and Department of Interior leadership to
ensure this was not done and that there are no impediments to EPA's and
Department of Interior's relationship.
Question. Please provide all documents and emails that pertain to
that investigation as well as all relevant documents, emails and
information related to your staff and Secretary Zinke.
Answer. EPA is in the process of searching, collecting, and
reviewing documents related to this event. If this search uncovers any
information, the Agency will deliver the documents to you once
available.
epa employees granted permission to work part-time
Question. Since the beginning of the Trump Administration, how many
non-career employees of EPA have been granted permission or implicitly
allowed--whether through waivers or other means--to perform work for
compensation outside the Federal Government and/or to work part-time
for EPA?
Answer. Two non-career appointees have sought and been approved for
compensated outside activity. Agency records indicate there are no non-
career appointees that are on part-time status.
Question. In addition, please provide:
The names and positions of all such individuals, their start dates
at EPA, and the date ranges during which they were or are authorized to
work part-time for EPA and/or to perform work for compensation outside
the Federal Government.
Answer. (1) Patrick Davis, Special Assistant, Office of the
Administrator, started 01/20/17. Outside activity granted on 02/03/17.
Confirmation of continuing approval, given change in official duties,
granted on 6/28/18. (2) John Konkus, Deputy Associate Administrator for
Public Affairs, started 01/23/17. Outside activity granted on 08/01/17.
As it happens, Mr. Konkus did not receive any compensation or engage in
any outside activity in CY 2017, and on 04/20/18, confirmed that he was
rescinding his request and approval.
Question. The documented (in government paperwork, emails, memos or
other records) reasons for allowing each such individual the
opportunity to work outside EPA.
Answer. See attached.
Question. Copies of all documents, including waivers, letters, and
emails, related to such waivers/permission.
Answer. See attached.
Question. Copies of all documents placing any restrictions upon
such individuals' outside work, including any terms that address
identifying, reporting or avoiding conflicts-of-interest.
Answer. See attached.
Question. Copies of any guidance provided by or to such individuals
describing the scope or nature of their non-government
responsibilities, including any limitations on the scope and amount of
their compensation.
Answer. See attached.
Question. For each such individual, with respect to outside work
performed during the period of the individual's employment by EPA and
to the extent this information is available to EPA (e.g., information
disclosed on annual financial disclosure forms), the amount of
compensation received for such work (within ranges, if reported as
such), the time spent on such work, whether the work is performed for
clients with actual or potential business before EPA, and if so, the
name of each such client or industry.''
Answer. Both of these employees are obliged to complete public
financial disclosure reports. As required by the Ethics In Government
Act (EIGA), filers must report income ``from whatever source derived,
including but not limited to . . . compensation for services.'' 5
U.S.C. app. Sec. 109 (7). To obtain a copy of the individuals'
financial disclosure reports, which are releasable to the public under
EIGA, requestors must submit an OGE-201 to [emailprotected] Copies of
the form can be obtained at www.oge.gov.
ATTACHMENTS
Questions Submitted by Senator Dianne Feinstein
border pollution in the tijuana river valley
Question. Due to geography and inadequate wastewater infrastructure
on the Mexican side of the border, untreated sewage, trash, and
sediment routinely flow into U.S. communities. These toxic
transboundary flows jeopardize the health of U.S. Border Patrol
officers and U.S. residents, requiring the regular closure of U.S.
beaches and endangering sensitive wildlife habitat. According to some
reports, 80 agents at the Imperial Beach Border Patrol Station were
sickened last year from toxic transboundary runoff that could be
addressed through EPA's U.S.-Mexico Border Water Infrastructure
Program.
EPA's U.S.-Mexico Border Water Infrastructure Program funds
competitive grants to help finance critical infrastructure projects,
including construction of sewage collectors in Mexico to reduce
polluted runoff to the U.S., wastewater treatment plants on both sides
of the border, and residential and commercial sewer connections on both
sides of the border to prevent illegal dumping into rivers and streams.
Given these binational challenges, I strongly support funding for
EPA's Border Water Infrastructure Program, which will not only improve
the quality of life for U.S. communities along the border, but also
improve the safety of U.S. Border Patrol officers.
In light of the health and safety concerns that these transboundary
flows pose for U.S. citizens and Border Patrol officers, why does your
budget proposal eliminate funding for the U.S.-Mexico Border Water
Infrastructure Program?
Answer. The proposed program elimination is part of the
administration's overall goal to focus on funding core environmental
programs with a national scope. Other EPA sources of funding are
available to support these efforts in U.S. communities along the
border, most notably the Clean Water and Drinking Water State Revolving
Funds.
Question. If this program were eliminated, how would you improve
conditions for U.S. Border Patrol officers working in polluted areas?
Answer. EPA is working with stakeholders including the
International Boundary and Water Commission (IBWC), Department of
State, U.S. Customs and Border Patrol managers and agents, the North
American Development Bank (NADB), and State and local officials to
identify diplomatic and financial mechanisms to minimize transboundary
contamination.
epa region 9 appointment
Question. On May 17, 2018, I sent a letter regarding Mr. Mike
Stoker's appointment to be Region 9 Administrator, given the questions
surrounding his desire to work remotely from Los Angeles. I am
concerned about the costs associated with such a remote work
arrangement and whether it would negatively impact the mission of EPA
Region 9.
On May 18, 2018, Mr. Stoker was officially appointed EPA Region 9
Administrator.
Please provide any information as to the criteria and
decisionmaking process if Mr. Stoker has in fact requested to work
remotely instead of out of the San Francisco headquarters full time.
Answer. Mr. Stoker's official duty station is San Francisco,
California, the location of EPA's Region IX headquarters. EPA intends
to follow all applicable rules and policies regarding the conditions of
Mr. Stoker's service.
Question. Would tax payers be expected to pay for Mr. Stoker's
travel costs when he travels to San Francisco to meet with his own
senior staff?
Answer. Mr. Stoker's official duty station is San Francisco,
California, the location of EPA's Region IX headquarters. EPA intends
to follow all applicable rules and policies regarding the conditions of
Mr. Stoker's service.
Question. Does the EPA have any estimate of how much travel would
be required?
Answer. Mr. Stoker's official duty station is San Francisco,
California, the location of EPA's Region IX headquarters. EPA intends
to follow all applicable rules and policies regarding the conditions of
Mr. Stoker's service.
Question. To the best of my knowledge, Mr. Stoker lives in Santa
Barbara and has no plans to move to closer to Los Angeles. Is Mr.
Stoker planning on commuting 2 to 3 hours to the Los Angeles office
each way every day?
Answer. Mr. Stoker's official duty station is San Francisco,
California, the location of EPA's Region IX headquarters. EPA intends
to follow all applicable rules and policies regarding the conditions of
Mr. Stoker's service.
Question. What plans does the EPA have in place to keep Mr.
Stoker's travel costs to a reasonable level?
Answer. Mr. Stoker's official duty station is San Francisco,
California, the location of EPA's Region IX headquarters. EPA intends
to follow all applicable rules and policies regarding the conditions of
Mr. Stoker's service.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jack Reed
pfas
Question. On April 13, 2018, I wrote to you, along with 24 of my
colleagues, to urge the EPA to declare a Maximum Contaminant Level
(MCL) for Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) based on rigorous
scientific evidence. My office received a response on May 11, 2018
stating that the EPA was ``evaluating this monitoring data and
available peer reviewed studies . . . to determine if a national
primary drinking water regulation should be promulgated.'' On May 14,
2018, Politico published an article asserting that staff from the EPA
and the White House sought to block publication of an assessment of
these chemicals by HHS's Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry (ATSDR).
Will you commit to ceasing all efforts by the EPA to block the
ATSDR assessment from becoming public and instead support its immediate
release?
Answer. Addressing Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) is
one of EPA's top priorities and the Agency is committed to continuing
to participate in and contribute to a coordinated approach across the
Federal Government. ATSDR released the report on June 20, 2018, after
coordinating with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA and several
other Federal agencies. The report contains ATSDR toxicological
profiles (or Tox Profiles) on four PFAS. EPA looks forward to
continuing to collaborate with ATSDR and all of our Federal partners as
we work together to protect public health.
Question. The EPA issued a voluntary standard in 2016, but a draft
of this assessment indicates that exposure to PFAS chemicals could
endanger public health at levels far below that standard. If scientific
evidence is showing that the standard is too high to adequately protect
the public's health, what immediate steps is EPA taking to update the
standard as quickly as possible?
Answer. A key priority for EPA is to further the understanding of
human health impacts of PFAS to support States and local communities.
EPA has published drinking water Health Advisories for PFOA and PFOS
that provide technical guidance to State agencies, public water
systems, and public health officials on health effects, analytical
methodologies, and treatment technologies to inform decisionmaking to
address drinking water contamination. As the science continues to
evolve, EPA will evaluate the need to revise or update Health
Advisories as appropriate. It is important to note that ATSDR's Minimum
Risk Levels (MRLs) and EPA's Health Advisories (HAs) are two different
tools that are used in different situations. MRLs are intended to be
used to help public health professionals determine areas and
populations potentially at risk for health effects from exposure to a
particular chemical. An MRL is an estimate of the amount of a chemical
a person can eat, drink, or breathe each day without a detectable risk
to health. MRLs are unique to each substance. These are used as
screening levels by public health professionals. EPA's HAs, on the
other hand, provide information on contaminants that can cause human
health effects and are known or anticipated to occur in drinking water.
At the PFAS National Leadership Summit, Administrator Pruitt
announced that the Agency will initiate steps to evaluate the need for
a Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) (that would be legally enforceable
nationwide) for PFOA and PFOS as laid out in the Safe Drinking Water
Act (SDWA). As a first step, the Agency has already included PFOA and
PFOS as priority contaminants on the Contaminant Candidate List for
regulatory consideration. The Agency also collected monitoring data for
six PFAS compounds, including PFOA and PFOS, from drinking water
systems across the country, from 2013 to 2015, as part of the third
Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule (UCMR).
The next step is to publish a preliminary regulatory determination
on whether to regulate the contaminants. To do so, the Agency is
evaluating available information to determine if PFOA and PFOS meet the
three criteria for regulation in accordance with the SDWA: (1) whether
a contaminant may have adverse health effects; (2) whether a
contaminant is known to occur or there is a substantially likelihood
that it will occur in public water systems with a frequency and at
levels of concern; and (3) whether, in the sole judgement of the
Administrator, there is a meaningful opportunity for health risk
reduction through a national drinking water regulation.
Question. A national standard for PFAS would provide much-needed
certainty to move forward with remediation activities and protection
regimes for drinking water systems. Establishing an MCL for
Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS) and Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA), two
types of PFAS, is especially urgent for the Department of Defense, as
it awaits the MCL to know what standard it needs to use to remediate
and clean up affected military installations. Do you agree that the EPA
should replace the voluntary standard with something that is legally-
enforceable nationwide?
Answer. EPA is currently conducting the next step under the SDWA,
which is to develop a preliminary regulatory determination on whether
to regulate the contaminants. EPA is required by the SDWA to publish a
preliminary determination and provide an opportunity for public comment
prior to making a final determination to regulate. To do so, the Agency
is evaluating available information to determine if PFOA and PFOS meet
the three criteria for regulation in accordance with the SDWA: (1)
whether a contaminant may have adverse health effects; (2) whether a
contaminant is known to occur or there is a substantially likelihood
that it will occur in public water systems with a frequency and at
levels of concern; and (3) whether, in the sole judgement of the
Administrator, there is a meaningful opportunity for health risk
reduction through a national drinking water regulation.
Question. When will you issue an MCL?
Answer. At the PFAS National Leadership Summit, Administrator
Pruitt announced that the Agency will initiate steps to evaluate the
need for a Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) (that would be legally
enforceable nationwide) for PFOA and PFOS as laid out in the Safe
Drinking Water Act (SDWA). As a first step, the Agency has already
included PFOA and PFOS as priority contaminants on the Contaminant
Candidate List for regulatory consideration. The Agency also collected
monitoring data for six PFAS compounds, including PFOA and PFOS, from
drinking water systems across the country, from 2013 to 2015, as part
of the third Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule (UCMR). The next
step required by the SDWA, which EPA is currently working on, is to
issue a preliminary regulatory determination for public comment.
vehicle emissions standards
Question. You have announced your intention to weaken fuel economy
and vehicle emissions standards for cars and trucks, and have
challenged California's authority under the Clean Air Act to set its
own standards. Rhode Island is one of the 12 other States that aligns
with California, and together these States represent over one-third of
the Nation's auto market. During a recent meeting with automakers,
President Trump reportedly directed his Administration to work with
California on these standards.
Are you working with California toward a resolution that will
preserve the ability of States like Rhode Island to pursue cleaner car
standards?
Answer. EPA will continue to engage with all stakeholders,
including California and other States, with the goal of retaining a
single, national program.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jon Tester
asbestos
Question. You know that the community of Libby has struggled with
the direct health impacts of asbestos, with the highest rate of
asbestos-related diseases in the country. This matter is deadly
serious. Your asbestos evaluation scoping document cited evidence from
the National Toxicology Program, the International Agency for Research
on Cancer, the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, as
well as past work from the EPA. These reports lay out the truth:
asbestos causes mesothelioma, and a whole variety of cardiovascular,
pulmonary, immunodeficiency diseases. People are losing their lives.
If the agency is still on track to finalize its evaluation in
December of 2019, what is the absolute soonest asbestos could be pulled
from the market? Do you believe that taking asbestos of the market
before then would save lives?
Answer. The Agency is on track to finalize the risk evaluation for
asbestos as required by the Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the
21st Century Act. Upon completion of the risk evaluation, if
unreasonable risk is identified, EPA is required to take action to
propose a Section 6(a) rule within 1 year of the completion of the risk
evaluation and to publish a final rule within one additional year
(extendable in the aggregate for two additional years).
In addition to the risk evaluation, on June 13, 2018, EPA proposed
a Significant New Use Rule for certain uses of asbestos (including
asbestos-containing goods) that would require manufacturers and
importers to receive EPA approval before starting or resuming
manufacturing, including importing or processing, of new uses of
asbestos. Under the proposed rule, if approval is sought under the
review process, EPA would evaluate the conditions of use of asbestos
and, when necessary, take actionto prohibit or limit the use. The
Proposed Rule may be found at https://www.Federalregister.gov/
documents/2018/06/11/2018-12513/asbestos-significant-new-use-rule and
is available for public comment until August 10, 2018 (Docket: EPA-HQ-
OPPT-2018-0159).
Senator Murkowski. Again, we thank you for being with us
today and the level of cooperation that you have committed to.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Thank you very much. And with that, the subcommittee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:40 a.m., Wednesday, May 16, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]