- HEARING ON THE NOMINATION OF HAROLD B. PARKER OF NEW HAMPSHIRE TO BE FEDERAL COCHAIRPERSON OF THE NORTHERN BORDER REGIONAL COMMISSION
[Senate Hearing 115-381]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-381
HEARING ON THE NOMINATION OF HAROLD B. PARKER OF NEW HAMPSHIRE TO BE
FEDERAL COCHAIRPERSON OF THE NORTHERN BORDER REGIONAL COMMISSION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION
AND INFRASTRUCTURE
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
SEPTEMBER 6, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
32-678 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming, Chairman
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware,
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
Ranking Member
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
JONI ERNST, Iowa
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
Richard M. Russell, Majority Staff Director
Mary Frances Repko, Minority Staff Director
----------
Subcommittee on Transportation and Infrastructure
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma, Chairman
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland,
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
Ranking Member
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
JONI ERNST, Iowa
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming (ex officio)
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware (ex
officio)
[[Page (iii)]]
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
SEPTEMBER 6, 2018
OPENING STATEMENTS
Inhofe, Hon. James M., U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma...
1
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L., U.S. Senator from the State of Maryland
2
Sanders, Hon. Bernard, U.S. Senator from the State of Vermont,
prepared statement.............................................
50
WITNESSES
Shaheen, Hon. Jeanne, U.S. Senator from the State of New
Hampshire......................................................
3
Parker, Harold B., nominee to be Federal Cochairperson of the
Northern Border Regional Commission............................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
8
Responses to additional questions from:
Senator Sanders..........................................
12
Senator Gillibrand.......................................
13
[[Page (1)]]
HEARING ON THE NOMINATION OF HAROLD B. PARKER OF NEW HAMPSHIRE TO BE
FEDERAL COCHAIRPERSON OF THE NORTHERN BORDER REGIONAL COMMISSION
----------
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 6, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Environment and Public Works,
Subcommittee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m. in
room 406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. James M. Inhofe
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Senators Inhofe, Cardin, Boozman, Wicker, Ernst,
Gillibrand, and Carper.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES M. INHOFE,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA
Senator Inhofe. Our Subcommittee will come to order.
Let me see the order of things here.
OK, we are here today to consider the nomination of Harold
B. Parker--who I haven't seen for 15 years--to be the Cochair
of the Northern Border Regional Commission.
Congress authorized the Commission in the 2008 Farm Bill to
fund economic and community development in Maine, New
Hampshire, Vermont, and New York. The Commission works to
direct fund Federal appropriations toward State prioritized
economic and community development strategies and projects.
If confirmed, Mr. Parker will be one of five voting members
of the Commission, to include the Governors of Maine, New
Hampshire, Vermont, and New York.
Nominated by President Trump on July 27th, 2018, he
currently serves as Special Assistant for Intergovernmental
Affairs to New Hampshire Governor Chris Sununu, focusing on
issues of trade, security, and the economy. Previously, he has
served as a long-time congressional staffer for then
Congressman John Sununu, as well as Congressman Charles Bass.
Throughout his career, Mr. Parker has developed
relationships across New Hampshire and Canada, and those
relationships will serve him well in his role.
Governor Sununu wrote of Mr. Parker, ``Harold understands
the need for economic rejuvenation in the northern tier of New
York, Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine,'' and ``Mr. Parker has
worked to spur economic development and has spearheaded New
[[Page 2]]
Hampshire's efforts to attract Canadian business to move over
the border.''
Senator Shaheen is here today to introduce the nominee, and
as I said, we have received letters from both Democrats and
Republicans attesting to Mr. Parker's qualifications and to his
character.
Let's hear, first of all, from Senator Cardin for an
opening statement, then we will recognize you, Senator Shaheen,
for an introduction.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BENJAMIN L. CARDIN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MARYLAND
Senator Cardin. Senator Inhofe, first of all, thank you for
calling this hearing.
I do want to make an observation. It is normally not this
quiet on this hallway, but there is something else going on
today in the Senate on confirmation hearings which has a little
bit more attention than this nomination hearing.
But I want Mr. Parker to know that we very much appreciate
your willingness to serve in this very important position. We
know there is sacrifice involved in doing this, things that you
will be doing by being called upon for public service, and we
thank you for being willing to step forward to serve in this
very important role.
Mr. Chairman, I am going to be spending Saturday in the
western part of Maryland. I mention that because the
Appalachian Regional Commission, which is a similar commission
to the Northern Border Regional Commission, has been critically
important for economic growth in that part of Maryland.
I will be talking about a STEM program that is going to be
set up at Garrett College, which is the most further western
part of our State. The broadband Last Mile Connections has been
done through that commission and has really given economic hope
to the people of Western Maryland and the Appalachian region.
It is a wonderful community, but they need to have economic
futures for their families to be able to stay and live and work
in that area, and the Appalachian Regional Commission has been
a critical partner in making that a reality.
In the areas that are under the Northern Border Regional
Commission, you have similar challenges. I applaud those that
were in the Senate and House that initiated this effort. I know
Senator Shaheen has been critically involved in that both as
Governor and as Senator.
We look forward to hearing your vision as to how this
Commission can help that region, and I will be asking you
during the question period how we can learn from the different
regional commissions that we have in this country. We have
established one in Alaska; there is one in the Mississippi
Delta. It seems to me that we should be trying to learn from
each other.
The second area that I would mention, Mr. Chairman, is that
we have not had consistent support from this Administration in
funding these programs. The Appalachian Regional Commission was
zeroed out in the last budget by the President. We supported it
and put the money back in. The President included the funds in
this budget cycle, but in regards to the Northern Border
Regional Com
[[Page 3]]
mission it is my understanding the Administration has zeroed
out the funding.
We are committed to making sure the funding exists, but it
is a challenge, I guess, for the leader to figure out how do
you deal with OMB that hasn't exactly given you the broadest
support signal by the way they have presented their budget.
So these are interesting questions I hope we will have a
chance to get into, but I think you are going to find, Mr.
Parker, a very supportive Committee in regards to trying to
give you the tools you need to carry out your very important
assignment.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Cardin.
Senator Shaheen, you are recognized for an introduction.
STATEMENT OF HON. JEANNE SHAHEEN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
Senator Shaheen. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member Cardin and Senator Ernst. It is nice to be here
with you this morning. I am really pleased to have been asked
by Harold to introduce him. He has been nominated, as you
pointed out, to serve as the Federal Cochair of the Northern
Border Regional Commission.
I also want to recognize, behind me, Mark Scarano, who is
his predecessor, who is here to support Harold.
We have had a bipartisan approach in New Hampshire, and I
think in Congress, to these commissions, to the Northern Border
Regional Commission because it has, as you pointed out, Senator
Cardin, really had a substantial impact on communities in
northern New Hampshire, Vermont, New York, and Maine in helping
to create jobs and to support projects that improve the quality
of life for people in the northern parts of those four northern
New England and New York States.
During my time in the Senate, I have seen the NBRC grow
from an ambitious idea to a multi-million dollar collaboration
of State and Federal partners that help to assist in job
training activities and develop much needed public
infrastructure in the Granite State and in those communities
throughout the northern forest region.
As you pointed out, Senator Cardin, there has been an
effort to zero out funding for the NBRC, as well as some other
regional commissions, and on the Appropriations Committee we
have restored that funding and actually increased it in the
last budget cycle.
To continue the great work of the Commission, the next
Federal Cochair must have an extensive knowledge of the region,
a clear understanding of the challenges it faces, and an
insight into its potential for growth in the future, and in
this respect, I believe that Harold Parker is well suited for
the role.
Throughout his tenure in State and Federal Government,
Harold has worked in many capacities that required deep
engagement with New Hampshire's North Country communities. In
his current role as Special Assistant to the Governor for
Intergovernmental Affairs, Harold focuses heavily on issues of
trade, security, and the economy. Right now he is spearheading
an effort to craft an economic policy agreement between the
State of New Hampshire and
[[Page 4]]
the province of Quebec that would promote opportunities for
businesses in both countries to grow across our international
border.
Now, as you pointed out, Senator Inhofe, prior to his work
with the Governor, Harold served as outreach director in the
Offices of Congressman Charlie Bass and Congressman and Senator
John E. Sununu, who is not our current Governor, who is Chris
Sununu, a brother.
I got to know Harold in those days when he was working for
Congressman Sununu and saw his good staff work, and I know that
his position in both of those offices brought him in close
contact with communities in the Northern Border Region.
I must also say that I have had the opportunity, as a
Senator, to work very closely with Harold on a program that we
call Law Enforcement Awards in New Hampshire. This is an idea
that he actually came up with when he was working with
Congressman Sununu, and it is to recognize law enforcement
officers in the State who have gone above and beyond the call
of duty in their role as police officers. It has been a
bipartisan program that has been very effective in recognizing
law enforcement in the State of New Hampshire, and he really
deserves the credit for making that program go.
So, whether bringing the perspectives of local leaders to
the Federal level or helping small towns navigate the
government grant process, Harold has been a dependable advocate
and resource for the people of New Hampshire.
He has deep roots in the region covered by the NBRC, and he
has cultivated bipartisan relationships across State and
national borders that would be valuable in this position.
So, I hope that the members of this subcommittee will agree
with me that his experience and expertise make him well suited
to serve as Federal Cochair at the NBRC.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you very much, Senator Shaheen. You
are welcome to stay and even come up on the dais during the
proceeds, or if you have scheduling problems, you can be
excused.
Senator Shaheen. Yes, I have an Appropriations Committee,
so I won't go there, but thank you.
Senator Inhofe. All right. That's good.
We are anxious to get the opening statement.
Why don't you come up, if you would.
There are, however, some required questions that have to be
asked. I will get those out of the way, then we will hear your
opening statement, and we will ask questions, all right?
Mr. Parker. Yes, sir.
Senator Inhofe. All right. You have to answer these
audibly, if you would. I have to ask the following questions.
Do you agree, if confirmed, to appear before this Committee
or designated members of this Committee, and other appropriate
committees of Congress, and provide information subject to
appropriate and necessary security protections with respect to
your responsibilities?
Mr. Parker. Yes, sir.
Senator Inhofe. Do you agree to ensure that testimony,
briefings, documents, and electronic and other forms of
information are
[[Page 5]]
provided to this Committee and its staff, and other appropriate
committees, in a timely manner?
Mr. Parker. Yes, sir.
Senator Inhofe. Last, do you know of any matters which you
may or may not have disclosed that might place you in any
conflict of interest if you are confirmed?
Mr. Parker. None that I am aware of, sir.
Senator Inhofe. All right, Harold, you are recognized for
an opening statement.
Mr. Parker. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Inhofe. If you want to abbreviate it, feel free to
do that. Your entire statement will be made a part of the
record.
Mr. Parker. I have managed to narrow it down.
Senator Inhofe. Use your mic there. I don't think you're
turned on, are you?
STATEMENT OF HAROLD B. PARKER, NOMINEE TO BE FEDERAL
COCHAIRPERSON OF THE NORTHERN BORDER REGIONAL COMMISSION
Mr. Parker. Chairman Inhofe, Senator Cardin, members of the
Environment and Public Works Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss my
qualifications for the position of Federal Cochair of the
Northern Border Regional Commission, or the NBRC.
I would like to start by thanking the President for
nominating me to this position and to Governor Chris Sununu for
his recommendation. I would also like to extend my deepest
thanks to Senator Jeanne Shaheen for introducing me here today.
I would also like to thank Senator Maggie Hassan and Senator
John Sununu, and all those who have submitted letters of
support on my behalf.
The President's submission of my nomination and my
appearance here today is one of the great honors of my career
in public service, a career which includes being a staff member
for Senator John Sununu in this chamber and 8 years of service
in the U.S. House of Representatives.
I grew up in the territory covered by the Northern Border
Regional Commission. I saw firsthand what happened when the
pulp and paper economy collapsed and how it devastated entire
communities and generations of workers and businesses.
Over the decades since then, I have seen generations of
dedicated elected officials work to help find economic
solutions to these communities. We have been through multiple
new strategies and plans. The result is what we are all
painfully aware of: there are no easy solutions. The challenge
we face in these regions is cultural, generational,
demographic, and most of all, it is complex.
Providing the leadership and resources to help find a path
forward for these communities across the four State Northern
Border Region is exactly what the Commission is tasked with. I
want to contribute to an agency that has helped the people of
the region by providing financial resources that have a quick
and direct impact on the communities by helping increase
economic diversity across northern New York, Vermont, New
Hampshire, and Maine, and
[[Page 6]]
working to enable communities in these States to chart a path
forward of their own choosing.
I am prepared to focus my passion and my energy to use
these resources of the Federal Government as a partner to State
and local decisionmakers as they chart their path forward to
build communities that represent places where the next
generation will want to live and work.
My career brings a vantagepoint that comes from extensive
experience in public service. When I was right out of
university, I was a part-time police officer in the town of
Durham, New Hampshire. During this time, my career in politics
and public service began by starting to volunteer on
congressional races.
I went on to become a staff member during a 1996
presidential campaign, which led to a position on Congressman
John E. Sununu's first congressional staff later that year. My
portfolio started to consolidate around the issues of law
enforcement, homeland security, New Hampshire-Canadian trade,
international relations in New England.
I eventually became Director of the Outreach Program that
allowed me and other staff members to travel around the State
and meet with public officials and business owners and
citizens. It was the Outreach Program that allowed me to gain
experience with grant research, coalition building on issues,
and working for communities that needed help.
From 2011 to 2013 I worked for Congressman Charles F. Bass
of New Hampshire as Projects Director, which was an in-depth
experience in dealing with local citizens and businesses
affected by or seeking help from the Federal Government.
While I was in Federal service, I also served my hometown
by being elected to the Planning Board and Budget Committee. It
was on the Budget Committee where we handled the town's $25
million a year line item budget that I began to see how, if
structured correctly, the government could partner with private
enterprise to make investments that lead to economic growth.
In 2014 I was elected to the New Hampshire House of
Representatives, or as we call it in New Hampshire, the General
Court, where I served on the Executive Departments and
Administration Committee, Criminal Justice and Public Safety
Committee, and the Fish and Game Committee. I was also
appointed to the New Hampshire-Canada Trade Council by the New
Hampshire Secretary of State and was a representative of the
New Hampshire House to the Council of State Governments.
I resigned from the New Hampshire House in January 2017 to
join the staff of Governor Chris Sununu. I started as Policy
Advisor and was later promoted to become Special Assistant to
the Governor for Intergovernmental Affairs. My portfolio has
been similar to my Federal service, with the added area of
transportation infrastructure. I am the Governor's
representative to the Coalition of Northeastern Governors,
where we work with Eastern Canadian Premiers on interstate and
cross-border issues of transportation, trade, economic
development, and the environment.
I believe in outreach to the governments of eastern Canada,
our neighbors, and partners of the intertwined economies of the
Northeast. In the 2008 law that set up the NBRC, crossing the
inter
[[Page 7]]
national border to advocate for the Commission's region was
recognized. While doing my research for this position I
identified gaps in using Canadian contacts and opportunities to
cross the border that are not being utilized. With Canadian
companies looking for business opportunities across the border,
I believe the NBRC should be a partner with its member States
to explore the possibility for expansion of Canadian companies
into the Northern Tier, and a regional entity like the NBRC can
back up those States and make the regional case. It adds a new
level of diversity to the NBRC portfolio and provides another
avenue for increasing opportunity and economic diversity for
the workers of the region.
I will continue the progress made by my predecessors. My
goal is to expand economic diversity and leave the Commission
stronger and ready to face future challenges.
I truly appreciate the opportunity to appear before you. I
look forward to answering any questions you may have.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Parker follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.001
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.002
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.003
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.004
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.005
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.006
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.007
Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Mr. Parker.
We will go ahead with some questions.
Confession is good for the soul, and I have to tell you
that I don't really know about this Commission. I remember when
this took place, but of course, Oklahoma is quite a ways away
from you guys up in the Northeast, so why don't you just go
ahead and explain to me what the role of the Northern Border
Regional Commission is.
Mr. Parker. The Northern Border Regional Commission is a
Federal-State partnership that basically does economic
infrastructure and communications grants or telecommunications
grants to affected regions across the Northern Border;
broadband Internet, infrastructure of that we can help grow
business development parks and direct economic grants in towns
for business incubators, just as an example.
It allows a concise and immediate impact by grant funding
to towns in affected regions to help them out in the more
economically troubled areas of the region.
Senator Inhofe. I see. I see. It was stated by both your
introducer, as well as Senator Cardin, about zeroing out the
budget for the Northern Border regions. Give us your response
to that, what your feelings are, and how you can overcome that.
Mr. Parker. I believe in the work of the NBRC. I believe it
provides an essential service to the four States affected. It
helps the regions develop economic diversity, helps stop the
outflow of migration of workers, and helps trying to make a
better life for the people who live there.
If I am confirmed as Federal Cochair, I will continue to
advocate to help those people out in those positions.
Senator Inhofe. Well, as you describe the works and the
function of the Northern Border, in looking at your background,
you seem to be certainly a right one to be doing this, and I
look forward to working with you in the future.
Senator Cardin.
Mr. Parker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[[Page 8]]
Senator Cardin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Parker, thank you. I think the Chairman's question is
one that was at least partially responsible for the President's
team zeroing out your budget; that is, very few people know
what you do. We had a similar problem with the Appalachian
Regional Commission. The President zeroed out that budget last
year. He did not this year. Many of us have put a spotlight on
the work of the Appalachian Regional Commission.
As I said in my opening statement, I will be in the western
part of Maryland Saturday. I will be at Garrett College, which
is in Garrett County, which is one of our largest geographical
counties and one of the smallest in population. It is in the
mountains, and it has had challenges to get any type of
economic growth.
Garrett College will have, now, a STEM program, a major
STEM program, the 2-year community college, and will have
equipment that will be unique among higher education facilities
in this country thanks to the Appalachian Regional Commission's
grant. That will attract and keep students in Garrett College
from even outside of Garrett County coming in to use the STEM
facilities that are there.
It is not the only grant that has been given by the
Appalachian Regional Commission; they have given a grant to
Allegheny College, which is also in the Appalachian Region, in
Cumberland, to establish a STEM program. They have also given
grants to Frostburg State University, which is also in that
region.
I mention all of that because it has been a magnet for
developing job opportunities for that area. I can mention also,
as I did earlier, the broadband. We have broadband in Maryland,
but the connections are very difficult to finance because it is
not economically feasible for cable companies to connect that
last mile. The Appalachian Regional Commission in Maryland has
given grants so that our key facilities, our hospitals, our
schools, our development centers, are all now connected by
broadband as a result of the Appalachian Regional Commission.
I mention all that because I really do think one of your
challenges is to promote what you do.
Mr. Parker. Well, Senator, that starts today. Realizing I
have a 14-year career with Congress. It has been a joy to serve
this institution. Coming back down to talk to Appropriations,
to talk to this Committee, to anybody who wants to hear about
the Northern Borders Regional Commission is one of my jobs. I
will probably be down here more than people want to see my
face, sir, to make sure that this Commission is understood,
what it does, what we can do, and how we can help the people in
the four States involved, and if that means pounding the
pavement on Capitol Hill all the time, that is where we start.
The delegations in those four States know exactly what this
organization does. I agree with you, it is time to expand
outwards and make sure that the rest of Congress understands it
also, sir.
Senator Cardin. I would suggest that you could get some
help in doing that through the other three regional commissions
that have been authorized for funding by the Congress. I
mentioned Appalachian, but we also have the Delta Regional
Commission, and you also have Denali Commission in Alaska.
[[Page 9]]
They have similar functions. They are all different; the
regions are all different, but they all have the similar
problem, and that is, until this hearing was called, I only
knew about the Appalachian Regional Commission. And I am sure
that those that represent outside the Appalachian Region knew
very little about the Appalachian Regional Commission.
I think that if you would reach out to our colleagues from
Alaska, from the Delta Region, you could magnify the audience
that may be interested in the work of our commissions.
Mr. Parker. As you see, I am a typical staffer, Senator; I
am taking notes on what you are saying, and I will act upon
them.
Senator Cardin. Well, I appreciate that. The Chairman asked
you some required questions at the beginning of the hearing
that we ask all nominees, and that is to respond to what the
Committee asks you to do. I think it would be advisable to keep
the Committee informed as to what you are doing so that our
staffs are fully aware, as the authorizing committees, to make
sure that the appropriators understand what you do and that we
can be more informed if asked by the appropriators or if they
try to do some things that we do or do not like, and also
perhaps even to seek additional partnerships if in fact that is
deserved.
Working with us in that capacity will further your mission,
but will also help us carry out our responsibilities.
Mr. Parker. Thank you, Senator. I would like to extend an
invitation to any member of this Committee. I would be glad to
give you a tour of the Northern Border Region, any State you
would like.
Senator Cardin. I would like to do that today, considering
the weather we have here in Washington.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Parker. Unfortunately, Senator, I don't think it is
much different at home right now, from what I heard.
Senator Cardin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you.
We have been joined by Senator Boozman from Arkansas.
Senator Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
being here, Mr. Parker.
I think Senator Cardin makes a really very, very good point
about the different authorities working together. As he pointed
out, he was familiar with the Appalachian Region. I am very
familiar with the Delta Regional Authority and have heard of
Appalachian because that was an early one and was on the
forefront a lot, but really was not aware of this until we got
into actually looking through the Committee at it.
I think the idea of very different regions, but very, very
similar problems: how do you jumpstart opportunity in these
areas. So, I think that is an excellent suggestion.
You mentioned you have a long history of being a staffer,
working hard, this and that, at the Federal level, local level.
Tell me how that has prepared you to do a good job in this
particular role.
Mr. Parker. Well, Senator, this is what I was doing at 5:30
this morning, I was working down my work experience because it
spans
[[Page 10]]
over three decades. It helps me on many reasons: economic
security agreements is talking with Government; infrastructure
projects.
I have been working with the Port of Portsmouth for new
docks, new fiber optic cable. Local requests to municipalities,
business incubators, business parks, industrial businesses,
cities and town; budget. I have a $25 million line item budget
in my hometown of Wolfeboro, New Hampshire, which is about $5
million more than what all the NBRC's budget is. I have been
doing that for 14 years.
My background in planning, revolving loan funds on the
Planning Board in Wolfeboro, and congressional background is
the ability to come here, talk to you Senators, Congressmen, to
sit there and make the case for this Commission. My background,
I believe, has prepared me for that, along those lines; my
experiences. I have written more grant letters; I have gone to
more meetings; I have dealt with more Federal agencies in 16
years now that I don't think I can put on one piece of paper,
sir.
Senator Boozman. Very good. I appreciate you highlighting
that because I think that is very, very important also.
In your testimony, you discussed how your time served on
your hometown's budget committee and planning board showed you
how public-private partnerships--the P3s--could lead to
economic growth. If confirmed, do you plan on looking at
innovative ways for the Government to partner with private
enterprise? Certainly, that is something that President Trump,
all of us are trying--how do you get that done. And how do you
think public-private partnerships could be helpful to the
Regional Commission?
Mr. Parker. Public-private partnerships are the
encouragement of private development and the Commission is
enabled in law. In my hometown, public-private partnerships on
the more municipal level is to help build new ski areas, new
libraries. It is town-funded, business-funded, and civilian-
funded.
I believe, in the Northern Border Regional Commission, the
more we can bring private business in either from outside of
the region, on our side of the border or from Canada, I see a
business coming in, they need to train their work force. The
NBRC has the ability to train, through funding, a work force,
work hand in hand with the business to set up the type of
workers they would like to have trained.
A great example of this is transportation and
infrastructure or transportation aircraft businesses.
Bombardier in Quebec is coming over the border a lot to set up
American operations. They look at the Northern Tier because of
its close aspect, obviously, to Quebec. Our ability is to talk
to a company like that. Let's set up a partnership. You come
down, we will help you train workers, we will increase the
workload for the area or increase the worker retention in the
area, along those lines. I can see the Commission doing that,
sir.
Senator Boozman. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Parker. I hope to God I didn't lose part of your
question in that answer, sir.
Senator Boozman. No, no, no. You know, those things are so
important. With limited resources and things, that has to be
the fu
[[Page 11]]
ture. There has to be a lot more joining together so that we
can get some of these things accomplished.
Senator Cardin mentioned broadband, things like that, all
these things. Hopefully, that would be something that, again,
the commissions talking could put forth some best practices and
share amongst you all, and then hopefully come forward with how
we can get this done in other ways, utilizing other authorities
to just do the best job that we can.
Mr. Parker. Yes, sir.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Boozman.
I have 10 letters from leadership throughout the area that
we are addressing that. In addition to that, letters from
places in Quebec, outside of the United States. All of these
are support letters for you. Without objection, I will make
them a part of the record.
[The referenced information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.008
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.009
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.010
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.011
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.012
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.013
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.014
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.015
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.016
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.017
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.018
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.019
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.020
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.021
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.022
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.023
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.024
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.025
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.026
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.027
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.028
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2678.029
Senator Inhofe. Senator Cardin.
Senator Cardin. No objection.
Could I just ask Mr. Parker, how do you interact with
Canada? Do they have a regional commission, or is it strictly
through the province governments, or is it through the national
government?
Mr. Parker. Actually, many different levels, Senator.
Senator Cardin. They don't have a regional commission, I
assume?
Mr. Parker. No, but as part of the Northeastern Governors,
we deal with the Eastern Canadian Premiers. We have our yearly
conference. This year it was in Stowe, Vermont, where, as I
said in my testimony, we talked about economic, transportation,
infrastructure, along those lines.
The difference between us and Canada, as you well know,
Senator, is that the bulk of their population and industry is
probably within 100 miles of the U.S. border, so the economic
setup is a little bit different going across that tier.
In my own experience, a lot of State to State work, New
Hampshire to Quebec, New Hampshire to Ontario, New Hampshire to
New Brunswick, and through these missions on behalf of my
Governor there is a lot of trade out there. There is a lot of
business coming back and forth across the border. Three of the
four States in the Regional Commission are top exporters to
Canada. For some reason, New Hampshire is not. I don't know
why. But four States are top importers from Canada.
What we have found is that when I went over the border with
the Governor to Montreal last year, in our first trade mission,
they have the big concept of trade. They don't know what the
individual States can do for them, which brings me back around
to the Northern Borders Regional Commission. In partnership
with the States in this Commission, I think we can make a
clearer case of what these--each State is different and unique,
and we also have the same problems, but we can sit there and
bring forward added opportunities, an added voice, if you want
to expand to the United States, come talk to us; there are ways
we can help you.
And the beauty of it is, when I am working for my State, I
am always running across Vermont, or I am always running across
[[Page 12]]
New York, or I am always running across Maine and Quebec or
Ontario, so we are all actively pursuing. But I think each
State has a regional asset that we can advertise to Canada, and
I think the NBRC can help advocate for the individual member
States.
Senator Cardin. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you.
Are there other questions?
If there are no other questions, we have members who may
submit follow up written questions for the record by noon.
[Discussion off the record.]
Senator Inhofe. I was told that Senator Carper--normally,
when they say they are on their way, that means the 14th Street
Bridge. We will wait for a few minutes, but it can't be too
long because we have another Committee hearing.
Senator Cardin. I will ask another question, then.
Senator Inhofe. Let me go ahead and get this requirement
out of the way here.
We are actually going to keep the record open until noon,
Monday, September 10th, and then you, as the nominee, should
respond to those questions by 5:00 on Thursday, the 13th. As
long as you will agree to do that, everything will be fine.
You are recognized, Senator Cardin.
Senator Cardin. I should point out that Senator Carper of
Delaware is having their primary elections today, so it is
understandable. Senator Carper does commute from Delaware,
following the tradition of Senator Biden.
What I wanted to point out by the question in regards to
what Canada does is that whether there are ways that we can
facilitate your authority to help in dealing with the region
with Canada. There may be ways in which we, through our
mechanisms, can help you with giving you more authority to deal
with some of the intercountry issues.
Obviously, there are a lot of major issues between Canada
and the United States today, we recognize that, in which our
agencies will maintain their authority, but we may be able to
help you deal with your regional economic issues by giving you
greater parity with your counterparts in Canada. That was the
reason I asked the question.
I would appreciate it if you could just, during your time,
get back to us if there are things we can do to help you.
Mr. Parker. I would be glad to do that, Senator.
Senator Cardin. Thank you.
Senator Inhofe. And we have been joined by Senator
Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. Mr. Parker, thank you for being here.
The Northern Border Regional Commission has invested more than
$57.6 million in Federal funds in some of the most distressed
areas in New York State's Northern Border Region. This funding
has supported critical initiatives to improve access to
essential services like high speed Internet and safe drinking
water, as well as to support the launch of new businesses and
growth of existing businesses.
[[Page 13]]
The Commission has done similar work across other Northern
Border States, helping economically distressed communities
create good paying jobs based on local needs and strategies.
Congress has recognized the need for increasing funding for
the Commission's effort, with the agency now funded at $15
million annually, up from $10 million in fiscal year 2017.
Despite all of this, President Trump's past two budgets
have called for the elimination of the Commission.
Do we have your commitment today to advocate for continued
and robust funding for this vital agency?
Mr. Parker. Senator, I will do my job as Federal Cochair to
help the people involved in the region to make the case for why
this Northern Borders is important to the region. The final
authority on what happens to the Northern Borders Regional
Commission is done by the authority and funding of the U.S.
Congress. In my time there, I will do everything I can to make
it a successful organization.
Senator Gillibrand. Well, I would urge you to come to the
North Country and see how these funds are actually being used
so effectively, so when you do have a chance to advocate within
the Administration you can give real examples of what you have
seen with your own eyes. So I welcome you. And the North
Country is beautiful in the fall; you have all the foliage, so
you must come.
Mr. Parker. Senator, I actually want to go to New York
first, if I am blessed to be confirmed. I know New Hampshire,
Maine well, Vermont well; New York I need to go to and see.
Senator Gillibrand. We would welcome you, and we can
coordinate your visit.
Related, what are your views on the Federal Government's
role in supporting economic development efforts in distressed
regions?
Mr. Parker. I wouldn't be here today, Senator, if I didn't
believe in the Federal Government that we can help individuals
through direct impact grants to communities and regions
involved.
Senator Gillibrand. Do you think the Federal Government
could do more than what it is already doing today?
Mr. Parker. Once again, Senator, that is up to the will and
the authority and the funding of the U.S. Congress.
Senator Gillibrand. But if asked your opinion, what would
your opinion be?
Mr. Parker. Just that right there, ma'am.
Senator Gillibrand. Do you think you could invest more,
though?
Mr. Parker. Depends on the size of the territory. I mean,
if the Northern Borders increases, you have to be conscious of
the budgetary side, too.
Senator Gillibrand. I can give you an example. I think
getting access to the Internet should be a basic human right. I
think it is hard for businesses to succeed if they can't sell
their products or services throughout a community, throughout
the world. So, one of the challenges we have in the North
Country is access to rural broadband, because it is not
economic for a Verizon or another provider to actually provide
services. So, the reason why we use a lot of the funds toward
economic development for rural broadband is because we want the
economy to grow. You can't put in a new
[[Page 14]]
hotel, you can't put in a new hospital, you can't put in a new
business if you don't have access to the Internet. That is the
truth of the matter.
So, I would like you to see these communities, see what is
working already, get an idea about where they would like to
grow, and see why more funding for rural broadband is win-win-
win for the Federal Government, because more people will pay
more taxes, but good for the United States, we are more
competitive, we sell more aggressively worldwide, and we have a
stronger economy.
So, I think, if you take the time to come, you will see how
some of this funding actually is used locally very effectively,
and you will see that there is no economic case to be made for
a private provider to actually provide it. There might only be
1,000 families living in an area, but there might be five major
businesses that could continue to grow if they had access. So
that is the whole nub.
So, I would like you to come, see it for yourself so, when
you are in the room to negotiate, to advocate, to say, you
know, this is not wasted money and I know of places where you
could certainly use more. That is useful and important for the
long-term health and well-being of the country and the economy.
So, I would like you to realize that your position can be one
of advocacy, not just do what you are told.
Mr. Parker. Senator, I have the honor of meeting with
members of your staff, I believe, at 3:00 this afternoon, and I
will set up a visit time with them over the next couple weeks.
Senator Gillibrand. Great. Wonderful.
Next issue. One of the Northern Border Regional
Commission's greatest strengths is its flexible portfolio of
programs and ability to work with other Federal, State, and
local agencies to respond quickly to disruptions across
industries or the threat of mass layoffs from a plant closure
and to make the kind of investments necessary to revive
distressed communities.
What actions will you take or will you ask Congress to help
you with to increase the coordination and impact of investment
by the Commission and other related Federal economic
development agencies in our most economically struggling
communities?
Mr. Parker. Senator, it is a great question. Can I get back
to you with an answer on that? I would like to look into it a
little bit more in depth.
Senator Gillibrand. That would be fantastic.
And probably related is what would you propose the
Commission do to increase its ability to respond rapidly to
economic disruptions in dislocations.
The reason why I ask this specifically is, because of some
of these global trade wars, we have seen the price of steel
collapse; we have seen some of our manufacturing plants have to
shutter its doors. We are seeing it rapidly throughout the
North Country. I have seen it with our historic production of
steel and paper.
So, it is important to know that as the Administration goes
up and down on trade, it has real world consequences, and one
of them, sadly, is a lot of businesses are struggling. So,
being flexible and being able to rapidly respond I think is a
really important role for you personally, but also for the
agency that you hope to run, because I think that would be the
real gift to a community like
[[Page 15]]
mine for when there is going to be a big business that is going
to shutter its doors, go overseas, lay off employees, the
flexibility of what is the best economic development plan and
getting resources to support it.
Last point that you can also submit for the record is what
role do you see entrepreneurship playing in the revival of
distressed communities, and how can the Commission support that
work. So, entrepreneurialism, innovation, respond rapidly to
the disruptions, and the ways that your Commission can
facilitate coordination.
Mr. Parker. Got it.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Inhofe. Yes, thank you, Senator Gillibrand.
Are there other questions, others who want to be heard?
[Discussion off the record.]
Senator Inhofe. Mr. Parker, if you want to relive our
experience of 15 years ago, this will be a good time to do it.
Mr. Parker. It was a dusty fairground outside of Oklahoma
City. I was out there working for Candidate Coburn at the time.
Gave a great speech. Don't ask me, after 14 or 15 years, I
can't remember, but----
Senator Inhofe. You are saying I made a great speech 15
years ago?
Mr. Parker. You made a great speech.
Senator Inhofe. That was the last great speech I made, as a
matter of fact.
Mr. Parker. That is not my judgment to make that call,
Senator. I just remember I was so surprised by Oklahoma, going
out on deployment. The Wichita Mountains; Altus, as it was
drilled into my head for the proper pronunciation, down in the
southwest corner; just going around the State. People were
friendly and welcoming. Never forgot it.
Senator Inhofe. It is interesting. Altus is what you were
trying to think of. I will be there tonight.
Mr. Parker. Oh, really?
Senator Inhofe. Yes. We have an annual event in Altus, and
it happens to take place at this time.
Mr. Parker. We had someone from Senator Nichols' staff who
really drilled the proper pronunciation of that town into our
head. Because everybody from the Northeast was doing it wrong.
Senator Inhofe. That is right. They normally do. And that
doesn't go unnoticed.
Mr. Parker. I found out after the bus ride.
Senator Cardin. Let me join in on this conversation.
I heard you mention that one of your responsibilities has
been dealing with some of the ski resorts that are in this
region. I mention that because in Western Maryland we have the
Wisp Resort, which is located in the Appalachian Regional
Commission, and it is, I would say, an underutilized economic
tool for the region. It is important, but it could be even
stronger.
There has been some change of ownership, and they are
trying to redevelop, and they are doing some good things there,
but one thing about mountain areas, mountain areas are
challenged to get there because of the terrain, but does have
one of the advantages
[[Page 16]]
in regards to its weather. It allows you to do things that
people are attracted to, such as skiing.
So, it is one area where I think, again, there could be a
relationship between the Commission that you have been
nominated to and the Appalachian Regional Commission that has
these facilities. In West Virginia there are also significant
ski resorts that are doing well.
Mr. Parker. Well, the ski areas I worked for--I was in the
private sector at the time, but our biggest challenge actually
was electricity costs. When I worked at Waterville Valley for
the then CEO, now Governor of New Hampshire, the electric bills
were probably over $1 million a month just in snow making and
other areas, so it is a challenge.
They are also a great attraction all across the Northern
Tier. A lot of our competition actually comes from southern
Canada, especially in Quebec, the mountains right across the
border, but overall it has been a thriving industry again, the
last decade and a half to two decades. It takes its ups and
downs.
Senator Cardin. One of our advantages in Western Maryland
is that we have Deep Creek Lake, which gives us water, so we
have plenty of water. Also we have Deep Creek Lake, which makes
it a four season for recreation; not just skiing, but the
boating in the summer, and of course, the foliage in the fall
that we have already talked about, is incredible. So, we have
all four seasons that we can take advantage of for recreation.
We also have the C&O Canal National Park, which is one of
the most popular national parks. So, there are different areas
that we can attract to try to make it four seasons on visitors.
The same thing is true up in upper State New York, Vermont,
New Hampshire, and Maine. There are similarities that you can
build on.
Mr. Parker. And I look forward to talking to, obviously--I
am going to reach out to the other commissions just to see what
worked, what didn't work, what has been done well, what
mistakes to avoid, and the institutionology.
The other thing about the Northern Border Regional
Commission, I am working with economic experts from four
States, along with my staff--or potentially my staff--and there
is a lot of input. I actually sat in on the last NBRC meeting
in Hanover, New Hampshire 2 weeks ago, and it was very
congenial, very easy; a lot of issues were talked about. There
was a lot of wisdom in that room. Not everybody agreed on
everything, but it was well thought out, well argued, and
finally, consensus was reached to move forward.
There is a lot of fallback in this position, if I get
confirmed, to grow into and get more wisdom coming from the
people who are there already.
Senator Cardin. Mr. Chairman, I will relay a story that I
was told about one of our Senators who asked that the vote be
held open so that he could make that vote. It was the late
Senator Ted Kennedy who said he is at the airport; would they
hold the vote until he got here, and they said certainly they
would do that. He was at the Boston airport.
[Laughter.]
[[Page 17]]
Senator Cardin. So, I am sure Senator Carper is close by.
One of the great things--both Senator Inhofe and I started
in the House of Representatives. We were just relating to
Senator Kyl, who was sworn in yesterday; the three of us
started the same year. Nineteen eighty-seven was our first year
in the House of Representatives, so we all have gotten our
beginning in the House.
We know in the House that if a Congressman was 10 seconds
late, they would probably be shut out. There was not a lot of
leeway and courtesy in the House, and one of the things I think
I like about the Senate is the fact that there is great respect
for all members of the U.S. Senate. We recognize that we have
demands on our time that can make it difficult for us to be
where we want to be, and the courtesies are almost always
extended in the Senate, and that is one of the things I
appreciate.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your patience for Senator
Carper.
Mr. Parker. I have a very comfortable chair, so I am quite
relaxed right now.
Senator Inhofe. Well, here he is, Senator Carper.
All right, Tom, the first question comes from me. How is
your day going?
Senator Carper. So far so good, but it is early.
Senator Inhofe. We have had a good hearing and had fairly
good participation considering what is going on elsewhere in
here, but we have had a chance to know Harold Parker well. We
will just recognize you to ask any questions you like and make
any comments.
Senator Carper. My thanks to you and our Ranking Member,
Mr. Chairman, and to Mr. Parker.
Tell me just a little bit about your background, if you
would, the elevator introduction. I know a little bit, but just
go ahead in your words.
Mr. Parker. Well, I was born in Massachusetts, pretty much
grew up in New Hampshire, lived my life in Wolfeboro, small
town on Lake Winnipesaukee. One of my neighbors a couple miles
away is Mitt Romney.
I have been in government service in one form or another--
--
Senator Carper. I understand Mitt Romney is running to join
us. Is that true?
Mr. Parker. I didn't hear you.
Senator Carper. I think he has an interest in maybe coming
and serving here in Washington.
Mr. Parker. I heard the rumor, sir.
Senator Carper. Yes. I heard he might be successful.
Mr. Parker. Yes, could be.
So long career in public service in various different
forms, in the U.S. House, in the U.S. Senate as a staffer. I
was elected to the New Hampshire House of Representatives twice
from my hometown.
Senator Carper. How many members of your State legislature
are there?
Mr. Parker. It is a very easily manageable 400 members,
sir. When I get elected, I literally just represent a town.
Actually, half of my town.
[[Page 18]]
Senator Carper. And how many Senators do you have in your
State?
Mr. Parker. Twenty-four.
Senator Carper. Twenty-four. I can't imagine what it is
like. So, you served two terms there?
Mr. Parker. I served a term and about 2 months into the
second term, where I resigned to join Governor Sununu's staff
as a policy advisor.
Senator Carper. And when was that?
Mr. Parker. January 2017, sir.
Senator Carper. OK. And tell us about your work as a policy
advisor.
Mr. Parker. Well, I got promoted to the Governor--I am the
Special Assistant to the Governor for Intergovernmental
Affairs, but I still kept my policy portfolio. I did New
Hampshire Department of Transportation, New Hampshire
Department of Safety, New Hampshire Fish and Game Commission,
New Hampshire Canadian Trade Council, Fire and Emergency
Services in New Hampshire. Basically, those are the issue areas
I worked on for the Governor.
There were four of us on the policy team. We roughly had a
responsibility of a quarter of a State government each.
Senator Carper. OK. One of the things that I focus on as
Governor myself and as a Congressman, certainly as a Senator, I
focus on how do we create a more nurturing environment for job
creation and job preservation. Folks in our businesses, mayors,
Governors, Presidents, we don't create jobs; we help by
creating a nurturing environment for job creation and job
preservation.
Would you just talk with us a little about your experience
and how it helps prepare you to better ensure that that happens
through this Commission?
Mr. Parker. The one thing I really, really have admired
about the NBRC over the years is two things: its direct
economic grant impacts on the communities and towns involved,
and two, as I stated--but I know you weren't here, sir--as I
stated, I watched the pulp and paper industry collapse in the
Northern Tier of the Northeast. There was too much
concentration on one industry, throwing tourism aside for a
second.
What I like about the NBRC is its diversity; it is to find
new ways to diversify the economy out where we are not set
forward in one area under one condition. And with the State
Cochairs of this Commission, the local connection is not lost,
because a lot of these solutions are coming up from the town,
whether it be an incubator or a project or increase in a
business park. To sit there and help them do that I believe is
the way to increase diversity or give that nurturing for the
business that you are addressing, sir.
Senator Carper. Would you talk with us a little bit about
the communication that takes place between the various
commissions, including this one, and how do the commissions
coordinate and collaborate with one another, if at all?
Mr. Parker. Are you talking about the other regional
commissions?
Senator Carper. Yes.
[[Page 19]]
Mr. Parker. The NBRC actually, if I remember correctly,
they have twice a year meetings with other members where they
share ideas and practices and experiences among each other. I
have not experienced any of that.
Right now I have been more focused on the NBRC directly
when it involves the States. It is something that, as we
discussed earlier and Senator Cardin mentioned, too, as a new
chair, if I am confirmed, is to go out, reach out to them, and
learn best practices and the history of what is successful and
what hasn't been successful with them.
Senator Carper. Good.
Mr. Parker. There is a good level of communication, from
what I have been told by the previous Federal Cochair, who is
sitting behind me.
Senator Carper. Who is that person?
Mr. Parker. Mark Scarano is the previous Federal Cochair of
the Northern Border Regional Commission.
Senator Carper. I just want to say this is the smallest
audience I have ever observed as a confirmation hearing, which
is actually a good thing.
Senator Cardin. We could move this up to the confirmation
hearing on Kavanaugh.
Senator Carper. That is a little more contentious.
Mr. Parker. I am actually enjoying this.
Senator Carper. Well, good. Well, we won't hold you too
much longer.
One of the things we had in the National Governors
Association was the Center for Best Practices, a clearinghouse
for good ideas, and it was an opportunity for us to learn from
other States what was working, what wasn't. That is called the
Center for Best Practices within the NGA. We were always
stealing good ideas from other Governors, other States, and
letting them steal our good ideas, too, and our bad ideas, as
well.
You touched on this just now, but how would you go about
reaching out to the other commissions and say what are you
doing about this or what are you doing about that? How would
you do that? Or maybe there is already a way to do so?
Mr. Parker. Outside of the twice annual meetings, a phone
call, sir. If confirmed, I would call my counterparts in the
other commissions, talk to them, tell them what the situation
is and what is going on in the NBRC. I would actually,
hopefully, use them as a resource to say have you faced this
problem, have you faced that problem? What have you done that
has been successful?
I built my whole career in public service on talking and
collaborating with other folks with different points of view or
different experiences, and it won't stop at this position. It
is a matter as simple as me reaching out and picking up the
phone and calling them.
Senator Carper. Good, good, good.
Do I have time for one more?
Senator Inhofe. Sure.
Senator Carper. Thank you very much.
The Northern Border Regional Commission reauthorization
bill is currently part of the Farm Bill that has passed the
Senate, as you know. I would just ask have you had a chance to
look over that
[[Page 20]]
legislation, the Farm Bill legislation, the reauthorization for
the Northern Border Regional Commission? Do you support that
legislation? Are there some improvements that you would have us
take?
Mr. Parker. I haven't had a chance to look at the current
legislation, Senator. I would like to take a look at it. If you
have a specific question on it, I would love to get back to you
on it.
Senator Carper. All right, good. Thanks.
Well, good luck. We appreciate all of your service and your
willingness to take this on as well. Thank you.
And thanks to my colleagues for making sure I had a chance
to ask some questions.
Senator Inhofe. Well, we understand you have a busy day.
Senator Carper. It is.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Carper.
Are there further questions? If not, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11 a.m. the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[An additional statement submitted for the record follows:]
Statement of Hon. Bernard Sanders,
U.S. Senator from the State of Vermont
Too often, rural America has been left behind when it comes
to economic development. That is why the resources provided
through the Northern Border Regional Commission are so
important. The projects funded through the Commission--in areas
ranging from business development to infrastructure
improvement--have had significant and positive economic and
social benefits throughout some of the most economically
challenged regions of our State.
At a time when many families in Vermont and throughout the
Northern Border region are struggling to make ends meet, and
when the President has proposed eliminating the NBRC and
gutting community development programs, it is more important
than ever that the Commission's Federal Co-chair be a strong
advocate for the communities that desperately need these
investments. If confirmed, I look forward to working with Mr.
Parker to ensure this successful Federal-State partnership
continues to provide critical funding for innovative projects
in northern Vermont.
[all]