- EXPLORING THE STATE OF WESTERN KENTUCKY'S SMALL BUSINESSES
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
EXPLORING THE STATE OF WESTERN KENTUCKY'S SMALL BUSINESSES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
JUNE 18, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Small Business Committee Document Number 115-078
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-503
WASHINGTON : 2019
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
JOHN CURTIS, Utah
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT
Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Hon. James Comer.................................................
1
WITNESSES
Mr. Bruce Kimbell, President, First Community Bank of the
Heartland, Clinton, KY.........................................
3
Mr. Leon Owens, President, Swift & Staley, Inc., Paducah, KY.....
5
Mr. Edward Musselman, Owner, Musselman Properties, Paducah, KY...
7
Mr. Jonas Neihoff, Owner, Socially Present, Paducah, KY..........
11
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Mr. Bruce Kimbell, President, First Community Bank of the
Heartland, Clinton, KY.....................................
26
Mr. Leon Owens, President, Swift & Staley, Inc., Paducah, KY.
31
Mr. Edward Musselman, Owner, Musselman Properties, Paducah,
KY.........................................................
34
Mr. Jonas Neihoff, Owner, Socially Present, Paducah, KY......
38
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.
EXPLORING THE STATE OF WESTERN KENTUCKY'S SMALL BUSINESSES
----------
MONDAY, JUNE 18, 2018
House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:10 a.m., at the
Paducah Area Chamber of Commerce, Paducah Bank Room, 300 South
3rd Street, Paducah, KY, Hon. James Comer presiding.
Present: Representative Comer.
Mr. COMER. Good morning. I call this hearing of the
Committee on Small Business to order.
I appreciate everyone coming out today. This is something
that we have been working on for a long time. Small business is
important, and I have a statement that I am going to read. But
just so everyone knows, the purpose of this Committee is to get
testimony and do a question-and-answer from four leading
business people in West Kentucky in all different businesses
that have a huge impact on West Kentucky. I want to be able to
listen to the success story that each have, but if they also
have impediments to future growth.
What we are trying to do with the Small Business Committee
is find solutions to problems that we can take back to
Washington to determine future legislation, especially after
the August recess. I think we will have an aggressive fall in
Washington, especially in the lame duck session. There are a
lot of problems that we have as a nation, but I believe that
these problems can be solved if we work together.
Let me add that small businesses are the backbone of the
American economy, making up 99.9 percent of all U.S.
businesses, and 46.5 percent of all U.S. employees. By the
latest count, there are more than 30 million small businesses
in the United States, including more than 347,000 here in
Kentucky.
Small businesses employ nearly 57 million Americans,
including more than 696,000 in Kentucky. Small businesses were
responsible for 1.9 million net new jobs in 2015, including
more than 17,000 net new jobs in Kentucky. While in Washington,
my fellow Small Business Committee members and I regularly held
hearings and participated in roundtables where we heard from
small businesses from all across America, subject-matter
experts and government officials about policy recommendations
to create an environment that will spur entrepreneurship and
help small businesses grow and create jobs.
We also write legislation that will improve federal
policies and initiatives that will help these small business
owners and job creators succeed. Access to capital has always
been a top priority for this Committee. It gives small
businesses the resources they need to keep the doors open and
the lights on, to purchase inventory, and to pay employees.
However, since the financial crisis almost a decade ago,
the number of community banks in the United States has
decreased, the amount of paperwork for banks and businesses has
increased, and it has become more difficult for small
businesses just to meet payroll.
The Small Business Committee is continuing to work to
ensure that small businesses and entrepreneurs are able to
access the funds they need to expand and grow their businesses.
Another concern is one-size-fits-all regulations that have
a substantially higher impact on small businesses than the rest
of the economy. We continue to fight career Washington
bureaucrats to reduce the burden of regulations on small
businesses so that employers and employees can focus on running
their businesses rather than dealing with confusing and
duplicative paperwork.
As most of you know, Paducah is a dynamic, fast-growing
city that engages its citizens and is recognized as a regional
leader on many levels. Paducah is also financially sustainable,
maintains quality infrastructure and facilities, and has a
thriving river industry. It is a small city with big
aspirations that offers great incentives for families and
businesses to flourish.
This morning we will hear from a distinguished panel of
West Kentucky small business leaders. I requested this field
hearing so that I could hear your concerns and get your advice
on the policies and initiatives that matter the most to small
businesses in West Kentucky and Paducah. I will take these
ideas and recommendations back to Washington and continue to
work with my colleagues at the Small Business Committee to
focus on these priorities.
I appreciate the witnesses for taking time from their
businesses to be here today, and I look forward to your
testimony.
I am going to explain real briefly what we have here in
front of you. We have to deal with the lights. Each person on
the panel will have an opening statement that has been
prepared, and it will be submitted for the record.
I would like to take a second to explain the lights. You
will have 5 minutes. Once 4 minutes pops up, you get a warning
light. If you go over that 5, we are not going to be too strict
on that rule. But in Washington, you have to have a timer on
everything, everything. If you didn't, we would still be on the
floor talking about something.
But before I do the introductions, I want to thank the
Paducah Chamber. Senator Wilson is here in the back. Thank you
for allowing us to be here. Hopefully most people know we have
a regional district office here in Paducah, upstairs. Marty is
the field rep in the back. If you ever have any questions or
concerns, feel free to talk to Marty.
I also want to recognize Senator McConnell's field rep is
here, Morgan Alby, in the back. Thank you for being here.
We have a lot of good friends and business leaders in the
crowd.
I would like to take time to introduce our witnesses. I
will introduce each witness, and then we will start when I
conclude the introduction. I will let Mr. Kimbell start.
But I would like to introduce our first witness, Bruce
Kimbell. Mr. Kimbell is President and CEO of First Community
Bank of the Heartland in downtown Clinton. He is a graduate of
the University of Kentucky and a past member of the Board of
Directors of the Kentucky Bankers Association.
I would like to also acknowledge Mr. Greg Gunter, Vice
President of First Community Bank of the Heartland, who is here
today. I appreciate you being here.
I look forward to hearing Mr. Kimbell's testimony today.
Our second witness is Mr. Leon Owens. Mr. Owens is
President of Swift & Staley in Paducah. Swift & Staley began in
1979 as a construction contractor and has participated in
electrical and general contracting. In December 2017, Mr. Owens
was elected to serve as the 2018 Chair of the Board of the
Paducah Area Chamber of Commerce, which I might add is by far
the best Chamber of Commerce in Kentucky, probably in America.
He is a graduate of Eastern Illinois University and earned an
MBA from Murray State University. We welcome Mr. Owens here
today.
Our next witness is Mr. Edward Musselman. Mr. Musselman is
the owner of Musselman Properties in Paducah. Musselman
Properties restored the Coke plant in Paducah as a home for 10
local small businesses, including the Dry Ground Brewery
Company, owned by the Musselmans and Socially Present's
representatives, who are also testifying today.
I would also like to recognize Ms. Megan Musselman, Co-
Owner of Musselman Properties. Is she here?
Mr. MUSSELMAN. She is unable to be here.
Mr. COMER. Okay. We welcome Mr. Musselman here.
Mr. MUSSELMAN. Thank you.
Mr. COMER. Our final witness is Mr. Jonas Neihoff. Mr.
Neihoff is the President and Founder of Socially Present, a
digital marketing firm in Paducah. Socially Present provides a
variety of services for clients not only in Paducah but also in
St. Louis, Nashville, Louisville, and beyond. Mr. Neihoff is a
graduate of Mid-Continent University in Mayfield. Welcome, Mr.
Neihoff.
We appreciate everyone being here. I think this is as good
of a panel as we could assemble to talk about the challenges
that we have in small business and to hear some success
stories. So with that, we will start with the testimony.
Mr. Kimbell, you may begin.
STATEMENTS OF BRUCE KIMBELL, PRESIDENT, FIRST COMMUNITY BANK OF
THE HEARTLAND, CLINTON, KY; LEON OWENS, PRESIDENT, SWIFT &
STALEY, INC., PADUCAH, KY; EDWARD MUSSELMAN, OWNER, MUSSELMAN
PROPERTIES, PADUCAH, KY; JONAS NEIHOFF, OWNER, SOCIALLY
PRESENT, PADUCAH, KY
STATEMENT OF BRUCE KIMBELL
Mr. KIMBELL. Thank you. Good morning, Congressman Comer and
other guests. My name is Bruce Kimbell, President and CEO of
First Community Bank of the Heartland. We are a community bank
headquartered in Clinton, Kentucky, with five offices here in
the Purchase area and two in Northwest Tennessee.
The history of our $220 million bank dates back over 80
years, and we pride ourselves on being able to serve the
financial needs of our local area. I appreciate the opportunity
to be here today to present my views on helping the
agricultural and small business community through public-
private partnerships like the 7(a) program.
Here in my time at the bank, the SBA's 7(a) program has
been an important tool as we resolve to help the small
businesses in the communities we serve. At my bank, we are
intensely focused on building and maintaining long-term
relationships with our customers. We view our customers not as
numbers but as individuals and business owners. They are our
friends, neighbors, and job creators in the communities.
The SBA programs, like the USDA loan programs that we also
utilize, are an important part of our business in ag lending.
They help fill a critical gap, particularly for new and
beginning businesses that need access to longer terms and the
flexibility that guarantees provide.
The guarantee is critical to the bank as we seek to manage
the risk associated with these loans and facilitate
opportunities that might never have been made without this
important level of support. Government guarantee programs like
those provided through SBA have been an important product for
our institution since my arrival in 1989. 7(a) lending at one
time was a core product, but unfortunately changes to the
program over the years have complicated the loan-making process
not only for us but for several of my peers that I have reached
out to for comment.
We continue to try to utilize the program and have had the
good fortune of helping many beginning farmers as they sought
to diversify their family farming operation. Our guaranteed
business lending has assisted a wide variety of enterprises all
along Main Street, and each of these entities play a key role
in their local rural community providing job opportunities and
needed services.
On March the 6th, 2018, the SBA Inspector General released
a report on ag lending within the 7(a) program which examined
11 poultry loans made between 2012 and 2016. The IG then
recommended taking corrective actions on the loans if
necessary, and to review current arrangements between
integrators and growers. My understanding is that the SBA
examined all loans and found that they were correctly made in
accordance with SBA policy at the time.
As you are aware, poultry loans represent approximately 1
percent of the entire 7(a) portfolio. Our utilization of
federal and state-sponsored guarantee programs to assist our
poultry customers and other small ag producers has allowed
numerous farm families to remain on the farm and to remain a
viable economic entity. Farmers need to have as many financing
options as possible as every farmer is different and sooner or
later will experience both good and bad times. Maintaining
access to the 7(a) program is critical for the development and
success of our nation's smaller producers in the overall ag
economy.
As with any other program, there is room for improvement,
and I would like to share some examples of how the program can
be improved primarily related to the servicing of SBA loans.
One, we should be able to enable consolidation or
refinancing by the same lender of a single borrower; provide a
carve-out for small portfolio lenders such as the First
Community Bank and other community banks across the country to
attain a guarantee to avoid regulatory loans to one borrower
limitation; and then facilitate liquidation of multiple loans
to a borrower.
In conclusion, banks play an integral role in promoting the
economic strength of the communities we serve. The SBA's 7(a)
loan program is a vital piece of that, as our bank wants to
facilitate and promote economic growth, and this program should
be vigorously supported in the future.
Thank you for having this meeting and my invitation to
speak. I look forward to any questions you might have. Thank
you.
Mr. COMER. Thank you, Mr. Kimbell.
Mr. Owens?
STATEMENT OF LEON OWENS
Mr. OWENS. Good morning. My name is Leon Owens. I am
President of Swift & Staley, Inc., a 100-percent employee-owned
local business, government and commercial contractor. I would
like to thank the members of the House Small Business
Committee, especially Kentucky's 1st Congressional District
Congressman, James Comer, for hosting the field hearing in
Paducah. We sincerely appreciate the opportunity to share our
story and provide insight into the challenges we encounter.
Swift & Staley Mechanical Contractors, Inc., was
established in 1979. The initial focus was to provide
electrical and mechanical contracting support services to local
businesses. In 1994, the company split. The husband and wife
team, Mr. and Mrs. W.G. Holsapple, Jr., purchased the assets of
the mechanical portion of the business. The Holsapples had a
vision for Swift & Staley Mechanical and redirected the
company's efforts toward mechanical maintenance support for
area hospitals.
The Holsapples ultimately wanted to position the company
for business opportunities in the government contracting arena.
The vision came to fruition in 2000, when Swift & Staley
Mechanical Contractors was awarded a general site services
subcontract by Bechtel Jacobs Company, LLC, to perform facility
maintenance, roads and grounds maintenance, and janitorial
services at the site of the Paducah gas infusion plant in
Paducah, Kentucky.
The United States Department of Energy Office of
Environmental Management awarded Bechtel Jacobs a management
and integration contract for 5.5 years that included a
provision for Bechtel to serve as a site integrator, which
meant they were to hire subcontractors through competitive bids
to accomplish the end mission in Paducah.
In 2004, recognizing the potential benefit that small
business could provide, and seeking to improve small business
contracting goals, DOE solicited requests for proposal for the
first DOE EM complex-wide small business prime contract, the
Paducah site infrastructure contract. Based on the excellent
performance that Swift & Staley Mechanical had experienced as a
subcontractor to Bechtel, the Holsapples formed a team and
submitted a proposal for the opportunity. The scope of this
initial contract included environment safety and health and
quality, safeguards and site security, roads and grounds
maintenance, snow and ice removal, property management, fleet
management, information technology, and janitorial services. In
June 2005, Swift & Staley Mechanical commenced work as a small
business prime contractor.
Since the initial contract award in 2005, Swift & Staley
has won the re-competitions in 2010, and again in 2015. And the
contract itself has grown in revenue, as well as employees. The
contractual scope of the work expanded in 2015 to include
engineering, construction, and additional facility support and
maintenance.
In 2012, the company changed its name to Swift & Staley,
Inc. This change was made to alleviate confusion with another
small business of a similar name. And in 2016, Swift & Staley
and North Wind Solutions, an Alaska Native small business
corporation, formed a joint venture and submitted a proposal
for work, similar to what we were performing in Paducah, in
Piketon, Ohio. The effort was successful and the joint venture,
Portsmouth Mission Alliance, was awarded a firm fixed-price
contract.
Swift & Staley transitioned from a privately-owned entity
to an employee stock ownership plan in May of 2017. We are
aggressively looking to expand our service to other federal
sectors and locations while maintaining our core competencies
and client focus. On behalf of all small businesses, we would
like to thank Congressman Comer and the Small Business
Committee for supporting H.R. 5236, better known as the Main
Street Employee Ownership Act. As a small business prime
contractor, we would like to highlight a few of the challenges
that we have encountered.
Number one, small business size standard. Swift & Staley,
Inc.'s primary North American industry classification code, or
NAICS code, is 561210, Facility Support Services, with a
revenue basis of $38.5 million on a three-year rolling average.
Because we obtained additional work to support our client in
years 2014, 2015, and 2016, Swift & Staley exceeded this
revenue threshold for 2017. And based on that, we were unable
to competitively bid any small business set-aside procurements.
We respectfully request the Committee review the small business
size standard methodology, simplify the process, and include an
annual increase in the revenue threshold to allow for small
business growth.
Number two, at the national laboratories across the United
States, the U.S. Department of Energy should require the
outsourcing to small business of all necessary site functions
that otherwise distract the labs from executing their core
mission in high-end science, R&D, and weapons. Example areas to
be outsourced include environmental compliance, facility
maintenance, safeguards and security, occupational medicine
services, IT and cyber, roads and grounds, capital projects,
engineering construction, maintenance and repair of real
property. Importantly, every dollar subcontracted to a small
business by a national laboratory counts toward DOE's prime
contracting goals.
Number three, competitive prime opportunities are limited
for capable small businesses and should be made available
through a more balanced and fair procurement process. Unless a
small business possesses extraordinary qualifications, only a
few companies, large or small, within the DOE sector can
qualify for most prime opportunities.
Number four, small businesses are often left with Tier 2
DOE opportunities that are not meaningful in nature, and
predominantly staffing contracts or less sophisticated project
scope that is low price driven or reverse option. The terms and
conditions for execution are often iron clad, and all risk is
driven down to small business. Most prime contractors would not
agree to perform work under these same terms and conditions
they impose on small business contractors.
Number five, consistent with unrestricted prime contracts,
the DOE should consider a 10-year contract term that includes a
five-year base period and one or two multiple-year option
periods for small business prime contract set-asides. Longer
contracts enable small business to bid competitive pricing
through forward-looking pricing models. It also encourages a
long-term government contractor partnering where efficiencies
and execution are gamed and progress is made. It eliminates
frequent competitive bids that are costly and time-consuming
for both the government and the contractor.
Congressman Comer, we want to thank you for chairing. We
appreciate your consideration and look forward to your
questions.
Mr. COMER. Thank you, Mr. Owens.
Mr. Musselman?
STATEMENT OF EDWARD MUSSELMAN
Mr. MUSSELMAN. Thank you, sir. This is written to all
members of the Small Business Committee and any other
interested parties, and thank you for the interest in the
region. Obviously, you as well have a lot of interest in the
region. I believe this inquiry is very timely. Western Kentucky
has been slow to grow over the years. Many of the region's
larger employers have reduced jobs. Some plants have ceased
operations altogether. There has been a fear for many years
about what our region is going to look like in years to come.
However, there has been a recent mounting of enthusiasm and
excitement for the creativity that has swelled to relevance in
Paducah and surrounding areas through small business growth. It
is momentum that can forever change the landscape of our local
economies and have a lasting impact on our region, or it can be
abused and squandered through lip service of support and
accompanied cash grabs.
I really don't know if the intent here is to celebrate wins
in our region or to point out where help may be needed. What I
want to see is a booming economy of small businesses opening
and flourishing, increasing the draw to the area for visitors
and residents alike.
Over the past 5.5 years my wife and I have worked on a
project that really depicts what makes small business success
so difficult. Those ``supporting'' are often the ones who are
guaranteeing limitations on levels of success and achievement.
Lenders and government are two specific bodies that come to
mind. I refuse to accept no for an answer, even when hearing it
continuously for years, and quitting is not in my nature.
We took a building that was deemed a liability of no use
and slated for demolition and put it back to its former
grandeur. With that said, we saw the opportunity to better
showcase and promote some creative people and their businesses
and higher visibility, that it might help them, us, and the
attractiveness of our community. We have been celebrated
locally and regionally, featured in publications across the
state and the country. An economic development group here in
Paducah has won an international award due to the small
business undertaking. We have been awarded state preservation
awards. We and the tenants of the Coke plant employ many
talented folks and are involved in countless collaborative
activities with area businesses and non-profits.
Why was something this appreciated not easy to achieve?
Answer: Imposed limitations by people doing a job that aren't
empowered to do anything risky, which really translates to new,
creative, innovative, or change creating. The only risky thing
here that I see is if it would have imposed enough fear and
small thinking onto our project to change the outcome to one of
failure.
There have been some helpful contributors throughout this
process, many of them, in fact, and thank you to the partners
and supporters. But understand that it took everything that we
had to get it to go. This was an absolute gut-wrenching
sacrifice that our family made and had to endure. We put our
head down, we did what we had to do.
Why? Why was it that hard?
There were far more challenges that were necessary to make
this celebrated thing come to fruition. Why? Why is the climb
so steep to get a small business around all the naysayers and
powers-that-be that control one's ability to get open and
operating successfully? Why is the immediate tax burden so
high? Are governing bodies so short-sighted that they want to
grab all they can right out of the gate, rather than foster
prosperity to the business so they can yield many magnitudes
greater reward down the road than the cash grab up front,
followed by yet another vacant storefront and the questioning
as to why?
The Affordable Care Act is just one example of several
federal and state examples of limitations that our government
brings us. The Affordable Care Act impacts restaurant owners in
a way that I do not believe was intended. Obamacare was set to
waive small businesses from penalty. The criteria is confusing,
and no one is an expert on the subject except the insurance
companies, and that is questionable. Seeking advice on if you
need more insurance from an insurance company is like going to
a car lot and asking if it is time to buy a new car. All
businesses owned by someone pulled together for the Obamacare
calculation, and restaurants are very personnel heavy. It is
not difficult to get to 50 full-time equivalents as a
restaurateur and heavily penalized by the government.
Does that make you a big business? I certainly do not
believe so. Does this discourage hiring, expanding, opening,
owning additional businesses? I believe it does.
We have earned federal tax credits through the extensive
cost of proper historic preservation. The tax credits are
appreciated, and I want to state that clearly, are appreciated
and significant, and would be very beneficial in assisting with
cost reduction of start-up. But unlike the state historic tax
credits, the federal tax credits are not refundable and can
only be used against passive income. By the time I have enough
passive income to use these tax credits, I won't need them
anymore. I need them now.
We have active income that applying this credit towards
would benefit our situation greatly, but it appears it only
applies toward passive income. This is after consultation with
accountants and experts on historic preservation at the state
and federal levels. Despite the belief by some that it is
intended to and can be used on active income, we have reached
no definitive path to applying these credits in any manner
despite some exhaustive effort.
If these tax credits had immediate value to our situation,
we would already be undertaking preservation from an additional
historic building that we own. As it stands, we currently have
no feasible financial means to that.
We applied for an SBA loan. During this process, for one of
our businesses in the Coke plant and after the extensive red
tape of the application and the obligatory begging process,
they said yes and strung us along for seven months before
finally saying no. All that time-wasting run-around did was
increase the challenge and decrease the time available to
achieve a baseline of success to avoid foreclosure, then
bankruptcy and making the naysayers right. It is very easy to
say something can't work, and there are a lot of people out
there who are going to prove that that is right.
It wasn't easy, and it should have been, but I am okay with
that. I was determined to never quit, and I knew we would make
it work. I am not sure that everyone would have, and I can say
with all likelihood that very, very, very few would not have
quit at some time in the last five years.
This celebrated landmark has become a blueprint for growth
in other communities and brought good things to our community
should not have been able to happen. It is not necessarily
because I am good at anything. It is because I don't know when
to quit and I believed in what we were doing. But people who
are conditioned to quit during tremendous adversity have zero
chance. Hence, high small business failure rates, foreclosure
rates, bankruptcy rates, and subsequent tightened lending
principles mandated by the Federal Government comes as a result
of the failures of under-capitalized businesses. It is kind of
cyclical.
If governments would lower the take from the small business
owner in the first place, few would be operating short of
funds. There would be more happy stories and fewer bankruptcies
and less need for the mandated red tape that slows growth to a
crawl when approaching lenders.
We told everyone what was going to happen in this building
5.5 years ago. They thought we were crazy, but we did it
despite the necessary roadblocks. There is no reason it should
have taken five years to get to this point. There are likely
many, many, many success stories that would stop just short due
to all the wrong reasons.
Small business success needs to be available to many, not
to a few. It needs to be achieved with reasonable effort and
commitment to necessary challenges with limited bureaucratic
imposed barriers, and that will be good for all.
Small business development center I have already stated is
great. Chris Woodard has been very helpful in our process.
However, his office and others in the region are underfunded
and spread thin. The Paducah location of the Kentucky
Innovation Network has disbanded recently. Also, the focus for
small business services is typically to get you open, not
helping keep costs down through services offered once business
is operational.
The Forward Paducah initiative through Paducah Economic
Development is a great vision and road map for this region. I
believe Entre Paducah is back in action, getting people pointed
in the right direction. There is a non-profit, Maker Space
Sprocket. Our Visitors' Bureau is a tremendous asset and
promoter of creative offerings in our area, but I think there
is more needed to raise the level of expectation for small
business growth in this relatively rural region.
Lower costs, lower payments to governing bodies, and fewer
mandates are real access to real value provided by those
governing bodies. If someone has a talent and a business is
needed to showcase and present their talent for a living, they
need to first abandon all focus on their skill, which is the
reason for them opening a business, become a jack of all
trades. Master accounting, marketing, bookkeeping, legal, HR,
hiring, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. It is endless. While
trying to open a business and attract customers and compete
with larger companies, they also must learn how to perform
professional-level services that one may have little interest
or aptitude for, or hire an accountant, a payroll clerk,
bookkeeper, an attorney, et cetera, which would make paying the
many tax bills that much more difficult.
Obviously, this is a known battle that small businesses
have to account for, but all this could be outsourced or
handled adequately in-house if federal, state, and local
governments were not showing up to the ribbon cutting with
palms extended.
There will be jobs. There will be increased values when
fewer commercial locations are vacant. There will be growth.
With growth comes money. But there is no growth when the doors
are shuttered due to an inability to keep up with tax burdens,
licensing fees, ridiculous and unnecessary increases in cost of
construction improvement associated with code interpretation,
which comes down to one hired person's interpretation, and
there is no means for a small business owner to really
adequately challenge or question those costly opinions of
inspectors.
If you want people to step out and step up to grow and
change areas, let it happen. Aide if you will, but just
allowing more money to stay in the hands of those driving
change and starting businesses will allow for more growth to
occur.
One of our small businesses is a brewery. We own a brewery
and a restaurant under the same roof. The restaurant sells the
beer that is brewed by the brewery. The three tier system in
Kentucky prevents self-distribution, and therefore prevents the
direct sale and transfer of the beer 60 feet from one cooler to
another. Instead, we are mandated by Kentucky state law to use
a distributor, a distributor that we don't need, and they must
transfer our beer 250 miles to here in Kentucky where it must
sit for 24 hours in a bonded cooler before traveling 250 miles
on a return trip back to Paducah to the same building where it
was brewed and mandated by law to have left the day before.
This is not environmentally friendly. This drives up cost
for the small business. This potentially diminishes product
quality, and it most certainly is an unnecessary inefficiency
felt by buyer and seller, in this case my wife and I on both
ends. This is a state law, but the state law is hurting
businesses nonetheless.
We did something that was very difficult, and now it is a
jump. Now it is the city and the state and the Federal
Government's cash cow, and that limits our growth and hiring.
Having free or reduced access to bookkeepers, accountants,
attorneys, marketing firms, human resources services, hiring
agencies, et cetera, et cetera, that would be a real help to
improving success rates of small businesses. Or better yet,
just let small businesses keep the money that they are earning.
Most will be immediately returned to the economy by easing the
burdens that restrict growth.
If the cost of doing business is less, more will be able to
successfully operate businesses while providing an adequate
living to their family and those that they employ. Fewer vacant
buildings will strengthen real estate markets. More jobs, more
offerings, and strong economies will attract additional
residents and businesses. This is all known; this is all very
obvious. I am not sure why we are not doing it.
I certainly mean no disrespect to any individual or
specific business or organization. I appreciate the willingness
of Mr. Comer and the other members of the Small Business
Committee to be inviting feedback in this manner here today. I
know there is some over-simplification of some complex issues
that might intertwine with commitments to other stakeholders
other than small business owners, but I am hopeful that
consideration will be given to the further reduction of burdens
placed on the shoulders of the American small business owner.
Small businesses don't have lobbyists. We appreciate
opportunities such as these to voice concerns.
Thank you all very much for the invitation, the time, and
your attention. Thank you.
Mr. COMER. Thank you very much.
Mr. Neihoff?
STATEMENT OF JONAS NEIHOFF
Mr. NEIHOFF. All right. Well, you all have my written
testimony, so I am going to go off script a little bit and just
kind of share a little bit. It is probably a horrible mistake,
but I am going to go ahead and do it anyway.
Just a little bit of background on myself. I am one of six
kids. My father is a home painter. My mother cleans homes. We
grew up in a lot of challenging situations, both my parents
working for themselves. I saw their struggle. I saw my dad have
multiple ideas and aspirations and things he wanted to achieve,
only to hit roadblocks himself and feel that it was just too
overwhelming. The discouragement of trying to step out and
start a business when you have a complex business ecosystem
like we have now with government, but also technology changing,
it can be very intimidating.
As Ed said, it is not for the faint of heart. You have to
have some grit to really get through it. You have to have a
little bit of your quitter to just be missing in your brain to
keep going. It is not easy.
So I saw those challenges, and that is really what inspired
me to start Socially Present. When I went to school for
business, I wanted to be able to help those people navigate
through some of the complexity of business and accomplish some
of their dreams and their goals, because I saw my own father
not being able to do that.
And I have seen time and time again throughout my life with
this that entrepreneurs who are stepping out and trying to do
something hitting these roadblocks because everything is just
overly complicated. It is just overly complicated. We need to
simplify things. We need to make it easy and provide real help.
I think a lot of that complexity comes, and where the
bureaucracy kind of comes is because we take outlined
situations and we start to build policies and procedures around
them, and they are outlining situations that don't apply to
everyone because business is dynamic. Every business, every
organization is different.
So we try to systemize, and I understand why the government
tries to do that, to create their own efficiencies, but it has
created inefficiencies. We have had all these legal loopholes
to jump through that slow down our ability to just grow, as Ed
was saying, being able to just really grow and expand.
The two sides of what I feel would be the most helpful is--
and when I look back at my success, the question was asked what
is the biggest resource, and what was your biggest obstacle? I
would say by far the biggest obstacle is the complexity of
business. There are just too many things that you have to jump
through. The government makes it difficult a lot of times, and
the technology changing, all the different aspects, putting a
business plan together. It seems like half the time when we
meet with people, by the time they have their business plan put
together it is not even relevant anymore. Things just change so
quick. So by far, the biggest obstacle is the complexity.
The biggest resource when I look back at what helped me
was, honestly, the very core of it was a mentor. Having someone
who had been there and had gone on and accomplished some great
things to help me along the way and help me navigate the
complexity of business was an incredible resource. And it
wasn't always just the education, but sometimes it was that
encouragement to keep going and to keep moving forward.
Looking back and after meeting with several business
owners, I realize how rare that was that I had the opportunity
to be able to find someone like that and how really valuable it
truly was. I see these others who don't have access to that,
and I see organizations like Chris Wooldridge and some of the
others, that these organizations exist and they are trying to
fill that gap, but they are incredibly under-resourced. They
don't have the resources to meet the demand.
I spoke with a gentleman this week who said that he had
gotten involved in the SCORE program, and it was six months
before he even got matched up. I mean, it takes too long to do
it. In the meantime, and this is kind of a soapbox rant, but I
see a Baby Boomer generation that is retiring that I think
would be a great asset to field some of those mentor programs.
But I think that the biggest two things, again, that I
think the government and that I would ask that we could do is
really remove some of the complexity and get rid of some of the
bureaucracy that it takes and realize that every business is
different and dynamic and unique; and then the second is to
meet that need. What I would love to see is a statewide
mentorship program, whether it be even some of the seminars and
some of the things that Chris has done, or even matching people
with others in their industry throughout the state. The
difficulty of doing that on a local level is a lot of times you
are matched up with people who might be perceived competitors.
Statewide, you could give people access to great minds and that
are a little further along that are willing to share that
knowledge and help Kentucky grow as a whole.
That is really all I have.
Mr. COMER. Well, thank you all very much for your
testimony.
Again, this is the Small Business Committee. So when I
requested to have a field hearing, we wanted to have four
diverse small businesses in West Kentucky. So we have a
community banker with a large agriculture portfolio; we have
one of the subcontractors for the DOE side; we have a real
estate developer; and we have a startup technology company
based here in Paducah. So I think that is a pretty diverse
portfolio of small businesses.
At this time, what I am going to do is we have notes from
the testimony that was submitted and from things that I just
jotted down listening. I am just going to go down the line and
ask each of you different questions, and when we conclude I
will probably ask a question to the effect of what would you
like to see Congress do, what can Congress do legislatively to
help small business? But that will be the last question, and we
will be mindful of everyone's time, and we will rattle down
through these questions, and hopefully we can get everything in
and then get the concluding statements. Then I will go back to
Washington and hopefully we can get some results from this
field hearing, and I think we will. I am very confident.
I will start with Bruce Kimbell. One of the reasons that we
asked you to be on the panel is you all do a lot of SBA loans.
I was with a bank in a rural community that didn't do any SBA
loans, but the other bank, the other community bank did. This
Committee has jurisdiction over SBA, SBA loans, and things like
that.
What are some things that need to be changed with the SBA
program to make it easier? I know that Mr. Musselman gave an
example of someone applying for an SBA loan for a long time and
then they were rejected. What are some things that can be done
to tweak the SBA program to make it easier to get a final
decision quicker? I don't know if Dodd-Frank reform has changed
that any or what.
Mr. KIMBELL. I don't know if there is an easy answer for
that or not. Just as Mr. Musselman was talking about a few
moments ago, we too have seen the struggles as far as trying to
deal with some of our borrowers. Most recently, it just so
happens in the same line, in the same industry, the restaurant
business, we just recently had closed an SBA loan, I guess
within the last couple of months, and I think that that
particular deal took us about a year to get through.
Mr. COMER. Versus how long would it take a normal loan? If
you were going to the SBA, your bank was doing it, what would
that be?
Mr. KIMBELL. Sixty days, maybe. I am guessing. Sixty to 90.
You would hope 60. You would hope less than that. But still,
that particular process to the individual, they were a
multifaceted company, a husband and wife team. They had two or
three different lines of business that were all fairly new over
the last 10 years. So it complicated the process going through
each one of those entities, where that might not have been the
case. But just trying to find that, I spoke with--I am sorry, I
can't remember his name here, the staff member--and the issue
that I have seen. I started with our bank in 1989. At that
point in time, there was a regional SBA office in Louisville. I
can remember the gentleman's name, David Heil.
When we had a problem with a loan or trying to work through
a process, we called David. David helped us through that
process. I haven't seen Mr. Heil in 20 years, but he has
expertise, he has ability to help us work through that process,
versus today where everything is automated, everything is
standardized. You are trying to put everything into a box, and
just as you spoke of the differences between each one of us and
the stories we brought, each small business brings that to the
table also. So it is very difficult to put that into a box. It
is difficult to make a standardized process.
Now, I understand the need to be efficient. I see where
that comes from. But yet anything that we can do to push that
back down to the local level helps, even if that local level is
still 300 miles away in Louisville. That is still better than--
I am not sure now, maybe California where we send an
application today.
So that, to me, is one step that could very easily help, is
just trying to bring some of that back down to a closer level.
Mr. COMER. Thank you.
I am just going to go down the line. We will do this for a
few questions, and then we will try to start wrapping it up.
Mr. Owens, I am intrigued by the ESOP. I didn't know--I
should have known. I didn't know you all were an ESOP until I
read your testimony that you submitted. I am a big fan of
ESOPs. I think one of the most successful companies in Kentucky
is Hutchinson Industries. I know people who work at
Hutchinson's. I know low-level workers that were back boys that
were in the ESOP that retired with just unbelievable pensions
because the company had grown and stuff.
One thing I want to mention is our Committee and the full
House advanced H.R. 5236, which you mentioned, the Main Street
Employee Ownership Act. The bill allows small business owners
to participate in ESOPs, which I think is the most beneficial
program in the world for employees to gain wealth and be part
of the management team and everything at the company. But this
bill hasn't advanced in the Senate yet, so we are working on
trying to push the Senate, our counterparts in the Senate Small
Business Committee to try to get this bill pushed through. I
wanted to mention that.
But can you tell us anything about the ESOP? Has it been
any type of change going from a private company to an ESOP or
anything like that?
Mr. OWENS. Yes, sir. I think it has been a major culture
change for us because previously, as I stated, we had a husband
and wife that owned the entire company, and the decision-making
was centered based on their experience. But now we have a board
of directors, and that board of directors is made up of
employees who have been with the company for a number of years.
But the board of directors also recognizes that for us to
maintain a level of excellence, and also to be relevant moving
forward, it is in our best interest to make different decisions
than if the profits were going directly to individuals, and
that has been the largest, probably the biggest change.
I think also the ability to look and venture out beyond
just our local area, because we currently have another project
that we are performing in Ohio, and we are branching out into
Tennessee and then in some other areas and not just be specific
to one particular governmental agency like we are right now. I
think being able to diversify is very important.
Also, Van Meter Insurance, we have had a long-term
relationship with them, and I think just listening to their
story has been an encouragement for us as we move forward
because we just completed our first year in the ESOP world.
Mr. COMER. That is great.
The second question to begin with, we get a lot of
complaints in our office about the definition of size for the
DOE contracts. You mentioned that in your testimony. We have
other subcontractors at the DOE site that are in the audience
today.
What do we need to do to change the definition of size? We
want small businesses to grow, and it seems sometimes they grow
and they slightly exceed the definition of a small business,
and then they are going to shrink because they are ineligible
for contracts.
Agencies are trying to meet the small business goals. That
is something that we hear about in Washington. The goal of this
Committee is we want more small businesses awarded subcontracts
for projects like the deactivation. But the growth of small
businesses kicks them out once they move past that threshold.
What do you think needs to be done? You had mentioned
changing the threshold. What should the threshold be?
Mr. OWENS. I think, Congressman, if you take a look--and
again, I will use us as an example. But if you gain additional
work, if you are already a prime contractor, not a
subcontractor, not doing staff augmentation, but if you are
already a prime contractor and you have an opportunity to gain
additional work, you are always looking to see and you are
having to work with your accountants to make sure, because--I
will come back to your question--there is a gap between the
38.5 and then a large business. As I pointed out, last year we
were unable to compete as a small business because we had
exceeded the revenue standard by a small amount, but it doesn't
matter, we had exceeded it.
In order for us to then compete, we would have to be in the
area that is called full and open competition, and that brings
in all of your large, multi-billion-dollar companies, and you
can't compete with that. I mean, there is no way that you can
compete in a full and open.
There is a whole other discussion about the deactivation
contract here in Paducah. I can make a strong case to you that
that did not have to be a large business procurement. I can
make a case to you that it could have been a small business
set-aside. I can make a case to you that what that large
business is doing by subbing out all these pieces of work, a
small business can do the same thing because it is not about
performing that work as a large business. It is about managing
the work that you subcontract out. There is a difference there.
But I think that there should be an automatic cost-of-
living adjustment that is built in to the revenue size standard
because we may exceed that again, and if you exceed it one
year, then you are out of business for a couple of years based
on that rolling average.
So I just think that there is a way to have a more
simplified process. As each one of the panelists has mentioned,
there has to be a way to have a more simplified process. You
could tie it to the cost-of-living index. You could have an
automatic increase. Right now it is 38.5. You could use some
type of calculation to make that 40, and each year, because as
businesses grow--I mean, that is what you want. You want your
revenue to increase. So quite naturally, you would then want to
have the size standard increase as well.
One other option, though, too, Congressman, is some of the
NAICS codes are set aside for a number of employees and/or
revenue. So you could easily say if you have 250 employees or
less, or the revenue size standard of 38.5, you would still
qualify. So there are a couple of options there that could be
utilized.
Mr. COMER. Thank you.
Mr. Musselman, I appreciate your testimony and your story
and the difference you made in Paducah, especially there at the
brewery. I appreciate risk takers. In this Congress, I can say
today, we try to reward risk takers because we believe that
that is the path to growing the economy, not through the
government.
One of the goals of this Committee and of President Trump
has been to try to reduce unnecessary and burdensome
regulations to try to be able to free up the private sector to
where you invest more money into the economy, grow the economy,
create the jobs and things like that.
One of the big issues, certainly in the year-and-a-half
that I have been in Congress, and beyond, has been the
Obamacare mandate. I want to mention this. The Small Business
Committee has written the IRS seeking more information about
enforcement for small businesses with 51 to 1,500 employees for
2015 and going forward. The IRS, believe it or not, has not
provided the information, but we are going to continue to
request that. There has been a lot in the news about Congress
requesting information from the Department of Justice and the
FBI on another issue that I certainly don't want to get into
today, but we are trying to break this bureaucracy. The
government created a huge bureaucracy over the last decade. We
are trying to disrupt it. We have disrupters here. You all are
younger entrepreneurs, more of the disrupters, and we are
trying to battle the bureaucracy.
But I wanted to ask a specific Obamacare question because
you mentioned that in your testimony. While employers with 50
or fewer employees are not subject to Obamacare's burdensome
employer mandate, many small business employers still find the
cost of health insurance unaffordable and options limited. How
important is it that we continue to fight to repeal and replace
Obamacare so that Americans have more options for better access
to care and to try to reduce the cost of health care, or at the
very least stop the double-digit growth of health care premiums
every year?
Mr. MUSSELMAN. Well, that is certainly a very high-level
question, and thank you very much for the kind words. I am no
expert on Obamacare, but I have been involved in two restaurant
operations, one that I was an advisor, one that I am an owner,
and both I just feel are being brought into Obamacare standards
outside of the intention of that law. If you are running an
accounting firm or you are running an architecture firm, you
have 50 architects, you probably are a big business. Running a
restaurant with 50 employees is not a big business.
So I feel like the restaurants specifically are falling
into a grey area that really--I mean, we want to provide health
care for employees that are doing a good job for us. It is not
about that. It is really about the mandate itself, and there
are so many employees who aren't necessarily in a restaurant
looking for health care because it is a small business.
So I feel like the restaurants are falling into a grey area
that was intended to probably be falling into the small
business side.
Mr. COMER. What about the--and if you don't want to answer
this, you don't have to. When we were doing the tax reform
bill, the historic tax credit initially was----
Mr. MUSSELMAN. I would love to talk about the tax credit.
Mr. COMER.--was taken out, and we got a lot of calls from
Paducah. Sandra Wilson is a very effective lobbyist in the
Paducah area, and I will be honest, I didn't realize there were
as many people in the 1st Congressional District of Kentucky
that were taking advantage of, in a good way, the historic tax
credit.
Mr. MUSSELMAN. I think it is fantastic.
Mr. COMER. Did you participate?
Mr. MUSSELMAN. Absolutely. I probably spent, again--you
know, I don't want to dig into finances. I mean, everybody has
their issues, needs, wins, losses, whatnot. But I put about
$10,000, I would estimate, between drawing up the paperwork, as
well as paying for the process of getting that tax credit,
probably around $10,000 cash out for a tax credit that is non-
refundable, which means it does not come in the form of cash if
you can't use it that year. Some do. Kentucky state historic
tax credit does, and it only applies towards passive income.
So I would love to be operating passive income at a level
where I could actually use the tax credit that I earned, but I
am not in a position to do that. So when I need it, when my
businesses are in their infancy, when I am trying to grow and
expand and do more things and I am fighting the burdens of
short-term loans, unable to take advantage of SBA loans and
whatnot, we have stepped out on a long limb, and we are very
proud of what we have done. I am very confident in the
direction that we are going.
But if that tax credit could play a role now rather than 10
years from now, it is a game changer, and I would jump right
back into another project rather than not be able to.
Mr. COMER. And I appreciate that. We are obviously taking
notes. I believe that there will be another tax reform clean-up
bill. The President calls it Tax Reform 2. One of the goals
will be to make the individual tax cuts permanent. I think that
is a very doable goal, but also to kind of tweak some mistakes,
some unintended consequences of the tax bill. We will certainly
look at that again.
Mr. MUSSELMAN. I very much do not want that tax credit to
go away.
Mr. COMER. Right.
Mr. MUSSELMAN. I think it is very beneficial.
Mr. COMER. And it won't, I am pretty confident. It is very
popular.
Mr. MUSSELMAN. It is fantastic, and if I were a wealthy
individual sitting here, I probably would be using that in the
next two to three years.
Mr. COMER. And I want to mention something else that has
nothing to do with this one, but it does have to do with West
Kentucky. I stayed at the Meadows Hotel in Fulton. I don't know
if anybody has been there yet. I highly recommend it. You are
going to be shocked when you see it. That wouldn't have
happened without the historic tax credit. That is according to
the developer that developed that hotel, too. That was one of
the things that I learned during the tax reform bill, how many
people were utilizing that, and how many projects probably
wouldn't have happened without it.
Mr. MUSSELMAN. Our project was actually on the cover of
that. I don't know if you are familiar or not. I mean, I was
very much involved in all of those conversations and very
much--I mean, between you and I and everybody else listening to
this testimony, I can make that statement, but it is only
partially true.
The Kentucky state tax credit, that is a fact. I got that
back as a--any that I did not use, any tax burden that was not
relieved I got as a check to offset expenses. This right here,
I will go ahead and throw it out there just for the magnitude
of it. It is $670,000 that I probably won't be able to use in
the next 20 years, and you can imagine if that were a small
percentage of the cost of our project, it would be pretty
valuable to plug in.
Mr. COMER. Absolutely. Good to know. Thank you.
Mr. MUSSELMAN. Thank you.
Mr. COMER. Mr. Neihoff, when we look at one of the
challenges facing rural Kentucky, rural America but
specifically rural Kentucky, our best and brightest young
people, when they graduate from high school they go off. They
would maybe like to come back to rural Kentucky, but they don't
have the opportunity there that they may have in a Nashville
and St. Louis and Louisville, particularly when it comes to a
technology job, high-tech jobs.
What are some things that we can do in rural Kentucky to
try to foster more startups like yours? I know you had
impediments like every other small business, access to capital.
You are starting out as a startup with no business plan,
probably no tax history to be able to obtain a loan in the
traditional method. But what are some things that we can do to
try to get more high-tech startups from this next generation,
from the Millennials and maybe the younger generation, the X-
ers and things like that?
Mr. NEIHOFF. I think there are really kind of two sides to
that question, the one of recruiting young people to this area
and what is important to them, whether they are going to be
employed or they are going to start a company themselves. Is
that kind of what you are asking? Do you want to move them back
here to be employed or to be entrepreneurs themselves?
Mr. COMER. Either, either/or.
Mr. NEIHOFF. Okay. Well, I think for me, what I see in our
area, and when we talk about marketing our area as a whole to
young people, I have asked all the time why do you choose to
stay in Paducah and live here? Well, for me it is being on the
ground level of a community that you know is about to grow to
the size of a Nashville or one of those other areas. I imagine
being in one of those larger communities when it was just kind
of grassroots and it was still growing, you feel like you have
the ability to actually be part of voicing how that community
shapes. So that is very appealing to me, and I feel like that
is probably appealing to a lot of younger people as well, that
you have the freedom--and Paducah is good about this--the
freedom as a young person to have a voice. I think that is what
people are ultimately looking for in the community that they
live in if they are those Type A, get-`er-done type of people.
You have that desire to want to create the place that you live.
As far as entrepreneurs, I go back to it is just that
everything has become way too complicated, and there are
barriers to entry for a lot of young people to go out and start
their own. I think that it is both financial barriers that,
again, if you try to reach out and get a grant or you try to
get funding, it is a complicated process that discourages a
lot; and then also the lack of education and knowledge of
knowing how to do that. That is where I feel like that
mentorship program could go a long way because really, I feel
like successful young people are those who honor and value the
wisdom of those who have gone before them. I think that is a
big difference.
So I guess really, for this area, I don't feel like we
compete with Louisville and Nashville and St. Louis. I feel
like that is the wrong conversation to try to even compete with
them. If people want to live in a larger community, a
cosmopolitan, metropolitan area, they are going to move to
those. They are not even going to consider Paducah. But there
are a lot of people like myself. I have three children--11, 9,
and 7. I don't want to live in one of those communities. I want
to live in one that I have a voice in, that I can be successful
in, that I can have some access to some cool things for my
family to be able to do, and that is really what I am looking
for.
So I feel like if we want to recruit those people, we need
to better market and communicate who we are as a community, and
we need to remove some of the barriers and provide them with
mentorship and encouragement to be able to launch those
companies and businesses.
Mr. COMER. A couple of specific questions for your industry
which we have some jurisdiction over. I want to ask a quick
question about intellectual property protections and
trademarks, just real briefly.
In your experience, are startups aware of intellectual
property protections?
Mr. NEIHOFF. Are they aware of intellectual property
protections? I don't think they are aware, a lot of times, of
even the laws, what that goes into. You run into a lot of theft
in that area. A lot of businesses will step out and try to take
a design or take a piece of creative property without really
understanding how that even works. So I think there are some
limitations and really a need to educate the public on those
types of things.
Mr. COMER. I am going to ask this question about trademark.
If you can answer it, that is great. If not, don't worry about
it. But can you describe the process a small business owner
goes through to obtain a trademark?
Mr. NEIHOFF. Talk to an attorney.
[Laughter.]
Mr. COMER. Okay.
Mr. NEIHOFF. That is the extent of what I know.
Mr. COMER. That is a great answer.
In the technology field, if you were looking for more
employees in that field, how difficult is it to find employees
that are tech savvy, that have a high tech IQ?
Mr. NEIHOFF. It is very difficult. The reality--and I don't
know all the statistics on how it all goes, but I hear all the
time that there are people without jobs, and then there are
jobs without people. Any time you have that, when you have one
side saying we can't find work, and you have another side that
says we can't find employees, you have a workforce development
issue, and I think that there needs to be better access and
better training and better promotion of existing programs to
help people learn those types of skills.
I think again, kind of going back to the issue of
complexity versus simplicity, we over-complicate that because
we put these programs together that, by the time they are done
and ready, they are irrelevant. Technology changes too fast.
So again, having access to people who understand those
things to be able to coach and expand and help young people
grow in that area I think would be very valuable. I think we
need to start at a very young age, I think even the middle-
school level and up, that people need to not just learn systems
and processes but understand how to learn. They need to learn
how to learn. They need to be critical thinkers of being able
to figure out how coding and some of those technology things
work, because if you can teach people to learn, then it doesn't
matter what is presented to them, they will soak it up.
I have always said with college and math and things, I love
math and things of that nature, and people say, well, when are
you ever going to use calculus? Well, that is not the point.
What calculus does for individuals is it teaches them to
formulate a problem and put it together and solve that problem.
I think that it is an exercise for your brain. Your brain is a
muscle, like anything else, and you are training people to be
thinkers and problem solvers, and that is what we need to do.
We have to get out of the process, the traditional education
system.
Mr. COMER. Good deal.
One thing that the Small Business staff passed along that I
wanted to mention. We recently, we the Small Business
Committee, recently had a hearing on intellectual property for
small businesses. Our considered legislation would provide more
resources for small business through SBA. But one of the big
problems with the trade issue now with Canada is stealing our
intellectual property, and that applies to the big businesses
much more so than the small businesses. But that is something
that we wanted to note, something that the Committee is going
to be delving into as we move forward.
I want to go back and ask Bruce a couple of quick
questions, and then we are going to wrap this up. We said we
would keep it to an hour-and-a-half.
Mr. Kimbell, we finally have a success story in a piece of
legislation that small businesses were wanting that passed the
House, the Senate, it actually passed the Senate first and then
the House, the President signed into law, and that is Dodd-
Frank reform. For those of you that may not be familiar with
that, that was a piece of legislation that Congress passed
after the big banks failed, the big banks being Bear Stearns,
Lehman Brothers, those Wall Street investment banks.
The community banks didn't do anything wrong, especially in
Kentucky. To my knowledge, not one community bank went under,
not one community bank was even in danger of going under. But
Congress overreacted and passed legislation that treated the
community bank in Clinton the same as Bear Stearns or Lehman
Brothers or Bank of America or Citibank, much different types
of banking, much different sizes.
So we passed this Dodd-Frank repeal for community banks
only. When do you think you will be able to start seeing change
in the compliance and all that? Have you gotten any indication
of when?
Mr. KIMBELL. Hopefully the sooner, the better. As that
worked its way through the process, the biggest piece probably
for us is some of the residential aspects, trying to work
through putting things in our own loan portfolio that would
allow us to do away with certain underwriting requirements. So
that is probably going to be very helpful for us as we go
through, as I have heard from a lot of my peers across the
state that that is going to be helpful to them. Maybe in some
of the more populous areas, that is probably going to be more
of a benefit to them.
Any time, though, I guess when there is a change of
attitude as far as the regulatory side where they are trying to
work with us, just as we all heard today from the regulatory
side working its way down from one-size-fits-all, that is hard.
That makes it very hard. From Washington, D.C. to Clinton,
Kentucky is a long way, and that step there, a lot of things
can go into something that makes it very difficult for us to
put into play every day, or makes it very difficult for us to
do our jobs.
As a community bank, there is nothing that makes you
happier than seeing someone, one of your customers being
successful. I had the good fortune of coming home, to come back
to our bank. So any time that I can see young people that have
been successful that I have known their entire lives, that
makes you very happy as a banker, because we know these folks.
We see the heartaches, we see the struggles, we see the
successes, but we don't go off somewhere to a faraway, distant
place either. We go back home, and so we know these people.
That makes it a little bit more touching.
Mr. COMER. Absolutely. That is what I would tell the
critics that were complaining about Dodd-Frank reform. It was
going to lead to big banks needing to be bailed out again,
which I completely disagree with. No bank wants to make a bad
loan. It is not in your best interest to make a bad loan.
Mr. KIMBELL. And the larger banks, the whole
standardization process, the larger banks are the ones who
appreciate that because they don't have to know the community.
They don't have to know the people. All they have to know is
what the process is, and then how can we make that as efficient
as we possibly can.
Mr. COMER. Switching gears, one last question. We spend a
lot of time in the Small Business Committee with the SBA
program because we have jurisdiction over the SBA. I know you
all have a big poultry portfolio with SBA. Are there other
types of agriculture that you can get an SBA loan approved for
other than poultry?
Mr. KIMBELL. Pretty much on the livestock side, whether it
be poultry or pork.
Mr. COMER. Pork.
Mr. KIMBELL. Those would be the two.
Mr. COMER. Vertically integrating----
Mr. KIMBELL. Vertically integrating. You probably could get
off into some--I would be guessing, so I can't really speak to
that. But we have always tried to look to USDA and to SBA to
try to assist us just because of the specialized nature of
those buildings and of the whole process.
Mr. COMER. Okay. Great.
Well, I appreciate everyone's open testimony and your
answering the questions.
I am going to let everyone say if there is anything that
you have a recommendation for the Small Business Committee.
Obviously, every word will be in the official record. We are
taking this back to the Small Business Committee. We want to
try to get results. Each of you have unique small businesses.
You have successful small businesses. But you each have some
challenges that I think government could make life a little
easier for you to be able to grow and expand your businesses.
So I will start with Bruce Kimbell, if you have any closing
recommendation or if there is anything you forgot that you
wanted to mention for the Small Business Committee in
Washington.
Mr. KIMBELL. I would just like to reiterate, number one,
thank you for hosting this today. I very much appreciate it.
Anything we can do to promote Western Kentucky is a great
thing. We have a lot of individuals here today, not only at
this table but in the back of the room too, that bring their
best every day to try to make this a great place to live.
Anything that can be done to push those decision-making
processes back down to the local level, I think that is always
where we have to concentrate at. We have to put it back to us.
We are the ones that live with it. We are not going to do
something foolish just to expedite something because, as I
said, we live in the communities. We see the results, both good
and bad, so why would we put ourselves into that situation? So
put it back to where we can make those decisions and that we
can try to work with our customers to help them achieve what
they want to.
Mr. COMER. And I appreciate, Bruce Kimbell, in Hickman
County, Monroe County, where I reside, and all the communities
around where I reside, the community bank is the best corporate
citizen in town.
Mr. KIMBELL. We try to be.
Mr. COMER. Every sponsorship of every Little League
program, or any time that they need anything, they go to the
community banks first. So we appreciate the role that the
community banks provide as a corporate citizen and as a
provider of access.
Mr. KIMBELL. Thank you very much.
Mr. COMER. Mr. Leon Owens.
Mr. OWENS. Congressman Comer, again, we would just like to
thank you for taking the time out of your busy schedule to have
a field hearing here. I think it is very important. I think
this is the first field hearing that has been held in Paducah
since the late `80s. So we commend you for doing this.
I have two comments that I would like for you to be mindful
of. In regard to the ESOP, this legislation that hopefully will
pass the Senate and then be signed by the President, it is the
first ESOP legislation in over 20 years. We know that there is
a significant tax benefit that ESOP companies receive. We would
ask the Committee to please continue to be mindful of that and
be diligent to ensure that that benefit still continues for
ESOP companies because we know that any time a business,
whether it is small or large, but particularly a small business
is able to receive a tax benefit, that is something that is
looked at by others in a less-than-favorable manner. So we
would encourage the Committee to continue to just be supportive
of any ESOP legislation that might come before you.
The other thing that I would like to add is small
businesses, government contractors, it is a dying breed, so to
speak, because oftentimes--and I will use us as an example--a
lot of federal agencies do not want to deal with small
businesses from a prime contract standpoint. They want to deal
with the large businesses because that is what they are used
to. As was pointed out, the large businesses have the high-paid
lobbyists. The small businesses don't. The small businesses
have to use their existing staff and do the best that they can
to ensure that their positions are identified and promoted. We
would ask that any legislation that could be favorable to small
business be promoted.
The other thing is each one of these federal agencies, they
have a small business office, the office of small business that
is responsible, supposedly, to promote small business within
that agency. I know that we have found over time that their
mission is contrary to what is promoted, and that is very
difficult for small business. I will give you a quick example.
The contracts that we have been fortunate and blessed to
win, they are in excess of $100 million, and you need to have
mature systems, accounting systems, HR systems, to be able to
successfully manage those contracts. But then I can point to a
contract that might be $50 or $60 million that should be set
aside for small business, but it is not. It is considered full
and open competition for large business. Why?
Those are the kinds of concerns that we have, that there is
not a recognition of small business as prime contractors by
various governmental agencies.
So again, we appreciate you for taking time to have the
hearing here.
Mr. COMER. And we look forward to working with you on that
as we proceed.
Mr. OWENS. Yes, sir.
Mr. COMER. Thank you.
Mr. Musselman?
Mr. MUSSELMAN. Yes, thank you very much again for the
invitation. We really appreciate that.
I guessing paring it back to what I think is a tangible,
reasonable request, I think looking at where restaurants can
fall into the Affordable Care Act, whether or not the intent,
whichever side of the line the intent was intended for, let's
clarify that and see. Again, I don't feel like one single
restaurant should be qualifying people as a big business.
Tax credits, historic tax credits are a fantastic thing. It
is very expensive to do proper historic rehabilitation. Many
times, it is much more expensive than new construction. But
there is culture, there is history, there is real value in
protecting and maintaining our built heritage, and the tax
credits are a tangible offset to that. It still would probably
not go 1-to-1 on cost, but getting that actual return. So
seeking whether or not those could be refundable tax credits,
as they are in the state, that would be a huge change in
whether or not people are actually continuing with these
projects.
And then again, I appreciate your and Mr. Kimbell's
insights on the Dodd-Frank repeal. It will be interesting to
see how that impacts the local level. All of our financing has
been provided at the local level by community lenders, and they
have been doing the best that they can to provide support.
Hopefully this will enable them to abbreviate the process and
get hands--not in mine. I am pretty well to the point where I
am through the entry to small business. But there are so many
talented folks in our area that just really need an
opportunity, and that opportunity is with capital, and
potentially reduction in taxes as well.
Thank you very much.
Mr. COMER. Well, thank you, and I look forward to your next
big investment in Paducah. I think you all may have missed it.
I visited your establishment last night.
Mr. MUSSELMAN. Wonderful. Thank you very much.
Mr. COMER. Mr. Neihoff?
Mr. NEIHOFF. I just want to start out by saying thank you
as well for your time. I appreciate the opportunity to sit up
here with such a distinguished group here. I feel like why am I
here sometimes.
Just to kind of echo what Mr. Kimbell has said, I think
really it is important to put the resources in the hands of
local organizations to make those decisions. It is very
difficult for someone who is hundreds of miles away to make the
decision on whether or not this business needs these resources.
I would think even the decision-making on grants and loans and
things of that nature would be better used on a local level,
and also funding for organizations like Wooldridge and people
of that nature, that they can be better staffed and better
provide programs that can provide education.
So I think both on the financial side and the education
side, being able to mentor, those being pushed to the local
level would be very valuable to any small community or any
metropolitan area.
Thank you again.
Mr. COMER. Great.
I want to thank again our witnesses for being here today. I
appreciate both your testimony and your contributions as small
business leaders in Western Kentucky. With individuals like you
leading the way, it is no wonder that Paducah has been
recognized as one of the world's 50 smartest cities and one of
the 100 best communities for young people.
I will take your recommendations and ideas back to
Washington and continue to work with my colleagues at the Small
Business Committee to improve federal policy so that
entrepreneurs can start businesses, access the capital that
they need, and spend more time running their businesses than
dealing with burdensome regulations.
I ask unanimous consent that members may have 5 legislative
days to submit statements and supporting materials for the
record.
Without objection, so ordered.
We are adjourned. Thank you all.
[Applause.]
[Whereupon, at 11:31 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]