- NOMINATION HEARING FOR DIRECTOR OF THE GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
[Senate Hearing 116-135]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-135
NOMINATION HEARING FOR DIRECTOR
OF THE GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON RULES AND ADMINISTRATION
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
NOVEMBER 14, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Rules and Administration
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available on http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-674
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON RULES AND ADMINISTRATION
FIRST SESSION
ROY BLUNT, Missouri, Chairman
MITCH McCONNELL, Kentucky
AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
DIANNE FEINSTEIN, California
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
CHARLES E. SCHUMER, New York
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
RICHARD J. DURBIN, Illinois
TED CRUZ, Texas
TOM UDALL, New Mexico
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
Fitzhugh Elder IV, Staff Director
Lindsey Kerr, Democratic Staff Director
C
O
N
T
E
N
T
S
----------
Pages
Opening Statement of:
Hon. Roy Blunt, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from the State of
Missouri.......................................................
1
Hugh Nathanial Halpern, Nominee for Director of the Government
Publishing Office..............................................
2
Prepared Statement of:
Hugh Nathanial Halpern, Nominee for Director of the Government
Publishing Office..............................................
9
Materials Submitted for the Record:
Letter of Endorsement............................................
13
Questions Submitted for the Record:
Hon. Roy Blunt, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from the State of
Missouri to Hugh Nathanial Halpern, Nominee for Director of the
Government Publishing Office...................................
14
Hon. Amy Klobuchar, a U.S. Senator from the State of Minnesota to
Hugh Nathanial Halpern, Nominee for Director of the Government
Publishing Office..............................................
17
Hon. Hyde-Smith, a U.S. Senator from the State of Mississippi to
Hugh Nathanial Halpern, Nominee for Director of the Government
Publishing Office..............................................
21
Hon. Angus S. King, Jr., a U.S. Senator from the State of Maine
to Hugh Nathanial Halpern, Nominee for Director of the
Government Publishing Office...................................
23
NOMINATION HEARING FOR DIRECTOR
OF THE GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
----------
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2019
United States Senate
Committee on Rules and Administration
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:09 a.m., in
Room 301, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Roy Blunt,
Chairman of the committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Blunt and Capito.
Also Present: Deb Fischer, Tom Udall, and Cortez Masto.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HONORABLE ROY BLUNT, CHAIRMAN, A U.S.
SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MISSOURI
Chairman Blunt. The Committee will come to order. Good
morning. Glad to start our second hearing this morning and
welcome my colleagues and our nominee to today's hearing.
Shortly we are going to hear from Hugh Halpern, the President's
nominee to be the Director of the Government Publishing Office.
Before we start that, I want to extend my congratulations,
Hugh, to you on your nomination. Of course, you and I worked
together in the House and Senator Capito sitting here beside
me, a member of the Rules Committee, when you were a critical
staffer on that committee. We are both glad to be here with
you.
Most recently, Hugh served as the Director of floor
operations in the Office of the Speaker of the House where both
sides of the aisle have always appreciated his dedicated
service. In 2018, Mr. Halpern was awarded the John W. McCormick
Award of Excellence to Congressional Employees for recognition
of lifetime bipartisan service in the House. It is the highest
award given to the staff in the House and I think that is a
reflection of you and how well you were appreciated and
respected there. I think those same abilities can be
successful, if you have the chance, to lead the Government
Publishing Office.
I want to recognize your family members that are here with
you, one, your son Ari, your wife Jennifer, your dad David, and
there may be another family member on the front row or just a
good friend on the front row. I am glad all of them are here
with you and with us today.
This is an agency that has an incredibly long record that
goes back to the Civil War. It began its work as a critical
part of the Government over 150 years ago. It was obviously
created to be the Government's official printer, and since its
founding, it has produced and distributed Government documents
and products for the American public today. The GPO mission is
to keep America informed as the official, digital, and secure
resource for producing, preserving, and distributing official
Federal Government Publications and information products for
Congress, for Federal agencies, and for the American public.
While the mission remains, evolving technology has really
changed both stakeholder expectations and how that job is done.
There are still significant numbers of employees there but one
time I think that may have been an agency that had as many as
12,000 employees--a big facility to be responsible for--
employees that I think are ready for new leadership and I
believe ready for your leadership. I look forward to hearing
your thoughts. Senator Capito, is there anything you want to
say at the start?
Senator Capito. No, I will just wait for the testimony then
ask questions. Thank you.
Chairman Blunt. Alright. Hugh, your full written statement
will be part of the record, but we would be pleased for you to
proceed and make whatever statement you would like to this
morning.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HUGH NATHANIAL HALPERN, NOMINEE FOR
DIRECTOR OF THE GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
Mr. Halpern. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator Capito.
Before I start, let me just say that I spent a lot of time
sitting behind you guys, so being on this side of the table is,
well, a little different. Thank you very much for having me
today. I am pleased to appear before you as President Trump's
nominee to be the next Director of the Government Publishing
Office. I come to this role as a longtime customer of GPO and
an advocate for making legislative data more available.
I was a committee staffer for most of my career, and in
many of those roles, I was ultimately responsible for the
committee's document production. When Congress established GPO
more than 150 years ago, they chartered it as an agency of the
Legislative branch largely because Congress was to be its
primary customer. Today, the talented women and men of GPO
literally work around the clock to produce congressional
documents, meeting tight deadlines with perfect copy day after
day. However, during my time as a house staffer, I observed one
immutable fact: it is really hard to work with GPO.
As a committee staffer, you generally have two choices to
produce documents with GPO. One, you can either use their
proprietary software that doesn't always operate as you would
expect it to, or two, you can just ship everything to GPO and,
frankly, kind of hope for the best. Neither of those options
are particularly good for ensuring the rapid and accurate
production of congressional documents, particularly in formats
other than print. We need to reduce the friction between GPO
and its customers, otherwise those customers will find
alternatives that don't involve GPO and ultimately that could
hamper public access to Government information.
GPO's customers should be able to use commercial, off the
shelf tools to prepare documents for publication. GPO should
have the expertise to help their customers fine-tune those
tools to maintain quality and speed up the workflow. That
partnership should reinforce GPO's role as the permanent and
authoritative source for Government information.
Now, some of these problems are really driven by the design
of these documents themselves. For instance, the design of a
committee report has never changed since Congress started
printing them back in the 1800's. Each time technology changed,
GPO designed their process to reproduce that same output, often
at the request of the customer.
As GPO stands on the precipice of its next major
technological change, maybe it is time to take a look at how
congressional documents are designed. For instance, the UK
parliament updated its document design years ago. They use
modern designs, print their documents on standard size paper,
and even use color where it is appropriate.
We should do the same. GPO would need to partner with this
committee and its House counterpart to begin the process of
modernizing congressional documents. But, if this committee is
willing, I believe that taking a fresh look at the design and
production of congressional documents will yield benefits to
Congress and the public alike.
However, none of this will be possible if GPO's future is
not secure. As one of the few agencies that works on a cost
recovery model, GPO is wholly dependent on its customers for
revenue. The good news is that GPO is on solid financial
footing, but it also has some notable challenges looming on the
horizon.
GPO's main campus is composed of buildings dating back to
the early 1900's with significant maintenance and upkeep
issues. Those buildings still have areas that are underutilized
because GPO's workforce is smaller than it was a few years ago.
Perhaps most importantly, that workforce is nearing an
inflection point as more than one-third of GPO's employees will
be eligible to retire in less than two years.
However, I prefer to look at those challenges as
opportunities. They will provide the impetus to update the
business model, to reduce friction with GPO's customers, and to
adjust the workforce to meet GPO's customers' needs. In order
to meet those challenges, I look forward to creating strong
partnerships: labor and management, Congress and GPO, GPO and
its customers.
Should I be confirmed, my commitment is that I will do my
best to harness GPO's strengths and to put it on a path that
leads to long-term security. My hope is that you share my
vision for how to get there and will be a partner as we
proceed. Mr. Chairman, Senator Capito, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today. I would welcome your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Halpern was submitted for
the record.]
Chairman Blunt. Thank you, Mr. Halpern. Senator Capito, do
you want to start?
Senator Capito. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, I am
really pleased to be here with my friend, Hugh Halpern. In the
many ways that you have helped me in my service in the House of
Representatives, not just the Rules Committee, but also House
Financial Services and as the floor Leader, I know that your
intellect and organizational skills will really do well at the
GPO. I really don't have any qualms about saying right away to
my colleagues over here in the Senate that this should be on
100 to 0 vote.
But I did want to ask a question and I did want to bring
attention to the chairman that not only was Hugh a great person
to know on the House side, he did have the great wisdom to
marry somebody from Glendale, West Virginia, which is where I
am from. So, thank you for that. You know, there has been so
much instability. You talked about it in your opening
statement.
And one of which not having a permanent Director for
several years. How do you think you can bring that stability
back to the organization? You mentioned some of the things,
better working relationship with the staff. You are probably
looking at a lot of staff that are nearing retirement age. How
are you going to attract that next generation to fulfill this
much-needed task?
Mr. Halpern. You brought up the age of folks with GPO and
it is interesting because my last boss, Speaker Ryan was my
first boss who was younger than I was. Coming into GPO, I am
sort of in the middle of their age cohort there. But the folks
at GPO have actually done a really good job of keeping the
agency going without permanent leadership.
The folks who have come before, all of them have been great
and have really done a fantastic job on setting the agency on a
course for stability. But the problem is that the rest of the
world keeps moving forward and just stability isn't going to
cut it if GPO is going to continue to be the asset that it is.
I think as we look at filling a lot of the vacant spots and
looking at readjusting the mix of folks we have, we need to
look in both directions. We need to buildup that digital side.
We need to have a commitment to really making things easier for
the customer and that is where my experience has been. But we
also need to preserve some of the artisanal things that GPO is
really good at doing.
This is my House manual and I used this book four, five
times a day when I was working in the Speaker's office. It is
basically handmade. The leather binding, the foil stamping, the
thumb indexes, the tabs, and the marbling are all done by hand
by artisans at GPO. We have to maintain the ability to do that.
We have to maintain the ability--you know, I know it will come
as a little bit of a shock that all of the Appropriations work
may come down to one gigantic document at some point here in
the near future, but GPO helps ensure that Congress meets its
deadline.
In that case, it would be the clerk of the House doing the
enrolling, making sure that the document that goes to the
President is the same document that the House and Senate
passed. We need to maintain all of those capabilities while
building up the digital side, building on the work that they
have done, and look into the future that way.
Senator Capito. Right. We have talked a lot of--and
actually I was Chair of the Appropriations subcommittee, did
take a tour of the GPO, did see some of the artists at work
there, and it really is an amazing thing to see how they create
such really beautiful documentations. I agree with you we have
to preserve that. We just had the Secretary of the Smithsonian,
we had the Librarian of Congress.
Everybody is talking about digitization and the best way to
preserve our documents, but also make them accessible. Do you
see the digitization of documents that come to the GPO as a way
to open it up to more people? You mentioned two things that
make it very difficult to work with. Do you see this as making
it easier?
Mr. Halpern. Well, I think the thing is that GPO to-date
has really been a paper first organization. They have started
the transition to a more digital outlook, but the systems that
they have got in place currently really look at the digital
almost as an afterthought. I can get really technical if you
want, but just look at the text display of the Congressional
record. What they do is they spit out the columns from the PDF
document. Well, that is great if you just want the text, but if
you are trying to repurpose that text then you have got to
manually go in and take out those line breaks.
If you look at this from more of a digital first or digital
parallel perspective, I think you can improve the product that
GPO is producing in conjunction with its Congressional partners
and its agency partners while still taking that data and
producing it, whether it is in print, whether it is for your
phone, whether it is for your computer screen. Any of those
media should be easily--it should be available easily on any of
those media. Today, that is not always the case.
Senator Capito. Alright. Agree. Thank you and good luck.
Mr. Halpern. Thank you.
Chairman Blunt. The workforce there, I believe you said
that maybe a third of the workforce would be retiring within
the next----
Mr. Halpern. Eligible to retire.
Chairman Blunt. Eligible to retire within the next what 10
years?
Mr. Halpern. Two years.
Chairman Blunt. In the next 2 years?
Mr. Halpern. By the end of fiscal year 2021.
Chairman Blunt. That is both a challenge and an opportunity
as you try to begin to repurpose or restructure some of the
things you do. That workforce has been represented or at least
75 percent of it by 11 different labor unions, bargaining
groups. Do you want to talk a little bit about your ability and
willingness to work with those bargaining groups?
Mr. Halpern. Absolutely. The one phrase you are going to
hear me talk about time and time again are partnerships. While
I haven't had the experience during my 30 years in the House of
having to work with a lot of labor units, I am not going to
approach that any differently than I approached working with
outside groups that may not necessarily share my view on a
particular issue or folks across the aisle. It is figuring out
how we get to a shared destination together.
You know, ultimately, I think what all of these groups want
is they want good opportunities for their members, they want to
be compensated well, and they want a future at the agency. I
think we are going to have to work together to ensure that all
of those things come together. You know, given its current
trajectory, the problem you are going to have is that the
customers are going to go away. If the customers go away, then
you are not going to have any jobs.
What we need to do is have the bargaining units work with
management as we plot this new course, and it is probably going
to require some adjustment between the older plant operations
and some of the newer digital and customer service operations.
But I don't necessarily see a huge reduction in head count
in the future. I see more of a change in the mix of folks that
we have got at the agency and I think that gives us an
opportunity to work together to try and figure out how that
works for everybody.
Chairman Blunt. Well and in the realm of increasing the
customer base, I think one of the areas where the customer base
has grown is the secure documents and all of the passports are
produced by this agency. Many of the various documents that are
needed to get into facilities and secure documents at
facilities, is that an area where you would see further
potential for growth?
Mr. Halpern. Absolutely. Now, you know, we are working with
our partners over at the State Department to make sure that as
we embark on the next iteration of the passport, that continues
to be one of the most secure documents found any place in the
world. In terms of some of the other documents, we found
customers coming to GPO largely because of its expertise in
this area.
You know, GPO traditionally has walked kind of a fine line
here. It should come as no surprise that there are some private
sector folks who would prefer to get that business themselves.
My personal view is that GPO should be able to compete on
quality, on price, and on ability to deliver. By doing that I
think we will be able to earn business without having to
actively necessarily market those items. But I think it is an
area for continued growth.
Chairman Blunt. We had the Inspector General for GPO in
recently to talk about his report, which was very concerning.
Have you had a chance to look at that report?
Mr. Halpern. I have looked at some of his stuff, yes.
Chairman Blunt. Any observations you might want to make
about the report would be welcome. But also the specific
question is your view of the importance of the role of the
Inspector General in an organization like this and specifically
at the organization, if confirmed, you would be running.
Mr. Halpern. Absolutely. I think any of the folks that I
have worked with over the years will tell you our ethics and
good Government guidelines can sometimes yield what you would
affectionately call a dumb result, but I would much rather know
that dumb result earlier in the process than later in the
process. So, I think the IG can bring a really important
perspective by flagging problem areas that instinctively we
wouldn't see and flagging them early.
My plan is for our Inspector General to be an important
part of our Executive team, for us to meet regularly, and
really, look to him for advice as we go forward. I know that
our Inspector General is facing some issues coming up. The
expiration of his law enforcement authority, things like that.
I know that they are working with this committee and other
folks trying to address those problems. But I am very
supportive of an independent Inspector General.
Obviously, we need to figure out and make sure that they
are properly resourced, that they have the authorities that
they need, and I want to be a partner with both the Inspector
General and this committee in doing that going forward.
Chairman Blunt. Well, with respect to the Inspector
General's report, which I am sure you will look at in great
detail, you know, everything from concerns about harassment to
promotion to procurement to use of space are in there. It is
a--this is an agency that really is ready for somebody to
settle in, look at all these problems with a commitment to
solve them. I believe you will have that. One last question.
Just with the big footprint of space way beyond the current use
of space, what steps would you take to develop a comprehensive
space utilization and building maintenance plan?
Mr. Halpern. Well, you are absolutely right. It is a large
facility. There is still some underutilized space and some
unused space as well. I think we need to review what all of
that looks like. I know that under prior heads of the agency,
they have leased out a lot of that space to partner agencies.
You know, bringing folks with shared interests under one roof
is actually not a bad idea, but we will need to review what
we've got and what the future looks like for that.
As we continue to upgrade the physical plant capabilities
with new presses and things like that, those items are getting
smaller, so they require less of a footprint and sort of
figuring out how we arrange all of that stuff so that we are
using the space to its maximum capability.
Chairman Blunt. Well, good. Thank you for joining us today,
Mr. Halpern, sharing your views with the committee. I intend to
move this nomination quickly so any questions for the record
need to be in by the end of the working day tomorrow. I would
like your response to any of those questions to be as soon as
possible.
Mr. Halpern. Absolutely.
[The information referred to was submitted for the record.]
Chairman Blunt. Hopefully we are able to take action on
this early next week. With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:30 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]