- BUSINESS MEETING
[Senate Hearing 115-596]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-596
BUSINESS MEETING
=======================================================================
MEETING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
AUGUST 1, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-173PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming, Chairman
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware,
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
Ranking Member
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
JONI ERNST, Iowa
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
Richard M. Russell, Majority Staff Director
Mary Frances Repko, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
AUGUST 1, 2018
OPENING STATEMENTS
Barrasso, Hon. John, U.S. Senator from the State of Wyoming......
1
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware..
2
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL
H.R. 5572........................................................
13
S. 3021..........................................................
15
Nomination Reference and Report Receipt for Peter C. Wright, to
be Assistant Administrator, Office of Solid Waste,
Environmental Protection Agency, vice Mathy Stanislaus.........
17
Nomination Reference and Report Receipt for William Charles
McIntosh, to be an Assistant Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency, vice Michelle DePass, resigned..............
20
Nomination Reference and Report Receipt for Mary Bridget Neumayr,
to be a Member of the Council on Environmental Quality, vice
nancy Helen Sutley.............................................
23
Nomination Reference and Report Receipt for John Fleming, of
Louisiana, to be Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Economic
Development, vice Roy K.J. Williams............................
26
Construction, U.S. Land Port of Entry, Alexandria Bay, NY........
29
Alteration, John W. McCormack, U.S. Post Office and Courthouse,
Boston, MA.....................................................
30
Lease, Social Security Administration, Baltimore County, MD......
31
Alteration, Jacob K. Javits Federal Building, New York, NY.......
33
Lease, Department of Treasury - Internal Revenue Service,
Plantation, FL.................................................
34
Lease, Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
Seattle, WA....................................................
36
Letters of Support for Nominations............................... 38-55
BUSINESS MEETING
----------
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Environment and Public Works,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:52 a.m. in room
406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Barrasso
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Barrasso, Carper, Inhofe, Capito,
Boozman, Wicker, Fischer, Moran, Rounds, Ernst, Sullivan,
Cardin, Whitehouse, Merkley, Gillibrand, Booker, Markey, and
Van Hollen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN BARRASSO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING
Senator Barrasso. I would like to bring this meeting to
order. I want to inform the audience that this is a formal
Senate business meeting, followed by a hearing. In order to
allow the committee to conduct its business, we will maintain
decorum. That means if there is any disorder or demonstration
by a member of the audience, the person causing the disruption
will be escorted from the room by the Capitol Police, who are
currently in the room.
This morning, I call this business meeting to order. Today
we will be considering four nominees. President Trump has
nominated Mary Bridget Neumayr to be a Member of the Council on
Environmental Quality, whom he will designate as Chair upon
confirmation; William ``Chad'' McIntosh to lead the EPA's
Office of International and Tribal Affairs; Peter Wright to
lead the EPA's Office of Land and Emergency Management; and
John Fleming to lead the Economic Development Administration as
Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Economic Development. These
nominees are all well qualified and will bring a wealth of
experience and expertise to their jobs.
This confirmation will fill critically important roles in
ensuring that all Americans benefit from clean air, clean
water, clean land and a growing economy. I urge all my
colleagues to support the nominations.
We will also consider two bills to name Federal
courthouses. H.R. 5772, to name a Federal courthouse in
Amarillo, Texas, after Mary Lou Robinson, who served as a judge
in Texas, and on the U.S. District Court in the Northern
District of Texas. And S. 3021, to name a Federal courthouse in
Minneapolis, Minnesota, after Diana Murphy, the first woman
appointed to the bench of the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for
the Eighth Circuit.
The committee will also consider six resolutions to approve
prospectus providing General Service Administration leases. The
leases will provide office space for the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, the Internal Revenue Service, the Social
Security Administration and other agencies.
After Ranking Member Carper gives his statement, other
members may make remarks. At 10:15, we will proceed to the
items in our agenda, provided we have a reporting quorum. After
we have completed the business portion of the meeting, we will
immediately begin the hearing with EPA Acting Andrew Wheeler on
Examining EPA's Agenda, Protecting the Environment and Allowing
America's Economy to Grow.
I will now turn to the Ranking Member for his statement.
Senator Carper.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS CARPER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE
Senator Carper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, one
and all. I want to thank you for holding this business meeting
today. It is going to be kind of a convoluted today for us, at
least this morning is going to be busy. We will need the help
of everybody, including the audience, to make sure we get
through this.
We have a relatively brief but important agenda. Once we
complete the markup, we look forward to hearing from the Acting
Administrator of EPA, Andrew Wheeler.
Today we are considering six GSA prospectuses. Some of them
are very time-sensitive, which is why we have agreed to
proceed. However, GSA still has not answered our questions
about the status of the FBI headquarters, which is very
important to some of our colleagues, or provided complete
responses to requests for information on the Trump hotel lease.
I continue to urge GSA to work with our committee as we fulfill
our oversight responsibilities.
We also have two courthouse naming bills before us today,
which comply with our committee's rules. They are not
controversial.
We are also considering a number of nominations. The first
nominee we are voting on today is Mary Neumayr, who has been
nominated to lead the Council on Environmental Quality.
Compared to the last Trump CEQ chair nominee, Ms. Neumayr is a
welcome improvement. However, to be honest with everybody,
while I was encouraged, maybe you were too, very encouraged by
many of her answers during the hearing last month, I am
troubled by a number of her answers to our questions for the
record in the days following that hearing, creating some
reservations about supporting her nomination today.
I will just give you a couple quick answers. Ms. Neumayr,
under her leadership CEQ has signaled an intent to consider
significant revisions to the way the National Environmental
Policy Act, NEPA, operates. From her answers to questions from
the record, it is unclear whether such revisions will provide
or prioritize environmental protection, as is the requirement
under current law, or if there will be a rigorous public
comment process before any changes are made.
As I stated in a letter to Ms. Neumayr just last month, the
risk of limiting public involvement is particularly concerning,
given the fact that the very intent of NEPA is to ensure that
the Federal Government hears from the public. In addition, Ms.
Neumayr refused to support the reinstatement of tools that help
American communities become more resilient to extreme weather
and climate changes. Without extra planning and targeted
investments, I know we will continue to lose lives, livelihood,
and taxpayer dollars.
For those reasons, I will refrain from supporting her
nomination at this time, although I hope we can have some
further discussion to come to some resolution on some of the
issues I have mentioned and perhaps a couple of other important
issues in the weeks to come.
The second nomination we are considering today is Chad
McIntosh to lead EPA's Office of International and Tribal
Government Affairs. This position serves as a liaison between
international and tribal communities and the EPA. American
Indian and Alaska Native communities across the U.S. face
unique challenges, as we know, in many of the States
represented right here on our committee. I am concerned that
Mr. McIntosh has had minimal interactions with tribal
communities and limited international experience.
Next, a couple of words about Peter Wright, who has been
nominated to serve as EPA Assistant Administrator leading the
Office of Land and Emergency Management. The Office is
responsible, as you know, for helping States manage our
Nation's waste, cleanup contaminated sites, and respond to
national and environmental disasters.
Mr. Wright has spent much of his career at Dow, where he
worked on the company's Superfund sites. As I noted during his
confirmation hearing, Mr. Wright agreed to recuse himself from
working on any sites for which Dow Dupont may have liability.
And I commended him at that time for doing so.
However, his recusals were all contingent upon Senate
confirmation. And since his hearing in June, Mr. Wright has
joined EPA as a special counsel. It is unclear what, if any,
recusal or ethics agreement he is currently abiding by. This
fact, along with many troubling responses to the questions,
again, I am troubled by what we hear at the hearing and then
read in the responses to the questions. They just don't line
up. They just don't line up in too many instances, including in
this instance.
And we need to sort that out. What do we believe? What we
hear with our own ears? What we hear in or meetings? Or what we
hear in the responses to our questions for the record?
But we note that, along with other members of the
committee, I have sent letters to Mr. Wright and Mr. McIntosh,
asking them for additional information, and they have yet to
respond. I also note that of the 60 oversight letters that
members of this committee have sent to EPA, 60, we have still
received complete answers to only 24. We did get one last week.
And we are encouraged by that. But there's about 35 more that
we haven't.
The final nominee we are considering today is Dr. John
Fleming to guide the Economic Development Administration. I am
just going to call an audible here. My staff, being real honest
with you, Mr. Chairman, my staff introduced us, I thought no on
this nomination. I am going to vote yes to report him out. And
on one hand, here's a fellow, in the House of Representatives
voted not once but twice to basically get rid of the Economic
Development Administration. He's been nominated to head up an
organization, EDA, which the current Administration has
proposed to de-fund and to eliminate. De-fund twice, and to
eliminate it in a reorganization plan.
Now, I may be mistaken about the reorganization plan, but I
know that it was proposed twice in Budget to de-fund the
organization. And we heard Dr. Fleming say here, I voted the
way I did, I was maybe not well informed, and I'm not
interested in getting rid of the EDA, after he's been nominated
to head. But if you look at the responses to our QFRs,
questions for the record, it is not all that clear. He clearly
supports the President's budget, which calls for zeroing out
funding for this organization that he is going to be confirmed
to head. That just causes me some trouble.
Every now and then we have a chance to, however, to vote
our hopes over our fears. And today I'm going to vote my hopes
over my fears. But if we don't get some real clarification on
this issue, I won't be voting this way when this nomination
comes before the full Senate.
So I'm glad we're all here, I look forward to a productive
day. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Senator Carper. I
want to tell you that I absolutely agree with members of this
committee that we do deserve timely responses to the questions
that you've raised, and that Senator Cardin has been providing
significant leadership in making sure we get these answers
regarding the FBI headquarters project.
Last night, finally, GSA submitted to the committee their
answers to the questions for the record, way beyond the time
they were due. I still haven't had a chance to review them,
just got these last night, because I knew we were hearing
today, and they'd be hearing from us. We are still waiting on
responses from the FBI.
Accordingly, I have sent a letter to the FBI requesting
expedited delivery of these past-due answers to the members'
questions. And Senator Cardin, I would like to call on you.
Senator Cardin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I very much
appreciate your leadership on the FBI issue.
I point out that we do have an FBI lease that is on the
agenda today from GSA, which I intend to support. The FBI needs
additional leased space. Part of that reason is the inadequacy
of the FBI facility in Washington.
I just really want to followup. We had, I thought, a very
informative hearing on this issue. There were some conclusions
that were reached at that hearing, one, there was
acknowledgment of the extreme waste of government funds in the
process that has been used. No one disputes that, hundreds of
millions have been wasted in the process that has been used.
Second, there is no question that the FBI needs additional
space, and more modern space. That is absolutely without
question.
Third, there is no dispute that the security needs that the
FBI wants, the level of security that they want, cannot be
achieved at the D.C. location. That is the reason why, many
years ago, we started with finding a new location, a suburban
location. Sites were selected in Virginia and Maryland. And we
went almost to the finish line on selection before the
Administration withdrew the prospectus and the proposals.
Not only did the government waste a lot of money, but
contractors who were operating in good faith lost tens of
millions of dollars.
We had the hearing, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate that
very much. Reports this week confirm that the President himself
has been involved in this decision. I say that with two
concerns in mind. First, during our hearing, that was denied by
the witnesses. And yet, we know now that the President has a
direct interest in this facility. It has been confirmed by a
press report that he informed members of the U.S. Senate of his
interest in the downtown location. And again, that was denied
in the hearing before us.
Second, the President's concerns have been specifically
expressed that he doesn't like the way the building looks, and
is clearly more concerned about the appearance of the building
than the usefulness of the building from the point of view of
the FBI's mission. That's also clear by the press accounts that
have been given of late.
So I say all that, recognizing of course that the President
has multiple interests on what is happening on Pennsylvania
Avenue, and recognizing full well that at that hearing, they
promised us a prospectus which we have not seen on the FBI. The
appropriators have taken action so far to deny the funding of
the FBI, which, additional funding, which as you know, we
provided significant funding for the suburban locations, and
have raised questions that they are not going to go forward
unless they understand the plan and that can meet certain
minimum conditions.
I think the appropriators are doing the right thing, Mr.
Chairman. I won't disagree with what the appropriators are
doing. But it is our committee's jurisdiction to approve the
prospectus, to make sure that we are in agreement as to what is
being done. We are talking about multi-billion dollar
renovation here, or construction. Multi-billion dollars. Could
be the largest single construction that any of us will ever
vote on in the U.S. Senate.
So I had suggested to the Chairman that I think if we don't
get something soon from the GSA that our committee has a
responsibility to act, that we should consider a resolution
spelling out what we desire to happen. That has been done in
the past. I know we just got the answers, I have not seen those
answers, but you just informed us we just got the answers that
were long overdue.
But it is this committee's jurisdiction. I think all of us
want the FBI to have the facilities that they need and want the
taxpayers to get the value for the funds that are being
invested. That is our responsibility. I would just urge us to
take the responsibilities of our committee in a timely way, so
that we can influence decisions that are being made.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you. Senator Whitehouse?
Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, Chairman. I just want to say
a few words about Ms. Neumayr and Mr. Fleming, who we will be
voting on today. I am going to be voting against Ms. Neumayr
because a number of us have a letter in to her, asking for
clarification on some of the, I thought, very unfortunate
answers she gave in her QFR responses. I don't know if she
actually wrote those, or if there is some kind of White House
politburo that writes those for her and she is stuck with it.
But I need to push a little harder to see that her answers in
writing are consistent with what I felt her answers were, both
in our private meeting and here at the committee.
So I want to get to yes, but I feel if I vote yes on her
now, the likelihood of getting serious answers to the letter
diminish. So I will be voting no in the hopes of getting to
yes.
With respect to Mr. Fleming, like the Ranking Member, he
has given very positive assurances about how importantly he
views EDA, how importantly he views its programs, how
importantly he views the coastal work that EDA needs to do, how
fairly he says he will treat climate change, sea level rise
projects, not be categorial or ideological about not taking
them seriously. So I'm a close vote on Mr. Fleming, given his
past record of voting to eliminate the agency he would now
lead.
But I would note that we had Representative Bridenstein go
over to NASA and he had been a real antagonist to both science
and to NASA. As soon as he got over there, he suddenly was
actually a bit, he had had some revelations, including that
climate change is actually real and that humans and our
emissions are causing it and all that. I think he probably
discovered that NASA is a scientist's organization and if you
are going to say things that are scientifically preposterous,
it is very hard to lead.
So I am hoping for a similar series of epiphanies from Mr.
Fleming. Again, I reserve the right to vote no on the floor.
But I intend to vote yes for him today. And I appreciate the
Chair allowing me to make those comments about what are very
close votes.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Whitehouse.
Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted
to second the comments of my friend and colleague from
Maryland, Senator Cardin, with respect to the FBI building. I
want to thank you and the Ranking Member for having what I
thought was a very informative hearing a number of months back,
where I think we got a lot of revealing information.
I think folks here know that for over 10 years there had
been a plan, as Senator Cardin said, to move the FBI to a more
secure location. Just as we have sort of campus settings for
the CIA, for the NSA, for security reasons, there had been a
plan to find a more secure location for the FBI. GAO reports
backed up the need to find a more secure location. And then all
of a sudden we had a change in plan.
And I gather we just got the QFRs from that hearing. I have
not had a chance to look them over. But I do hope this
committee will take a close look at that original GAO report
and the original intent behind Congress, where there had been
numerous appropriations actually provided for the more secure
location.
I think as you know, Mr. Chairman, we had some testimony
that day where the witnesses at least on the record said that
there had not been sort of close contact between GSA and FBI
and either the President or senior White House officials. After
the hearing was over, they had to send you a correction for the
record. As Senator Cardin said, the reports yesterday just
confirm the intimate involvement of the White House in this
decision, a decision I think we all agree should be based on
the merits, not on whim.
So I want to thank you and Senator Cardin for raising that.
Senator Barrasso. Yes, Senator Markley.
Senator Markley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much. I
would just like to make a couple of brief comments on two of
the nominees before us today. First, on Peter Wright, he is
Dow's self-proclaimed dioxin lawyer, to take charge of the
Superfund program at the Environmental Protection Agency. It
would be a clear violation of the public trust. Mr. Wright has
openly questioned the science behind dangerous toxics that
cause cancer and other illnesses. At the EPA, he would face
dozens of conflicts of interest overseeing the work of the
chemical industry.
Mr. Wright is the classic fox guarding the hen house. Mr.
Wright should not be confirmed by the Senate to lead these
programs at the EPA.
Second, I would like to voice my concern over the
nomination of Mary Neumayr to lead the Council on Environmental
Quality. Her focus on the streamlining, or as I call it, the
steamrolling, of the National Environmental Policy Act is
deeply unfortunate. We need a head of the CEQ that will advise
the President on climate science and how to better include
environmental review and infrastructure, not someone who is
advising on how to dismantle environmental review.
I urge this committee not to confirm Ms. Neumayr. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you. We are waiting for one final
member to arrive. Does anyone else have any comments they would
like to make regarding any of these nominations?
If not, let me move to some of the parts of this committee
that do not require roll call votes, and we would like to move
to the votes on the items on today's agenda. The Ranking Member
and I have agreed to vote on the two courthouse naming bills
and the six GSA resolutions en bloc by voice vote. But members
may choose to have their votes recorded for a specific item in
that en bloc after the voice vote.
The Ranking Member and I have agreed to bring up the four
nominees for separate votes. And the Ranking Member has
requested that each of these nominees receive a roll call vote.
So to begin, I would like to call up H.R. 5772, a bill
naming a Federal courthouse in Amarillo, Texas; S. 3021, a bill
naming a Federal courthouse in Minneapolis, Minnesota; and six
General Service Services Administration resolutions, en bloc.
I move to approve and report H.R. 5772 and S. 3021
favorably to the Senate, and approve six GSA Resolutions en
bloc. Is there a second?
Senator Carper. I second.
Senator Barrasso. All those in favor, please say aye.
[Chorus of ayes.]
Senator Barrasso. All those opposed, please say no.
[No audible response.]
Senator Barrasso. In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes
have it. We have approved H.R. 5772 and S. 3021, which will be
reported favorably to the Senate. We also have approved six GSA
resolutions.
Waiting for one more member to attend, and we will hold off
a few seconds until that member arrives. He is in en route and
should be here momentarily.
[Pause.]
Senator Barrasso. Next I would like to call up Presidential
Nomination 2136, Mary Bridget Neumayr, of Virginia, to be a
member of the Council on Environmental Quality. I move to
approve and report the nomination favorably to the Senate. Is
there a second?
Senator Inhofe. Second.
Senator Barrasso. The Clerk will please call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Booker.
Senator Booker. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Capito.
Senator Capito. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Cardin.
Senator Cardin. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Carper.
Senator Carper. No.
The Clerk. Mrs. Duckworth.
Senator Carper. No by proxy.
The Clerk. Mrs. Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Fischer.
Senator Fischer. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Inhofe.
Senator Inhofe. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Markey.
Senator Markey. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Merkley.
Senator Merkley. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Moran.
Senator Moran. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Rounds.
Senator Rounds. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sanders.
Senator Carper. No by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Shelby.
Senator Shelby. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan.
Senator Sullivan. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse.
Senator Whitehouse. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Wicker.
Senator Wicker. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Aye. The Clerk will report.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, the yeas are 11, the nays are 10.
Senator Barrasso. We have approved the nomination of Ms.
Neumayr to be a member of the Council on Environmental Quality,
which will be reported to the full Senate for approval.
I would now like to call up the nomination of Presidential
Nomination 1766, William Charles McIntosh of Michigan, to be
Assistant Administrator for the Office of International and
Tribal Affairs of the Environmental Protection Agency. I move
to approve and report the nomination favorably to the Senate.
Is there a second?
Senator Inhofe. Second.
Senator Barrasso. The Clerk will call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Booker.
Senator Booker. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Capito.
Senator Capito. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Cardin.
Senator Cardin. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Carper.
Senator Carper. No.
The Clerk. Mrs. Duckworth.
Senator Carper. No by proxy.
The Clerk. Mrs. Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Fischer.
Senator Fischer. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Inhofe.
Senator Inhofe. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Markey.
Senator Markey. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Merkley.
Senator Merkley. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Moran.
Senator Moran. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Rounds.
Senator Rounds. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sanders.
Senator Carper. No by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Shelby.
Senator Shelby. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan.
Senator Sullivan. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse.
Senator Whitehouse. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Wicker.
Senator Wicker. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Aye. The Clerk will report.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, the yeas are 11, the nays are 10.
Senator Barrasso. We have approved the nomination of Mr.
McIntosh to be an Assistant Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency, which will be reported to the full Senate
for approval.
I would now like to call up Presidential nomination 1681,
Peter Wright of Michigan to be Assistant Administrator for the
Office of Land and Emergency Management of the Environmental
Protection Agency. I move to approve and report the nomination
favorably to the Senate. Is there a second?
Senator Inhofe. Second.
Senator Barrasso. The Clerk will call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Booker.
Senator Booker. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Capito.
Senator Capito. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Cardin.
Senator Cardin. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Carper.
Senator Carper. No.
The Clerk. Mrs. Duckworth.
Senator Carper. No by proxy.
The Clerk. Mrs. Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Fischer.
Senator Fischer. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Inhofe.
Senator Inhofe. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Markey.
Senator Markey. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Merkley.
Senator Merkley. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Moran.
Senator Moran. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Rounds.
Senator Rounds. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sanders.
Senator Carper. No by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Shelby.
Senator Shelby. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan.
Senator Sullivan. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse.
Senator Whitehouse. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Wicker.
Senator Wicker. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Aye. The Clerk will report.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, the yeas are 11, the nays are 10.
Senator Barrasso. We have approved the nomination of Mr.
Wright to be an Assistant Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency, which will be reported to the full Senate
for approval.
Now I would like to call up the nomination, Presidential
Nomination 2171, John Fleming of Louisiana, to be Assistant
Secretary of Commerce for economic development. I move to
approve and report the nomination favorably to the Senate. Is
there a second?
Senator Inhofe. Second.
Senator Barrasso. The Clerk will call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Booker.
Senator Booker. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Capito.
Senator Capito. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Cardin.
Senator Cardin. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Carper.
Senator Carper. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Duckworth.
Senator Carper. Aye by proxy.
The Clerk. Mrs. Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Fischer.
Senator Fischer. Yes.
The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Inhofe.
Senator Inhofe. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Markey.
Senator Markey. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Merkley.
Senator Merkley. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Moran.
Senator Moran. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Rounds.
Senator Rounds. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sanders.
Senator Carper. No by proxy.
The Clerk. Mr. Shelby.
Senator Shelby. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan.
Senator Sullivan. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse.
Senator Whitehouse. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Wicker.
Senator Wicker. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Aye. The Clerk will report.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, the yeas are 15, the nays are 6.
Senator Barrasso. We have approved the nomination of Dr.
John Fleming to be an Assistant Secretary of Commerce, which
will be reported to the full Senate for approval.
The voting part of our business meeting is concluded.
Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman, could I just make a brief
comment?
Senator Barrasso. Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. There is a pattern here in terms of our
votes. I think a number of us, not all, but a number of folks
on our side voted no on several of these nominations. Because
what we heard here and what we heard in our private meetings
with these nominees did not line up with what we read in the
QFRs.
We need some clarification and we look forward to getting
that clarification. If we get it, then I think we will be able
to move forward. If we don't, it will make things more
difficult. My hope is we will get it.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you so much, Senator Carper.
Now I ask unanimous consent that the staff have authority
to make technical and conforming changes to each of the matters
approved today. With that, our business meeting is concluded.
[Whereupon, at 10:21 a.m., the meeting was concluded.]
[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]