- DRUG PRICING IN AMERICA: A PRESCRIPTION FOR CHANGE, PART III
[Senate Hearing 116-415]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-415
DRUG PRICING IN AMERICA:
A PRESCRIPTION FOR CHANGE, PART III
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
APRIL 9, 2019
__________
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Finance
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
43-563 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2021
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
CHUCK GRASSLEY, Iowa, Chairman
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
JOHN CORNYN, Texas
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
MICHAEL F. BENNET, Colorado
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
ROBERT P. CASEY, Jr., Pennsylvania
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
STEVE DAINES, Montana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
Kolan Davis, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Joshua Sheinkman, Democratic Staff Director
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Grassley, Hon. Chuck, a U.S. Senator from Iowa, chairman,
Committee on Finance...........................................
1
Wyden, Hon. Ron, a U.S. Senator from Oregon......................
2
WITNESSES
Miller, Steve, M.D., executive vice president and chief clinical
officer, Cigna Corporation, Bloomfield, CT.....................
5
Rice, Derica, executive vice president, CVS Health; and
president, CVS Caremark, Woonsocket, RI........................
7
Fleming, William K., Pharm.D., segment president, healthcare
services, Humana, Inc., Louisville, KY.........................
8
Prince, John M., chief executive officer, OptumRx, Minnetonka, MN
10
Kolar, Mike, interim president and CEO, Prime Therapeutics, LLC,
Eagan, MN......................................................
11
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL
Fleming, William K., Pharm.D.:
Testimony....................................................
8
Prepared statement...........................................
53
Responses to questions from committee members................
66
Grassley, Hon. Chuck:
Opening statement............................................
1
Prepared statement with attachments..........................
102
Kolar, Mike:
Testimony....................................................
11
Prepared statement...........................................
106
Responses to questions from committee members................
115
Miller, Steve, M.D.:
Testimony....................................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
136
Responses to questions from committee members................
144
Prince, John M.:
Testimony....................................................
10
Prepared statement...........................................
170
Responses to questions from committee members................
176
Rice, Derica:
Testimony....................................................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
205
Responses to questions from committee members................
209
Wyden, Hon. Ron:
Opening statement............................................
2
Prepared statement with attachments..........................
232
Communications
American Pharmacists Association.................................
237
American Society of Clinical Oncology............................
239
American Society of Health-System Pharmacists....................
248
Campaign for Sustainable Rx Pricing..............................
250
Coalition for Affordable Prescription Drugs......................
256
Kasisky, Christine, RPh..........................................
256
Morning Consult..................................................
259
National Association of Chain Drug Stores........................
260
National Association of Specialty Pharmacy.......................
264
Pharmacists United for Truth and Transparency....................
268
Pharmacists United for Truth and Transparency--Illinois..........
270
DRUG PRICING IN AMERICA:
A PRESCRIPTION FOR CHANGE, PART III
----------
TUESDAY, APRIL 9, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Finance,
Washington, DC.
The hearing was convened, pursuant to notice, at 10:13
a.m., in room SD-215, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon.
Chuck Grassley (chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Cornyn, Thune, Portman, Scott, Cassidy,
Lankford, Daines, Young, Wyden, Stabenow, Cantwell, Menendez,
Carper, Cardin, Brown, Bennet, Casey, Whitehouse, Hassan, and
Cortez Masto.
Also present: Republican staff: Brett Baker, Senior Health
Advisor; Stuart Portman, Health Policy Advisor; and Karen
Summar, Chief Health Policy Advisor. Democratic staff: Joshua
Sheinkman, Staff Director; Anne Dwyer, Senior Health-care
Counsel; Elizabeth Jurinka, Chief Health Advisor; Matt Kazan,
Senior Health Advisor; and Kristen Lunde, Winston Fellow.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CHUCK GRASSLEY, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
IOWA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Chairman. Good morning, everybody.
The committee will come to order. Today the committee
continues to look at why prescription drug costs are so high
and what can be done to reduce them.
I would like to welcome all of our witnesses. Thank you for
coming. These are top executives for major pharmacy benefit
managers. Around this town we refer to them as PBMs.
Medicare prescription drug plans hire PBMs to manage Part D
benefits. Medicaid State-managed care organizations also employ
PBMs. We know that drug companies set the list price. Our
February hearing with CEOs of major manufacturers focused on
those high prices.
We now today turn our attention to PBMs. These
organizations negotiate with the drug companies as well as
pharmacies to arrive at a price for a drug and its ultimate
cost.
This system of private entities negotiating is what I
envisioned as an author of the Part D program of Medicare. I
still believe that this is absolutely the right approach. I
oppose any effort to undo the non-interference clause currently
in the statute. However, as this hearing indicates, it is our
duty to understand how the system is working today and what we
can do to improve it.
In addition to negotiating prices, PBMs also determine what
drugs are covered and what patients pay out of pocket. Despite
this vast influence over what often amounts to life or death,
many consumers have very little insight into the workings of
PBMs. PBMs report rebates and other price concessions to the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. But the statute
severely restricts what can be done with that information. More
transparency is needed. The current system is so opaque that it
is easy to see why there are many questions about PBMs' motives
and practices.
One question we must ask is whether or not PBMs prefer a
high-cost drug with big rebates over a cheaper drug. Some even
argue that PBMs force drug companies to raise their list price.
Senator Wyden and I are investigating pricing and rebating
practices related to insulin. This will help us more broadly
determine whether PBMs and manufacturers today are focused on
patients or their own bottom line.
Mergers and vertical integration is another area that has
increasingly prompted concern. All of the PBMs here today are
owned by or affiliated with an insurance plan. In many cases
the combined company also owns pharmacies and other players in
the health industry. It is important to look to see whether
such integration actually helps patients and consumers, or
whether it just opens the door for anti-competitive activity.
Last year, I sent a letter to the Federal Trade Commission,
a letter on this very issue, and asked them to keep me apprised
of their work. I am putting my letter and the response in the
record. Without objection, that will be included.
[The letters appear in the appendix beginning on p. 103.]
The Chairman. I realize that I have raised many issues. I
look forward to hearing what the witnesses have to say,
providing insight and helping us find solutions.
Ranking Member Wyden and I are committed to working on a
bipartisan basis to bring down the cost of drugs. Our next step
is to work with committee members to develop policies to help
Medicare and Medicaid patients and to protect the taxpayers.
Senator Wyden?
[The prepared statement of Chairman Grassley appears in the
appendix.]
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RON WYDEN,
A U.S. SENATOR FROM OREGON
Senator Wyden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
pick up right where you left off because, as you have noted,
this is a bipartisan effort to end this pharmaceutical price-
gouging that does so much harm to American consumers and to our
taxpayers. And I think we all understand that there is a lot of
heavy lifting to do in the days ahead.
And at the same time I want to note that the committee has
already begun to put some points on the board. Just last week
the Congress passed our bipartisan legislation, legislation the
chairman and I worked on for months to stop a blatant rip-off
where big pharmaceutical companies were fleecing Medicaid and
taxpayers.
Now this morning the committee is going to be looking at
one of the most confounding, gnarled riddles in American health
care today. Pharmacy benefit managers are among the most
profitable companies in America. What these pharmacy benefit
managers actually do to rake in all of these profits is a
mystery. The deals they strike with drug makers and insurers
are a mystery. How much they are pocketing out of the rebates
they negotiate is a mystery. With Americans learning about
schemes like ``spread pricing'' in Medicaid, whether pharmacy
benefit managers bring any real value to taxpayers is a
mystery.
The pharmacy benefit managers are supposed to be
negotiators who get a better deal, a fairer shake for the
consumer on prescription drugs. What they actually are are
middlemen who are raking in these profits while the drug prices
soar into the stratosphere.
As most people will tell you--as I hear at town hall
meetings continually, most Americans think that there are
already too many middlemen taking a big juicy cut out of the
American health-care system.
Just a little bit of history and some basic facts: pharmacy
benefit managers first showed up decades ago, back when
prescription drugs were being utilized more extensively. The
PBMs told the insurance companies, ``We are the ones who know
drug pricing. We will handle the negotiations for you.''
But there is little evidence that these pharmacy benefit
managers have actually held down the prices in a meaningful
way. In fact, most of the evidence shows just the opposite.
Pharmacy benefit managers actually make more money when they
pick a higher-price drug over a lower-price drug.
Colleagues, let us remember that all the way through this
discussion. Benefit managers make more money when they pick a
higher-price drug over a lower-price drug. The logic on this is
not exactly complicated graduate-level economics.
PBM profits are based on taking their slice of the
prescription drug pie. More expensive drugs mean there is a
bigger pie. When there is a bigger pie, there are bigger slices
for the pharmacy benefit managers.
I have been looking at this issue extensively, as has the
chairman. And I am of the view that pharmacy benefit managers
guard their operations with greater secrecy than HBO is
guarding the ending of ``Game of Thrones.''
Now we know there has never been more outrage in the
country over the rising cost of medicine, and I say that
looking all the way back to my days when I was director of the
Gray Panthers. If PBMs had clear, hard evidence proving that
they are getting patients a better deal on prescription drugs,
they would be leafleting the countryside and shouting it from
the rooftops. Instead they work overtime to keep patients and
taxpayers in the dark.
Today the committee is going to get a thousand different
versions of the same talking point: ``We are all about getting
the best possible price for patients.'' But based on what I
have seen so far, we are not getting actual proof.
The bottom line is, pharmacy benefit managers are middlemen
who strike deals with drugmakers in secret. In my experience,
that kind of negotiation rarely results in an act of charity
for consumers and taxpayers.
Now, because of our jurisdiction, I just want to close with
a few specifics with respect to the Federal health programs.
First on Medicaid: a PBM scheme known as spread pricing to
rip off taxpayers through Medicaid has set off alarm bells in
the States from one end of the country to another. It has
nothing to do with cream cheese, all this spread pricing. But
here is how it works. The PBMs pay one set price to pharmacies
for a particular drug. But then they turn around and charge
Medicaid and other health-care payers far more for the same
prescription.
The chairman and I are digging into this. So this will
continue our bipartisan efforts. We have asked the Health
Department Inspector General to take a look. If there are
changes that can be made to clamp down on this exploitation of
Medicare, I think it is important we consider it. The chairman
and I are looking into it. It is as clear a middleman rip-off
as you are going to find.
Now with respect to Medicare, some key issues. First, Part
D is one of the few health benefits in America that does not
have an out-of-pocket cap. That means seniors with catastrophic
illnesses can face costs of thousands and thousands of dollars.
These are folks on fixed incomes. This is a flaw that needs to
be fixed, and I have introduced the Rx Cap to protect seniors
in our country from having to pay more and more out of pocket
for their medicine.
Next, Medicare Part D encourages drugmakers and PBMs to
push seniors on to more expensive drugs. That is because, after
a certain amount of spending on drugs, seniors on Medicare are
on the hook for 85 percent of the cost. After that point, PBMs
pay only 15 percent, and drugmakers are just home free. So it
is good business for the drug industry when seniors cross that
threshold as fast as possible.
Second, rebates are working against the seniors who need
the benefit most. Drug rebates in Part D get sent straight to
the insurance companies. In theory, they use the rebates to
lower premiums, which sounds good if you are healthy. It is not
such a good deal for seniors who battle illnesses. The amounts
they pay for their prescriptions are based on list prices, not
on the prices factoring in rebates.
Again, I have introduced legislation, the C-THRU Act, so
that patients can finally see whether these rebates are worth
the trade-off. And my understanding is that there is progress
on this in the House of Representatives as well.
The administration has proposed new rules having to do with
this topic as well. I continue to be concerned that the Trump
approach could produce a windfall for the drug companies at the
end, if the administration is unprepared to take the next steps
to reign in the pharmaceutical companies and bring down list.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate very much that we are pursuing
this in a bipartisan way. You mentioned insulin, mentioned our
new effort with respect to Medicaid and so-called ``spread
pricing.''
Colleagues, we have got to move with urgency. Twenty-
nineteen is the year to get this done. We all know that 2020--
there are going to be a couple of things going on in America in
2020. So let us continue with a sense of urgency and get this
done in 2019 and stop the price-gouging.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Wyden.
[The prepared statement of Senator Wyden appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. And thank you for your cooperation on this
and several other issues as we try to do things in a bipartisan
way.
So first of all, in the introduction of these witnesses, I
should not only say ``thank you'' for being here today to
discuss an important topic, but I want to thank you--as far as
I know, I have not heard anything negative from staff. You came
here without a lot of hassle. And we have had some witnesses on
this subject--it was quite a hassle to get them here. So thank
you for your cooperation. We are grateful for that.
First is Dr. Steve Miller, Cigna chief clinical officer,
who leads all of the company's clinical policies, quality, and
performance efforts.
Derica Rice is executive vice president for CVS Health and
also president of CVS Caremark, the company's pharmacy benefit
management business.
Dr. William Fleming is segment president, healthcare
services, where he is responsible for Humana's clinical and
pharmacy business.
John Prince currently serves as chief executive officer of
OptumRx.
Finally, Mike Kolar currently serves as interim president
and CEO of Prime Therapeutics.
So we will start with Dr. Miller and go from my left to my
right. I know that all of you have more to say than 5 minutes
will allow, so for all of you a longer statement will be very
much appreciated and will be put in the record.
So go ahead, Dr. Miller.
STATEMENT OF STEVE MILLER, M.D., EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT AND
CHIEF CLINICAL OFFICER, CIGNA CORPORATION, BLOOMFIELD, CT
Dr. Miller. Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and
members of the committee, thank you for inviting me to testify
and for your interest and leadership on these important topics.
I am Dr. Steve Miller, executive vice president and chief
clinical officer at Cigna. From 2005 to 2018, I served as
senior vice president and chief medical officer at Express
Scripts.
I am a kidney doctor by training. I work in this industry
by choice. As a nephrologist, I could help one patient at a
time. In my current role, I can help over 100 million Americans
achieve better health with greater choice, affordability, and
predictability.
When I started practicing medicine, patients diagnosed with
cancer were most likely to undergo surgery to treat their
condition. Since then, pharmaceutical companies have discovered
and developed innovative medicines that have transformed care,
leading to cures for previously untreatable conditions.
Now the preferred treatment for cancer patients and
patients with many other diagnoses is increasingly prescription
drug therapy before surgery. Accordingly, prescription drug
spending has become the fastest-growing portion of total
medical expenditures.
Innovations can yield exciting life-changing new therapies
and treatments that improve or extend life. But innovation in
the pharmaceutical sector often comes with a high price tag.
At Cigna, we are focused on accelerating solutions that
support both innovation and price stability. Express Scripts
has a range of world-class capabilities that enhance clinical
quality, reduce costs, and improve or accelerate access to
therapies. These include specialty pharmacy care and
distribution, formulary management, medical and drug data
analytics, and patient care services.
We employ hundreds of nurses and thousands of pharmacists
who deliver life-saving drugs to patients, make sure patients
know how to use them, and ensure that the treatment is working.
The coordination of care is a huge part of what we do and what
makes my job so rewarding. Thousands of health plans, unions,
government plans, and employers, including many pharmaceutical
companies, trust us to manage the pharmacy and medical benefits
of millions of Americans. Our clients are sophisticated
purchasers who demand value and innovation from us every day.
We deliver safer, more affordable medicine, and provide
specialized care with tailored solutions, including specialized
pharmacists with deep understanding of specific disease states.
We negotiate discounts for prescription drugs so that the
innovations created by the biopharmaceutical industry can be
accessed by all.
For example, 4 years ago our society faced a challenge
treating patients with hepatitis C. A cure was developed that
had an extraordinary price tag of $1,000 per tablet for 84
pills. That meant for the first time a curative treatment was
going to be reserved for only the sickest patients.
The situation was unacceptable, and Express Scripts worked
to solve it. We did this by driving competition between
clinically similar products and innovating to guarantee
adherence.
In the first year, we treated 50,000 patients to cure,
achieved higher adherence than the drug's clinical trial, and
saved patients and health systems over $1 billion. But we have
more work to do. Approximately 90 percent of all prescriptions
we fill are generics. And there are some cases where generics
are not an option. The remaining 10 percent are branded drugs
which represent 70 percent of the spend on prescription drugs.
We believe there are targeted solutions to address this 70
percent. We work to do this through sophisticated evidence-
based negotiations for clinically equivalent therapies. For
example, over 7 million Americans diagnosed with diabetes use
insulin. For some patients, the increasing price of insulin
limits access and adherence. When Cigna and Express Scripts
announced the merger, we clearly stated that we would improve
choice, affordability, and predictability. Within the first 100
days of our combination with Cigna, we announced a Patient
Assurance Program, which will cap the cost at $25 a month for
patients who take insulin. This is just one example of private-
sector innovations and solutions aligning incentives in the
financing and delivery of care.
Cigna is excited to do our part. We look forward to working
with the committee on solutions ensuring that drugs are
affordable for all Americans. We have highlighted proposals in
our submitted testimony, but I will mention a few.
We recommend improving price transparency tools for
patients and physicians at the point of prescribing and
prioritizing public policy that speeds biosimilars and generics
to market. We recommend the administration move forward with
proposals to introduce more private-market tools into Medicare
Part B and Part D programs.
I welcome the opportunity to discuss these recommendations
and issues and look forward to your questions.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Miller appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Now, Mr. Rice.
STATEMENT OF DERICA RICE, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, CVS HEALTH;
AND PRESIDENT, CVS CAREMARK, WOONSOCKET, RI
Mr. Rice. Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and
members of the committee, I want to thank you for the
opportunity to join you today.
My name is Derica Rice, and I am an executive vice
president at CVS Health, and also president of CVS Caremark. I
joined CVS Health because I believe in the company's vision of
helping patients on their path to better health. We want to
make health care more accessible, more affordable, and improve
health outcomes for the communities that we serve.
Never has our work been more important than today. The
rising costs of health care and prescription drugs affect every
household in this Nation and are a critical issue for consumers
and policymakers. Our job is to work with the employers,
unions, and government programs we serve to ensure that when
their members get to the pharmacy counter, they get the
medicines that they need at the lowest possible cost.
As drug prices increase and consumers shoulder more of the
burden, we believe we can and must do more to deliver
affordable care. In the spirit of our common goal of reducing
health-care costs for consumers and the overall system, I am
here to share what we as CVS Caremark are doing to directly
reduce consumers out-of-
pocket costs at the pharmacy counter and to discuss policies
that would help further advance that agenda.
Our goal as a PBM is simple: to reduce costs and improve
health outcomes. We do this by negotiating discounts with
manufacturers, designing formularies that encourage the use of
generics and biosimilars, and creating new tools to help bring
escalating drug prices under control. Some of the new tools we
have put to work for our employees and our clients include
point-of-sale rebates at the pharmacy counter that directly
lower out-of-pocket costs, in particular during the deductible
phase. Currently, almost 10 million of our clients' members are
in plans offering these savings.
We also offer the first and only Medicare Part D plan
offering point-of-sale rebates through our SilverScript Allure
plan, which leaves the choice to the individual beneficiaries
as to what plan best serves their needs. We provide zero-dollar
copays on preventive medications for chronic conditions to our
employees. And we have redoubled our efforts to encourage our
clients to do the same.
Our hard work has had a real impact. Over the last 3 years,
we have saved our clients and their members $141 billion in
drug costs. At the same time in 2018 alone, 44 percent of our
clients saw their net prescription drug prices decline. And 85
percent of our members utilizing their prescription benefit
spent less than $300 on their prescriptions.
We recently announced our guaranteed net cost pricing
model, a new pricing option that provides our clients with a
guaranteed price for retail, mail, and specialty drug products
regardless of product or price inflation. This heightens our
focus on the lowest actual cost of the drug, and 100 percent of
the rebates are passed through.
As we have interacted with consumers, they have told us
that they want to know whether their drug is covered and what
their out-of-pocket costs are going to be. So we now provide
member-
specific information in the doctor's office, at the pharmacy
counter, and directly to consumers on their phones and online.
We call this ``real-time benefits.'' That means prescribers
can see the actual cost of the drug to the member or patient
based on their current coverage and up to five potentially
lower-cost options, enabling them to make informed decisions
and help patients save money while improving their care.
But as much as we have been able to accomplish, we also
understand that more must be done. We support the FDA's focus
on bringing more lower-cost alternatives to market faster.
As I have detailed at length in my written testimony, we
also support many of the policies authored by members of this
committee, including Chairman Grassley's and Ranking Member
Wyden's policies that would bring more competition to the
market and limit out-of-pocket expenses for seniors.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. I am happy
to answer any questions.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Rice.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rice appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Now it is Dr. Fleming's turn.
STATEMENT OF WILLIAM K. FLEMING, Pharm.D., SEGMENT PRESIDENT,
HEALTHCARE SERVICES, HUMANA, INC., LOUISVILLE, KY
Dr. Fleming. Good morning, Chairman Grassley, Ranking
Member Wyden, and members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to be here and for your leadership in creating and
advancing Part D. I have spent my career in a variety of
pharmacists' roles. And today I lead Humana's clinical
organization including pharmacy, home health, and behavioral
health.
We provide Medicare Part D coverage to approximately 8.4
million seniors. I am passionate about improving health
outcomes. And I appreciate the committee examining the root
causes of high drug costs, advancing policy solutions, and
gaining a deeper understanding of what integrated health plans
do.
Today, more than 43 million seniors are covered by Part D.
The program was designed to leverage market competition to
provide affordable access to prescription drug coverage. The
private market has responded to that construct by creating
competition that has resulted in generic dispensing rates
greater than 90 percent; stable premiums through 13 years of
the program, averaging around $30 per month; and beneficiary
satisfaction rates of nearly 90 percent.
And our efforts have not just been on the negotiation side.
The majority of our employees develop and manage patient
engagement programs as well as advance the interoperability
between Humana and doctors as well as with pharmacies.
For example, we have a tool called Intelligent Rx which
provides actionable information to doctors at the time of
prescribing. By linking information on formulary coverage and
cost in the electronic medical record right into the
physician's workflow, the doctor and her patient can have a
holistic discussion about the patient's needs.
Part D is working incredibly well for the majority of
seniors, but we have a rising tide of high-cost specialty drugs
driving unsustainable costs for seniors and taxpayers. Fifty
thousand to $100,000 treatments did not exist in 2003 when Part
D was signed into law. Today it is common for new innovations.
In 2018, 2 percent of our members used specialty drugs that
comprised 36 percent of our total Part D spending. In 2 years,
we project it could rise to nearly 50 percent. Nearly one of
every two specialty drugs results in members entering
catastrophic coverage on their very first fill.
As we approach the 2020 coverage year, we anticipate the
Part D rebate model will be changed to one where the rebates
that manufacturers are willing to offer will be applied at
point of sale. This regulatory action will have mixed results.
All beneficiaries will pay higher premiums. While 12 percent
will see savings of greater than $70 per year, 5 percent will
see savings of less than $70 per year. Eighty-three percent
will pay higher total cost, given the premium increases.
There are numerous moving pieces associated with such a
tremendous policy change. While we are still reviewing, we are
encouraged by CMS's announcement last Friday addressing one of
our key implementation concerns. And we will continue working
with HHS and CMS to identify additional opportunities to
minimize beneficiary disruption and to create sustainability
and competition. The rebate rule does not solve the drug
affordability problem. To truly protect beneficiaries from high
drug costs and to ensure sustainability in Part D, we would
encourage the committee to explore policy ideas modernizing the
benefit.
At a high level, this could mean placing limits on out-of-
pocket costs, creating a special funding mechanism for today's
high-cost specialty drugs, and including new flexibilities for
Part D plan design such as options for beneficiaries on high-
cost specialty drugs or dually eligible Medicaid/Medicare
beneficiaries. We also strongly encourage Congress to continue
evolving FDA and patent policy to create competition.
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, I look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Fleming appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Now, Mr. Prince.
STATEMENT OF JOHN M. PRINCE, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, OPTUMRX,
MINNETONKA, MN
Mr. Prince. Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and
members of the committee, I am honored to be here today on
behalf of OptumRx, a pharmacy care services company whose
dedicated employees work to ensure that the people we serve
have affordable access to the drugs they need.
Our team includes 5,000 licensed pharmacists and pharmacy
technicians who help patients learn how to take their
medications, avoid harmful drug interactions, and manage their
chronic conditions. Our nurses infuse life-saving drugs in
patients' homes. Our pharmacists serve behavioral health
patients in 450 community mental health centers and Federally
Qualified Health Centers. Our opioid program is helping lower
over-prescribing of opioids, promoting compliance with CDC
prescribing guidelines, and advancing the use of medication-
assisted therapies to reduce opioid dependency.
OptumRx services increase medication adherence, which in
turn reduces unnecessary ER visits and hospitalizations and
improves consumer health. We also manage pharmacy benefits on
behalf of employer, union, commercial, and government
customers. We achieve savings by designing drug benefits that
promote clinically effective drugs at the lowest possible cost,
as a result reducing annual drug costs on average by $1,600 per
person per client.
This starts with a clinical assessment by our Pharmacy and
Therapeutics Committee comprised of independent pharmacists and
physicians. They evaluate formula placement based on scientific
evidence about drugs' efficacy and comparative effectiveness,
not cost. The meetings are open and transparent to our
customers.
Cost only becomes a factor after this independent committee
has identified clinically effective drugs in a therapeutic
class. If a lower net cost generic or biosimilar exists, we
prefer it on our formularies, which is why about 90 percent of
the prescription claims we administer are for generics.
If there is no generic or biosimilar option or more than
one brand or biologic drug in a class, we negotiate meaningful
discounts for manufacturers and prefer the drug with the lowest
overall cost on our formularies. Approximately 98 percent of
the discounts we negotiate go to our customers.
We know consumers have felt the manufacturers' list price
increases in the form of higher out-of-pocket cost. We have
heard the call for action, and we have taken action to make
sure consumers directly benefit from the savings we are
negotiating.
Last year, we dramatically increased the availability of
the discounts at the pharmacy counter for millions of eligible
consumers who are now saving on average $130 per eligible
prescription. In 2020, all new employer-sponsored plans we
serve will provide discounts to their members at the pharmacy
counter.
But more needs to be done. Manufacturers continue to
increase the list and net prices at unsustainable rates because
the lack of meaningful competition allows them to. List prices
have increased on the 20 most prescribed brand drugs for
seniors by an average of 12 percent for each of the past 5
years.
Prices for specialty drugs, in particular, are spiraling
out of control. Less than 2 percent of Americans take a
specialty drug, yet those drugs will make up half of the total
drug spending by 2022.
Manufacturers also engage in anti-competitive practices
such as pay-for-delay deals and evergreening their patents. A
recent study found that 78 percent of drugs associated with new
patents were not new drugs, but just extensions of existing
ones. So called ``authorized generics'' are not a solution.
They are not generics. They are a tactic used by manufacturers
to give the appearance of competition, but they do not lower
overall costs.
Real solutions reform the patent system, promote
competition, and lower costs. These include passing the CREATES
Act, prohibiting pay-for-delay deals, restricting evergreening
of patents, accelerating biosimilar treatment options, and
reducing the exclusivity period for drugs.
We also need to drive meaningful value-based payment models
for drugs, just as is happening throughout the health-care
system. With reforms that promote competition and value-based
payments, we will all get far more value for our considerable
investment in prescription drugs.
We appreciate the opportunity to be here today. The 28,000
women and men of OptumRx are committed to doing our part to
make sure prescription drugs are more affordable.
I look forward to answering your questions. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Prince appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Now, Mr. Kolar.
STATEMENT OF MIKE KOLAR, INTERIM PRESIDENT AND CEO, PRIME
THERAPEUTICS, LLC, EAGAN, MN
Mr. Kolar. Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, members
of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to be here
today to discuss how pharmacy benefit managers and Prime
Therapeutics provide value to the health-care system.
I am Mike Kolar, and I serve as the interim president and
CEO of Prime. At Prime, we make health care work better by
helping people get the medicine they need to feel better and
live well. We do this by ensuring that plan members get the
medication most appropriate for their condition at a cost that
is the most affordable in the context of their overall
insurance benefit.
Prime is a unique PBM. We are owned and controlled by 18
not-for-profit Blue plan clients. We are focused on driving
savings for these plans instead of margins. Our business model
is based upon delivering the lowest net cost on prescription
medicines and the lowest overall cost of care for the benefit
of our plans and ultimately their members. Getting the right
drug for the right patient at the right time at a cost as
affordable as possible in the context of their insurance
benefit helps to ensure sustainability and optimal health
outcomes.
We appreciate the committee's efforts to examine the
problem of high drug prices. We see firsthand the challenges
that these high costs cause for plans, members, and taxpayers
every day.
Prime and PBMs are often misperceived as transactional
middlemen. This entirely ignores the immense value we bring by
using deep pharmacy expertise to ensure clinically appropriate
drug use and to drive improved safety, quality, outcomes, and
savings.
While high prices are and should remain a central issue in
this discussion, it is important to acknowledge the impact of
our clinical expertise in ensuring appropriate utilization,
resulting in lower costs for plans and individual members.
As a client-owned PBM, our business is built upon
transparency, and we understand the importance of transparency
in the health-care system. Our model encompasses full client
transparency and meaningful actionable pharmacy, provider, and
patient transparency. We believe that transparency to the right
parties for the right reasons can improve our health-care
system and lower costs.
Rebates and the role they play have been key areas of focus
in the drug cost debate. In our view, rebates are a powerful
tool to offset high prices which are set by pharmaceutical
companies and pharmaceutical companies alone. The fact that
rebates are not offered on many of the highest-cost drugs and
that studies show no correlation between prices and rebates,
underscores that rebates are a key to mitigating, rather than
causing high drug prices.
We pass rebates through fully to our plans. And we believe
our plans should be able to choose how to apply these rebates
in ways that best serve their members and market needs by
balancing premiums and cost-sharing.
This is particularly true since the majority of commercial
members we serve do not face high coinsurance or high
deductibles. Nevertheless, we are proud to offer our plans a
commercial point-of-sale rebate solution to provide pricing
relief where appropriate.
We are also strong proponents of value-based contracting.
We use these programs to align the interests of manufacturers,
payers, and patients by tying reimbursement to quality outcomes
and value.
We agree that high drug prices must be addressed, and we
support necessary inquiry and change. We believe that
opportunities for meaningful improvement lie in increasing
competition and in greater use of proven clinical tools to
drive down costs. Pharmaceutical competition allows us to use
our clinical expertise to add value and produce savings.
However, patent abuses and restrictions on formularies and
utilization management result in less competition and higher
costs. We support efforts to correct these market imbalances.
We appreciate the committee's interest in our perspective
on drug prices, the role that we play in lowering drug costs
for plans and members, and policy initiatives that can provide
solutions to the drug cost problem. We believe that all parts
of the drug supply chain should be carefully studied and
considered in evaluating possible solutions, and we are
committed to working with you to help bring lower costs to the
most important stakeholder in this conversation, the patient.
We look forward to answering the questions you have
regarding these issues. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kolar appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. I compliment all of you for staying within
the 5 minutes, and I am sure all of you have put in a longer
statement. We will take all of that into consideration as well.
I am picking my first questions for Rice, Prince, and
Miller for the reason that you are the largest with us.
We all agree that seniors are sensitive to premium prices.
When you negotiate drug prices with plans, is a premium impact
for beneficiaries considered? Start with Mr. Rice.
Mr. Rice. Yes, Senator.
The Chairman. Okay, and then Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. When we negotiate, we focus on the lowest net
cost for that drug.
The Chairman. Does that say that the consumer is taken into
consideration or is that one and the same?
Mr. Prince. Yes, absolutely. The consumer is taken into
consideration, so they pay the lowest price.
The Chairman. And Dr. Miller?
Dr. Miller. Most definitely.
The Chairman. Yes.
Now to the same three people. Without rebates--so forget
rebates--what tools do you have to keep drug prices and
premiums low? I will start with Mr. Rice.
Mr. Rice. Senator, we use a number of different tools. As
you heard me articulate in my opening remarks, we negotiate
with manufacturers. Putting rebates to the side, we provide
point-of-sale rebates in order to provide benefits to the
consumer at the counter to keep their out-of-pocket costs low.
We provide formulary and clinical program management which
improves adherence for members, and we know that this
downstream--through that improved adherence--it saves medical
costs downstream. And you also heard me reference in my remarks
that we also provide what we call ``real-time benefits'' to
bring visibility both to the clinicians and physicians, as well
as the patient, as to what the lowest possible cost options are
for them, given their specific plan design, in order to make
sure health care is affordable and accessible for them.
The Chairman. Yes.
So, Mr. Prince, to the extent to which you do some of the
same things, just say that and then whatever else you do that
he did not cover.
Mr. Prince. Sure.
In terms of the value we deliver, we save our clients about
$1,600 per person in value each year, and that is driven. Other
things that we do are the negotiations with retail pharmacies.
We have 67,000. We negotiate a better price for our consumers.
We do other types of drug utilization review. But if you
lost the tool for some type of mechanism for controlling for
rebates, that would actually take a lot of value out of the
system and increase cost.
The Chairman. Okay.
Dr. Miller?
Dr. Miller. Much of the same. Remember that we prefer
generics. So most of the time--in fact 90 percent of the
dispenses we have are for generic products. And that is one of
the greatest tools to help lower costs.
But really important is the coordination of care. If the
patient is not taking the drug, we are not getting the medical
benefit. And so helping those patients identify gaps in care,
fill those gaps and be able to make sure their drugs are
working appropriately, is crucial to the success of treating
the patient.
The Chairman. Okay.
And on the next question, I am going to concentrate on the
same three people.
I would like to talk about consolidation, including the
recent integration of PBMs with insurance companies. Last year
I wrote the Justice Department on the issues. It reported that
the three largest PBMs--who are before us today--now cover 71
percent of Medicare Part D enrollees and 86 percent of stand-
alone drug plan enrollees.
Such market power raises questions. So the first question--
I want to hear briefly from each of you whether the PBM
industry is competitive. For example, are there high barriers
to entry for new competitors? And I think that is an important
point, but you do not have to just concentrate on high
barriers.
Let us go with Dr. Miller.
Dr. Miller. Thank you. So the consolidation in the industry
is actually in an effort to really take better care of
patients. By looking at total cost of care across medical and
pharmacy, we believe we can do an even better job of
controlling costs and improving care.
As far as barrier to entry, this is actually a wildly
competitive marketplace with over 60 players. People buy based
on their needs. Some people want to use a regional player or a
local player. Some people want to use a national player. And
there is plenty of selection of all.
The Chairman. Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. Senator, this is a highly competitive space. In
addition to the three that you have pointed out here, there
is--I think CMS has noted there are over 60 PBMs across the
U.S. So therefore, the competition there is more than--there
are many options for the employers that are out there,
government entities as well as unions, to choose from, given
their specific needs.
And we have seen that play out in terms of each of us
trying to get to--for our clients and their members, their
patients--the lowest possible cost we can to keep premiums low
and out-of-pocket cost burdens low as well.
The Chairman. And then, Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. Senator, I would say the market is very
competitive. Every time we go out to a bid, there are at least
three to five other competitors in the market.
Our clients are very sophisticated. They use complicated
spreadsheets to evaluate the clinical value and the cost-
effectiveness of proposals. They have outside advisors that
help them in that process.
When you get to the broader market, there are dozens of
other competitors, especially as you get into the mid-size
employers. So it is a very competitive market with a lot of
pricing pressure.
The Chairman. Senator Wyden?
Senator Wyden. Thank you.
Gentlemen, when I am home, what Oregonians tell me is that
the whole system is just rigged against them. And they look at
the drug companies, the middlemen, the insurance companies, and
they say they are just a bunch of health-care corporations
scratching each other's backs and keeping our prices up and
taking advantage of us.
And all of you as pharmacy benefit managers consistently
say--this is your message: you bring value and fight for the
lowest price.
So I am going to use a couple of examples to try to see how
that works in the real world. Amgen manufactures a brand-name
cholesterol drug that is very expensive. I have covered my
concerns with high list prices with them.
They recently launched an identical version of the drug
that cost 60 percent less than the original. Now here is a copy
of a prior authorization form that CVS requires doctors to fill
out if the doctor wants to prescribe a cheaper version of this
cholesterol drug. I am going to ask unanimous consent to enter
this document into the record.
[The form appears in the appendix on p. 234.]
Senator Wyden. The CVS forms says, and I quote: ``The two
products are the exact same, and they are made in the same
manufacturing facility.'' But they ask the doctor to answer
detailed questions about the patient's medical history.
Mr. Rice, why is CVS--based on this form--putting arbitrary
barriers between patients and cheaper medicine? Is it because
you get a bigger rebate on a more expensive drug?
Mr. Rice. Senator, I understand your question, and the
short answer is, absolutely not. What you may find is that, in
many cases, the highest list price drug, or the lowest list
price drug in the particular example you cite, may not be the
absolute lowest-cost drug.
So what we tend to do is, we look at the drug's cost after
all discounts have been taken into account, because that then
is what allows members to keep out-of-pocket costs low as well
as the plans to keep their premiums low for their members. And
in that particular scenario, the branded drug was still the
lowest cost for----
Senator Wyden. You are making the argument the consumer
somehow, by your analysis, wins on net price. Is that the
argument you are making?
Mr. Rice. Yes, Senator.
Senator Wyden. Okay.
To me that answer is a prime example of our broken drug
system favoring the big corporations rather than patients. At
the pharmacy counter anywhere in America, patients pay cost-
sharing based off the list price.
And my view is--we will talk to you some more about it--
when I use that form and I hear your answer, it sure looks to
me like you all are taking deliberate actions to pad your
bottom line at the expense of patients.
Now, Mr. Prince, a question for you, because time is short.
A February 11, 2019 article describes letters United sent to
several drug manufacturers late last year and early this year--
Mr. Chairman, I would ask unanimous consent to enter that
article into the record.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
[The article appears in the appendix on p. 235.]
Senator Wyden. Mr. Prince, the letters demanded that drug
manufacturers give United almost 2 years' notice if they intend
to lower prices, giving manufacturers, again, an easy excuse to
keep list prices high. Even more galling, United demanded that
these lower prices would not diminish the rebates United
receives. The letters say United should receive equivalent
rebates off the lower prices.
So, Mr. Prince, you all argue, PBMs, that drug prices set
by manufacturers need to come down. But in private, United
seems only to care about the size of their rebate and when
their bottom line might take a hit.
Mr. Prince, do you have any agreements with drug
manufacturers, similar to this letter, that penalize the drug
manufacturers if they choose to lower their price?
Mr. Prince. So, Senator, regarding that letter that was
sent out in December of last year, it was intended to make sure
that our clients we work with--Part D plans--we wanted to make
sure that when they put in their bids, they understood what
would be the rebate amounts so that they could enter a bid
accurately.
And you know how the part D program works: you have to
submit your bid in June of one year for the next 7 months.
Senator Wyden. My time is short.
The question was, do you have any agreements with the drug
manufacturers, similar to this letter, that penalize the drug
manufacturers if they choose to lower their prices? ``Yes'' or
``no''?
Mr. Rice. We strongly encourage people to lower list price.
We support----
Senator Wyden. I would like to see any agreements.
My time is up. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Cornyn?
Before Senator Cornyn's time starts, there is going to be a
vote. I thought it started right now. So we are going to keep
this meeting going. And while I am gone, Senator Cassidy is
going to control the time.
Senator Cornyn?
Senator Cornyn. Gentlemen, in our meetings in my office and
elsewhere, I told you we are trying to understand the basic
features of the contracts between the manufacturers and the
PBMs and how those relate to the consumer.
So I would like to ask five questions to establish some
basic facts about how your companies operate. And if possible,
I would like for you to answer ``yes'' or ``no'' just so we can
establish some basic facts. We can come back for further
explanation in some format or another. I am not trying to cut
you off, but I am trying to work within the guidelines and the
time we have today.
So, does your company structure an agreement where rebates
and fees are a percentage of list price? Dr. Miller?
Dr. Miller. Yes.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. Yes.
Senator Cornyn. Dr. Fleming?
Dr. Fleming. Yes. It is wholesale acquisition cost.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. No, for Medicare. No, for Medicaid. No, for
generics. And we pass on 98 percent in the commercial.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Kolar?
Mr. Kolar. Yes.
Senator Cornyn. The second question is, has your company
proposed in a contract or otherwise prohibited or penalized a
manufacturer from decreasing the price of a drug?
Dr. Miller?
Dr. Miller. No.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. Absolutely not.
Senator Cornyn. Dr. Fleming?
Dr. Fleming. Absolutely not.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. No.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Kolar?
Mr. Kolar. No. We welcome lower prices.
Senator Cornyn. Third question: has your company proposed
in a contract or otherwise demanded that manufacturers give
advance notice of a price decrease? I think this may relate to
some of what the ranking member was asking.
Let me ask that again. Has your company proposed in a
contract or otherwise demanded that manufacturers give advance
notice of a price decrease? Dr. Miller?
Dr. Miller. No.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. No.
Senator Cornyn. Dr. Fleming?
Dr. Fleming. No.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. Yes.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Kolar?
Mr. Kolar. No.
Senator Cornyn. Fourth question: has your company proposed
in a contract or otherwise demanded that manufacturers pay a
higher fee or rebate if list prices do not increase above a
certain percentage in that contract year?
Dr. Miller?
Dr. Miller. No.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. No.
Senator Cornyn. Dr. Fleming?
Dr. Fleming. No.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. No.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Kolar?
Mr. Kolar. No.
Senator Cornyn. Finally, has your company proposed in a
contract or otherwise demanded that manufacturers pay a certain
rebate amount even if they decrease--decrease--their list
price?
Dr. Miller?
Dr. Miller. The manufacturer is required to continue to pay
the rebate until renegotiation.
Senator Cornyn. So that would be a ``yes''?
Dr. Miller. Yes.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. We focus on, with the manufacturers, getting to
the lowest possible cost, whether it is rebate or if they can
reduce the list even further below the fully discounted value.
Senator Cornyn. Is that a ``yes'' or ``no''? Has your
company proposed in a contract or otherwise demanded that
manufacturers pay a certain rebate amount even if they decrease
their list price?
Mr. Rice. Not that I am aware of.
Senator Cornyn. Dr. Fleming?
Dr. Fleming. Not that I am aware of. Most of our discounts
are a percentage of wholesale acquisition cost.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. For the specific case that was referenced, yes.
But in general, 100 percent--it was only for the Part D
program, and 100 percent of those rebates were passed on to CMS
and to our consumers.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Kolar?
Mr. Kolar. No, Senator. Not that I am aware of.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit a
question for the record. I will do it in writing to each of
these gentlemen. But I want to give you warning ahead of time
of what is coming so you can prepare.
I would like to know from each of you the total dollar
amount that you obtain from pharmaceutical manufacturers in any
form, such as rebates, fees, and the like, and secondly, what
the total dollar amount that you remit to health plans is.
We will give you a chance to respond in writing, but I
wanted to give you a fair notice at this hearing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Stabenow?
Senator Stabenow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome to each of you. Obviously, this is an
incredibly important topic. You have each indicated this is the
fastest driver of health-care costs, and certainly for
families, for seniors, for individuals there is deep, deep
concern.
There was an issue that Michigan pharmacists brought to me
a little over a year ago that we were able to successfully
address on a bipartisan basis. My Know the Lowest Price Act was
signed into law after it was clear that pharmacists were
extremely concerned that people were walking into a pharmacy,
handing over their insurance card, paying the copay, assuming
it was the lowest price, and sometimes--in fact, the report
showed 23 percent of the time the person could have gotten a
lower price paying cash out of pocket. And yet, the pharmacists
could not tell people.
So when we raised that, we heard basically from everybody
that nobody did it. It was just a few bad guys. Nobody did it,
and in fact, it was just a couple of bad actors, not a common
practice. And so we were able to fix that.
So my first question is, can you tell me if there are any
other egregious anti-consumer PBM practices taking place
anywhere in your industry like this that you would want to
highlight today?
[No response.]
Senator Stabenow. Okay, so let me go on to the next
question. So I am assuming that is a ``no'' because no one
responded.
So let me go on then and talk about negotiation, talk about
the various tools that you have to be able to bring down costs
for people. And one of the main tools is negotiating. I am
assuming when you look at the number of customers, it is about
bulk purchase, being able to secure the best price; right?
So when we look at it, Express Scripts has 100 million
Americans covered, CVS 90 million, OptumRx 65 million, Prime
Therapeutics 27 million, Humana 21 million. And yet we still,
Americans still pay the highest prices in the world even though
you are negotiating for millions of people.
And so my question is, the VA has its own pharmacy benefit
manager service. They negotiate for 9 million people, 9 million
veterans. And they pay on average 40 percent less for the same
drugs that the rest of the health-care system pays.
Despite greater volume, you are unable to secure these
kinds of low prices. With all due respect, you guys are pretty
bad negotiators, given the fact that the VA can get 40 percent
less.
And so, I would like to know from each of you why that is
the case. Dr. Miller?
Dr. Miller. Yes, so part of the equation is giving patients
choice. And so at the VA, they actually limit their formulary
more than any of us at this table do.
And so oftentimes they will have one beta blocker, one ACE
inhibitor. And so if it is going to get to that level of
choice, then we could get better prices also.
Senator Stabenow. But let me also just jump in in the
interest of time. I know you create nationwide drug
formularies, you have pre-authorization, you give preferred
status to certain medications.
So you do not use any of those tools that the VA is using?
Because you do.
Dr. Miller. We definitely use those tools. But we also give
people choice. It is crucial for both physicians and patients
to have the choice of the products they want to be able to
access. So many of our plans want us to have broad formularies.
And so when you have more products, it means you move less
market share. You cannot get----
Senator Stabenow. And so they get 40 percent more--so
basically 40-percent premium, you are saying? It gives them
more choice.
I mean, I would like to ask people how much they would
think that is a good trade-off given the cost of medicine
today. And I would welcome the opportunity to look at the tools
in detail that each of you have, versus the VA. Because when I
look at it, it does not look to be that much different.
But in the interest of time--Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. Yes, Senator.
Senator Stabenow. Any comments?
Mr. Rice. Yes, Senator. What we have seen is that when we
are able to manage a more tight formulary versus an unmanaged
formulary, we can actually drive lower costs for the patients
as well as for the cost of the plans.
And we have seen through our own data that an unmanaged
plan--which means it has an open formulary, as was being
referenced--may have an average cost of $108 versus a managed
plan that may have a cost on average closer to $80.
Senator Stabenow. So would you support doing something like
what the VA does in terms of how they manage their plans, then?
Is that what you are suggesting, that they have a more narrow
focus and that that would be better for consumers?
Mr. Rice. What I would support, Senator, is choice and
optionality. And with our members and their respective clients,
that is what we have provided such that in our own case, if you
take the example of our Med D plan for seniors, we provide a
plan that can be as cheap as a premium of $30 all the way to a
premium of $80 depending upon which choices those members think
best meet their specific needs.
And that $80 premium begins to contemplate things like
point-of-sale rebates.
Senator Stabenow. Yes. No, I understand that.
Mr. Chairman, I know that--I would like to hear from
everyone else, but I do recognize that I am out of time. So I
will follow up in writing with each of you.
I do want to say, though, that Medicare does have 59
million beneficiaries, much less than many of you have as well.
And I do not understand why they are not allowed to negotiate
best price in terms of what is best for consumers.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Cassidy [presiding]. Ms. Cantwell?
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank the chairman and ranking member for
holding this briefing. I want to emphasize that, obviously, one
of the themes of today is the lack of transparency, and in the
2009 legislation, I authored a PBM transparency provision that
is current law. This provision requires the PBMs to
confidentially report information to the Secretary of Health
and Human Services, including the total amount and types of
rebates, discounts, and price concessions that PBMs negotiate
on behalf of insurance plans.
So, that information is somewhere in this government. And I
would suggest that we work with Secretary Azar on that
information, not that it can be made public, but that it will
give us what we need to see today, that we have a lack of
direct negotiating ability, in my opinion, by States and other
jurisdictions. I personally would give States better
negotiating authority.
I get that this is a business model for PBMs. But there is
no reason why that business model has to exclude having other
market competition.
When I look at the fact that three PBMs have 85 percent of
the market or that the CVS-Aetna merger was opposed by the
American Medical Association because it raised concerns about
reduced competition, then my question is, why can we not induce
more competition into this marketplace by allowing States to
negotiate on behalf of various plans within their State?
So I am not asking for an answer that I already asked the
drug companies. They think that is unfair. I am pretty sure you
are going to say the same thing. So I do not need to hear that
answer.
What we need to do is get the answers from Secretary Azar
about what is currently happening in the marketplace and move
forward with giving States the ability, or the Federal
Government, to negotiate on price.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Cassidy. Thank you.
The chair calls on himself. There is no one else to call
on.
Now, I have thought a lot about your business model. And
multiple times it was said that if you do a point-of-sale
rebate, premiums will rise. Now if you think about that, what
that is saying is that those patients who actually need
medications are the ones who are lowering the premiums for
those who do not.
Now, it is kind of a reverse Robin Hood. We are going to
take from the sick and give to the well. Now on the one hand,
you could say that is just a business decision. But you could
imagine that this could be manipulated, that the way to keep
somebody requiring expensive drugs off of your plan, maybe to
get on their spouses' plan, would be to make them pay more.
Now I say that--I am not accusing. I just cannot help but
reflect upon that. And so I want to then--can we show that
second poster, please? This one.
Now, one thing I have noted is, we have heard several times
that the amount of PBM retained revenue on retail prescription
drugs by source is--and this would be the maroon that would be
related to rebates. And this would be related to fees.
[Indicating.]
And so the amount related to fees is increasing
dramatically. And the amount related to rebates is decreasing.
So what it tells me is that you seem to be passing more of
these rebates on, or else getting fewer, less rebates. I
suspect that more are being passed on.
But this is what concerns me, that $16.6 billion. I think
it was you, Mr. Rice, who said that the amount paid for drugs
is flat or decreasing.
Does that also include these other fees that might be
related to the filling of the prescription? Is the fee--put
differently, you probably understand what I am asking, but just
for the record--put differently, when you say ``the drug cost
is remaining flat,'' is that everything included, including
that which is charged at the pharmacy as a dispensing fee or
any other fee which may be included? Or is it merely the price
of the medication itself?
Mr. Rice. It is all-inclusive, Senator. We pass through 100
percent of all rebates----
Senator Cassidy. Now, not related to the rebates----
Mr. Rice [continuing]. And fees to our clients on behalf of
their members.
Senator Cassidy. So if there is a DIR fee collected from
the pharmacist, then that is rebated to the payer even if not
to the patient? So when you say--and the flat cost to the
patient includes this increased amount of fees that are going
into your business model?
Mr. Rice. Yes, Senator. In many of our cases with our
clients today, they have progressed to what we call a
``transparent arrangement,'' which is, there is no spread
between the two.
Senator Cassidy. Now is this the same for each of you, that
when you say the cost of the drug has remained flat, that you
are including the cost of the ancillary fees?
I will just go down, Mr. Kolar, and go this way.
Mr. Kolar. So, Senator, when we negotiate with
pharmaceutical companies, we are fully transparent with our
clients about the amounts we receive. We pass those back to the
plans.
Senator Cassidy. So is that 100-percent pass-through?
Mr. Kolar. It is. We do--there are----
Senator Cassidy. On the fees?
Mr. Kolar. There are elements of fees that we retain, but
we retain them in lieu of charging our clients administrative
fees.
Senator Cassidy. I am almost out of time, so I will not ask
the others.
So I have also thought about the retained fees--because I
have had several good meetings with you guys.
But one of the things that was raised with me was that
sometimes clients would rather have a fee retained, as opposed
to paying a fee. And I have read that that is a way to
circumvent the Obamacare MLR rule. And I say that not to ask
your comment, because it is not your decision, it is the payer
or the insurance company. But for the record, it has been at
least labeled as that way.
Next, I once went to a site of a pharmacy benefit manager,
and I was very impressed with much of what you do. But one
thing I saw was bottles being emptied, and then the same pill
that had formerly been in one bottle was then placed in another
bottle. And the second bottle is that which was sent.
And I did not understand that for the life of me. But at
one point I was told that that allows it to be billed at a
higher NDC code, that, sure we acquire, but because we empty
one bottle and fill another, we can now even as much as triple
the cost of the basis of the drug being shipped out to the
patients.
So let me just ask you, ``yes'' or ``no,'' if your company
does that. Dr. Miller?
Dr. Miller. No.
Senator Cassidy. Okay.
Mr. Rice. No.
Dr. Fleming. No.
Mr. Prince. No.
Mr. Kolar. No.
Senator Cassidy. Now it was, I think, Express Scripts that
I toured and saw that. And I kind of lose track of who is who.
Who now would be the recipient of Express Scripts?
Dr. Miller. I am Express Scripts.
Senator Cassidy. So I did remember seeing that. Is this,
therefor, a practice that has been discontinued?
Dr. Miller. What you probably remember is, in our high-
volume filler, we take--to make sure we have accuracy, we put
the pills into these containers. When they are moved from the
pill bottle--we can only buy the largest volume that the
manufacturer makes. We use the high-volume fillers for mail
order pharmacy. We move them from the small containers into a
larger container. The NDC does not change, and that does not
change the price.
Senator Cassidy. The NDC does not change. That is my key
point.
Okay, I yield back. Thank you. And I will have some QFRs,
but thank you very much.
Senator Brown?
Senator Brown. You always call on me when nobody else is
sitting here. [Laughter.] Thank you.
Thanks to all five of you for joining us. It is not exactly
breaking news that Ohioans do not trust pharmacy benefit
managers. Between repeated reports on the egregious use of
spread pricing, alleged breaches of contract, accusations of
anti-competitive behavior, a misuse of taxpayer dollars, a
general lack of transparency, I cannot say that I blame them.
Several of you, I understand, are making a conscious effort
to rebuild trust with Ohio pharmacies, and consumers and
taxpayers. I appreciate that, but I need you to do that better,
and we need you to do that faster.
Part of that means changing the way you think about your
business, and it means considering models that benefit the
Ohioan at the pharmacy counter, as much as it benefits your
direct client or the other half of your business. It is past
time to put patients ahead of profits and Ohio taxpayers before
shareholders. So I ask you to do that.
I want to ask a few ``yes'' or ``no'' questions, starting
with you, Mr. Kolar, and if you really would answer ``yes'' or
``no'' just right to left. Does your company play a role in
setting list prices of any drugs?
Mr. Kolar. No, we do not.
Mr. Prince. No.
Dr. Fleming. No.
Mr. Rice. No.
Dr. Miller. No.
Senator Brown. Okay. Thank you.
If the administration's rebate rule were finalized as
proposed, would you in some way be required to change the way
you do business?
Mr. Kolar. Yes, Senator, we would.
Mr. Prince. Yes.
Dr. Fleming. Yes.
Mr. Rice. Yes.
Dr. Miller. Yes.
Senator Brown. Okay. Thank you.
If the administration's rebate rule were finalized as
proposed, do you believe any pharma company would be required
to change the way it does business?
Mr. Kolar. No, Senator.
Mr. Prince. No.
Dr. Fleming. No.
Mr. Rice. No.
Dr. Miller. No.
Senator Brown. Okay. Last--this question is a short answer
if you can. And thank you for your cooperation.
What percentage of prescriptions that you fill across Part
D actually receive a rebate? Roughly what percentage?
Mr. Kolar. So, Senator, approximately 8 percent of the
prescriptions that we cover in Part D are associated with a
rebate.
Senator Brown. Okay.
Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. Senator, I do not know the exact number. I know
overall business, about 7 percent.
Senator Brown. Okay. Thank you.
Dr. Fleming. About 7 to 8 percent.
Senator Brown. Okay.
Mr. Rice. Senator, I do not know the exact number, but we
pass through 100 percent of all rebates and discounts.
Senator Brown. Okay.
Dr. Miller. Ninety percent of the prescriptions will be
generic. Of the 10 percent that are branded, about two-thirds
have rebates. So it is about 7----
Senator Brown. Seven or 8 percent like the others. Okay.
To recap, PBMs do not set drug prices, forcing you to
change the way you do business as the administration's rule
would not change that fact. And while the rule might impact a
small percentage of drugs in Part D that receive a rebate, it
does nothing to lower costs, as your answer suggests, for the
other 90 percent of prescriptions you fill.
Most importantly, absolutely nothing in the proposed rule
would require Secretary Azar's former employer, or any other
pharma company, to lower the price of insulin or any other
drug. It is important to establish that. So, thank you for
that.
In fact, no pharma company is willing to commit to lowering
the price of their drugs if this rule goes into effect. Instead
of relying on the administration's claims that the proposed
rebate rule will solve the drug pricing problem, we should be
focusing on solutions that are sure to result in lower drug
prices, like my legislation to allow Medicare to negotiate on
behalf of all Part D drugs and to prohibit manufacturers from
price-gouging.
In the last couple of minutes--many of you acknowledge in
your testimony the fact that biosimilars have enormous
potential to help lower drug prices for all Americans. As you
know, biosimilars are approved by the FDA based on safety and
efficacy. And in every circumstance that I am aware of, they
have a lower list price than their innovator product, not
surprisingly.
I understand that many of your plans sometimes require the
use of higher list price innovator brand-name products over the
use of a cheaper therapeutically equivalent FDA-approved
biosimilar or generic. This is short-sighted. It is already
having a chilling effect on the potential for a robust
biosimilar market in the U.S.
My time is about to expire, but I would like to ask each of
you to answer for the record what more your company can and
will do and what more Congress should do to ensure the U.S.
develops a robust biosimilar product.
Why don't we start with you, Dr. Miller, if you would?
Dr. Miller. So one of the biggest problems facing the
industry is the lack of biosimilars. They have come to the
marketplace. The FDA has approved many biosimilars that still
are not in the marketplace. They are caught up in law in the
legal actions. And so, shortening the period of exclusivity
could make a huge difference in bringing these biosimilars to
the marketplace.
And so we are strongly supportive, and have been for over a
decade, to get biosimilars out there. And when they are there,
we often take great advantage of them to lower the cost for our
plans.
Senator Brown. Thank you.
And, Mr. Rice, as you answer the same question, include in
it any pushback ideas on manufacturers' tactics like bundling
rebates and rebate blocking.
So go ahead. Thank you, Mr. Rice.
Mr. Rice. Yes, Senator. As you have heard previously from
my counterpart here, we absolutely are supportive of bringing
more competition into the marketplace. We have seen, even in
the space of insulin, when we have been able to have that
competition, a biosimilar introduction, we were actually able
to reduce the out-of-pocket burden for the members by 9
percent.
And so having more competition like that on the market
would be extremely beneficial. And we know today that the U.S.
still lags Europe in the availability of biosimilars.
Senator Brown. Thank you.
Dr. Fleming?
The Chairman. Senator Hassan?
Senator Brown. Could they answer the question?
The Chairman. Yes. I thought you just had one question.
Senator Brown. It is one for all of them.
The Chairman. Everybody answer his question, and then we go
to Senator Hassan.
Dr. Fleming. Yes, Senator. We need more competition. We
love biosimilars. When they do come out, we try to put them in
parity position with the originator drug to allow the
biosimilar to compete, but the big problem we have today is, we
need more. More competition allows prices to come down for the
same therapeutic area.
Senator Brown. In a shorter window, as Dr. Miller suggested
would work. Okay.
Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. Senator, there is a lot that needs to be done
to increase competition in the biosimilars market. We are very
strong supporters of it.
There are over 50 biosimilars that are actually used in
Europe. Less than six--around six or seven are in the market in
the United States.
So the main reform areas could be in the FDA. So there is a
series of things. If you follow up, we would love to provide
solutions that you can work on.
Thank you.
Senator Brown. Mr. Kolar?
Mr. Kolar. So, Senator, we are very supportive of
biosimilars. We generally treat them on parity or preferred
over brand. We assess them on a lowest net cost basis.
We do not engage--you asked about bundling. Bundling is not
a practice for us that creates a meaningful barrier to
biosimilar uptake.
We think one of the biggest barriers to uptake of
biosimilars is lack of final FDA guidance on
interchangeability.
The Chairman. Senator Hassan?
Senator Brown. Mr. Chairman, one more thing. I am sorry. I
apologize.
I think their answers really do show the importance of a
shorter window on biosimilars, on exclusivity.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Hassan?
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank
you and Ranking Member Wyden for having this hearing. Thank you
to our witnesses for being here today.
Mr. Prince, as you mentioned in your testimony, we cannot
lose sight of some of the truly obscene price increases from
drug manufacturers that we have seen in recent years. And I
agree that we cannot solve the problem of skyrocketing
prescription drug costs without addressing that.
But we do have a responsibility to look at all points in
the supply chain. We spend a lot of time attempting to educate
patients, for instance, about the value of choosing lower-cost
generic alternatives. And many formularies penalize consumers
financially when they do not.
You point out in your testimony that there are times when--
because of rebates and discounts that you negotiate--the brand
name drug may be the better value to the plan than the
authorized generic. I certainly understand that and recognize
that you have to balance the needs of a variety of payers in
developing your plan.
But just this week, my office heard from a constituent, not
for the first time, who was baffled about why he is being told
to pay more for the brand name drug instead of using the
generic. In the cases where the brand-name drug is the better
financial option for your company and for the plan purchaser,
why are you not charging the end-use consumer the lower copay?
Mr. Prince. So, Senator, just to frame the overall
discussion around how things go on a formulary, then I will
talk about how we then----
Senator Hassan. Yes.
Mr. Prince. So our formulary process starts with an
independent pharmaceutical and therapeutics committee that is
independent from our company.
Senator Hassan. I do want to hear about that. I would ask
you to keep it short, because I have another question. And I am
really trying to get at why doesn't the consumer get the
benefit that you also say in your testimony here your company
does?
Mr. Prince. We absolutely agree with you that the consumer
should get all the value that we are negotiating. And that is
why last year and this year, we have made such a huge effort
around making sure that every discount we get is passed on to
the consumer point-of-sale.
Senator Hassan. So----
Mr. Prince. We now have 9 million people as a part of that
program. We are not going to take any additional customers in
2020 without that, but not all of our customers have that yet.
But we are sharing the evidence with them around the value
for that program.
Senator Hassan. Okay.
So, in the case of a consumer being told they have to buy a
brand-name drug and pay more for it because, ultimately, you
are directing them that way because it increases the profits
for your company, you are saying here that you want to get to a
place where the consumer recognizes the savings and could be
charged the lower copay.
The PBM is choosing the brand name, in some cases, and the
consumer should not be stuck with that decision by your
company, is my point.
Mr. Prince. So, Senator, it is a rare circumstance where a
brand would be less expensive. But in rare circumstances--
because we negotiate on behalf of our customers--the price of
the generic would actually be higher than the brand after you
look at all the discounts.
So the actual price--not for us, but for our client, is
less expensive, and we want to make sure that that value is
then passed on to the consumer, which is why we are advocating
for point-of-sale discounts in the commercial market.
Senator Hassan. All right.
I am going to follow up with you a little bit after this
hearing about that, because I just think what my constituents
are seeing is, they are being told they have to purchase a
brand name, and they are being charged the higher copay for it.
Mr. Prince. Okay.
Senator Hassan. Okay.
To all of the witnesses, I know there has been a discussion
here about Chairman Grassley's inquiry to the FTC. In theory,
we know that PBMs help patients by helping negotiate lower
prices. But I am concerned that the lack of competition in this
area may mean that the industry is falling short of that goal
today. And I know there has been discussion already about what
level of competition you all think there is.
The Federal Trade Commission oversees PBMs and has already
begun looking into concentration and competition in this
market. And Chairman Grassley mentioned this in his opening
statement and sent a letter to the FTC about the issue this
fall.
The FTC has the authority to do more, to request rebate and
fee information and analyze the impact of your companies' drug
prices. I think that is a good idea, and I plan to join
Chairman Grassley in talking with the FTC and ultimately
encouraging them to look into it further.
So I would just like your commitment today that if the FTC
requests information from you, your companies will cooperate
fully and provide the information that the agency needs to
conduct a rigorous analysis.
And we will just start at the end of the table, and I just
would--Dr. Miller?
Dr. Miller. Yes. We look forward to participating.
Senator Hassan. Thank you.
Mr. Rice. Absolutely, Senator.
Senator Hassan. Thank you.
Dr. Fleming. Yes, Senator.
Senator Hassan. Thank you.
Mr. Prince. Yes, Senator. We will cooperate.
Senator Hassan. Thank you.
Mr. Kolar. Yes, Senator, absolutely.
Senator Hassan. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Daines?
Senator Daines. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am hearing from folks all over Montana--in fact in every
corner of our State--on the need to lower prescription drug
costs, particularly out-of-pocket costs. I believe one way to
help lower costs of prescription drugs is to shine light on the
role of the middlemen, which is why you are here today. That is
what you are. You are between the pharmaceutical company and
the consumer.
It is your role, as I understand, to negotiate better drug
prices for patients. But what we are seeing today is that there
are higher profits on your end and we are not seeing lower
costs ultimately for the end-user, for Montanans. In fact in
Montana, there is a bill before legislature as we speak that
aims to hold you all accountable, and then pass along the
savings to consumers, versus profits back to the PBMs.
We need more transparency on drug pricing to lower costs
for patients. And I am exploring legislative options to do just
that.
My question to the panel is--we are getting a lot of
resistance back in Montana. And why are you all fighting so
hard against that legislation in Montana and efforts here to
increase transparency and to pass on that savings that you
negotiate to patients?
Whoever wants to take the question first.
Mr. Rice. Senator, I am not familiar with that specific
piece of legislation, but as it pertains to transparency
overall, we at CVS Caremark are very supportive. We provide
full visibility to our clients of all our contracts and the
discounts that we negotiate on their behalf.
As I stated earlier, we pass through in the Medicaid/
Medicare book of business 100 percent of all rebates and
discounts. We pass through overall more than 98 percent.
In the spirit of transparency, we have been supportive of
policies like legislation being proposed by MedPAC. What we
have done to try to further enhance transparency is, we provide
a real-time benefit such that the members themselves, the
patients actually, have that same visibility. And we too are
concerned about the out-of-pocket burden on patients.
And so, therefore, we brought forward tools that can
specifically help them, like point-of-sale rebates, like
preventative drug lists for maintenance drugs that would have a
zero-dollar copay, so then they would not have to worry about
the deductible phase with high-deductible plans.
These are things that can impact the patient immediately.
Senator Daines. I want to shift gears.
Mr. Prince, we saw the report that Optum sent a letter to
drug makers in December asking for 7 quarters' advance notice--
that is nearly 2 years--if a manufacturer is going to lower
their price for patients. When Montana patients are choosing
not to fill their prescriptions, and we get these stories,
because of high out-of-pocket costs, requesting a nearly 2-year
advanced notice frankly shocked me.
In fact, this type of demand would have prevented Montanans
from getting about a 60-percent price reduction in their
cholesterol-lowering medications after a drug maker announced
they were dropping their list price just last year. Working
that out, that is nearly $8,000 per year, per patient for those
Montanans who take that drug.
Montanans cannot afford to pay higher prices for 2 years
for the sake of keeping industry happy, and perhaps Wall
Street.
My question is, why does the company need to take more
money out of the pockets of Montanans for nearly 2 years,
versus you doing your job and negotiating lower costs for
patients?
Mr. Prince. Well, Senator, specifically on rebates and
discounts in the Medicare market, we pass 100 percent on to the
plan, and it is just fully disclosed to CMS. So the discounts
are fully passed on.
And then in terms of the commercial market for employers,
we are an advocate for point-of-sale discounts. We rolled that
out dramatically. So the discounts that we are delivering
actually get passed on. So we actually are not going to be
taking additional customers in 2020 unless we pass on the
discounts.
So overall, the people from Montana are getting the value
from what we deliver.
Senator Daines. Why the 7 quarters?
Mr. Prince. Senator, that was a technical, legal contract
that was making sure that we could get information so that our
clients, when they submitted their bids, the preview in June,
would have all the information they needed to actually submit
their bids correctly.
And as you know, in the Medicare Part D program, you submit
a bid in June for the following year, so that covers the 7
quarters.
Senator Daines. On another note, I think we can all agree
on the importance of cracking down on drug companies
discouraging low-cost generic drugs from coming to market.
Since last Congress, I have worked with Chairman Grassley on
the CREATES Act to combat anti-competitive practices and
improve Montana's access to lower-cost generic drugs.
I am going to continue to push for this common-sense
legislation to be signed into law and pursuing other
legislative priorities that will lower drug costs for folks in
every corner of Montana and across this Nation.
Thank you.
The Chairman. The Senator from Nevada.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, gentlemen, for being here. I appreciate the
opportunity. I have met with some of you as well and had the
opportunity to talk to you.
And one of the things we talked about was rebates. Many of
you discussed products that you offer clients that allow for
point-of-sale rebates. And I am curious, in those contracts, do
you keep any portion of the rebate for yourself?
And if we would just kind of go down the table----
Mr. Kolar. No, we do not.
Mr. Prince. No, we do not.
Dr. Fleming. Senator, no.
Mr. Rice. No, we do not.
Dr. Miller. No.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Let me ask you, Dr. Fleming: in your testimony you say
Humana's analysis of the rebate rule--and we are talking about
the administration's rebate rule now. But you say that Humana's
analysis of the rule found that approximately 17 percent of
beneficiaries will see savings at the pharmacy counter as a
result of this rule.
Can you tell me a little bit more about who these people
are, and what kind of conditions they have?
Dr. Fleming. Senator, that would be a number of members who
are taking brand drugs for which we get rebates. And so it
could vary all the way from the common chronic conditions,
things like diabetes or hypertension or high cholesterol, all
the way over to occasionally, not usually, but occasionally on
the specialty drug side, when you think of some medications
like treatments for rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis,
places where there is competition.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
So let me ask you this, and then I will open it up to
everyone.
There is a lot of hesitancy from all sides of the industry
to talk about models that would enable HHS to negotiate
directly with manufacturers. But there are a handful of
therapies--those are the sole source drugs for which there is
no therapeutic alternative--where you have no leverage to
negotiate better prices.
One of my concerns with the rebate rule is that it would
not address this issue. Is there any situation where you would
support or perhaps remain neutral on giving the Secretary the
ability to negotiate prices for that subsection of drugs? And I
am curious to hear from the witnesses, and we will open it up.
Mr. Kolar. So, Senator, we would have to study the issue
more closely. But from our perspective, while the Secretary
would certainly be able to aggregate volume, what we bring is
clinical expertise and the pharmacy expertise to better
negotiate with manufacturers. That would have to be replicated
within the Department or an agency in order to do that
effectively.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
So you would want to study it before you signed off on, or
supported, or remained neutral whether or not the Secretary
could negotiate for those drugs?
Mr. Kolar. With respect to the question of government
negotiation overall, our perspective is that it would require a
significant development of formulary expertise within the
government to replicate the work that we do with respect to the
narrow drugs that you mentioned. We would want to study the
issue. Our inclination is that that would not be as effective
as what we do as PBMs.
Senator Cortez Masto. For sole source drugs?
Mr. Kolar. Correct.
Senator Cortez Masto. Correct.
Do you feel the same way?
Mr. Prince. Senator, we think the solution is around
creating more competition, addressing patent issues, addressing
biosimilars in the market. And that would be the solution that
we think would solve it.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
Dr. Fleming. Senator, similarly, we need more competition.
We need more biosimilars. My concern with government
negotiation for those sole-source drugs would be higher list
prices, initially, when those drugs come out to offset what the
manufacturer may have to give up.
And I invite a conversation at the right time around other
tools we can employ around value-based contracts. We are asking
physicians to engage in value-based contracts. We are asking
hospitals to engage in them. We have programs with pharmacies.
But we need more tools. We need the flexibility to bring
more tools to market so that when these sole-source drugs are
out, we have the ability to hold them accountable for the
clinical outcomes that they are intended for.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
Mr. Rice. We too, Senator, believe that, before we move
down that path, we should look to exhaust all the other options
that are available to us today, such as bringing more
competition into this space.
We know--via the hep C example that was cited earlier this
morning--that when we have competition, we can bring down drug
prices, and we do have leverage in that equation.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Dr. Miller. Like my colleagues, we believe that competition
is the key to bringing down the drug prices. And using the
tools that we have in value-based contracting, which is not
allowed in Part D, would be crucial to help--it would be one
more of those tools that would help.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
And the final question I have--and let me direct it to Mr.
Prince. When I was in Las Vegas recently, I spoke with a
constituent who was prescribed Xolair, a specialty medication
for uncontrolled moderate to severe asthma. His copay for that
medication is $489 per month.
In September of 2018, the Institute for Clinical and
Economic Review found that all five of the major biological
asthma treatments that are on the market, including Xolair,
were overpriced. The Institute also said that the cost of
Xolair, specifically, should be cut in half if the price of the
drug were to properly reflect its efficacy.
Do you use evidence like this in negotiations with drug
companies, and if so, how effective is it?
Mr. Prince. So, Senator, we use evidence-based clinical
information initially to see if it goes on the formulary. So
our process actually starts with independent pharmacists and
physicians to evaluate the clinical effectiveness of a drug,
the comparative effectiveness, to determine whether it goes on
the formulary or not.
Then we go use that same data as part of the cost
negotiations. So it is part of the process.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Yes. Senator Young?
Senator Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Various stakeholders have called for more transparency in
your transactions, specifically into the rebates and
administrative fees paid by manufacturers. If Congress did what
these stakeholders are calling for and made all PBM
negotiations with the manufacturer, insurer, wholesaler, and
pharmacy transparent and publicly available, how would that
affect your drug pricing? Would there be a race to the top, or
perhaps a race to the bottom?
We will start with Dr. Miller and down the line, please.
Dr. Miller. Yes, so we are really a strong proponent for
transparency for those who pay for health care. So the patient
should know exactly what they are going to pay. Our plan
sponsors need to know exactly what is in their contract.
The FTC and the SEC have both demonstrated that if you
provide transparency for competitors, what that does is, it
puts a floor on negotiations. It does not put a ceiling.
And so what happens is, you would have shallower rebates.
So the ability to negotiate is enhanced by the competitors not
knowing each other's data.
Senator Young. Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. Yes, Senator. We are very supportive of
transparency. And transparency--today we report and fully
disclose not only to our clients, but to CMS. And we have been
very supportive of legislative proposals like MedPAC's. And
many of you heard me comment earlier today about even bringing
transparency to the patient through our real-time benefits.
What we are not supportive of is public transparency that
would inhibit our ability to effectively negotiate with drug
manufacturers to get to the lowest possible cost for patients
and to lower their out-of-pocket premiums and the cost to
plans.
Senator Young. Right down the line.
Yes, sir.
Dr. Fleming. Senator, we are an integrated health plan. So
we spend a lot of time with transparency, both at the patient
level and at the physician level. I mentioned our Intelligent
Rx tool. I submitted in our testimony about how we give
physicians information right on the glass in the exam room so
that they can have really important conversations with the
patient.
In this example that you are talking about, the thing I
worry about is behaviors--in this case, the manufacturer
behavior of wanting to negotiate to the lowest possible price
if everything is fully transparent.
Will they regress to the mean? Will they want to
demonstrate that one company has gotten a better deal than
another company because it is fully transparent?
I do not know what that looks like. I do not know how that
will show up. But I am not convinced that full transparency
will allow the manufacturers to negotiate as feverishly as they
could otherwise.
Mr. Prince. Senator, if our discounts were publicly
available, it would hurt our ability to negotiate effectively.
Our discounts are transparent to our clients. Our clients have
audit rights to actually look at our rebate contracts, look at
the----
Senator Young. They have what rights? I am sorry, sir.
Mr. Prince. Audit rights.
So actually, our clients have audit rights to look at our
rebate contracts, to look at line-item detail on how much we
get and tie it back to their contract. So we have transparency
to who hires us. We also are transparent to the government in
terms of disclosing it to CMS in terms of our rebates.
But if you disclose that to the external market, it would
hurt our ability to a get a good value for the people we
negotiate for.
Mr. Kolar. So, Senator, our business model is founded on
the basis of transparency. And we are strong believers in
transparency where it is meaningful and actionable in ways that
can help improve the system and lower costs.
So we believe in client transparency. We believe in
actionable provider and patient transparency. We do share the
concern around the transparency of our negotiations with
pharmacies, with pharma, and the impact that that would have on
our ability to drive savings for our plans and ultimately to
their members.
Senator Young. Is there an issue that any of you could
speak to, perhaps a challenge where, if we require transparency
in a more robust way, there will be adverse selection,
especially in the Medicare Part D program, which is a voluntary
program?
[No response.]
Senator Young. Does that resonate with anyone?
[No response.]
Senator Young. No? Okay.
Is there a way to inject transparency into the entire
pricing system without giving proprietary information away?
Dr. Miller. I will tell you that transparency tools are
crucial in giving doctors transparency at the time of
prescribing. It is crucial to the patient and the doctor,
choosing the right drug.
We have actually run an analysis where we have a real-time
benefit check in the hands of about 120,000 doctors already.
And we can see that when they have that information, the
patient and the physician can choose the lower-cost drug, and
even the lower-cost channels to get the drug, either the right
pharmacy or a mail order pharmacy.
So you are correct that transparency tools done well will
make a huge difference in the market.
Senator Lankford [presiding]. Senator Thune?
Senator Thune. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for holding
this hearing. And thanks to our witnesses for being here today.
I hear often from South Dakotans frustration--from health-
care providers--regarding transparency and the power that a few
PBMs in the market wield, particularly when it comes to the
retroactive application of DIR fees for pharmacies, from any of
these pharmacies, especially those serving rural areas. It is
difficult for them to run their businesses not knowing how much
PBMs will pull back later.
We have heard support from the panel for a few of the bills
that Chairman Grassley and others have introduced. I think many
of us would like to see some ideas on the table for what role
that your industry can play in advancing transparency in the
drug supply chain.
I think the thing that most people find frustrating is just
how opaque the health care pricing system is generally, whether
it is hospitals or pharmaceuticals, all these things, they
are--in most free market economies, you know, competition helps
drive prices down. But people know what prices are. If you go
into a store, there is usually a list price and the discount
might be on there: ``we are marking it down 40 percent.''
People understand that. And in a free market, they can make
very informed decisions because they have an opportunity to
comparison-shop. And it just seems to me that in this area of
health care, like in other areas of health care, there is not
that transparency.
I understand what you are saying about the ability to
negotiate contracts and propriety and not being able to give
away trade secrets and that sort of thing, but it does really
detract, you have to understand, from people's understanding of
this market.
And there is a list price. And there is a rebate. And there
are discounts. And there is a net price, ultimately, that is
offered out there. But it all happens in this kind of opaque
world that I think people just find really, really
uncomfortable and question. It raises a lot of doubts.
For the panel: in testimony from Mr. Kolar and Mr. Prince,
there was some discussion about the decisions for PBMs to
consider clinical value and efficacy first when setting
formularies, as opposed to price and rebates, the importance
of, obviously, premiums in negotiations.
We have heard a lot about that today between manufacturers
and PBMs, where rebates are used to incentivize placement of a
more costly brand-name drug over a generic, or where rebates
are conditioned based on the exclusion of another cheaper,
clinically effective drug from the formulary.
Do all of the panelists take the same approach to
negotiation? And how do you assess and determine clinical value
in making the decisions? And how do you respond if price and
rebates become the driving factor in the negotiation instead?
This question has been kind of asked in different ways
today, but somebody take a shot at that. Anybody?
Mr. Kolar. Senator, if I understand the question, our
approach--again as a transparent client-owned PBM--our approach
in setting formularies and making formulary recommendations, as
you said--you referenced the testimony--starts first with an
assessment of clinical safety and efficacy.
Then we assess if there are competing drugs available. And
we have talked much today about the need for competition.
We do assess on a lowest net cost basis--so what is going
to be the lowest net cost alternative for our plans to adopt
for the benefit of their members. We do also consider the
impact of patient transition in making formulary
recommendations to our plans.
Senator Thune. Does everybody follow that same negotiating
tactic? Do you take into consideration efficacy?
Mr. Rice. Absolutely, Senator. We start with first making
sure that we provide the highest level of quality of clinical
care. And then, only when we have met that threshold do we
begin to bring into consideration costs and providing the
lowest-cost alternative to the members, because we have seen
that when the drugs are more affordable for those members, they
tend to have better adherence and then downstream have better
medical outcomes.
And that, in essence, brings down total health-care costs.
Dr. Fleming. Senator, the thing I might add is, we think
about safety, efficacy, outcomes, and unit cost in that order.
If I had a dream, I would have more outcomes for when these
medications come to market. Typically, all we know is that they
are safe and effective. It is over time that we build a body of
evidence to understand does this drug really avoid a
hospitalization? Does it avoid an ER visit? Does it help with
some sort of activity of daily living that has nothing to do
with other health-care costs?
But those conversations are really important as we think
about coverage and providing the best health outcomes for our
patients.
Senator Thune. Mr. Rice and Dr. Miller, you both reference
legislation that I have worked on with Senator Carper to apply
value-based insurance design to high-deductible health plans
for chronic disease management. And I will have you--and maybe
submit this for the record--but I would like to know if
enacted, how you expect plans to utilize this tool, and what
will be the impact on drug prices and health-care spending more
broadly.
And like I said, my time has expired, Mr. Chairman. But if
you would take that one for the record, I would like to get
your reaction.
Thank you.
Senator Lankford. Thank you.
Senator Portman?
Senator Portman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for being here today to shed light on a
complicated area. I hear a lot of frustration back home over
the cost of prescription drugs, and for some people, they
actually are not taking the prescription drugs they should be
taking because of those high costs. So it is affecting their
health care.
And everybody has a role to play in this along the chain,
going from the manufacturer to the pharmacy and to the
consumer. And one is the PBMs. You have a role to play in
trying to lower costs and bring more transparency--the word has
been used a lot here today--to the system. People have a right
to know.
And in Ohio, as Mr. Rice and Mr. Prince probably know,
there is currently a lot of discussion about that. I am sure
you have seen the investigative reports from The Columbus
Dispatch and other stories regarding disputes between the State
and your respective companies.
With regard to CVS, there have been concerns that you are
withholding savings from the State Medicaid program and not
providing equitable reimbursement to pharmacies. In regards to
OptumRx, the State has raised concerns, again, regarding the
company withholding savings from Medicaid, and the Attorney
General has also accused your company of failing to disclose
certain rebates to the Ohio Bureau of Workers Comp that are
contractually supposed to be passed along to the State and to
beneficiaries.
I am sure you are aware of those allegations and the
stories. First, I would like to know what your answers are as
to why the State and other stakeholders in the system would
accuse you of hiding this kind of information. And again,
getting back to my comment on transparency, wouldn't
transparency solve a lot this, particularly with regard to the
rebates?
Mr. Rice. Senator, I will go first. Let me start by first
saying that I absolutely share your interests in making sure
that we bring the utmost level of transparency to not only the
plans, but also the members and the constituencies and
consumers in your State as well as other States.
The things that we have done--and I think it has been
validated through the independent audit report that was
conducted as well--I think we saved the State about $145
million. In the course of that, we have now made a decision as
of January 1st of this year, that we no longer have spread
pricing.
And as it relates to your commentary around pharmacy
reimbursement, we reimburse the independent pharmacies far
higher than the other major chains, including CVS pharmacy
retailers as well.
So we try to bring a level of transparency such that people
can make the right decisions, and even to Senator Thune's
earlier comments about health-care consumers needing to be able
to act like consumers, we have also tried to be transparent at
the patient level. And the way we have tried to do that is
equipping them with the data and the visibility to it such that
they can comparison-shop.
So today we have real-time benefits which enable a
physician to--in their office through electronic health
records--share with that patient----
Senator Portman. I totally support that. I think that is
critical to getting costs down, ultimately.
Mr. Rice. Yes.
Senator Portman. Consumers are pretty smart.
But I want to give Mr. Prince a chance to respond on the
rebates.
And let me just say this. If the Ohio government, which can
bring the full weight of the government down on this issue to
find out what the rebates ought to be, is having trouble
getting information, how about the small business out there? I
mean, why shouldn't these rebates be more transparent to the
beneficiary, which ultimately is the people I represent in
terms of the Medicaid system and its workers' comp system?
Mr. Rice. The fact that we share, Senator--we pass through
100 percent of the rebates and discounts.
Senator Portman. But----
Mr. Rice. One hundred percent.
Senator Portman. Transparency has been the issue that we
have not been able to resolve even in this case with the State
of Ohio bringing pressure on the PBM system.
Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. Senator, we believe we have delivered against
our contract for the State and also for the Bureau. We are not
going to go into--I am not going to go into the details in the
litigation here. But I guess I would say overall we are working
closely with them to resolve the matter and make sure we
address the concerns for them.
But overall our organization, we are very focused on--from
a rebate standpoint--point-of-sale discounts. We actually
made--as an organization we pass on 100 percent in the Medicare
market, 100 percent in the Medicaid market, and we are
committed in the commercial market to moving to everybody
having point-of-sale discounts.
We are not taking on any additional customers in 2020 and
beyond unless they do point-of-sale discounts.
Senator Portman. Again, that is a matter of transparency
also, so people can see what it is and understand what they are
getting.
Let me give you one quick story here where PBMs, I think,
play a constructive role. And this is with regard to
investigations we did in the permanent subcommittee,
investigations on the Evzio product, which is a naloxone
product. It is a life-saving thing in the opioid epidemic. This
is a miracle drug that reverses the effects of an overdose.
Kaleo, a company which provides this Evzio product, had
dramatically increased their price, and they did it through
kind of a loophole under the Part D Medicare program, saying
that doctors should say it is medically necessary. And in that
case, the PBM actually was encouraging the lower-priced
alternative.
And I think that is what your role ought to be. In other
words, you all stepped in as a PBM and said this life-saving
care can be provided at a lower cost.
Now when they found the loophole, frankly, the PBMs did not
have any additional role to play, and because the loophole is
in our law, we are trying to fix that. And ultimately, I will
tell you that the cost went down dramatically once we shone
some light on this.
But I give that as an example where I think PBMs can play a
positive role in the case of trying to keep drug costs down for
beneficiaries.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Cardin?
Senator Cardin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank all of
our witnesses for being here.
I want to drill down a little bit on your responsibility in
regards to the public itself. You are the benefit managers. You
are at the best interest of the people who need your services.
Today there are--according to the FDA, 270 drugs currently
are in shortage. I know of specific drugs that are absolutely
essential for infants' health, including eye drops, that are
not readily available, for cancer treatment that are not
readily available.
These are inexpensive drugs that are not difficult to
produce, that are not being produced because the pharmaceutical
manufacturer--usually one source--does not think it is
worthwhile from a profit point of view.
Now, you have contracts with pharmaceutical manufacturers.
Why have you not done something to act on making sure that in
this country we do not have shortages of drugs that are
essential for the health of the people in our community? You
enter into contracts every day with pharmaceutical companies.
Why is this not one of your goals, to make sure that in the
wealthiest nation in the world, common drugs that are
absolutely essential for serious health-care needs are not in
shortage?
Who can answer that for me?
[No response.]
Senator Cardin. Mr. Chairman, the silence is deafening.
Dr. Miller. I will help you, mostly from a physician
standpoint, and not as a PBM.
Senator Cardin. Please.
Dr. Miller. Let me help you out here.
Having drugs in supply is crucial. And so we do everything
we can to make sure our patients have the drugs they need.
There are drugs that are used in-hospital which are
different than the ones that we administer as outpatient, as a
pharmacy benefit manager. The vast majority of the shortages in
the last several years have been in-hospital drugs----
Senator Cardin. So do any of your people who are in your
plans ever use hospitals?
Dr. Miller. Most definitely, they use hospitals.
Senator Cardin. Do you care about their health?
Dr. Miller. And so we care passionately about their health,
and I as a physician care tremendously.
Senator Cardin. So why have you not taken up this issue
with the pharmaceutical manufacturers?
Dr. Miller. We do. So we actually have predictive models
where we can try to see which drugs are in short supply.
The biggest problem that we have had in the United States
is when there is a single-source manufacturer.
Senator Cardin. Yes.
Dr. Miller. And usually the problem is specific to that
product. So it is either----
Senator Cardin. And do you not have contracts with that
single-source manufacturer on other drugs?
Dr. Miller. So they either flunk--sometimes, sometimes not.
But when they flunk an FDA evaluation at their factory, they
are forced to shut down. So we have worked with--and I think
Dr. Gottlieb has done a great job at the FDA.
If you look at the number of shortages, they have actually
dropped dramatically over the last several years because he is
actually prioritizing review of those products to make sure
that other companies can either compete or that product can get
back into the marketplace.
Senator Cardin. You know, we all hear about using market
forces. I was very impressed with our conversations of how
market forces bring down the cost, and how you use that in your
bargaining power with pharmaceutical companies to get the very
best possible price for your customers, for your consumers.
Why do you not use that market force to make sure we do not
have drug shortages? That is my point.
You can make a difference today on this issue. You can use
market forces to say, ``Look, we will not tolerate our
subscribers not having access to absolutely essential medicines
because there is a single-source manufacturer who has made an
economic decision that it is not worth it to manufacturer that
drug.''
Do any of you have an explanation why we are not doing
something? You do not want government to set price, but you
want government to deal with shortages when you could deal with
shortages.
Any ideas here?
Mr. Rice. The best idea, Senator--and we talked about this
a bit--is competition, is working with the FDA to make more
generics. And quite frankly, the shortages that we are talking
about are usually for those single-source or generics, and
making more generics available to the marketplace would help.
And we talked about ways that we can try to incentivize
manufacturers to pursue and to manufacture more generics than
we do today.
Senator Cardin. I cannot accept that. I will tell you why.
You are a major factor in the pharmaceutical delivery
system. Market forces are allowing you to make profits, which
is fine.
You have leverage over pharmaceutical manufacturers. You
can affect whether they will be on a formulary or not. You
really determine their financial success, and that is why you
negotiate your price.
But it is more than the unit price of a particular drug
that my constituents and your subscribers are interested in.
They are interested in their general health.
And if they cannot get a medicine today to deal with their
cancer, and that is a real example, why are you not taking the
initiative to change that?
I really do not understand that. If you have a useful role
in this process, then deal with this issue.
Senator Lankford [presiding]. Senator Menendez?
Senator Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all
for being here.
I would like to start off with the same free advice I gave
the pharma CEOs who appeared before the committee in February,
which is--and as someone who appreciates the industry as a
whole from the State of New Jersey, either you come to the
table with real solutions to help patients in terms of the
costs, or you will find a legislative response that you will
not care for.
So I really urge you to be part of the solution at the end
of the day, or you will find a legislative response you do not
care for.
Having said that, there are widespread reports that PBMs
engage in spread pricing, especially for generic drugs, where
they pay the pharmacy one price but turn around and charge
their clients several times the price the pharmacy received.
So let me tell you how this little game seems to me. It is
like asking your mom for $10 to buy a T-shirt that costs $8,
and giving the seller only $7 and keeping the rest for
yourself.
So have any of you here today ever engaged in that
practice? Just go down the line and give me an answer, ``yes''
or ``no.''
Dr. Miller. We provide our clients with a lot of options on
how to pay for their pharmacy benefit, and spread pricing is
one of those options.
Senator Menendez. So the answer to that is ``yes.''
Next, Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. Yes, we too provide our clients with options
which include spread pricing.
Senator Menendez. Dr. Fleming?
Dr. Fleming. Senator, thank you. For 8.4 million Part D
members, absolutely no, never. For our commercial, fully
insured members, no. And for our limited self-funded block of
business, we do offer that option. That is about 200,000
members.
Senator Menendez. Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. Senator, we do not do it in the Medicare
program. In the commercial and Medicaid market, it is a client
choice about how they want to pay for our services. Ninety-
eight percent of the time, we actually offer the solution
either way. And the client chooses how they want to pay for our
services.
Mr. Kolar. So, Senator, in our model we are focused on
creating savings for our plans and not margins. We do not
engage in spread pricing as a part of our business model.
Senator Menendez. So what is the difference between the
rebates you negotiate--let me ask this of Mr. Prince and Dr.
Miller. Are the rebates you negotiate from pharmaceutical
companies in the separate administrative fees that you charge
the same companies?
Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. So in the Medicare program, we only collect a
fixed rebate from pharmaceutical manufacturers and pass 100
percent of that on. We do not have an administrative fee in the
Medicare market or the Medicaid market.
Those markets are--we have just fixed discounts that we
pass on. In the commercial market, we do have an administrative
fee that is disclosed to our client. And that is for clinical
services.
Senator Menendez. Dr. Miller?
Dr. Miller. So in Medicare, as you know, all the fees pass
back to the government. In the commercial marketplace, we give
our plans options as to how they want to pay us.
Many of them take all the rebates and the administrative
fees. Some choose to let us keep a portion.
Senator Menendez. Are these administrative fees based on
list price like the rebates? Just give me a simple ``yes'' or
``no.''
Dr. Miller. The administrative fee is usually a fixed fee,
not based on the rebate. And it is for services----
Senator Menendez. Are they based on the list price?
Dr. Miller. Are they based on the list price? I would have
to--I believe that there are options to base it on the list
price or to have a flat fee.
Senator Menendez. Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. Senator, as I said before, the administrative
fees are only in the commercial market. They are linked to the
services that we offer. Today they are linked to a percent, but
we are open to changing that to a fair market value that is
fixed.
Senator Menendez. Because as the list prices increase, the
administrative fees you collect, as well, increase. Is that not
true?
Dr. Miller. That is why we give our plans the option.
Mr. Prince. That is why I also give our plans the options
of how to pay for our services.
Senator Menendez. Finally, when a drug company does lower
their list price, how long does it take for the patient at the
pharmacy counter to see that savings, if ever? Let me give you
an example. Last fall, you may have read in the news that the
list price for one PCSK9 inhibitor, a cholesterol-lowering
drug, went down by 60 percent.
Despite the price decrease, putting the drug's price below
the threshold for specialty tier status, I recently read that
PBMs have kept the drug on a specialty tier, which means it is
more expensive for Medicare beneficiaries.
Going down the line, can you tell me in one or two
sentences why a list price cut would not lead to lower prices
for consumers? And if you are going to tell me it is the
different national codes, then if you get guidance on how to
handle this NDC issue, can we expect lower list prices leading
to immediate tier changes?
Dr. Miller. Thanks for the question, Senator. As you know,
we were the ones that actually negotiated with that PCSK9
inhibitor company to bring that lower price to the marketplace.
And so we definitely believe those prices should be reflected
in what the patients pay.
Mr. Rice. Senator, when those lower list prices result in
the lowest net cost for the patient as well as for the plan,
then absolutely, that is the preferred drug on formulary.
Dr. Fleming. Senator, we like lower list prices. And
candidly, had we known that the manufacturer was going to lower
its list price, or bring an authorized generic to market, or
bring one of these other things that allow their prices to come
down during the formulary-setting time for Medicare, which is
around this time of the year, in 2018 for this 2019 period, we
absolutely would have had that drug on formulary.
We absolutely anticipate including those drugs on formulary
for the 2020 benefit year.
Mr. Prince. Senator, we strongly encourage pharmaceutical
companies to lower the list price and do that in our
discussions with them. We are a strong advocate for making sure
we pass on the value of all the discounts we negotiate to that
consumer.
That is why last year we expanded that program
dramatically. It will serve 9 million people in 2019. We can
only have new customers--in 2020--that pass on the consumer
discount, all that value to the consumer at the point of sale.
Mr. Kolar. So, Senator, as a PBM focused on driving savings
for our plans, we welcome lower list prices as well. When a
lower list price drug becomes available, we will assess the net
cost effect to our plan as well as the impact of transition
across members.
And if the drug is the lower net cost, we will prefer that
drug, and those savings will pass through to the members.
Senator Menendez. Thank you.
Senator Lankford. Senator Carper?
Senator Carper. Thanks; our thanks to each of you. I think
my staff and I have had the privilege to meet with most of you
in the run-up to today's hearing. We appreciate your time.
As I mentioned to those with whom I have met, when we took
up the Affordable Care Act, in this room, there were witnesses
saying that folks in Japan were spending 8 percent of GDP for
health-care costs--8 percent. We are spending 18 percent.
They got better results and covered everybody. And we did
not get better results. You had about 40 million people at the
time going to bed at night without health-care coverage, and we
said, ``We can do better than that.'' And in some respects, we
have done better than that.
I think if we had more cooperation from some of our friends
on the other side of the aisle and the current President, we
could do even better in terms of getting better results for
less money, providing care the people need.
We have a strong interest in pharmaceuticals in my State.
It is consumers, patients, people who pay for health care, and
also employment. We have some very fine companies that are
involved in pharmaceuticals, as you may know.
One of the things I would like to try to do is develop
consensus, and to find consensus on a panel like this is what I
would like to do in the next couple of minutes.
But in the last Finance hearing on drug prices, we heard
from drug manufacturers that passing rebates directly to
consumers, improving transparency, and adopting value-based
arrangements would help reduce prescription costs.
I am not going to ask you to comment on those points, but
there is a fourth one that came up, and that was putting a cap
on patients' out-of-pocket drug cost. And they suggested that
putting a cap on patients' out-of-pocket drug cost may well
help reduce prescription drug prices. And I would just like to
hear from each of you.
We will start with you, Mr. Kolar. I do not think I had a
chance to meet with you before the hearing. So let us start off
with you.
Do you agree with that? Why or why not?
Mr. Kolar. So, Senator, capping patient cost--I assume you
are speaking about Part D and a proposal to cap costs there. We
believe that that is an issue worth studying.
When the Part D benefit design was rolled out, it was not
the drug pricing environment that we have today. Patients are
exposed to very high drug costs at the pharmacy counter, a
percentage of them.
We do believe, however, that that is going to require all
stakeholders to be a part of the conversation. We cannot
squeeze the balloon and then have increased costs in the form
of higher premiums for beneficiaries, or higher cost to
taxpayers. It is going to have to require manufacturer
participation and list price relief.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
Mr. Prince?
Mr. Prince. Senator, we would support a capping of the Part
D out-of-pocket costs if it is part of a broader reform of the
part D program. The program has been around and delivered a lot
of value for seniors over the last decade-plus, for almost 50
million seniors.
And so, as part of a broader reform that looks at all the
implications for other changes too----
Senator Carper. All right. Thank you.
Dr. Fleming?
Dr. Fleming. Senator, thank you. We absolutely support
modernizing Part D. I think the notion of putting caps on out-
of-pocket costs is one of the tools that could be used, and
dealing with the specialty drug issue where nearly half the
drug spend in the next couple of years will be consumed by
specialty drugs--consumed by 2 percent--is another example.
I am not convinced that just putting caps on member out-of-
pocket costs will cause the manufacturers to lower the list
price. I think you are going to need to think through what are
the tools and levers to maybe have the manufacturers
participate in those out-of-pocket limits, or other levers to
pull there.
But I do think out-of-pocket cost is something that is
important for consumers.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. Senator, we absolutely share the concern in terms
of the burden of out-of-pocket costs on today's patients and
American citizens. We absolutely would support putting a
spending limit or cap for seniors in terms of their out-of-
pocket exposure.
At the same time, we also support tools such as
preventative drug lists with zero copays as another means of
also trying to deal with the out-of-pocket burdens of Americans
in this country.
Senator Carper. All right. Thanks.
Dr. Miller?
Dr. Miller. Yes. Thanks for the question.
I think targeted copay caps are really crucial. As you
know, just a couple weeks ago we rolled out the Patient
Assurance Program where we capped insulin at $25 a month. We
believe that it is really important for our diabetic patients
to be able to take their medications. That is the best way to
lower costs for the country and improve health outcomes. But it
should be in a very targeted manner.
Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. I want
to just mention a question for the record, but I just want to
get it out here, and it relates to the first question.
For the 40 percent of drugs in Medicare Part D that do not
offer rebates, what are your recommendations for lowering their
prices? And I will give you that question to respond to for the
record.
All right. Thank you very much.
Senator Lankford. Thank you.
Senator Casey?
Senator Casey. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
witnesses for being here.
I think I may have said this to each of you at various
times when we have discussed these issues, that when it comes
to this issue, the cost of prescription drugs, if this issue
were playing out in isolation, that would be one thing.
Unfortunately, the folks who are bearing the burden of this,
bearing the cost, are the same folks who have lived in a
country where wages went up by 12 percent over 40 years by one
estimate. So, in 4 decades, wages went up only 12 percent.
And the costs of everything you can imagine for the middle
class and folks trying to get into the middle class are
skyrocketing. If you are younger and you have a family, it is
the cost of child care and maybe saving for college.
It seems like everyone is impacted by the cost of
prescription drugs going through the roof. I just had a witness
from Pennsylvania at our Aging Committee hearing, Barbara
Cisek, who is from southwestern Pennsylvania and is 63 years
old. She has multiple chronic conditions, including ulcers,
COPD, severe migraines, and the list gets longer and longer.
Five hundred bucks a month she is paying just on prescription
drugs. That does not include premiums, and it does not include
doctor visits.
So Barbara is emblematic of that senior citizen carrying
yet another cost. It is like American families have bags of
rocks put on their back. And prescription drugs are just
another bag of rocks that gets thrown on them.
A lot of people are just face-down on the pavement from
these costs. And I heard your testimony, and I read through
some of the ideas you have. And we appreciate those ideas.
But I think there has to be, from you and from
manufacturers, a sense of urgency about this. Not just ideas
thrown around, but a sense of urgency and what more you can do.
And that leads me to Medicaid, which is--you all are
familiar with the program, but maybe not until 2017 were enough
Americans familiar with the program, and certainly politicians
were not. But politicians found out in 2017 that Medicaid is an
``us'' program, not a ``them'' program.
They found out that in a State like mine, Pennsylvania, 40
percent of the kids benefit from Medicaid, roughly.
Approximately half the people with disabilities benefit, and
more than 60 percent of the people in my State who are over the
age of 65 benefit from Medicaid--seniors, kids, and people with
disabilities.
And that program is being decimated before our eyes. Or at
least attempts were made to do it.
And another thing we need your help on is to speak up when
proposals are made here. There is a House Republican budget
proposal, voted on by the House Budget Committee, that would
cut Medicaid by more than a trillion and a half dollars.
The administration, just days ago, proposed another
trillion and a half cut to Medicaid over 10 years. The silence
on that side is deafening. I hope the silence in your board
rooms, from your companies, is not deafening.
We need your help on this. We need your help to fight
against these kinds of cuts. It will hurt Americans who are
very vulnerable. It will also hurt each of you in your own way.
This question we will do very quickly, because you have
already answered it, but I want to hear it again. One of the
things that Senator Menendez raised was so-called ``spread
pricing contract behavior'' in which pharmacy benefit managers
mark up the difference between how much they reimburse
pharmacies and the amount they charge the plan sponsor.
I want to ask each of you, have you engaged in that
practice, number one? And number two, if you have not, does
your company plan to do anything to make sure that you never
engage in that process?
I will start with Dr. Miller and go down. And you can
amplify it in written form, because we are running out of time.
Dr. Miller. Yes. So in limited cases, we do engage in
spread pricing. We give our clients the options of how they
want to reimburse us. And that is one of the options available
to them.
Senator Casey. Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. Senator, it is an option that we do provide to
our clients in terms of how they want to engage in
remuneration.
Dr. Fleming. Senator, we are an integrated health plan--for
Medicare members, no. For Medicaid, no. For our fully insured
commercial, no. It is available on a limited basis for our
self-funded population, which is about 200,000 members. And it
is client choice.
Mr. Prince. Senator, we do not engage in that in the
Medicare program. In the Medicaid program, it is client choice
about how they want to contract and pay for our services. In
the commercial market, it is also client choice on how they
want to pay.
Usually, each client in the commercial market asks for a
bid with it and without it. And it is a client choice about how
they want to pay for our services.
Mr. Kolar. So, Senator, our business model is transparent
and passed through. With our clients, our model is not to
engage in spread pricing.
Senator Casey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Lankford. Senator Whitehouse?
Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Are the pharmacy benefit managers the most formidable force
that the pharmaceutical industry faces in terms of bringing its
pricing down?
[No response.]
Senator Whitehouse. Somebody is going to answer that,
right?
Mr. Kolar. Senator, I would say competition would be the
other force that heavily influences.
Senator Whitehouse. But, as an institution, you guys are
organized. You have a lot of expertise on your side. And you
tangle with the pharmaceutical industry to bring rebates that
then go through to your clients, who are mostly insurers, and
that ends up supporting clients.
That is kind of the theory of the case, is not it? Yes?
Mr. Rice. Yes, Senator.
Senator Whitehouse. Yes. So let me--two quick numbers here.
The pharmaceutical industry, last year, declared $27.5 million
in lobbying. And the individual drug companies add another $194
million, for a total of $221.5 million in lobbying by the
pharmaceutical industry, which as a general proposition, if you
want to understand what is wrong with Congress, just ask about
one industry that does $220 million in lobbying in 1 year. So
that is one figure--that $220-plus-million on lobbying.
The other is that, out of $480 billion that the U.S. spends
on drugs, my figures are that $323 billion of that goes to the
pharmaceutical industry, and $23 billion of it goes to you.
So that makes you 7 percent of what the pharmaceutical
industry gets, and 5 percent of the total spending. So if we
whacked you in half, that would affect prices by 3\1/2\
percent.
Fair math?
[No response.]
Senator Whitehouse. So it has to be interesting to you all
to witness how the pharmaceutical industry has been able to
take pressure on their pricing and turn it into, with political
Jiu-Jitsu of an almost magical variety, pressure on their
greatest adversary, the most powerful force for pushing prices
down.
So I hope that you at least respect what they have been
able to pull off here. That is quite a trick on their part.
You do not decide where the rebate goes when you send it
through your client, do you?
Mr. Rice. No.
Senator Whitehouse. No.
Do some of you have State Medicaid programs as your
clients?
Mr. Rice. Yes.
Senator Whitehouse. Yes.
Dr. Fleming. Yes.
Senator Whitehouse. Yes.
Mr. Prince. Yes.
Senator Whitehouse. Yes.
Mr. Kolar. Yes.
Senator Whitehouse. Yes.
Dr. Miller. Through some of our health plans; correct?
Senator Whitehouse. Okay, indirectly, then. Four ``yeses''
and one ``indirectly.''
And presumably those State Medicaid plans have the same
rights as your other clients to audit and look into your
methodology and your cost in your rebate structure?
Mr. Kolar. So, Senator, just to clarify, my answer was also
an indirect ``yes.''
Senator Whitehouse. Got it.
Mr. Kolar. Yes, our direct----
Senator Whitehouse. With respect to my question, can any
State Medicaid program look at your books as a client?
Mr. Kolar. Our clients have extensive audit rights in our
business, and their clients have audit rights into our
business. Correct.
Senator Whitehouse. Great.
So the State Medicaid programs do have audit rights in your
business?
Mr. Kolar. Correct.
Senator Whitehouse. True for all five of you?
Mr. Rice. Indirectly, yes.
Senator Whitehouse. Directly or indirectly.
Dr. Fleming. Senator, I might add that in the primary State
where we have Medicaid business, the State does its own rebates
and formulary.
Senator Whitehouse. Yes.
And there is legislation pending to provide transparency
into your business model, both to MedPAC and to MACPAC who
would then be in a position to provide expert advice to
Congress on whether there were problems with the industry and
things that we should address without having to divulge every
part of your business. By the way, I would support full
transparency, but this is not my hearing. This is your hearing.
So one-by-one, do each of you support or oppose the
legislation that would give MedPAC and MACPAC the ability to
examine your business model and report to Congress?
Dr. Miller. Support.
Senator Whitehouse. Support.
Mr. Rice. Support.
Senator Whitehouse. Support.
Dr. Fleming. Senator, we are neutral on that.
Senator Whitehouse. Okay. No opposition.
Dr. Fleming. No opposition.
Senator Whitehouse. Even through your lobby groups?
Dr. Fleming. Right.
Senator Whitehouse. Because sometimes people say they have
no opposition, and then they send their lobbyists out the
opposite.
Mr. Prince. We support if kept confidential--if the data is
kept confidential.
Senator Whitehouse. Yes, but the advice to us can be, you
need to look at this, this, and this. And you understand that?
There is an advice to Congress function in that.
Mr. Prince. Right, as long as the data is kept
confidential.
Senator Whitehouse. Got it.
Mr. Kolar. We support.
Senator Whitehouse. Support. Okay.
Well, let us hope we can at least get that piece of
legislation moving, which I think would be very helpful, and I
think a considerable number of members of this committee
support it. And then we will keep looking, but I guess my point
is, I appreciate the scrutiny of the PBMs, but let us not go
away without remembering that they are $23 billion out of a
$480-billion problem.
And just as somebody who sees a lot of this around here, I
stand in awe of the pharmaceutical industry's Jiu-Jitsu magic
to have gotten their prime antagonists to become the focus of
the problem with, by my count, $457 billion remaining to be
looked at.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Lankford. Thank you.
The chair recognizes himself for some time for questions.
Gentlemen, thank you for being here. Thanks for a very long
morning to be able to go through this kind of dialogue. There
are a lot of questions that you have been peppered with during
the course of the day.
Let me bring up some specifics that maybe we have not dealt
with already. The administration has put out a point-of-sale
effort for DIR fees. Does anyone here have a problem with what
the administration has put out so far as a recommendation for
how to do a point-of-sale effort for DIRs?
Dr. Miller. Are you talking about the point-of-sale rebate?
Senator Lankford. Yes.
Dr. Miller. So we really support the sentiment. We believe
that lowering cost at the counter is really crucial to
patients.
However, I am not convinced that this mechanism is going to
be very successful. A couple of things: one is, it shifts cost
to the taxpayer. CMS auditors have estimated that to be about
$196 billion over the next 10 years.
Second is, many patients will pay down their copay so they
will get stuck on a branded product instead of switching to a
generic that is equally effective and, therefore, continue to
cause high cost.
Third is that, when you make the rebates publicly known, it
will make our ability to negotiate deeper discounts that much
less effective. And so you will not get as effective discounts,
and you will decrease our negotiations. You will take the
pressure off of pharmaceutical companies; you will raise the
premium for 100 percent of the beneficiaries while only helping
a minority of the beneficiaries.
And so we believe, while the intent is really good, there
are targeted ways to achieve the same thing without these
problems.
Senator Lankford. What would those be?
Dr. Miller. So one of the things we did is, if you look at
the categories of drugs that are creating the pain for the
patients at the pharmacy counter, they fall into several
buckets. It is diabetic agents. It is hepatitis C. It is
asthma. Those are the ones that actually--if you had a targeted
solution for those, you would actually relieve most of the
patients who have the problem.
If you think about patients with cancer who have an
enormous burden at the counter--because there are no rebates in
those products--they do not benefit at all from moving the
rebate to the point of sale.
Senator Lankford. Right.
Does anyone have any other feedback on that, on both the
administration's recommendation or responses to it?
Mr. Rice. Yes, Senator. We are absolutely supportive of the
administration's goal of reducing out-of-pocket costs for
seniors and lowering overall health-care costs. We too--when we
look at the proposed rule--have a few concerns where there may
be elements of it that would drive costs higher actually, not
lower. The types of solutions that we would put forward are,
again, point-of-sale rebates as an option. And we were the
first Med D plan to provide that option in 2019 for seniors who
want to sign up.
In addition to that, we would also be very supportive of
preventive drug lists with $0 copays, again, as another means
of reducing the out-of-pocket burden for seniors that we are
all worried about.
Senator Lankford. So, let me switch subjects on this a
little bit.
When I talk to independent pharmacies, they will talk about
the DIR fees 100 percent of the time, and clawbacks. They are a
standalone rural pharmacy, and there are two issues that come
up. Let me deal with them in order.
One of them is, obviously, they get a bill at some point
for $50,000 that they are clawing back from something 6 or 7
months before, and they did not know that was coming back.
Obviously, cash flow becomes exceptionally difficult on that.
They will reference that there are performance metrics put
on them, but I can never hear what those performance metrics
are. Can anyone give me an example of what performance metrics
might be for an independent pharmacy to avoid the clawbacks?
Dr. Fleming. Senator, I am a pharmacist. Forever,
pharmacists have wanted to be paid for cognitive services, to
be at the top of the list.
Senator Lankford. I am limited on time. I understand for
the cognitive part of it.
Dr. Fleming. Yes, sir. So the example of performance fees
that we put in place to get the pharmacists engaged are things
that will help the patient with drug adherence, identify those
patients who are not as adherent, engage with them.
And through these programs, we have seen a 2 percentage-
point increase in drug adherence in several disease states year
over year over year because of getting the pharmacist engaged
in a value-based conversation just like we asked doctors and
hospitals----
Senator Lankford. All right.
Any other examples of metrics? Are those proprietary, the
metrics that go out to independent pharmacies?
Dr. Fleming. Senator, no.
Senator Lankford. Okay.
We will kind of walk through that somewhat. I have had
several independent pharmacists who have said to me, they will
have a particularly large requirement for a DIR fee, a
clawback. And within 2 weeks after that big check comes in,
they will get a phone call from a PBM that also owns pharmacies
that will say, ``How are things going? Would you consider
selling to us?''
They find those things strangely coincidental, that they
have a big check for a clawback and then a phone call to say,
``Are you interested in being able to sell back to us?''
Now, I would certainly hope those two are not aligned. But
that is a concern that they have, that is expressed. I cannot
be the first person who has expressed that to anyone here.
Let me express one thing, because I do not expect us to be
able to answer that without knowing the specifics on the
location. Do you ever negotiate a higher list price for a drug
to give you more flexibility on the rebate side? Is there a
time when you work with a manufacturer to negotiate a higher
list price to give you more flexibility? And let's have each of
you answer that.
Dr. Miller. No.
Mr. Rice. No.
Dr. Fleming. No.
Mr. Prince. No.
Mr. Kolar. No.
Senator Lankford. Do any of you ever, when a generic
becomes available--do you put the generic on a formulary with
the branded group? So there are branded tiers, generic tiers,
and such where the generic would enter the formulary in a
branded tier. Does that happen with you at all on the pricing?
Dr. Miller. I would have to--on the basis of the large
number of drugs, I would have to get back to you if there is
any specific example. But that would not be our practice.
Senator Lankford. Okay.
Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. Senator, our focus is providing the lowest cost
option.
Senator Lankford. So that generics would not be on a
branded tier?
Mr. Rice. If it is the lowest cost option.
Dr. Fleming. Senator, I can think of limited circumstances,
very rare, where that is the case, usually because of the 6-
month exclusivity rule when a generic hits the market.
Mr. Prince. Senator, our objective is around lowest net
cost for drugs in what tier it goes on. But in terms of what
might be--I am not sure if there would be examples where that
might occur. But it would be rare.
Senator Lankford. Okay.
Mr. Kolar. Senator, I cannot think of a specific example,
but our model would be to prefer the lowest net cost drug.
Senator Lankford. To the consumer?
Mr. Kolar. To the plan.
Senator Lankford. Okay.
Mr. Kolar. For the benefit of the member.
Senator Lankford. Okay.
Senator Wyden?
Senator Wyden. Thank you, Senator Lankford.
And I also note that the chairman of the committee, Senator
Grassley, is here, and he was kind enough----
The Chairman. Let me thank Senator Lankford for taking over
for me while I met with the Iowa hospital people.
Senator Wyden. And I want to thank Chairman Grassley as
well for being able to ask this extra question.
So, gentlemen, a couple of hours ago I said the whole
system--drug companies, middlemen, insurance companies--the
citizens think this is all one big scam. It is a ripoff. They
are all scratching each other's back and trying to keep the
prices up, and everybody is blaming each other.
My own view is--and I have talked to the chairman about
this--every sector of American health care has got to bring
more value and lower prices. In other words, you have to get
beyond the blame game.
Now, for 2 hours you heard from both sides of the dais, the
Democratic side and the Republican side, that there are not a
lot of people up here on this side of the dais holding rallies
for spread pricing.
Okay. And the reason why you heard this from Democrats and
Republicans is that spread pricing is a ripoff, plain and
simple. When a PBM pays a set price to a pharmacy and then the
PBM turns around and charges Medicare and Medicaid many times
more for that prescription, that is plain old price-gouging.
So I just want to ask a question and want to hear you
answer it in a ``yes'' or ``no'' fashion. If the Congress
proposes to ban spread pricing in Medicare and Medicaid, will
you oppose it?
Let us go right down the row. This is just a ``yes'' or
``no.''
Dr. Miller. We look forward to working with you on it.
Senator Wyden. ``Yes'' or ``no''? Are you going to support
it if Congress proposes a ban on spread pricing in Medicare and
Medicaid; ``yes'' or ``no''? Will you oppose it?
Dr. Miller. If it becomes market standard, we are
supportive.
Mr. Rice. Yes.
Dr. Fleming. One hundred percent support. We always have,
always will.
Senator Wyden. Good. We're making some headway. We are
going to save taxpayers some money.
Sir?
Mr. Prince. We do not do spread pricing in Medicare, and it
is the choice of the client on the----
Senator Wyden. Will you oppose it if we propose, in
Medicare and Medicaid, outlawing it? That is a ``yes'' or
``no''?
Mr. Prince. Probably neutral.
Senator Wyden. Okay.
Mr. Kolar. We would not oppose.
Senator Wyden. Great. So, out of the five of you, we got
three who will be with us if we propose getting rid of spread
pricing in Medicare and Medicaid. And we got one ``neutral,''
and one I am just going to scratch my head about a little bit
and try to figure out.
Gentlemen, you heard from Democrats and Republicans----
Mr. Rice. Senator, I want to make sure we are clear. I was
saying ``yes,'' we would support----
Senator Wyden. The ban.
Mr. Rice. Yes.
Senator Wyden. Yes. There are five of you. We got three of
you to be with us, one of you to be neutral, and one to take a
position that I am going to have to decipher.
But the point really is, gentlemen, this is a gut question.
I do not think it is really complicated.
As Chairman Grassley and I have talked about, this taxpayer
money, Medicare and Medicaid--some of the States have already
been blowing the whistle. We have not even talked about
Kentucky yet.
So I am leaving here saying I got 60 percent of you to say
we are going to protect taxpayers, but we have a lot more to
do. And I want you to know that everybody in this--the drug
companies, the middlemen, yourselves, the other players--has
got to be part of it, the insurers. So I hope that we will keep
the record open. I hope all of you are going to join me in
saying we ought to ban spread pricing in Medicare and Medicaid.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the chance to get into an
additional area.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
First of all, I thank you for your attendance. Thank you
for the preparation. I assume you had to put a lot of
preparation into it, even though you know your business well.
We thank you for that. And you know the inside, and you
know that I have said it is kind of an opaque business, and we
need more transparency, and all that. So you have helped us
considerably on that. And I assume that we will be back to you,
or we will be hearing from you as we progress. I hope you will
cooperate with us. I know you will, so I do not have any
questions about that.
I am going to ask all the members, if you have questions in
writing for these five witnesses, Tuesday, April the 23rd, is
the deadline for that. And then, in turn, the extent to which
you have to respond to those, I hope you can do it as soon as
possible.
With that, this hearing is adjourned. And thanks,
everybody, for attending.
[Whereupon, at 12:47 p.m., the hearing was concluded.]
A P P E N D I X
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
----------
Prepared Statement of William K. Fleming, Pharm.D.,
Segment President, Healthcare Services, Humana, Inc.
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and the members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to be here today. My name is
Dr. William Fleming, and I am a pharmacist. I have spent nearly 30
years working in a variety of pharmacist roles, including 25 years with
Humana. I currently serve as Segment President of Humana's clinical
organization, which includes pharmacy, home health, and behavioral
health.
I am honored to join you today, and I look forward to working with
the committee to achieve our shared goals of reducing prescription drug
prices for Americans and improving the Medicare Part D prescription
drug program for current and future beneficiaries.
Humana is an integrated health and wellness company focused on
providing value to seniors by operating a holistic, health outcomes-
driven model that is beneficiary-centric, and which focuses on chronic
care and contains locally integrated health capabilities. Humana
currently provides Medicare prescription drug coverage for more than
8.4 million seniors across all 50 States, with approximately 4 million
Medicare Advantage (MA) members and 4.4 million Medicare Prescription
Drug Plan (PDP) members. We also provide medical coverage for
approximately 1.5 million commercial customers, more than 340,000
Medicaid beneficiaries, and 5.9 million TRICARE enrollees in the
eastern United States. Humana is unique in that our pharmacy and
medical teams are tightly integrated and focused solely on serving our
own members--not those of other payers. As a result, the savings we
achieve through our pharmacy programs, such as manufacturer rebates and
discounts, accrue directly to our members through lower premiums and
improved benefits.
Humana's integrated approach to serving seniors delivers a
personalized and simplified experience through a value-based health
ecosystem that improves clinical outcomes. This ecosystem includes 233
owned, jointly-owned, or allied primary care facilities; an ownership
interest in the Nation's largest home health and hospice providers;\1\
as well as initiatives to address social determinants of health.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Forty percent stake in Kindred At Home and CURO Health
Services.
humana's transparency and clinical innovation tools
Humana is focused on providing seniors with the best care possible.
As part of that goal, Humana has developed innovative solutions for
ensuring that our members are informed when making decisions about
their prescription drugs to reduce costs and improve health outcomes
including:

IntelligentRx: Humana was the first Part D plan to provide
real-time access to drug cost and formulary information to
physicians and their patients through our IntelligentRx tool.
IntelligentRx enables physicians and their patients to make
joint treatment decisions based upon efficacy and cost for 3.1
million prescriptions annually. The tool is currently available
to all 10 million Humana members, including individuals with
Medicare, Medicaid, and employer coverage.

Maximize Your Benefits (MYB) Program: Humana continuously
analyzes our members' prescription drug claims to identify
opportunities for them to save money by switching to a lower-
cost drug or by pointing them to other savings programs such as
foundation-based cost-sharing assistance. Based upon that
analysis, we proactively reach out to our members and provide
instructions on how to maximize their savings opportunities. We
estimate that the program saved our members almost $200 million
in 2018.

Clinical Pharmacy Programs: Humana also ensures that seniors
are taking the right combination of drugs necessary to improve
their health through our clinical programs--medication therapy
management (MTM) and medication reconciliation during
transitions of care from facility to home. Through these
programs, we help seniors by eliminating duplicative drugs,
identifying lower-cost options, supporting medication
adherence, and identifying possible adverse drug interactions.
As a result of these initiatives, beneficiaries have increased
medication adherence by as much as 13 percent and have
experienced reduced emergency room visits, urgent care visits,
and hospital admissions.
I appreciate the committee's keen interest in working to understand
better the root causes of high drug costs and advancing policy
solutions.
evolution of the medicare part d program
Less than 15 years ago, Americans did not have access to an
outpatient prescription drug benefit under Medicare. Today, more than
43 million seniors have access to life-improving medicines through Part
D.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ ``March 2019 Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy:''
http://medpac.gov/docs/default-source/reports/
mar19_medpac_ch14_sec.pdf?sfvrsn=0.
At the inception of the Medicare Part D program, Congress designed
a competitive marketplace where prescription drug plan sponsors
competed based upon premium. As a result, seniors enrolled in
prescription drug coverage have gained significant value from the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
program's focus on market competition including:

Stable premiums through the 13 years of the program
averaging approximately $30 per month by negotiating rebates to
lower costs for all seniors;\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Ibid.

Generic dispensing rates near 90 percent;\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Ibid.

Medicare beneficiaries average more than 26 Part D plan
sponsor options;\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Ibid.

A 50 percent reduction in medication non-adherence due to
affordability;\6\ and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Diebold, Jeffrey. ``The Effects of Medicare Part D on Health
Outcomes of Newly Covered Medicare Beneficiaries.'' The Journals of
Gerontology: Series B, Volume 73, Issue 5, July 2018, pages 890-900:
https://academic.oup.com/psychsocgerontology/article/73/5/890/2631953.

Beneficiary satisfaction rates near 90 percent.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ 2018 Medicare Today Senior Satisfaction Survey: http://
medicaretoday.org/resources/senior-satisfaction-survey/.
Despite the benefits realized by Part D beneficiaries, there are
still seniors who struggle with the increasing cost of prescription
drugs. This is especially true for the 1 million beneficiaries who are
not eligible for the low-income subsidy who reach the catastrophic
phase of the benefit each year and generally spend more than $3,041 in
out-of-pocket costs for their prescription drug needs.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See Announcement of Calendar Year (CY) 2019 Medicare Advantage
Capitation Rates and Medicare Advantage and Part D Payment Policies and
Final Call Letter, available here: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Health-
Plans/MedicareAdvtgSpecRateStats/Downloads/Announcement2019.pdf.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.001
The most recent Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC)
Report to the Congress from March 2019 echoed the challenges for the
populations of seniors with high drug costs:\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Kaiser Family Foundation. ``No Limit Medicare Part D Enrollees
Exposed to High Out-of-Pocket Drug Costs Without a Hard Cap on
Spending:'' https://www.kff.org/report-section/no-limit-medicare-part-
d-enrollees-exposed-to-high-out-of-pocket-drug-costs-without-a-hard-
cap-on-spending-issue-brief/; Kaiser Family Foundation. ``10 Essential
Facts About Medicare and Prescription Drug Spending.'' January 29,
2019: https://www.kff.org/infographic/10-essential-facts-about-
medicare-and-prescription-drug-spending/; Kaiser Family Foundation.
``Medicare Part D in 2016 and Trends Over Time.'' September 16, 2016:
https://www.kff.org/report-section/medicare-part-d-in-2016-and-trends-
over-time-section-4-the-low-income-subsidy-program/. Part D enrollment
figures reflect 2016 enrollment.
\10\ ``March 2019 Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment
Policy:'' http://medpac.gov/docs/default-source/reports/
mar19_medpac_ch14_sec.pdf?sfvrsn=0.

Beneficiaries in the catastrophic phase continue to see
increasing costs: Spending for high-cost beneficiaries (those
who reached the catastrophic phase) increased from 40 percent
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
of Part D spending in 2011 to 58 percent in 2016.

The average list price increased 10 percent annually: MedPAC
cites the growth in the average price of drugs filled by high-
cost beneficiaries as the most significant factor for spending
growth among high-cost beneficiaries. The price per
standardized, 30-day prescription for high-cost beneficiaries
grew annually at 10 percent from 2010-2016.

Ten times the number of seniors reached the catastrophic
phase on first fill in 2016: The number of seniors who reached
the catastrophic phase through a single claim increased from
33,000 in 2010 to 360,000 in 2016. Non-LIS beneficiaries were
more likely to have this claim than LIS beneficiaries.

Spending on specialty drugs accounted for four times the
share since 2007: Specialty-tier drugs accounted for 25 percent
of Part D overall gross spending in 2017, an increase from 6
percent in 2007.
Humana's experience reflects the challenges faced throughout the
Part D program. In 2018, two percent of our beneficiaries who utilized
specialty drugs comprised 36 percent of total Part D spending. In 2
years, Humana projects that seniors utilizing specialty drugs could
account for as much as 50 percent of total Part D spending.
Ultimately, policymakers are faced with the challenge of preserving
the benefits of the Part D program--which has been successful for
many--while modernizing the program to address the new challenges in
the prescription drug market since the program's inception in 2003.
anti-competitive behavior by drug manufacturers
As members of the committee have highlighted in previous drug
pricing hearings, a major factor contributing to the increase in drug
spending is the list price of prescription drugs. Drug manufacturers
alone set the list price of prescription drugs. Drug manufacturers have
also historically engaged in a host of tactics meant to delay generic
competition, including preventing generic manufacturers from obtaining
drug samples, utilizing the Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy
(REMS) process to block timely entry of generics, utilizing loopholes
in the patent system to delay and thwart the market entry of lower cost
competitors, and paying generic manufacturers to delay market entry.
According to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), these anti-competitive
``pay-for-delay'' actions alone increase costs for seniors and American
taxpayers by $3.5 billion annually.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ See https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/reports/
pay-delay-how-drug-company-pay-offs-cost-consumers-billions-federal-
trade-commission-staff-study/100112payfordelayrpt
.pdf.
Blocking Entry of Generic Competitors
One tactic for blocking competition is the practice commonly known
as patent ``evergreening'' or ``product hopping'' where drug
manufacturers extend a brand drug's patent exclusivity through the
development of new formulations or products that offer clinically
insignificant additional benefits. This practice is inherently anti-
competitive and is designed to outright block or challenge the
legitimate market entry of generic competitors, raising drug costs for
seniors. For example, Forest Laboratories' Namenda (memantine HCl) is
indicated for the treatment of moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease.
When the 5/10 mg tablets were scheduled to go off patent in April 2015,
Forest responded by creating a ``new'' version marketed as Namenda XR
(an extended release version of the drug) and obtained a new patent,
providing the manufacturer with an additional 14 years without generic
competition.\12\ In 2015, the first year with generic memantine HCl
tablets, the annual per-user cost decreased 23.8 percent in Part D,
consistent with Calendar Year (CY) 2011 levels. In contrast, the per-
user cost of patent-protected Namenda XR increased 52.2 percent from CY
2014 to CY 2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Michael Carrier and Steve Shadowen, ``Pharmaceutical Product
Hopping: A Proposed Framework for Antitrust Analysis,'' Health Affairs
Blog (June 1, 2017); letter from Patrick G. Boen, Senior Director,
Clinical Development at Forest Research Institute, to providers (Feb.
2014) (announcing plans ``to discontinue the sale of NAMENDA''
(memantine HCl) tablets on August 15, 2014).
There are numerous additional examples where a brand drug
manufacturer has delayed competition to preserve its monopoly,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
resulting in astronomically high drug prices:

Humira, the highest-selling drug in the world, has received
six different orphan drug designations since 2005. Its drug
price increased by 200 percent from 2012-2018 to $38,000 per
patient.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ FDA, https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/opdlisting/oopd/
listResult.cfm.

The REMS for Thalomid, an earlier iteration of Celgene's
top-selling cancer drug Revlimid, has been patented over 14
times in order to delay the development of generics. The price
for Revlimid rose from $6,195 in 2006 to $16,691 in 2017.\14\
The Medicare program spent an average of $88,437 per
beneficiary for a year of Revlimid treatment in 2017.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Alison Kodjak, ``How a Drugmaker Gamed the System to Keep
Generic Competition Away,'' NPR, May 17, 2018.
\15\ CMS 2017 Part D Drug Spending Dashboard, available here:
https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-
Trends-and-Reports/Information-on-Prescription-Drugs/
MedicarePartD.html.

The price of Evzio, a drug manufactured by Kaleo and
utilized for emergency treatment of known or suspected opioid
overdoses with a novel delivery mechanism, has risen by
approximately 600 percent since 2014.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Ken Alltucker, ``Drug Company Raised Price of Lifesaving
Opioid Overdose Antidote More Than 600 Percent,'' USA Today, November
19, 2018.
These actions from brand drug manufacturers weaken the ability of
plan sponsors to negotiate lower costs for prescription drugs. Plan
sponsors have been most successful negotiating lower drug costs on
behalf of beneficiaries when there is sufficient competition in the
market. According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(CMS) Office of the Actuary (OACT), the:

Federal spending on retail prescription drugs is flat: For
the second consecutive year, retail prescription drug growth
has decreased; the 0.4 percent growth has been driven by a
continued shift to lower-cost generic drugs and declines in
generic drug prices.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ ``CMS Office of the Actuary Releases 2017 National Health
Expenditures,'' available online at https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-
releases/cms-office-actuary-releases-2017-national-health-expenditures.

Cost of drugs with limited competition has increased at
double the rate: Conversely, there have been significant price
increases for drugs subject to limited or no competition. In
2016, the cost of single-source drugs with no generic
alternatives increased at more than double the rate of average
annual drug spending.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Ibid.
The trend of increasing list prices for prescription drugs with
limited competition is seen for prescription drugs administered in both
clinical settings, which are typically covered by Medicare Part B and
are generally considered specialty drugs, and dispensed at the pharmacy
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
counter, which are typically covered by Medicare Part D.

90 percent of the Medicare B drugs with the highest
expenditure have no generic: A 2017 study performed by the
Government Accountability Office (GAO) found that Medicare Part
B drugs with the highest expenditures are predominantly single-
sourced (84 percent) without a generic option (90 percent).\19\
This has resulted in a market where eight of the top ten Part B
top-expenditure drugs have an annual cost of $10,000 to
$30,000.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ GAO, ``Medicare Represented at Least Half of the Market for 22
of the 84 Most Expensive Drugs in 2015,'' GAO-18-83, published December
18, 2017, available online at https://www.gao.gov/assets/690/
689082.pdf.
\20\ MedPAC, ``Medicare and the Healthcare Delivery System,''
available online at http://www.medpac.gov/docs/default-source/reports/
jun17_reporttocongress_sec.pdf?sfvrsn=0.

List prices increase beyond inflation for Part D drugs with
fewer than five manufacturers: An analysis of 2017 Part D
prescription drug spending found that prescription drugs with
less competition were more likely to have list price increases
than drugs with five or more manufacturers.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Based on Humana analysis of the CMS 2017 Part D Drug Spending
Dashboard and Data, available online at https://www.cms.gov/Research-
Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Information-
on-Prescription-Drugs/MedicarePartD.html. The CMS dashboard includes
all Part D organizations and plan types. Part D PDE records were
summarized by drug by linking National Drug Codes (NDCs) available in
the PDE data to a commercially available database and aggregated across
all strengths, dosage forms, and routes of administration to the drug
brand name and generic name. CMS did not provide NDCs in the public use
file. Over-the-counter drugs in the PDE data are excluded as well as
NDCs with fewer than 50 claims in the current (2017) or previous year
(2016). In addition, NDCs with large variations in reported units from
year to year were reviewed by CMS on a case-by-case basis and data
anomalies were excluded. Drug spending metrics for Part D drugs are
based on the gross drug cost, which includes ingredient cost,
dispensing fees, sales tax, and applicable vaccine administration fees.
Part D drug spending represents total spending for the prescription
claim, including amounts paid by the Medicare Part D plan and
beneficiary payments. The Part D spending metrics do not reflect any
manufacturers' rebates. For purposes of this analysis, we removed Part
D covered supplies, such as syringes and alcohol swipes for diabetics,
and weighted average change in spending per dosage unit by 2017 claim
volume. Average 2017 inflation rate is sourced from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics website.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.002
HHS OIG Proposed Rule Does Not Address Anti-Competitive Behavior
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The recently proposed regulatory changes to the Anti-Kickback
Statute's Safe Harbors from the Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
at the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) will not address
any of the anti-competitive actions from drug manufacturers detailed
above and, in some cases, will only increase the bargaining power of
manufacturers. Drug manufacturers alone set the list price of
prescription drugs; nothing in the proposed rule compels drug
manufacturers to lower the list price of drugs.
Recommended Legislative Actions
The examples of anti-competitive pricing detailed above and the
importance of competition require innovative policy approaches to
enhance competition in the market, especially for specialty drugs.
Humana strongly supports the introduction of S. 340, the Creating and
Restoring Equal Access to Equivalent Samples (CREATES) Act, as well as
S. 64, the Preserve Access to Affordable Generics and Biosimilars Act,
developed under Chairman Grassley's leadership. We believe the
enactment of these bills will encourage the development of generic and
biosimilar drugs that will infuse additional competition into the
market, prevent brand drug manufacturer REMS abuses that block generic
competition, and penalize brand drug manufacturers for engaging in pay-
for-delay agreements.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Is Taking Proactive Steps Within
Its Regulatory Authority
Humana applauds the FDA's efforts to bring additional competition
and transparency to the prescription drug market. In particular, Humana
supports the FDA's Drug Competition Action Plan and the goal of
removing barriers to generic development and market entry to increase
competition, improve access, and lower costs.
Policymakers within Congress and the administration have been
focused on addressing the rising prices of prescription drugs. In
January, the HHS OIG proposed a rule that modifies the current Discount
Safe Harbor under the Anti-Kickback Statute to exclude from discounts
protected by the Safe Harbor rebates negotiated by PBMs, Part D plan
sponsors, and Medicaid managed care plan sponsors.\23\ The OIG's
proposed rule also establishes a new Safe Harbor allowing those rebates
to be applied to reduce the price at the pharmacy counter.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Available here: https://www.regulations.gov/document?D=HHSIG-
2019-0001-0001.
Through the proposed rule, HHS ultimately seeks to reduce out-of-
pocket cost of prescription drugs for those currently covered by
Medicare and Medicaid and ultimately to reduce the list price of
prescription drugs. However, the rule fails to take into account the
role of rebates in reducing the price of premiums for all beneficiaries
and in reducing costs to the Federal Government. The proposed rule also
fails to consider the complexity of operationalizing the new
requirements by the proposed January 1, 2020, implementation date and
the downstream behavioral impacts of beneficiaries, drug manufacturers,
and plan sponsors.
Rebates Are Currently Used to Lower Premiums
Currently, plan sponsors utilize rebates as a tool to ensure that
beneficiaries are obtaining the greatest possible value from their
Medicare coverage. Savings that are obtained by Humana through rebate
negotiations with drug manufacturers are distributed to our entire
beneficiary population through reduced premiums for Part D coverage,
resulting in lower costs for seniors in PDP and MA plans.
Additionally, rebates have resulted in significant savings to the
government. As cited in the Medicare Trustees Report, rebates have
played a critical role in keeping the overall cost of Part D lower than
projected when the program was first launched in 2006.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ 2018 Medicare Trustees Report: https://www.cms.gov/Research-
Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/
ReportsTrustFunds/Downloads/TR2018.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Proposed Rule Will Lead to Higher Premiums and Increase Costs to
the Government While Creating a Windfall for Drug Manufacturers
If the proposed rule is finalized as written, all Part D
beneficiaries will pay higher premiums. Rebates that have historically
been utilized to lower premiums across the program will no longer be
applied to the entire population and will instead be utilized to reduce
out-of-pocket costs for a small number of seniors. The analysis
performed by the CMS OACT indicates that shifting cost savings from
rebates to a beneficiary's copay will increase the overall cost of the
Part D program for the majority of beneficiaries, the government, and
Part D plan sponsors.
Humana's analysis found that approximately 17 percent of
beneficiaries would see savings at the pharmacy counter, with only 12
percent saving more than $70 annually.\25\ The remaining 83 percent of
beneficiaries will see an increase in costs for prescription drug
coverage due to premium increases that will exceed any potential
savings the beneficiary may have experienced at the pharmacy.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Based upon internal analysis of estimated premium impacts for
CY 2020 resulting from the proposed rule.
\26\ Ibid.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.003
The small number of beneficiaries who will benefit from the rule
will do so at a significant cost to the government. The projections
developed by the OACT estimate that government outlays for the Part D
program would increase by approximately $200 billion while
beneficiaries would save approximately $25 billion; this means that
government spending will increase approximately $7 for every $1 of
savings realized by beneficiaries.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Based on internal analysis of estimated premium impacts
resulting from the proposed rule.
\28\ Removal of Safe Harbor Protection for Rebates Involving
Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Creation of New Safe Harbor Protection
for Certain Point-of-Sale Reductions in Price on Prescription
Pharmaceuticals and Certain Pharmacy Benefit Manager Service Fees (RIN
0936-AA08)
The rule also creates a significant windfall for drug manufacturers
through reduced liability in the Coverage Gap Discount Program (CGDP).
According to the analysis performed by OACT, drug manufacturers will
realize savings of $44 billion over a 10-year period.\29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Proposed Rule Will Lower Out-of-Pocket Costs for a Limited Number
of Seniors
The proposed rule will have a limited impact on seniors at the
pharmacy counter. An analysis based upon 2017 claims data for
prescription drugs from CMS found that only 7.8 percent of total
prescriptions filled were for drugs for which Humana has a rebate
agreement in 2019.\30\ This is due to the high utilization of generic
drugs, which are not eligible for rebates, and a large number of brand
drugs where the manufacturer does not offer rebates.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ Based on Humana's analysis of CMS Part D Drug Spending
Dashboard and Data, available online at https://www.cms.gov/Research-
Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Information-
on-Prescription-Drugs/MedicarePartD.html. Products in the dashboard
were categorized as generic if the generic name listed matched the
brand name. The remaining products were categorized as brand and then
segmented based on whether Humana has a rebate contract for that
product in 2019. Finally, ``Total Claims'' was summed across all
products in each category.
Put another way, fewer than one in ten prescriptions will have a
lower out-of-
pocket cost as a result of the proposed rule while premiums for all
beneficiaries will increase and costs to the government will rise
significantly. Humana believes that there are alternative policy
options that could modernize the Part D program and also reduce out-of-
pocket spending on prescription drugs. These options are discussed in
detail at the end of this testimony.
List Prices for All Brand Drugs Will Need to Decrease by 28 Percent to
Keep Beneficiaries Whole
One of the underlying assumptions in the proposed rule is that the
changes will result in drug manufacturers lowering their lists prices.
However, when asked by Chairman Grassley, ``Should the administration
finalize this [OIG] rule, would you commit to lowering your drug
prices?'', the CEOs of AstraZeneca, AbbVie, Bristol-Myers Squibb,
Johnson & Johnson, Pfizer, Merck, and Sanofi all testified that they
would only lower list prices if the same rules were applied in the
commercial sector or they failed to answer the question. The proposed
rule only applies to Federal health-care programs and does not extend
to ERISA or the Public Health Service Act which governs much of the
commercial market.
This will result in increased drug prices that will cause some
beneficiaries to pay more out of pocket. Based upon Humana's actuarial
analysis, the only way to achieve the same costs for the Part D program
and maintain beneficiary premiums comparable to the current system is
if all brand drug manufacturers--including those who do not currently
offer rebates--elect to decrease their list prices by at least 28
percent. Alternatively, if brand drug manufacturers refuse to reduce
their list prices for products not currently rebated, manufacturers of
the remaining branded products would need to drop their list prices by
at least 45 percent in order to avoid higher costs for CMS, taxpayers,
and beneficiaries.
Drug Manufacturers Raise List Prices to Boost Their Revenue
Drug manufacturers alone set the list price of prescription drugs.
However, some in the pharmaceutical industry cite rebates and other
price concessions as the driver of increasing list prices for all brand
drugs. Currently, there are few brand drugs with a rebate agreement in
comparison to the total number of drugs in the market. For the 2019
benefit year, Humana will only receive rebates on 255 brand drugs, or
seven percent of the potential drugs on its Medicare formulary.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.004
Additionally, there are many examples of increasing list prices for
brand drugs where the manufacturer does not offer rebates. To highlight
this, Humana analyzed the historical list prices of three brand drugs--
Revlimid, Imbruvica, and Isentress--which accounted for over $4 billion
in taxpayer spending in Part D for 2017.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Based on Humana's rebate experience applied to an analysis of
the ``total claims'' in the CMS 2017 Part D Drug Spending Dashboard and
Data public use file, available online at https://www.cms.gov/Research-
Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Information-
on-Prescription-Drugs/MedicarePartD.html. Note, CMS excludes over-the-
counter drugs and National Drug Codes (NDCs) with fewer than 50 claims
per year from the public file. Drug spending metrics for Part D drugs
are based on the gross drug cost, which includes ingredient cost,
dispensing fees, sales tax, and applicable vaccine administration fees,
but does not reflect any manufacturers' rebates. For purposes of this
analysis, we removed Part D covered supplies, such as syringes and
alcohol swipes for diabetics.
\32\ CMS 2017 Part D Drug Spending Dashboard and Data, available
online at https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/
Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Information-on-Prescription-Drugs/
MedicarePartD.html.
Examples of Brand-Name Drugs With No Rebate
Overall Part D
Product
Condition
Manufacturer
Spending in 2017
Revlimid
Cancer
Celgene
$2.3 billion
Imbruvica
Cancer
AbbVie
$1.4 billion
Isentress
HIV
Merck
$320.9 million
None of these drugs were subject to rebate agreements during the
2013-2017 time period examined. However, each drug's list price
increased annually by as much as 64 percent. This analysis, utilizing
publicly available CMS data, directly refutes the suggestion that
rebates are the driver of increasing drug list prices. Ultimately, this
is further evidence that the proposed changes to the Anti-Kickback
regulations will not result in HHS's desired outcome of lower list
prices for prescription drugs and lower out-of-pocket costs for
beneficiaries.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.005
the hhs's oig proposed rule will inject new uncertainties into the part
d market that will put upward pressure on part d premiums
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Based on Humana's analysis of the CMS Part D Drug Spending
Dashboard and Data, available online at https://www.cms.gov/Research-
Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Information-
on-Prescription-Drugs/MedicarePartD.html. Chart reflects the percent
change in the unit price of each product in 2013-2017 compared to a
base year. Base year is 2012 for Revlimid and Isentress. Base year is
2013 for Imbruvica, which was launched in November 2013.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consistent with the administration's own analysis, Humana's
actuaries project that Part D premiums will increase for all
beneficiaries as a result of the HHS's OIG proposed rule, with out-of-
pocket costs reduced for a subset of beneficiaries that utilize rebated
brand drugs. We project that those premium increases will lead to
changes in beneficiary behavior that will have premium and beneficiary
impacts not contemplated in the proposed rule. We have outlined several
potential consequences of the OIG HHS proposed rule--none of which are
contemplated in the regulation.

POS rebates will lead to changes in prescription drug
manufacturer pricing and market access behaviors that will be
difficult for plan sponsors to project--POS transparency also
impacts prescription drug manufacturer pricing and market
access behaviors. Each brand drug manufacturer will naturally
seek to develop pricing strategies that maximize market share
without deflating their profit margins. Some manufacturers are
considering authorized generic drug pricing strategies, while
others are examining an average net of rebate pricing strategy
with minimal or no price segmentation between Part D plan
sponsors. We expect many other variations on these pricing
strategies moving forward. The challenge plan sponsors face
when preparing 2020 Part D bids is that these constantly
evolving market/pricing dynamics further increase the
difficulty of projecting Part D plan costs if POS rebates are
implemented in 2020. This enhanced unpredictability will either
lead to greater pricing misestimates in Part D bids or
conservatism in pricing (and thus higher premiums).

Some beneficiaries with high drug costs will likely make
plan choices based primarily on POS drug costs, which may
result in migration to those specific plans, thus increasing
the likelihood of adverse risk selection--We anticipate that
beneficiaries shopping for Part D coverage in 2020 and beyond
will be choosing a plan based on different criteria than in
previous years. With greater transparency of drug prices
inclusive of manufacturer rebates, we anticipate that more
consumers will be selecting plans based on POS costs versus the
traditional focus on premiums, formulary, and pharmacy network.
While there are numerous long-term advantages to this change in
beneficiary shopping behavior, in the near term, this shift
will lead to increased membership movement between plans.
Increased beneficiary movement will place further upward
pressure on premiums because, historically, newly enrolled
beneficiaries are less likely to enroll and engage in clinical
programs. In addition, as beneficiaries increasingly select
plans based on POS costs, it will place plan sponsors at an
increased risk of adverse selection. The current Part D risk
adjustment model is not built to sufficiently mitigate this
risk, because it assumes that high cost beneficiaries will be
evenly spread across all Part D plan sponsors.
proposals to mitigate beneficiary disruption in 2020
Plan sponsors are in the process of preparing Part D bids to CMS
for the 2020 benefit year and will be submitted to CMS by June 3rd. If
the administration elects to move forward with the proposed changes to
the Anti-Kickback Safe Harbor regulations, it is absolutely critical
that CMS take immediate steps to mitigate inevitable premium increases
and beneficiary disruption. The proposed rule will make it exceedingly
difficult for plan sponsors offering Part D coverage to project costs
and set accurate beneficiary premiums.\34\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ For a more detailed discussion of the actuarial challenges
posed by the HHS OIG proposed rule, please consult public comments
submitted by the American Academy of Actuaries, available online at
https://www.actuary.org/sites/default/files/2019-04/
Rx_Rebate_Timeline_0403
2019.pdf.
Mandatory point-of-sale rebates would be the most significant
regulatory change to the Part D program since its inception. This
actuarial uncertainty, coupled with the lack of guidance to date from
the CMS OACT, will lead to more conservative (i.e., higher) rate
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
setting, potentially resulting in significant beneficiary disruption.
The following steps would be necessary to help preserve stability
and predictability in the Part D market in 2020. We would respectfully
suggest members of the committee and other members of Congress to
encourage CMS to take the following actions:

Implement interim adjustments to the Part D risk adjustment
model immediately--The current Part D risk adjustment model
cannot sufficiently mitigate the actuarial uncertainties posed
by the Anti-Kickback Safe Harbor proposed regulation.
Historically, it has taken CMS multiple years to recalibrate
the Part D risk adjustment model to reflect changes in Part D
utilization and spending. We strongly urge CMS to work with
plan sponsor actuaries immediately on methods for potentially
making interim adjustments and to implement a model
recalibration as soon as possible to reflect a mandatory point-
of-sale rebate market.

Require all Part D plan sponsors to offer a plan designed
specifically for LIS auto-enrollees as part of a new, fourth
plan option--Part D LIS-eligible beneficiaries will prove to be
the most challenging population for plan sponsors to predict
pricing and drug utilization for 2020, primarily because LIS
beneficiaries are more likely than the general Part D
population to utilize rebated brand-name drugs.\35\ Our
recommendation would encourage population-based formulary
design; enhance the value of manufacturer price concessions for
CMS; establish parity across the market; and preserve
competition and beneficiary choice. We note that there is
precedent for this approach; MA dual-eligible special needs
plans (D-SNP) are specifically structured for the dual-eligible
population both in cost-sharing and formulary design. In order
to accommodate the new LIS-only plan, CMS would need to allow
plan sponsors to offer a fourth plan, because they are
currently limited by CMS sub-
regulatory guidance to no more than three plans in any market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ ``MedPAC Report to Congress: Medicare Payment Policy, March
2017,'' available at http://www.medpac.gov/docs/default-source/reports/
mar17_medpac_ch14.pdf.

Narrow Part D risk corridors for 2020--In order to manage
the transition to the new Part D rebate model contemplated by
the HHS OIG proposed rule and mitigate premium increases, we
recommend that CMS narrow the Part D risk sharing corridors for
2020 consistent with risk corridors applicable during the first
2 years of the Part D program (2006-2007).\36\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ CMS used its demonstration authority to smooth the premium
impacts to protect beneficiaries from negative aspects at the start of
the Part D benefit. It announced the Medicare Demonstration to
Transition Enrollment of Low Income Subsidy Beneficiaries on June 8,
2006 as well as implementing a 1-year payment demonstration, the
``Medicare Demonstration to Limit Annual Changes in Part D Premiums Due
to Beneficiary Choice of Low-Cost Plans.'' Those are potential examples
of the agency's ability to minimize disruption.

Increase the 2020 de minimis premium policy for LIS-eligible
beneficiaries--In order to avoid disruption, movement between
plans, and confusion for LIS beneficiaries, we recommend that
CMS permit plan sponsors to voluntarily waive the portion of
the monthly adjusted basic beneficiary premium that is up to a
de minimis amount of $10 during the 2020 transition to the new
Part D rebate model.\37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ Ibid.

Allow plan sponsors to facilitate chargebacks and pharmacy
reimbursement--A 2020 implementation date does not provide
sufficient time for stakeholders to develop, test, and deploy
the new system for processing chargebacks and pharmacy
reimbursement contemplated in the HHS OIG proposed rule. Rather
than trying to reinvent the wheel in a matter of months, CMS
should continue allowing plan sponsors to process and
facilitate chargebacks in order to ensure that pharmacies
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
receive timely and accurate payment for their services.

Temporarily exclude Part D from the Total Beneficiary Cost
(TBC) calculation for MA-PD plans beginning in 2020--Because
drug formularies may change significantly as a result of the
proposed rule, there may be large changes in the Part D
component of the TBC calculation. We request that Part D be
excluded from the TBC calculation until the impact of formulary
changes can be adequately evaluated and quantified.

Issue guidance on 2020 bid assumptions as soon as possible--
We strongly encourage CMS to provide guidance on 2020 bid
assumptions to ensure consistency in approach among plan
sponsors. In particular, because direct subsidy and low-income
premium subsidy amounts are a function of plan sponsor bids,
there needs to be consistency in bidding approaches to avoid
wide swings in plan bids and beneficiary premiums.

Preserve the ability for plan sponsors to implement value-
based purchasing programs for pharmacies--Given the
extraordinary disruption that could occur in the Part D market
in 2020, we recommend that CMS not finalize its proposal. It
would add yet another layer of complexity by eliminating
pharmacy direct and indirect remuneration (DIR), such as value-
based purchasing programs. As CMS's own analysis indicates,
prohibiting pharmacy DIR will further increase Part D
premiums--amplifying the upward premium trend attributable to
POS rebates. In addition, CMS has failed to consider several
key unintended consequences of eliminating pharmacy DIR. For
example, we anticipate that plan sponsors would respond by
lowering pharmacy reimbursement rates and reducing the size of
their existing pharmacy networks. All of which would likely
result in significant changes in Plan Sponsors' pharmacy
networks occurring at the same time as widespread premium
increases and formulary changes.

Delay the Health Insurance Tax--In addition to the projected
impact of the rebate rule and value-based pharmacy networks
rule (DIR), we are also preparing for the potential return of
the Health Insurance Tax in 2020. Under both President Obama
and President Trump, bipartisan legislation passed delaying the
tax, including in the current calendar year (2019). Without
congressional action, the tax is scheduled to return in 2020,
resulting in tens of millions of seniors with Part D coverage
paying higher premiums. We strongly urge congressional action
in support of S. 172, the Health Insurance Tax Relief Act of
2019.
modernizing the part d program to better serve medicare beneficiaries
Given the profound changes that have occurred in the pharmaceutical
marketplace since the implementation of Part D, we encourage the
committee to examine potential reforms to the Part D program that would
both alleviate the burdens seniors face when paying for high cost drugs
and leverage market-based reforms to drive down prescription drug
prices.

Maximum Out-of-Pocket (MOOP) Cost Protection--In order to
better protect non-LIS beneficiaries from high prescription
drug costs, we recommend that the committee consider
establishing an annual maximum out-of-pocket cap for Part D
drugs. It is critical that any proposal to cap out-of-pocket
costs in Part D be paired with prescription drug pricing
reforms that meaningfully reduce prescription drug costs by
improving competition in the pharmaceutical market. Stated
another way, the costs of implementing a Part D MOOP should be
borne by the pharmaceutical industry.

High Cost Specialty Drugs--As discussed previously, 2
percent of our beneficiaries who utilized specialty drugs
comprised 36 percent of total Part D spending in 2018. In 2
years, Humana projects that seniors utilizing specialty drugs
could account for as much as 50 percent of total Part D
spending. We welcome the opportunity to explore potential
solutions for alternative pooling or funding mechanisms for
this growing category of products.
proposals to increase drug market competition
Humana strongly urges the committee to encourage CMS and other
Federal agencies to remove barriers to prescription drug competition
and regulations that are abused in anticompetitive ways and are harmful
to affordable drug access for beneficiaries. We specifically have
recommended to the administration to take the following actions that
would address abuses of regulations and anticompetitive behaviors:

Finalize CMS's proposed drug pricing rules aimed at
increasing competition--Humana urges CMS to finalize the
proposed rules on plan sponsor flexibility for protected
classes and the Part B step therapy program in ``Modernizing
Part D and Medicare Advantage to Lower Drug Prices and Reduce
Out-of-Pocket Expenses Proposed Rule'' [CMS-4180-P]. Humana has
long supported these policy changes and has identified
opportunities to create competition in the market and lower
drug costs for beneficiaries. Internal analysis estimates that
the lack of competition due to the protected class policy
collectively increased beneficiary premiums by an estimated
$2.79 per-beneficiary per-month (PBPM, $34 per-beneficiary-per-
year) in 2018. Additionally, 50 percent of Humana's Part B drug
spending is attributable to drug classes with multiple
clinically equivalent substances where additional competition
can be stimulated through utilization management. Additional
flexibility with respect to formulary development will enable
sponsors to effectively drive competition in the market and
lower drug costs for their beneficiaries.

Eliminate the requirement that Part D plan sponsors cover at
least two drugs in each therapeutic category or class--CMS
currently requires Part D plan sponsor formularies to cover at
least two drugs in every Part D covered therapeutic category
and class as long as there are at least two drugs available.
When two drugs are mandated to be covered in a class,
manufacturers of a drug with only one other competitor
typically refuse to negotiate rebates or discounts in Medicare
Part D because they know their products must be covered. The
existing policy increases costs to the plan sponsor, which are
passed through not only to individuals in the form of higher
premiums, but also to the Federal Government in terms of
increased direct subsidy payments.

Leverage CMS data to illustrate the cost impacts of
anticompetitive behaviors such as patent ``evergreening''--CMS
is best-positioned to leverage its claims from Parts A, B, and
D to empirically illustrate the Medicare Trust Fund and
beneficiary impacts associated with these and other
anticompetitive behaviors.

Issue information regarding manufacturers' drug pipelines
and anticipated drug prices prior to market launch--It is
critical for Part D and Medicare Advantage (MA) plan sponsors
and the CMS OACT to be aware of anticipated new drugs, new drug
indications, and their potential launch prices. These data are
necessary to make critical decisions about MA and Part D
bidding parameters, making special updates to the MA and Part D
risk adjustments models, and for OACT to perform its long-term
program cost estimation duties for the Medicare Trustees. With
the right information, this decision-
making will have a significant impact on our ability to provide
lower drug costs and premiums for beneficiaries. While we
understand there are proprietary data provisions and there is
general uncertainty about approvals of new therapies, we
believe that, between clinicaltrials.gov and PubMed, there is a
notable opportunity to produce a transparent summary dashboard
of the drug pipeline in one place. We ask that HHS ensure that
the FDA works toward this goal and provide CMS and plan
sponsors with this necessary information.

Address anticompetitive actions by drug manufacturers--
Humana strongly supports the administration's continued work to
address and prevent anticompetitive actions by drug
manufacturers. Again, congressional action through passage of
the CREATES Act and S. 64 will limit these actions, bringing
more competition to the market and placing downward pressure on
beneficiary drug costs.
conclusion
We appreciate the committee's keen interest in working to better
understand the root causes of high drug costs. We look forward to
working with you on policy solutions to ensure access to affordable
prescription drugs and to foster stability in the 2020 benefit year.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to William K. Fleming, Pharm.D.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
collection, use, and sharing of personal health information
Question. Consumers are becoming more and more concerned about the
data collection and sharing practices of companies. While these issues
have been most prevalent in the social media and tech industry,
companies in the pharmaceutical supply chain also have access to
tremendous amounts of sensitive, personal health information of the
individuals they serve. For example, the company Livongo partners with
CVS Caremark to provide low-cost or no-cost blood sugar meters to
diabetic patients. The meters are always ``connected'' to Livongo's
``Diabetes Response Specialists.'' As the company's website states,
``When readings are out of range, our Diabetes Response Specialists
call or text [the individual] within minutes.'' While these innovations
may be highly beneficial for individuals in managing their health, it's
also important for this committee to fully understand what types of
information is collected, how or why it's stored or shared, and for
what purposes PBMs themselves and other affiliated drug supply chain
participants (such as insurers) use the information.
Health information is extremely sensitive. It's the most personal
of all the information we share. So I want to know more about each of
your companies' data collection, sharing, and protection practices.
Does your company collect and store health information from the
end-users of the prescriptions you provide? For example, information or
records of a diabetic individual's blood sugar levels.
Answer. Yes. Humana's wholly owned pharmacy benefit manager
collects protected health information (PHI), as defined in 45 CFR
Sec. 160.103, as necessary to determine if a submitted claim meets the
applicable coverage criteria established by CMS and/or Humana's
Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee.
Question. Does your company make any treatment, cost, or coverage
decisions based on the health information you collect from an
individual?
Answer. In order to ensure compliance with Medicare coverage
requirements for certain items and procedures, MAPD and Part D plans
must collect health information from the patient and his or her doctor
to confirm that the patient meets the applicable coverage criteria
established by CMS and Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs).
Question. Does your company share health information with third
parties? And, if so, does your company profit from that sharing?
Answer. Humana shares data with third parties for health care
operations, treatment, payment, and other activities as permitted under
HIPAA.
Question. Do you believe customers are fully aware of your
information collection and sharing practices?
Answer. Yes.
impact of vertical integration between pbms and insurance companies
Question. To highlight whether/how vertical integration of PBMs and
insurance companies benefits the consumer and taxpayer.
The PBM industry has experienced significant consolidation within
the past 10 years, which has contributed to concerns about the
potential abuse of market power, barriers to market entry, and
exclusionary practices. In 2012, for example, Express Scripts acquired
Medco Health Solutions--a nearly $30-billion transaction that merged
two of the country's three largest PBMs.\1\ More recently, PBMs are
also vertically integrating with insurers/payers, reflected by the 2018
acquisitions of Express Scripts Holding Co. (a PBM) by Cigna Corp. (a
payer) and of Aetna Inc. (a payer) by CVS Health Corp. As a result, the
three largest PBMs are all vertically integrated with insurance
companies. According to a report from the Kaiser Family Foundation, the
two combined entities, along with UnitedHealth and Humana, will cover
71 percent of all Medicare Part D enrollees and 86 percent of stand-
alone drug plan enrollees.\2\ Vertical integration can result in
increased efficiencies and consumer benefits. I can also, however, lead
to higher barriers to entry for competition, leading to further
consolidation. FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb recently warned that
``consolidation and market concentration make the rebating and
contracting schemes [of PBMs] all that more pernicious. And the very
complexity and opacity of these schemes help to conceal their corrosion
on our system--and their impact on patients.''\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See ``FTC Closes Eight-Month Investigation of Express Scripts,
Inc.'s Proposed Acquisition of Pharmacy Benefits Manager Medco Health
Solutions, Inc.,'' Federal Trade Commission (April 2, 2012), available
at https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2012/04/ftc-closes-
eight-month-investigation-express-scripts-incs.
\2\ Juliette Cubanski, Anthony Damico, and Tricia Neuman,
``Medicare Part D in 2018: The Latest on Enrollment, Premiums, and Cost
Sharing'' (May 17, 2018), available at https://www.kff.org/medicare/
issue-brief/medicare-part-d-in-2018-the-latest-on-enrollment-premiums-
and-cost-sharing/.
\3\ FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb, M.D., ``Capturing the Benefits
of Competition for Patients,'' (March 7, 2018), available at https://
www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Speeches/ucm599833.htm.
I'd like to talk about consolidation, including the recent
integration of PBMs with insurance companies. Last year, I wrote to the
Justice Department on this issue. It's reported that the three largest
PBMs--who are before us today--now cover 71 percent of Medicare Part D
enrollees and 86 percent of stand-alone drug plan enrollees.\4\ Such
market power has raised concerns. FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said,
``the consolidation and market concentration make the rebating and
contracting schemes [of PBMs] all that more pernicious.''\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Juliette Cubanski, Anthony Damico, and Tricia Neuman,
``Medicare Part D in 2018: The Latest on Enrollment, Premiums, and Cost
Sharing'' (May 17, 2018), available at https://www.kff.org/medicare/
issue-brief/medicare-part-d-in-2018-the-latest-on-enrollment-premiums-
and-cost-sharing/.
\5\ FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb, M.D., ``Capturing the Benefits
of Competition for Patients'' (March 7, 2018), available at https://
www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Speeches/ucm599833.
htm.
I want to hear briefly from each of you on whether the PBM industry
is competitive. For example, are there high barriers to entry for new
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
competitors?
Answer. Competition between firms offering pharmacy care services
is intense and robust. Such competition helps to spur innovation of new
products and technology offerings to preserve the value proposition of
Humana's integrated pharmacy care services model. Humana's approach to
integrated pharmacy and medical care services allows Humana to deliver
a personalized and simplified experience for seniors through a value-
based health ecosystem that improves clinical outcomes.
Question. I'm also interested in what effect the most recent
consolidations of PBMs and insurers has had on the bottom line for the
government and consumer.
Do these arrangements result in a lower cost to the government--as
a payer--and the consumer? Please explain.
Answer. Humana's pharmacy care services are fully integrated with
our medical service offerings and focused on serving Humana members.
This integrated approach to serving seniors delivers a personalized and
simplified experience through a value-based health ecosystem that
improves clinical outcomes. This ecosystem includes 233 owned, jointly
owned, or allied primary care facilities; an ownership interest in the
Nation's largest home health and hospice providers; as well as
initiatives to address social determinants of health. As a result, the
savings to the government and consumers achieved through our pharmacy
programs accrue directly to our members through lower premiums and
improved benefits.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
manufacturer money
Question. What is the total dollar amount that you obtain from
pharmaceutical manufacturers in any form such as rebates, fees, etc.?
Answer. Rebates received by Humana for Part D drugs are reported to
CMS annually through Direct and Indirect Remuneration (DIR) and
reflected in Part D bid submissions. Humana Part D plans reinvest the
savings accrued from these rebates in benefit offerings. Humana's
wholly owned pharmacy benefit manager does not receive fees from
pharmaceutical manufacturers.
Question. What is the total dollar amount that you remit to health
plans?
Answer. Rebates received by Humana for Part D drugs are passed
through to the Part D plans. Humana's wholly owned pharmacy benefit
manager does not receive fees from pharmaceutical manufacturers.
biosimilars
Question. Managed Care Organizations are on record as widely
supportive of the potential of biosimilars. However, most MCOs have
continued to support originator brand products and have not preferred
and often excluded less expensive biosimilars. For example, most MCOs
have kept Remicade (a treatment for rheumatoid arthritis and other
diseases) as the preferred agent on their formularies, and in most
cases to the exclusion of its biosimilar, Infliximab.
Why do you tout support for biosimilars while, at the same time,
inhibiting adoption of these less expensive products?
Answer. We recognize the importance of biosimilars as low-cost
alternatives to originator brand products. We have elected to place
biosimilars at parity status compared to the originator brand products.
Unfortunately, today there are few biosimilar products on the market
and the prices of those products are similar to the originator brand
products. Our hope is that the market will continue to grow, resulting
in lower prices through increased competition. As the market matures
and prices begin to drop it is our intent to begin moving biosimilars
to lower formulary tiers and to prefer those agents over the originator
brand products.
Question. HHS may broaden the scope of its proposed rule and
eliminate rebates between Medicare Advantage plans and manufacturers
for Part B drugs.
Would this realign incentives to encourage preferred access for
lower-cost drugs, such as biosimilars?
Answer. As mentioned previously, Humana recognizes the importance
of biosimilars as low-cost alternatives to originator brand products
and currently places these products at parity with originator brand
products on the formulary. As with generic products, biosimilars
frequently launch at prices similar to the originator brand products
until there is competition in the market. We support biosimilars that
launch at a substantial discount to the originator brand product and
specifically prefer the biosimilar Retacrit over the originator brand
product Procrit. As such, we encourage the FDA to continue to provide
clear guidance, such as the recently released Interchangeability
guidelines, that will spur additional biosmiliars to market and
increase competition.
Question. What changes can we recommend/make to help you prefer
lower-cost drugs, such as biosimilars, without rebates?
Answer. Humana strongly supports the introduction of S. 340, the
Creating and Restoring Equal Access to Equivalent Samples (CREATES)
Act. We believe the enactment of this bill will encourage the
development of generic and biosimilar drugs that will infuse additional
competition into the market, prevent brand drug manufacturer REMS
abuses that block generic competition, and penalize brand drug
manufacturers for engaging in pay-for-delay agreements.
Question. Why is there such a disparity in reimbursed pharmacy
prices for specialty generic drugs in Part D? (e.g., Imatinib) Does
ownership of specialty pharmacy influence your reimbursement decision?
Answer. Network contracted pharmacies, including Humana owned
pharmacies, are predominantly reimbursed based off the same specialty
generic drug fee schedule as other pharmacies.
Question. I'm concerned with the recent trend of PBMs allowing
brand companies to ``pay for position'' on insurance formularies, which
results in seniors losing access to lower-cost generics and
biosimilars.
Do you ever exclude generic or biosimilar competitors from
formulary placement, or place these lower-cost drugs in higher cost-
sharing tiers that are generally reserved for non-preferred or brand
drugs?
Answer. We support continued flexibility to determine the cost-
sharing structure that is most appropriate for our benefit design,
including the ability to mix brand and generic drugs within the non-
preferred drug tier (second highest tier on the Humana Part D
formulary) or exclude drugs from the formulary. The cost of a brand-
name drug is not guaranteed to be lower than a generic. For example,
the oral bisphosphonate class of drugs utilized in the treatment of
osteoporosis in post-menopausal women illustrates this phenomenon.
Alendronate (the generic version of Fosamax) is placed on the lowest
tiers (tier 1 or 2), ibandronate (the generic version of Boniva)
tablets are placed on tier 2, and risedronate (the generic version of
Actonel) is placed on the non-preferred drug tier. This formulary
placement allows plans to create behavioral changes that drive members
to the more cost-
effective medication choice. Generally, an increased number of generic
competitors correlates strongly with lower formulary tier placement of
a generic and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has proven that
generic drug prices are reduced with each additional market entry of a
generic competitor.
delays and denials in cancer treatment
Question. I have received stories of cancer patients facing delays
or denials for their treatment due to PBM actions. Data shows that
breast cancer patients who experienced a 3-month or more delay in
treatment had a 12 percent lower 5-year survival rate compared with
breast cancer patients with only a 0- to 3-month delay.
What percent of patients experience a 14-day or longer delay in
receiving an oral oncolytic prescribed by their oncologist?
Answer. Once approved, 84 percent of patients receive their oral
oncolytic within 14 days of the initial authorization request submitted
by their prescriber. Sixteen percent of patients fill their oral
oncolytic more than 14 days after the initial authorization request is
submitted and approved. Authorization requests for oral oncolytics are
reviewed within 72 hours upon receipt for non-expedited requests and
within 24 hours for expedited requests or as quickly as the
beneficiary's condition requires in accordance with CMS requirements.
Most prescribers will submit the request for approval prior to sending
the prescription to the pharmacy for filling.
Question. What are the primary reasons patients experience delays
or denials for their treatments?
Answer. Delays for approval are primarily driven by incomplete
information provided by the prescriber or his or her office staff.
Approximately 30 percent of total requests received are incomplete and
require Humana to reach back out to the prescriber for this additional
information in order to adequately review the request. Humana provides
the specific information needed during the outreach in order to help
provide transparency to the prescribers and facilitate receipt of the
information needed to complete the review.
Denials for authorization are due primarily to the request not
meeting the clinical criteria outlined in the coverage policy for that
oral oncolytic or to the requested use not being supported by one of
the following: the FDA-approved labeling, the current treatment
guidelines or compendia (e.g., NCCN), or there is not adequate
available data in the current literature or peer reviewed medical
journals.
Question. What percent of determinations to delay or deny treatment
for cancer patients are made by an oncologist or healthcare
professional with oncology training?
Answer. The clinical criteria for approval that is outlined in the
coverage policies which governs authorization requests for oncology
therapies are developed by health-care professionals (both pharmacists
and physicians) with oncology training and are then reviewed and
approved by Humana's Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) Committee which
also includes healthcare professionals (both pharmacists and
physicians) with oncology training. In addition to P&T Committee
approved coverage policies, requests for authorization are reviewed
based on the national treatment guidelines and compendia (e.g., NCCN)
to see if the use is supported by the recommendations and these
guidelines are developed and reviewed by health-care professionals with
oncology training.
Question. Why is a PBM-owned specialty pharmacy better qualified to
manage a cancer patient's adherence and side effects than a community
cancer clinic with a medically integrated pharmacy?
Answer. A plan-owned specialty pharmacy has access to a patient's
entire medication profile and can more completely check for drug
interactions and risk for adverse drug events, as well as assess
historical adherence in order to identify opportunities to optimize a
patient's treatment. In addition, these pharmacies tend to have access
to other relevant and rich data elements, such as medical history, and
to a vast set of care team resources such as behavioral health
clinicians and experts in social determinants of health. These
capabilities allow the patient to be treated holistically, with the
intent being to reduce costs and improve clinical outcomes while
delivering a more integrated experience for the patient.
direct and indirect remuneration (dir fees)
Question. Many community-based cancer clinics have established
medically integrated pharmacies so patients can access their oral
chemotherapy prescriptions or other medications at the point-of- care.
These practices are often assessed large DIR which are based on certain
quality measures targeted toward primary care.
Shouldn't pharmacies be evaluated on the type of drug dispensed and
disease managed rather than a one-size fits all approach?
Answer. Humana's approach to performance-based contracting with
network pharmacies closely aligns with our value-based payment
initiatives for providers, hospitals, and other healthcare providers
and aims to improve defined quality metrics such as medication
adherence in targeted disease states. In all of our performance-based
reimbursement programs, we seek to incent our partners to improve the
quality of care delivered to our members by more closely aligning
reimbursement with beneficiary outcomes and moving away from the
traditional FFS reimbursement model. Humana's performance-based
pharmacy network is also modeled, in part, on CMS's Star Ratings
program. Humana received recommendations regarding the design of the
performance-based network from standard-setting organizations that
developed metrics for the Star Ratings program to ensure that high-
performing pharmacies were rewarded similarly to those plan sponsors in
the Star Ratings program.
Question. Does assessing large DIR fees on medically integrated
pharmacies drive patients to PBM-owned specialty pharmacies?
Answer. Humana's approach to performance-based contracting with
network pharmacies, including our own specialty network pharmacy,
closely aligns with our value-based payment initiatives for providers,
hospitals, and other healthcare providers and aims to improve defined
quality metrics, such as medication adherence in targeted disease
states.
Question. Why are pharmacies forced to pay DIR and other fees to
PBMs?
Answer. As stated previously, the concept of paying for value and
quality, which is at the core of the performance-based pharmacy
network, can be seen in numerous value-based payment models including
those implemented or proposed by CMS in which the financial incentives
are paid after the performance is observed.
Question. According to CMS, PBMs justify DIR fees as adjustments to
improve quality. CMS also found that PBMs and PDPs withhold
substantially more in reductions in payments than as rewards paid to
pharmacies. Aren't so-called ``quality adjustments'' that collect more
for ``poor performance'' than they pay out for ``high performance''
just another way for PBMs to collect even more money from pharmacies?
Why do PBMs collect more in quality payment adjustment than they
pay pharmacies under Part D?
Answer. Humana's approach to performance-based contracting with
network pharmacies closely aligns with our value-based payment
initiatives for providers, hospitals, and other healthcare providers.
In all of our value-based reimbursement programs, we seek to incent our
partners to improve the quality of care delivered to our members by
more closely aligning reimbursement with clinical interventions that
improve outcomes and moving away from the traditional FFS reimbursement
model. The concept of paying for value and quality, which is at the
core of the performance-based pharmacy network, can be seen in numerous
value-based payment models including those implemented or proposed by
CMS in which the financial incentives are paid after the performance is
observed.
formulary placement/generic tiering
Question. In 2011, 71 percent of generic drugs in Part D were on
the lowest tier designed for generics; by 2019, that number decreased
to only 14 percent of generics. According to an Avalere study, this
practice cost seniors $22 billion in higher out-of-pocket costs since
2015, costs that could have been avoided through the proper formulary
placement of lower-cost generics. This practice, known as ``paying for
position,'' allows brands to block uptake of lower-cost generics and
biosimilars, thereby unnecessarily increasing out-of-pocket costs for
seniors.
Do you ever exclude generic or biosimilar competitors from
formulary placement, or place these lower-cost drugs in higher cost-
sharing tiers that are generally reserved for non-preferred or brand
drugs? Do you ever consider portfolio or bundled rebates with brand
manufacturers?
Answer. The use of portfolio or bundled negotiations with drug
manufacturers does not align with Humana's Pharmacy and Therapeutics
Committee's policy and procedures or the formulary development process.
Our coverage decisions are based on treatment guidelines and the
evidence base. We prioritize low-cost generic drugs, and if multiple
brand name drugs are available to treat the same clinical condition, we
negotiate with competing manufacturers to provide access to drug
coverage that produces the most value to the member, which includes the
lowest out-of-pocket cost over the course of the year and the health
outcomes produced.
Question. When you place generics on your formularies, do you place
that generic favorably to brand products--in other words, on generic-
only tiers?
Answer. The primary drivers of formulary placement are the evidence
base, clinical efficacy, and status as a biosimilar. After these
factors are considered, the P&T Committee considers the affordability
of the drug. A drug's status as a generic or a brand does not always
correlate with the affordability of the drug.
Question. When a generic becomes available, do you place it on your
formularies immediately?
Answer. Each new-to-market medication, including generics, is
reviewed based on the available clinical data for the product, which
includes FDA labeling, compendia listing, peer-reviewed literature,
real-world evidence, comparative effectiveness data, and nationally
recognized treatment guidelines. Evaluation begins with safety and
efficacy and the incremental health outcome value in the context of
existing treatment options, including brand and generic medications.
Generic medications are safe and efficacious, cost-effective
alternatives, and the generic utilization rate among Humana's Medicare
population is greater than 90 percent among products with currently
available FDA AB-rated generic alternatives. This 90 percent generic
dispensing rate is driven by Humana not covering higher cost brand
medications in classes where a generic equivalent medication is on the
market.
It should also be noted that the presence of a single generic does
not always result in an immediate decrease in the price of the generic
or brand drug. Humana's analysis of 2017 Part D prescription drug
spending found that prescription drugs with less competition were more
likely to have list price increases than drugs with five or more
manufacturers.
Question. According to CMS, from 2012 to 2017 PBMs imposed a 45,000
percent increase in the amount of DIR fees pharmacies had to pay PBMs
and PDPs under Part D, and revenues earned from these fees increased
225 percent per year during this period.\6\ I thought PDPs and PBMs
were supposed to pay pharmacies for dispensing drugs to patients. Why
do pharmacies have to pay DIR fees to PBMs at all?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ CMS Proposed Rule: Modernizing Part D and Medicare Advantage to
Lower Drug Prices and Reduce Out-of- Pocket Expenses, 83 Fed. Reg.
62152, 62174 (November 30, 2018).
Answer. Humana's approach to performance-based contracting with
network pharmacies closely aligns with our value-based payment
initiatives for providers, hospitals, and other healthcare providers.
In all of our value-based reimbursement programs, we seek to incent our
partners to improve the quality of care delivered to our members by
more closely aligning reimbursement with clinical interventions that
improve outcomes and moving away from the traditional FFS reimbursement
model. The concept of paying for value and quality, which is at the
core of the
performance-based pharmacy network, can be seen in numerous value-based
payment models including those implemented or proposed by CMS in which
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the financial incentives are paid after the performance is observed.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. John Thune
Question. You've all shared your ability to leverage technology
such as real-time benefit tools to help patients and providers
understand drug costs at the point of prescribing, as well as how
technology can be used to help identify opportunities to provide
enhanced support and medication management for enrollees. What policies
can we consider to incentivize greater uptake of these tools?
Answer. Humana applauds CMS's final rule published on May 23, 2019,
which will require all Part D plan sponsors to have a real-time benefit
tool by 2021. We believe that there are several current barriers that
lessen the effectiveness of these tools. Most importantly, there are
currently no regulations requiring EHR vendors to implement open APIs
that specifically facilitate the integration of real-time benefit
tools. As a result, some EHR vendors have implemented exorbitant
``connection fees'' in order to enable this integration, while others
have refused to partner with plans. On the provider side, there are
often insufficient incentives in place to spur provider adoption. In
launching our Real Time Benefit Tool (RTBT) IntelligentRx, we found
that three functionalities made our tool more attractive for use by
providers: cloud-based solution, integration with a point-of-sale
claims engine, and electronic prior authorization functionality.
In fact, Humana is the first national health-care insurer to
collaborate with Epic to bring together patients, providers, and payers
to power value-based care. Humana and Epic are advancing
interoperability to promote open communication and information
transparency that will give patients and their practitioners integrated
and real-time access to the patients' medical history, health insights,
and treatment options, which, in turn, enables cost reduction, improves
quality, and increases patient satisfaction. To enhance the
prescriber's experience, Humana will integrate its RTBT, IntelligentRx,
directly into Epic's e-prescribing workflow, delivering real-time
pharmacy data throughout its network.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Richard Burr
Question. Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs) offer a variety of
contract designs to health insurance plans, allowing the insurer or
client to choose the best structure for their customers. During the
Finance Committee hearing on April 9, 2019, each witness stated that,
in the contracts structured to allow for the pass through of rebate
dollars at the point of sale, PBMs do not keep any portion of the
rebate. If the PBM does not keep a portion of the rebate, what type of
revenue do PBMs receive from these contracts? What percent of your
contracts are point of sale and what percent utilize a structure
providing a percentage of the rebate back to the PBM?
Answer. Currently Humana does not administer any point-of-sale
rebate plan designs. Rebates received by Humana for Part D drugs are
passed through to the Part D plans. Humana's wholly owned pharmacy
benefit manager does not receive fees from pharmaceutical
manufacturers.
Question. It is our understanding that contracts with
pharmaceutical manufacturers may also take a variety of forms. In
calendar years 2016, 2017 and 2018, what was the total dollar amount
that you obtained from pharmaceutical manufacturers in any form such as
rebates, fees, etc.? What is the total dollar amount that was passed on
to health insurance plans with which you have an agreement or contract?
Answer. For all calendar years, rebates received by Humana for Part
D drugs are reported to CMS annually through Direct and Indirect
Remuneration (DIR) and reflected in Part D bid submissions. Rebates
received by Humana for Part D drugs are passed through to the Part D
plans. Part D plans reinvest the savings accrued from these rebates in
benefit offerings. Humana's wholly owned pharmacy benefit manager does
not receive fees from pharmaceutical manufacturers.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Tim Scott
Question. One challenge that I see, when considering the medical
treatment marketplace, is that we have a new wave of life-saving
treatments--of incredible cures we could never have dreamed of, even 10
or 15 years ago--for which cost, by necessity, is going to be a major
issue. You look, for instance, at a condition like sickle cell disease.
For the average SCD patient who reaches age 45, lifetime treatment
costs are at roughly $1 million--and there are complications that can
make that figure even higher. Now that we see therapies coming down the
pipeline that could erase those long-term costs and drastically improve
the quality of life for sickle cell patients, the question becomes how
can our current payment systems adapt to--and absorb--the high costs
necessary to bring treatments like these to market and to ensure that
we continue to see innovations like these ones moving forward?
Answer. Few interventions are available for sickle cell disease
beyond palliative treatment but many therapies are on the horizon, and
some are already in late-stage trials. Clinically meaningful outcomes
that result in improved quality of life are essential for all new
products being reviewed by the FDA. Manufacturers have historically
focused drug development on safety and clinical efficacy compared to a
placebo for regulatory approval. FDA accelerated approval is often
based on surrogate markers as opposed to outcomes data which are
directly tied to improvements in patient health. This is a very real
issue in the treatment of oncologic diseases where products are
approved with limited phase 2 clinical trial data which are not
designed to assess outcomes for a broad patient population or long-
term. In a review of the 93 cancer drug indications granted accelerated
approval since 1992, only 19 drugs (20 percent) had improvement in
overall survival while 19 drugs (20 percent) simply met the original
surrogate end point used in the accelerated approval. To support better
health outcomes, the FDA approval process should be transformed from
accelerated approval based on surrogate endpoints to a system based on
outcomes and value that improves health. Such a shift in FDA approval
of high cost specialty drugs would facilitate payment and reimbursement
subject to a Coverage with Evidence Development (CED). CED would allow
Medicare Advantage and Part D plans to provide coverage and
reimbursement based on shared risk with drug manufacturers with the
condition that additional data is systemically produced by
manufacturers through prospective registries or additional controlled
trials to assess actual health outcomes that may be produced. Once
sufficient data is reported, permanent coverage and reimbursement based
on longer term health outcomes would be established.
Question. And along the same lines, beyond creating some much-
needed clarity around value-based arrangements--which I've been working
with Senators Cassidy and Warner to accomplish legislatively--are there
steps that Congress could take to facilitate these innovative payment
models?
Answer. Outcomes (or value-based) contracts: Outcomes-based
contracting should be leveraged and reserved for disease states with
limited or no competition and serve as a feedback loop to answer the
uncertainties that exist around first-in-class agents, accelerated
approval drugs, and orphan drugs approved in small populations in order
to inform future formulary and coverage decisions. Three disease states
account for 70 percent of the pharmaceutical industry's drug pipeline--
oncology, infectious diseases, and central nervous system (CNS)
disorders. And the proportion of new therapies approved as orphan drugs
has ballooned. In 2015, 21 orphan drugs were approved, accounting for
47 percent of all new medicines, up from just 29 percent in 2010; in
2016, nine more orphans won approval, 40 percent of the total. These
drugs are typically fast tracked, offered breakthrough status, and
approved on phase 2 trials without the rigorous standards other drug
classes are held to. These are the areas of focus where outcomes-based
contracting would be most helpful.
Manufacturers should take on meaningful risk in outcomes-based
contracting: Our experience is that the vast majority of manufacturers
are only willing to enter into outcomes-based contract arrangements
that align with a product's clinical trial data and FDA approval. As
such, the findings from such agreements add little or nothing to the
existing evidence base and virtually assure a positive outcome for the
manufacturer. In most cases, manufacturers seek outcomes-based
contracts for products in drug classes where robust competition already
exists, indicating that the manufacturer is more interested in gaining
a competitive advantage or preferred formulary access as opposed to
advancing the medical evidence around the safety and efficacy of their
product in a real-world environment. It is our view that outcomes-based
contracting remains the exception--and not the norm--in determining the
ultimate value of prescription drugs. They do not produce the best
arrangement in every situation. In competitive disease areas where
multiple drug manufacturers offer well-established treatments or where
generics are prevalent, such as the markets for oral diabetes drugs,
multiple sclerosis, and hepatitis C, the ordinary effects of
traditional price concession negotiations afforded by robust
competition produce the lowest costs.
Medicaid best price is a barrier to outcomes-based contracting: In
our negotiations with drug manufacturers, they often cite Medicaid Best
Price as the primary reason for refusing to take on more significant
downside risk in outcomes-based contracts. Although we cannot
empirically validate that Best Price is a limiting barrier--only drug
manufacturers can speak to that question--just over 30 percent of our
executed outcomes-based contracts apply solely to our Medicare Part D
plans, which are statutorily excluded from manufacturers' Best Price
calculations. The products associated with these outcomes-based
contracts are predominantly high-cost specialty drugs and include
therapies for auto-immune/inflammatory conditions (rheumatoid
arthritis, psoriasis), cardiovascular disease, diabetes, infectious
disease, and cancer. The remaining 70 percent of our outcomes-based
contracts apply equally to our commercial and Medicare lines of
business. Recently published reports have found that though Medicaid
Best Price is an understandable concern for manufacturers determining
whether to pursue value-based contracts, particularly in the commercial
market, its effect can be mitigated and is not the immutable obstacle
to value-based contracting that some manufacturers' claim. We encourage
CMS to review this research and determine if additional guidance is
necessary to clarify the treatment of outcomes-based agreements
relative to manufacturer calculations of Best Price. CMS may also wish
to consider using its demonstration authority to explore opportunities
to ameliorate manufacturers' concerns regarding the impact of outcomes-
based contracting on Medicaid Best Price calculations. For example, CMS
could develop a limited pilot program to test whether excluding
outcomes-based contracts from Medicaid Best Price results in
manufacturers taking on more significant downside risk, and whether
that in turn creates net savings for the Federal Government and
beneficiaries.
Question. I'm also interested in the role that technology can play
in helping to drive down drug costs--as well as to increase medication
adherence. Some estimates suggest that between 50 and 75 percent of
patients don't take their medications as prescribed, and that one in
five new prescriptions go unfilled. And study after study shows that
cost is a key factor here. As a consequence, we see roughly 125,000
deaths from non-adherence every year, along with more than $100 billion
in excess costs to the health-care system. To what extent can
technology help providers and patients to make more informed and cost-
effective choices about prescriptions--and to then adhere to these
prescriptions?
Answer. Humana was the first Part D plan to provide real-time
access to drug cost and formulary information to physicians and their
patients through our IntelligentRx tool. IntelligentRx enables
physicians and their patients to make joint treatment decisions based
upon efficacy and cost for 3.1 million prescriptions annually. The tool
is currently available to all 10 million Humana members, including
individuals with Medicare, Medicaid, and employer coverage.
Humana applauds CMS's final rule published on May 23, 2019, which
will require all Part D plan sponsors to have a real-time benefit tool
by 2021. We believe that there are several current barriers that lessen
the effectiveness of these tools including the lack of requirements on
electronic medical records vendors and creating incentives for
increased provider participation. In launching IntelligentRx, we found
that three functionalities made our tool more attractive for use by
providers: cloud-based solution, integration with a point-of-sale
claims engine, and electronic prior authorization functionality.
Question. And maybe more to the point, to the extent that these
technological tools are out there, what steps are you and your clients
taking to encourage physicians and patients to use them?
Answer. In 2019, Humana plans to launch integrations with
additional electronic medical record vendors, including Epic, which is
one the largest medical record companies in the country. We believe
this will significantly increase provider access to and utilization of
our real-time benefit tool.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Bill Cassidy
Question. Are there ever cases where a patient in your health plan
or one of the health plans for whom you negotiate as a PBM pays more
for a medicine than the plan spends on a net basis, when you reimburse
the pharmacy for that same medicine? In those cases, what entity
receives the benefit of the difference between the amount the patient
pays and the net amount the plan pays?
Answer. No. Humana members always pay out-of-pocket costs that are
the lowest amount of the benefit defined member cost share, the
negotiated rate, and the pharmacy ``usual and customary'' (U&C) cash
price.
Question. In calendar years 2015, 2016, 2017--what percent of your
revenue was from fees paid by plans, fees paid by manufacturers, other
fees, pharmacy spread or rebates? Same question as to profits. Of all
revenue generated from part D contracts, what percent did you retain?
Answer. For all calendar years, rebates received by Humana for Part
D drugs are passed through to the Part D plans. Humana's wholly owned
pharmacy benefit manager does not receive fees from pharmaceutical
manufacturers.
Question. Should a patient ever pay more out of pocket for a
medicine than what you pay the pharmacy for that medicine?
Answer. No. Humana members always pay out-of-pocket costs that are
the lowest amount of the benefit defined member cost share, the
negotiated rate, and the pharmacy ``usual and customary'' (U&C) cash
price.
Question. PBM revenue from fees has risen, illustrated below.
Further, PBM's retained revenue as a percent of net retail drug spend
has consistently increased. What do you attribute this increase to?
Answer. Humana's wholly owned pharmacy benefit manager does not
receive fees from pharmaceutical manufacturers. Rebates received by
Humana for Part D drugs are passed through to the Part D plans. Part D
plans reinvest the savings accrued from these rebates in benefit
offerings. Additionally, rebates have resulted in significant savings
to the government. As cited in the Medicare Trustees Report, rebates
have played a critical role in keeping the overall cost of Part D lower
than projected when the program was first launched in 2006.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.014
Question. How are bona fide service fees established? What was your
revenue generated in part D by bona fide fees in 2015, 2016, and 2017?
Answer. For all calendar years, Humana's wholly owned PBM has not
had bona fide service fee arrangements with drug manufacturers.
Question. A Health Affairs article suggests plans may prefer paying
PBMs using rebates instead of fees, as ``Using retained rebates to
cover PBM costs in lieu of fees could artificially lower reported
administrative costs and make it easier to meet government medical loss
ratio (MLR) requirements.'' Is it true that paying the PBM a percent of
rebates would keep that revenue from counting towards a plan's MLR?
Answer. Humana is not familiar with this approach. Rebates received
by Humana for Part D drugs are passed through to the Part D plans.
Question. Would you support an industry-wide standard set of
performance metrics by which a PBM would set its pharmacy contracts,
which would be tailored based on regional patient populations, to give
certainty for local pharmacies?
Answer. While Humana appreciates the goal of standardizing
information, we strongly oppose requiring plans and PBMs to implement a
set of universally applicable performance metrics. Mandating a
compulsory set of performance/contracting metrics would homogenize
value-based payment programs for pharmacies and stifle innovation.
Similar to the way in which CMS and other payers are experimenting with
a variety of value-based reimbursement for physicians and hospitals,
plans need the flexibility to test and learn. Furthermore, the
generation of a standard data set in this fashion would be an
infringement upon the contractual relationship between the plan
sponsors and the pharmacies and could potentially limit future
innovation to improve member outcomes.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Steve Daines
Question. In Medicare Part D, beneficiaries' deductible and
coinsurance payments are calculated based on the price negotiated
between the PBM and the pharmacy.
Does this take into account rebates and discounts the PBM
negotiates separately with pharmaceutical manufacturers?
Answer. Currently Humana does not administer any point-of-sale
rebate plan designs.
Question. In calendar years 2016, 2017, and 2018, what share of
brand prescriptions covered by the Part D plans you contract with were
filled in the deductible or required beneficiaries to pay coinsurance?
What was the total amount beneficiaries spent out-of-pocket for those
prescriptions? What would beneficiaries' total out-of-pocket spending
have been under the same cost sharing structure if their payments were
based on the net price to the Part D plan, inclusive of rebates and
other price concessions, rather than the price negotiated between your
PBM and the pharmacy?
Answer. It is important to note that Part D has a very high generic
dispensing rate, and plans do not receive rebates on generics. Generic
drugs account for the vast majority of Part D program utilization and
now approach 90 percent in the Part D Program. In CY 2016, low cost
generic drugs accounted for 87 percent of overall prescription drug
utilization for Humana. Despite accounting for the vast majority of the
utilization, these drugs only contributed to 24 percent of total drug
costs in 2016. To illustrate, we calculated the frequency distribution
of annual cost sharing savings of the POS rebate construct and the
associated percentage of Humana membership that would have received the
annual cost sharing savings if rebates at the POS were required during
the 2016 plan year (see table below).
Seventy-one percent of Humana's membership would receive $0 in cost
sharing reduction, 19 percent would receive $100 or less in annual cost
sharing reductions, and only 10 percent of membership would receive
more than $100 in annual cost sharing savings.
Frequency Distribution of Annual Member Cost Sharing Reductions With POS
Rebates
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annual Sum of Cost
Sharing Savings
Percentage of Membership
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$0
71.3 percent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
<$20
8.3 percent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$21-$40
4.3 percent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$41-$60
3.0 percent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$61-$80
2.0 percent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$81-$100
1.4 percent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$101-$1,000
9.4 percent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>$1,000
0.2 percent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
spread pricing in medicaid
Question. A PBM practice that has come up quite a bit recently is
the practice of spread pricing. Spread pricing occurs when PBMs charge
health plans more for prescription drugs than they actually reimburse
pharmacies, and then pocket the different as profit.
Do you engage in spread pricing practices?
Answer. Humana does not use spread pricing in the Medicare
Advantage, Part D PDP, or Managed Medicaid plans. Humana offers the
opportunity for employers to select spread pricing. Providing employers
a choice in financing preserves the ability for plan sponsors to
effectively manage the performance of pharmacy benefit managers through
performance-based contracts and creates incentives for stronger price
negotiations.
rebate demands
Question. The use of rebates as a negotiating tool has led to
problematic incentives in the prescription drug supply chain. For
example, drug companies have argued that they increase list prices in
response to demands from PBMs for high or increasing rebates.
Does your company currently have, or has your company had since
January 2013, any agreements with drug manufacturers that require
equivalent rebates, even in the case of a drug for which the list price
has been lowered?
Answer. No.
Question. Does your company currently have, or has your company had
since January 2013, any agreements with drug manufacturers that require
advance notice of changes in the list price of drugs, including
reductions or increases in list price?
Answer. No.
revenue sources
Question. Please provide an annual breakdown of the following
components of the revenue you received from drug manufacturers from
January 1, 2013 through December 31, 2018: dollar amount and percent of
revenue from rebates; dollar amount and percent of revenue from
administrative fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from
distribution fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from marketing
fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from clinical case
management fees; and all other sources of revenue from manufacturers
not listed above.
Answer. For all calendar years, rebates received by Humana for Part
D drugs were reported to CMS annually through Direct and Indirect
Remuneration (DIR) and reflected in Part D bid submissions. Humana Part
D plans reinvest the savings accrued from these rebates in benefit
offerings. Humana's wholly owned pharmacy benefit manager did not
receive fees from pharmaceutical manufacturers.
part d negotiation
Question. The PBM market has changed dramatically over the past
several years. Many Part D health plans also operate as PBMs, including
your companies. While Part D has done a great job offering Medicare
beneficiaries drug coverage they did not have access to before, Part D
has not been successful at keeping up with the growing cost of
medicines. PBMs and Part D plans claim they bargain to get lower
prices, but the HHS Inspector General found that almost 4 in 10 brand
name drugs in Part D offered no rebate or discount to Part D plans.
Why have Part D plans been ineffective at bringing down the cost of
almost half of brand-name medicines?
Answer. The current challenges in the Part D market are complex.
The three major issues that are preventing Part D plans from
effectively negotiating with manufacturers on the price of sole-source
brand-name drugs are: the introduction of high cost specialty drugs
which frequently do not have any competition; the anti-competitive
actions taken by manufacturers to delay competition and further prolong
monopolies; and the unintended consequences of well-intended drug
policies have limited the negotiating power of Part D plan sponsors.
We discuss these challenges and potential solutions to address them
in our response to the recent discussion draft on Part D Improvements
developed by the House Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and
Commerce, which is attached. We welcome additional conversations with
the Senate Finance Committee on these policy challenges as well.
Question. At the hearing, witnesses spoke about the ways in which
they seek to get the best price for patients. However, behind this is
the reality that PBMs are driven by their bottom line. Researchers at
Johns Hopkins University found that 72 percent of formularies in Part D
charge lower cost-sharing for a brand name drug compared to the cheaper
generic equivalent. This occurs because the more expensive brand name
drugs are able to give bigger rebates, but we can never know for sure
because rebate information is kept secret.
How can the public have confidence that they're getting the lowest
price and not the price that gives you the biggest rebate to your
business?
Answer. Humana has a history of maintaining low premiums in Part D.
Additionally, over 80 percent of seniors have out of pocket costs of
less than $275 annually. One of the tools used to ensure that
beneficiaries receive the best value from their prescription drug plans
is rebates. Savings that are obtained by Humana through rebate
negotiations with drug manufacturers are distributed to all Part D
beneficiaries through reduced premiums, resulting in lower costs for
seniors in PDP and MAPD plans. Additionally, rebates have resulted in
significant savings to the government. As cited in the Medicare
Trustees Report, rebates have played a critical role in keeping the
overall cost of Part D lower than projected when the program was first
launched in 2006.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. Should the CREATES Act become law, what commitment can
your company making to covering generics as soon as they are approved
and passing those savings on to patients?
Answer. Humana strongly supports the introduction of S. 340, the
Creating and Restoring Equal Access to Equivalent Samples (CREATES)
Act. If this bill were to become law, Humana will continue to advance
the adoption of generics through our formulary development process. We
also believe that the CREATES Act would lead to a more robust market
for generics that could be leveraged to increase the utilization rate
of generic drugs in Part D (currently 85 percent of the drugs provided
to Part D beneficiaries are generic).
Question. What are your concerns with point-of-sale rebates and
what alternatives do you propose to such rebates to improve consumer
savings at the pharmacy counter?
Answer. We anticipate the Part D rebate model will be changed to
one where the rebates that manufacturers are willing to offer will be
applied at point-of-sale. This regulatory action will have mixed
results. All beneficiaries will pay higher premiums: 83 percent will
see higher total costs given the premium increases; 5 percent will see
savings of less than $70 per year; and only 12 percent will see savings
of greater than $70 per year.
The only way to achieve the same costs for the Part D program and
maintain beneficiary premiums is if all brand drug manufacturers elect
to decrease their prices by at least 28 percent, not just the 7 percent
of drugs currently receiving rebates--which would require a 45-percent
reduction.
We have attached our recent letter to the House Energy and Commerce
and Ways and Means Committees, which include policy recommendations for
modernizing the Part D program.
Question. What are the specific steps your company is taking to
move PCSK9 inhibitors off the specialty tier in Medicare Part D and to
fixed copay tiers given that prices went down by 60 percent and are no
longer above the specialty tier threshold?
Why haven't your plans moved it already, given that CMS allows
plans to make positive mid-year formulary changes that improve patient
access and affordability?
Answer. At the time the formulary is developed, Humana formulary
placement is determined based on the evidence base, clinical efficacy,
and status as a biosimilar. After these factors are considered, the P&T
Committee considers the affordability of the drug. In some cases,
manufacturers do not share their intention to offer lower costs
versions of medications when plans and formularies are being designed.
In the case of PCSK9 inhibitors, Humana added the lower priced NDC to
its formularies as soon as it launched in 2019 and starting in 2020
PCSK9 inhibitors will be on a lower tier.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Benjamin L. Cardin
drug rebate rule and higher part d premiums
Question. In January, the Department of Health and Human Services
released a proposal to reform prescription drug rebates paid by
pharmaceutical manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers under
Medicare Part D. The OIG proposal attempts to ban most rebates by
eliminating their regulatory protections and creating two new safe
harbor provisions: one to expressly protect discounts applied directly
at the point of sale (POS) for consumers, and another to protect
certain service fees that manufacturers pay to PBMs for services
furnished to health plans. The only service fees that would be
permissible under the proposal are those that are fixed, and not based
on a percentage of sales and not based on volume or the value of other
business generated between the parties. The proposed rule was designed
to address the Department's concerns with the current rebate system,
which HHS believes rewards high list prices, discourages the use of
generics and biosimilars, and does not reflect patient out-of-pocket
costs. For consumers, this proposal may result in lower costs at the
pharmacy counter, but Part D premiums may increase as a result.
Could you explain which Part D beneficiaries could see savings on
their drug costs at the pharmacy counter and which Part D beneficiaries
could not see lower drug costs?
Answer. The implementation of the rebate rule is most likely to
reduce POS drug costs for non-LIS seniors who take patent-protected
drugs that treat conditions like hepatitis C, diabetes, and various
autoimmune disorders. Humana's analysis applying the POS rebate policy
to its 2018 benefits found that approximately 17 percent of
beneficiaries would see savings at the pharmacy counter, with only 12
percent saving more than $70 annually. The remaining 83 percent of
beneficiaries will see an increase in costs for prescription drug
coverage due to premium increases that will exceed any potential
savings the beneficiary may have experienced at the pharmacy.
perverse incentive to place more expensive drugs on formularies
Question. In a Senate Finance Committee hearing had a few weeks
ago, many pharmaceutical companies argued that the current rebate
structure incentivizes high list prices. These companies argue that the
higher the list price of the drug, the greater the rebates, and
therefore, the more profit the PBM earns. While contracts between PBMs,
Part D Plans, and pharmaceutical companies require PBMs to pass through
100 percent of the negotiated rebate back to insurance plans, I worry
that this structure could incentivize PBMs to favor a more expensive
drug on the formulary because they could get a higher rebate.
Is there an incentive for a PBM to place a higher cost drug on the
Part D formulary because the PBM receives a larger rebate for that more
expensive drug? Why or why not?
Answer. Our goal is to ensure that our beneficiaries are receiving
the lowest possible price. We prioritize low-cost generic drugs, and if
multiple brand name drugs are available to treat the same clinical
condition, we negotiate with competing manufacturers to provide access
to drug coverage that produces the most value to the member, which
includes the lowest out-of-pocket cost over the course of the year and
the health outcomes produced. Humana's current formulary design
includes 10 percent or less of brand medications on the preferred
generic and generic tiers (the lowest tiers on Humana's Part D
formulary), with the majority of those two tiers composed of generic
medications.
six protected classes proposal and access
Question. This past November, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services released a proposed rule for 2020 to help tackle drug pricing.
Among the proposed changes is one, which would alter the current rules,
governing the ``six protected classes.'' The concept of the ``protected
classes'' has been around since the launch of the Medicare Part D
Program, and it was instituted to ensure that some of our most
vulnerable patients would have access to their needed drugs by
requiring formularies to cover nearly all protected drugs. These
classes are anticonvulsants, antidepressants, antipsychotics,
immunosuppressants, antiretrovirals, and antineoplastics.
Some people have argued that these protected classes have led to
higher drug prices because formularies are required to include this
prescription coverage, and there are limited tools left to help lower
prices. In an effort to increase competition, this proposed new rule
would do a couple of different things. The first aspect of the
administration's proposal would allow Part D sponsors to implement
broader use of prior authorization and step therapy for protected class
drugs, including determining use for protected class indications. Any
time there is a mention of plans using prior authorization or step
therapy there is an immediate concern of restricting patient access to
needed drugs or medical services.
Could you explain why your company would favor such utilization
management tools like step therapy or prior authorization?
Answer. Humana fully supports the use of utilization management
tools such as prior authorization and step therapy--including the
expanded use of non-formulary drug status. Plan sponsors utilize their
pharmacy and therapeutic (P&T) committees, which make their own
assessments of clinical appropriateness and therapeutic alternatives
based upon labeling from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
clinical guidelines, peer-reviewed literature, and the medical
compendia, which is a critical component of a well-managed drug plan.
Humana's P&T committee evaluates each member case individually to
ensure members stable on their drug therapies receive evidence-based
quality care. Humana has long supported the use of
evidence-based utilization management for Part B drugs to lower out-of-
pocket costs for its members and stimulate increased price competition
in the Part B drug market. The historic barrier to more efficient
management of Part B drug utilization is that existing Medicare
policies made it impossible for MA plans to leverage market-based tools
to increase competition and lower costs. Without such tools,
pharmaceutical companies had nearly unlimited pricing power, as
evidenced by the ever-increasing costs of Part B drugs. Since 2009,
Medicare Part B drug spending has grown at an average rate of 9 percent
per year. Approximately 50 percent of the growth in Part B drug
spending from 2009 to 2013 was the result of increased prices for
existing products and shifts in the mix of drugs, including the
adoption of new drugs.
Question. Do you believe there is a danger that using step therapy
or prior authorization could possibly restrict patients from having
access to medication that has been successful for them? Why or why not?
Answer. We do not believe there is a danger of restricted access to
drugs due to prior authorization or step therapy. The step therapy
program was developed with clinical efficacy as the primary
requirement. Step therapy policies are reviewed periodically to ensure
that all standards are based on the most up-to-date clinical criteria.
Furthermore, all patients and providers have the ability to request
exceptions and appeals, which can be processed in less than 24 hours if
needed.
Question. If you were to use step therapy or prior authorization
for drugs in the six protected classes, how would you ensure patients
would continue to have access to their needed medications in one of the
six protected classes?
Answer. Humana is disappointed in CMS's decision not to finalize
the protected class proposals this spring. However, if Congress were to
revisit the proposals on protected classes, Humana would use many of
the same measures currently in place today in the Part B Step Therapy
to ensure that beneficiaries have access to the appropriate
medications. This would include the development of clinical policies,
communication efforts to beneficiaries and providers, expedited appeals
processes as necessary, and savings in the form of reduced premiums.
Question. The second aspect of the administration proposed change
to the six protected classes is the proposal to allow drug coverage
formularies to exclude a protected class drug from a Part D formulary
if the drug represents a new formulation of a single-sourced drug,
regardless of whether the older formulation remains on the market. My
understanding is that this administration is trying to target
pharmaceutical companies who participate in the anticompetitive
practice of ``evergreening.'' This is a practice where pharmaceutical
companies make slight alterations to a drug's packaging, color, and
formulation without an added or new benefit. However, we also
understand that seemingly small changes to a drug can still make a big
difference to patient well-being. We have heard from Maryland
physicians that the creation of combination antiretroviral pills was a
huge step forward in the fight against HIV. Even though these
combination pills or extended release versions didn't have a new
chemical formula, they made a world of difference to the HIV patients
taking over a dozen pills a day. These vulnerable patients are
obviously very concerned that they could lose coverage for new and
better drugs, especially when their old drugs may no longer be
available. HIV treatments have come a long way in the last few decades,
and proper antiretroviral treatment is vital to ensuring an end to the
HIV epidemic.
Do you think the proposed rule anticipates a situation where a
pharmaceutical company stops producing an older version of a drug when
a new formulation is available, but the newer formulation is not
covered by a Part D plan? Why or why not?
Answer. Humana is disappointed in CMS's decision not to finalize
the protected class proposals this spring. If Congress were to revisit
the proposals on protected classes, Humana does not believe there would
be access issues for protected class drugs. However, it should be noted
that manufacturers alone make production decisions for the medications
that are brought to the market.
Question. What would your company do to ensure that patients
continue to have access to their medication in this situation?
Answer. Humana would encourage manufacturers to continue to make
novel medications that support beneficiaries but manufacturers alone
make production decisions for the medications they bring to market.
appeals process in general
Question. Prior authorization and step therapy are some of the most
commonly mentioned concerns from patient groups coming to talk to my
office, second only patients' concerns about out-of-pocket costs. What
has become especially striking in the past few weeks is the number of
physicians explaining how they feel stymied by prior authorization
restrictions by insurance plans. We have heard from one surgeon who
argued for weeks with the insure to appeal a decision that had been
made to deny a newer type of less-invasive surgery. Someone who was not
a surgical expert made the denial. Eventually, his patient made the
decision to stop waiting and opted for a far more invasive and
dangerous procedure because it was covered by insurance. Other doctors
talk about the hours they spend on the phone waiting to appeal a
decision, only to be told they need to write an extensive report
justifying their medical decision. While the physicians are waiting for
a response, quite often there are patients suffering without their
proper medications, without certain tests, or not getting the surgery
that the expert recommends.
What is your organization doing to improve the appeals process for
patients and physicians, in order to ensure timely medical care and
access to their prescription drugs?
Answer. Humana strives to ensure that all of our beneficiaries and
their providers have as much information as possible when making
decisions about their care. That is why Humana was the first Part D
plan to provide physicians and their patients with real-time access to
drug cost and formulary information through our IntelligentRx tool.
IntelligentRx enables physicians and their patients to make joint
treatment decisions based upon efficacy and cost for 3.1 million
prescriptions annually. The tool is currently available to all 10
million Humana members, including individuals with Medicare, Medicaid,
and employer coverage. One of the elements of this tool is electronic
prior authorizations or ePA which instantaneously processes prior
authorizations and minimizes the need to file appeals.
Question. What do you think is an appropriate wait limit for
emergency medical appeals, and how do you make sure you meet it?
Answer. Humana complies with current CMS requirements to process
regular and expedited drug appeals within 72 or 24 hours respectively
or as quickly as the beneficiary's condition requires.
Question. Another complaint that I have heard from physician groups
is that many formularies do not cover newer drugs that they consider to
be necessary for hard-to-treat diseases, even if the drugs are very
well-studied.
With technology changing so rapidly, how do your companies ensure
that you keep up with the medical and surgical experts and new
research, so that your authorization decisions are in line with the
most recent medical innovations and physician standards?
Answer. Our coverage decisions are based on treatment guidelines
and the clinical evidence base. Our treatment guidelines are generally
evaluated quarterly and at least annually to ensure appropriate
coverage based on the most recent medical innovations and evidence.
direct and indirect remuneration fees
Question. I have heard from independent pharmacies in Maryland that
have struggled with Pharmacy Benefit Managers and Direct and Indirect
Remuneration (DIR) fees. According to independent pharmacies, there are
times when DIR fees are based on performance, and these fees range from
$2-$7 for certain types of maintenance prescriptions and are often
collected retroactively--weeks or even months after a prescription was
filled. A PBM can take money back from the pharmacy when the pharmacies
haven not met a PBM's performance standard. In these instances, the PBM
claws back money and creates a situation where the pharmacy does not
receive adequate reimbursement to cover its costs. As a result, DIR
fees can be a significant financial loss to pharmacies and an
additional cost burden to patients.
Could you explain what performance measures are considered when
determining a DIR fee?
Answer. The highest performing pharmacies in Humana's quality
performance network, those that are above the 80th percentile of
medication adherence measures, are rewarded at a higher level in order
to recognize their superior performance. For example, in 2017 the
highest performing pharmacies received up to $6 per eligible claim,
pharmacies in the 50th to 80th percentiles received up to $2 per
eligible claim, and those below the 50th percentile were not rewarded.
The medication adherence measures included:

Diabetes (non-insulin agents): biguanides, sulfonylureas,
thiazolidinediones, DPP-IV inhibitors, incretin mimetics, meglitinides,
sodium glucose co-transporter2 (SGLT2) inhibitors (Members filling
insulin products are excluded).

Hypertension/blood pressure (Renin Angiotensin System
Antagonists): Direct Renin Inhibitor, Angiotensin Receptor Blockers
(ARBs), Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors (members filling
Entresto (sacubitril/valsartan) are excluded from the measure).

Hyperlipidemia/high cholesterol: All statins.
Question. How is that performance measure communicated to the
pharmacy?
Answer. Quality performance measures are contractually laid out,
completely transparent and utilize a third party data service platform
called EQuIPP (Electronic Quality Improvement Platform for Plans and
Pharmacies). EQuIPP was created by Pharmacy Quality Solutions (PQS).
PQS is a subsidiary of the Pharmacy Quality Alliance (PQA), which has
developed, tested, and endorsed numerous measures of medication-use
quality. The platform provides a weekly updated list of outlier
patients to pharmacies and a monthly performance score. Outlier
patients are patients who are non-adherent to their medications or have
demonstrated historical non-adherence. Pharmacies can use this
information to help coordinate, inform, and monitor their quality
improvement efforts, allowing them to deliver high-quality care locally
while understanding how their performance compares to other pharmacies
in Humana's quality performance network. Performance results are
updated monthly with the percentage of Humana patients that are
adherent and pharmacy percentile rankings.
Question. How much does your company receive in DIR fees?
Answer. Rebates received by Humana for Part D drugs are reported to
CMS annually through Direct and Indirect Remuneration (DIR) and
reflected in Part D bid submissions. Humana Part D plans reinvest the
savings accrued from these rebates in benefit offerings. Humana's
wholly owned pharmacy benefit manager does not receive fees from
pharmaceutical manufacturers.
Question. How much does your company receive in performance-related
DIR fees?
Answer. Performance-related DIR fees received by Humana for Part D
drugs are reported to CMS annually through Direct and Indirect
Remuneration (DIR) and reflected in Part D bid submissions. Humana Part
D plans reinvest the savings accrued from these fees in benefit
offerings.
Question. Are those fees passed on to the consumer? If so, how?
Answer. Humana Part D plans reinvest the savings accrued from these
fees in benefit offerings.
drug shortages
Question. Currently there are over 270 drugs in shortage. Drug
shortages happen for many reasons such as manufacturing and quality
problems, natural disasters, and inventory practices of wholesalers and
pharmacies. Drug shortages cause harm to providers, hospitals, and most
importantly patients. Pharmacists and providers must spend significant
amounts of time on researching alternative drug treatments for the
patient, which may not always be the most optimal therapies.
As a pharmacy benefit manager, you have contractual agreements with
pharmaceutical companies in order to place their drugs on a plan's
formulary. While I understand that drug shortages happening in both the
inpatient and outpatient settings, there may be a role PBMs can play in
protecting patients.
For the prescription drugs you negotiate to cover on a plan
formulary, could you use your negotiating power to ensure a drug is
available to a patient? Why or why not?
Answer. Humana is focused on providing seniors with access to the
best care possible. As part of that goal, Humana has developed
innovative solutions for ensuring that our members are informed when
making decisions about their prescription drugs to reduce costs and
improve health outcomes. Drug manufacturing is outside of the scope of
the service offering of Humana's pharmacy care services.
Question. What do you do to ensure that patients have the drugs
they need?
Answer. Humana is focused on providing seniors with the best care
possible. As part of that goal, Humana has developed innovative
solutions for ensuring that our members are informed when making
decisions about their prescription drugs to reduce costs and improve
health outcomes. Humana was the first Part D plan to provide real-time
access to drug cost and formulary information to physicians and their
patients through our IntelligentRx tool. IntelligentRx enables
physicians and their patients to make joint treatment decisions based
upon efficacy and cost for 3.1 million prescriptions annually. The tool
is currently available to all 10 million Humana members, including
individuals with Medicare, Medicaid, and employer coverage.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown
biosimilars
Question. During the hearing, each of you expressed support for
biosimilars and most of you indicated you try and take advantage of
available biosimilars to help lower costs. When I asked each of you to
identify solutions to help ensure a robust biosimilar marketplace here
in the U.S., most of you mentioned things Congress or the
administration could do to help ensure uptake of biosimilars--from
lowering the exclusivity period for biologics to finalizing guidance on
interchangability at the FDA. However, none of you offered any
solutions or ideas for what your company could do to help ensure timely
uptake of biosimilars, a robust U.S. biosimilars market, and a
resulting cost savings to patients to taxpayers.
Most of the biosimilars currently approved and on the market in the
U.S. are reimbursed through the medical benefit. What are the
similarities and differences in how rebates are passed onto patients
and providers in the medical benefit versus pharmacy benefit. In your
answer, please describe these similarities and differences across each
of your books of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare, Medicaid).
Answer. Currently Humana does not administer any point-of-sale
rebate plan designs.
Question. Do any of your plans require the use of a higher list
price, branded product over the use of a therapeutically equivalent
lower list price generic or biosimilar product? Why? If a plan
restricts the use of a biosimilar or generic product in lieu of an
innovator or brand name product, do patients pay more out-of-pocket
than they would if the biosimilar was preferred?
Answer. Our position is to negotiate the lowest net cost for any
drug, and there are instances where it is beneficial to members to
exclude generic competitors from formulary placement. Unfortunately,
today there are few biosimilar products on the market and the prices of
those products are similar to the originator brand products. Humana
places such biosmiliars at parity with the originator brand products.
Question. Recognizing most biosimilars are paid for via medical
benefit, please explain whether you use step-therapy to restrict access
to biosimilars for your patients in any medical benefit you manage
across each of your books of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare,
Medicaid). What role do rebates playing in your consideration for
patient access to biosimilars in each of these instances?
Answer. As mentioned previously, our position is to negotiate the
lowest net cost for any drug, and there are instances where it is
beneficial to members to exclude generic competitors from formulary
placement. Unfortunately, today there are few biosimilar products on
the market and the prices of those products are similar to the
originator brand products. Humana places such biosmiliars at parity
with the originator brand products.
Question. How can and will your company help ensure a robust
biosimilars market here in the U.S.?
Answer. Humana strongly supports the introduction of S. 340, the
Creating and Restoring Equal Access to Equivalent Samples (CREATES)
Act. We believe the enactment of this bill will encourage the
development of generic and biosimilar drugs that will infuse additional
competition into the market prevent brand drug manufacturer REMS abuses
that block generic competition, and penalize brand drug manufacturers
for engaging in pay-for-delay agreements.
Question. I have heard concerns that ``rebate walls'' are
responsible for keeping new biosimilars off of formularies, where a
manufacturer offers conditional rebates on a bundle of their products
in order to incentive PBMs to exclude a new biosimilar competitor from
their formularies. Have you ever decided to place a drug on a preferred
tier because of the rebates you receive for other drugs from that
manufacturer? If you do not do this, do you support this practice being
carried out by your competitors?
Answer. Our coverage decisions are based on treatment guidelines
and the evidence base. We prioritize low-cost generic drugs, and if
multiple brand name drugs are available to treat the same clinical
condition, we negotiate with competing manufacturers to provide access
to drug coverage that produces the most value to the member, which
includes the lowest out-of-pocket cost over the course of the year and
the health outcomes produced.
Question. What more can and will you do to counteract efforts to
rebate-block or bundle rebates to block biosimilar formulary placement?
Will you commit to taking these actions as more biosimilars become
available in Part D?
Answer. While an increased number of generic competitors generally
correlates strongly with lower formulary tier placement of a generic or
biosimilar and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has proven that
generic drug prices are reduced with each additional market entry of a
generic competitor, there are numerous examples of generic medications
and biosimilars that do not provide cost savings or equivalent
therapeutic benefits that would warrant placement on a lower tier. As
generic class sizes grow and competition increases, we encourage the
continued flexibility to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of each
medication in the class in order to determine tier placement. This
includes the flexibility to mix brand and generic drugs within the non-
preferred drug tier (the second highest tier). Since the cost of a
brand name drug is not guaranteed to be lower than the generic
alternative, any requirement to name tiers ``brand'' or ``generic''
would not help the member understand which tier has a more affordable
drug. While moving certain high-cost generic and biosimilar drugs to
lower tiers may produce savings for some members through reduced out-
of-pocket cost-sharing, it would result in all members experiencing
higher monthly premiums.
rebates vs. fees
Question. During the hearing, Senator Cassidy asked each of you
about the trend in PBM contracting where a larger share of your
reimbursement and payment is a result of ``fees'' which you are able to
pocket, as opposed to ``rebates'' which must be passed back to the
plan/consumer.
Please define the word ``rebate.'' As part of your definition,
please clarify whether or not you consider administrative fees,
inflation payments, product discounts, prospective rebates, care
management fees, procurement fees or any other type of fee or payment
that isn't a retrospective rebate to be a rebate.
Answer. Payments made from a drug manufacturer to a plan or PBM
after the point of sale that change the cost of covered drugs for plan
sponsors.
Question. Please provide, across your books of business (i.e.,
commercial, Medicare, Medicaid), a list of each of the different types
of rebates, charges, and/or fees that you incorporate into your
contracts.
Answer. Rebates received by Humana for Part D drugs are reported to
CMS annually through Direct and Indirect Remuneration (DIR) and
reflected in Part D bid submissions. Humana's wholly owned pharmacy
benefit manager does not receive fees from pharmaceutical
manufacturers.
Question. Rebates, by definition, must be passed along to the
employer, health plan, or consumer. Please provide, across your books
of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare, Medicaid), details on which of
the rebates/fees detailed in my prior question are passed along to the
consumer and/or plan and which are kept by the PBM.
Answer. Rebates received by Humana for Part D drugs are passed
through to the Part D plans.
fiduciary duty
Question. Each of you have argued that you are the one entity in
the drug supply chain that exists to help lower the cost of
prescription drugs. You claim that your value comes in saving
taxpayers, plans, and consumers money.
Would you be willing to accept a fiduciary standard in your
contracts? In other words, do you believe you have a fiduciary duty to
the plan or employer you contract with--to act in their best interest
and not your own? If not, why not?
Answer. In today's highly competitive market for PBM services,
these types of requirements are unnecessary. Many PBM customers,
including Part D plan sponsors, receive 100 percent of rebates
collected by the PBM under pass-through pricing models. In these cases,
the interests of the PBM and its customer are already aligned. Other
customers, such as commercial insurers and large employer groups, may
receive services under spread pricing models, but they are
sophisticated purchasers operating in a highly competitive PBM market.
These customers often solicit competitive bids from PBMs before
selecting a contracting partner and negotiate ``market check''
provisions into their contracts, allowing the customer to periodically
renegotiate the contract if an independent third party determines that
more favorable aggregate pricing terms are available elsewhere in the
market. The entities that purchase PBM services have considerable
leverage to obtain competitive pricing from PBMs and pass savings
through to consumers. Government regulation in this area is not needed
and would interfere with an already highly competitive market.
paying pharmacists
Question. Following a series of reports in The Columbus Dispatch,
Ohio has taken a number of actions over the past year to crack down on
several PBM practices. Efforts to date have included investigations,
lawsuits, and policy changes to address the egregious use of spread-
pricing, alleged breaches of contract, accusations of anti-competitive
behavior, a misuse of taxpayer dollars, and a general lack of
transparency.
PBMs are responsible for creating pharmacy networks, setting the
price patients and health plans pay for prescription drugs,
adjudicating claims, and reimbursing pharmacies for dispensed drugs. In
addition, nearly all PBMs own proprietary pharmacies that directly
compete with the PBM-created retail network. Do you design plans that
incentivize or require patients to use a pharmacy owned by your
affiliate over a competing retail pharmacy. If yes, do you believe this
represents a conflict of interest? If yes, how do you ensure there is
no resulting anticompetitive misuse of pharmacy and patient data?
Answer. Under CMS's current requirements for Part D, the
beneficiary incentives for use of mail service are limited, which has
resulted in relatively low utilization of mail service as compared to
other programs. If more flexibility on mail service benefit design were
permitted, Medicare beneficiaries would be able to choose a plan that
incentivizes use of mail service pharmacy. Savings from increased
flexibility in plan design and the increased use of mail service
pharmacies in plan networks could significantly reduce Part D costs to
both the Medicare program and beneficiaries while simultaneously
improving clinical quality through improved medication adherence.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Michael F. Bennet
Question. Can you answer the following questions to help us
understand the pharmacy benefit manager business model and how you make
formulary decisions?
What percent of rebates are passed to the consumer under Medicare
Part D?
Answer. Currently, plan sponsors utilize rebates as a tool to
ensure that beneficiaries are obtaining the greatest possible value
from their Medicare coverage. Rebates received by Humana for Part D
drugs are passed through to the Part D plans. Part D plans reinvest the
savings accrued from these rebates in benefit offerings and reduced
premiums for Part D coverage, resulting in lower costs for seniors in
PDP and MAPD plans. Additionally, rebates have resulted in significant
savings to the government. As cited in the Medicare Trustees Report,
rebates have played a critical role in keeping the overall cost of Part
D lower than projected when the program was first launched in 2006.
Question. What percent of rebates are passed to the consumer in the
private insurance market?
Answer. Humana does not administer any point-of-sale rebate plan
designs.
Question. Do you have any comments on how health plans should use
their share of the rebates to lower drug prices for patients with high
deductibles?
Answer. Humana utilizes rebates as a tool to ensure that
beneficiaries are obtaining the greatest possible value from their
Medicare coverage. Rebates that are invoiced and collected from
manufacturers are returned to beneficiaries in the form of reduced
premiums for Part D coverage, resulting in lower costs for seniors in
PDP and MAPD plans.
Question. What is the process of deciding on which tier a generic
will be placed in your formularies?
Answer. Each new-to-market brand and generic medication is reviewed
based on the available clinical data for the product which includes FDA
labeling, compendia listing, peer-reviewed literature, real-world
evidence, comparative effectiveness data, and nationally recognized
treatment guidelines. Evaluation begins with safety, efficacy, and the
incremental health outcome value in the context of existing treatment
options.
Question. Are generics always tiered as preferred (versus branded
drugs)?
Answer. No. Our mission is to negotiate the lowest net cost for any
drug, and there are instances where it is beneficial to members to
exclude generic competitors from formulary placement. As generic class
sizes grow and competition increases, we encourage the continued
flexibility to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of each medication in
the class in order to determine tier placement. This includes the
flexibility to mix brand and generic drugs within the non-preferred
drug tier (second highest tier on the Humana Part D formulary). Since
the cost of a brand name drug is not guaranteed to be lower than the
generic alternative, any requirement to name tiers ``brand'' or
``generic'' would not help the member understand which tier has a more
affordable drug. While moving certain high-cost generic drugs to lower
tiers may produce savings for some members through reduced out-of-
pocket cost-sharing, it would result in all members experiencing higher
monthly premiums.
Question. How quickly are generics placed on formularies once FDA
clears them?
Answer. Each new-to-market brand and generic medication is reviewed
based on the available clinical data for the product which includes FDA
labeling, compendia listing, peer-reviewed literature, real-world
evidence, comparative effectiveness data, and nationally recognized
treatment guidelines. Evaluation begins with safety, efficacy, and the
incremental health outcome value in the context of existing treatment
options.
Question. Given the struggles we hear about patients accessing
insulin, what measures are you taking to ensure that diabetes products
and different types of insulin are placed on a preferred tier when
establishing a formulary?
Answer. Approximately 26 million Americans living with diabetes are
subject to the pharmaceutical industry's price increases, with
significant hikes in the cost of the life-saving drug, insulin. More
specifically:

The price of insulin has tripled in the last decade.

From 2013 to 2016, the average price increase for all insulin
products was 28 percent compared to 12 percent for all brand name drugs
over the same period.
Answer. Humana covers both a short- and long-acting insulin on its
preferred brand drug tier (tier 3 of 5 on the Humana Part D formulary).
This provides a significant contribution to stabilizing premiums and
reducing financial burden to members.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert P. Casey, Jr.
transparency, rebates, and spread pricing
Question. During the hearing, I asked an initial question on spread
pricing and wanted to follow up here. According to the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), total gross spending in 2017 on
prescription drugs was $154.9 billion in Medicare Part D, $30.4 billion
in Part B, and $67.6 billion in Medicaid.
One of the main challenges in lowering the price of prescription
drugs is that there is a disturbing lack of transparency all along the
supply chain, from research and development to what the patient is
expected to pay at the counter. Further, the out-of- pocket costs for
drugs varies greatly and unpredictably from patient to patient. That is
why Senate Special Committee on Aging Chairwoman Collins and I
introduced legislation that would codify the Drug Spending Dashboards
at the CMS. The dashboards provide cost and spending information for
drugs in the Medicaid, Medicare Part B, and Medicare Part D
programs.\7\ With regards to transparency in the prescription drug
supply chain, please provide answers to the following questions:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ S. 709, 116th Congress, Prescription Drug Pricing Dashboard
Act. Online at: https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-
bill/709?q=%7B%22search%22%3A%22drug+dash
board%22%7D&s=1&r=1. Accessed April 23, 2019.
Is it the policy and practice of your company to negotiate with
drug manufacturers in good faith and obtain the best and lowest prices
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
possible for patients and American taxpayers?
Answer. Yes. As mentioned previously, our mission is to negotiate
the lowest net cost for any drug.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company that
patients, providers, researchers, policymakers, and the American people
in general, know how taxpayer dollars are being spent in the Medicare
and Medicaid programs?
Answer. Humana supports transparency in the spending of taxpayer
dollars and supports legislation providing the Medicare Payment
Advisory Commission (Med-PAC) with the authority to collect information
about rebate agreements as long as the disclosure of the information is
protected.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company to disclose
how much a drug costs?
Answer. As stated previously, Humana supports legislation that
would require plan sponsors to provide MedPAC with the authority to
collect information about rebate agreements similar to the data
elements below as long as the disclosure of the information is
protected.
Question. Please provide a list of actions your company has taken
to ensure that pharmacists are enabled and allowed to communicate to
patients how they can pay the lowest out-of- pocket cost possible for
their prescription drugs.
Answer. Humana encourages pharmacies to provide our members with
information on the lowest possible price at which they can obtain their
prescription drugs. Humana does not currently, and has not in the past,
employed gag clauses or any other such limitations. Consistent with
Part D regulatory requirements, Humana members pay the lowest amount of
applicable member cost sharing, the negotiated price, or the pharmacy
``usual and customary'' (U&C) cash price. Humana has developed several
innovative solutions for ensuring that our members are informed when
making decisions about their prescription drugs.

IntelligentRx: Humana was the first Part D plan to provide
physicians and their patients real-time access to drug cost and
formulary information through our IntelligentRx tool. IntelligentRx
enables physicians and their patients to make joint treatment decisions
based upon efficacy and cost for 3.1 million prescriptions annually.
The tool is currently available to all 10 million Humana members,
including individuals with Medicare, Medicaid, and employer coverage.

Maximize Your Benefits (MYB) Program: Humana continuously
analyzes our members' prescription drug claims to identify
opportunities for them to save money by switching to a lower-cost drug
or by utilizing other savings programs, such as foundation-based cost-
sharing assistance. Based upon that analysis, we proactively reach out
to our members and provide instructions on how to maximize their
savings opportunities. We estimate that the program saved our members
almost $200 million in 2018.

Clinical Pharmacy Programs: Humana ensures that seniors are
taking the right combination of drugs necessary to improve their health
through our clinical programs--medication therapy management (MTM) and
medication reconciliation during transitions of care from facility to
home. Through these programs, we help seniors by eliminating
duplicative drugs, identifying lower-cost options, supporting
medication adherence, and identifying possible adverse drug
interactions. As a result of these initiatives, beneficiaries have
increased medication adherence by as much as 13 percent and have
experienced reduced emergency room visits, urgent care visits, and
hospital admissions.
Attachment: Humana Comments to House Ways and Means and Energy and
Commerce Bipartisan Draft on Part D Improvements
June 6, 2019
The Honorable Richard Neal
The Honorable Frank Pallone, Jr.
U.S. House of Representatives
U.S. House of Representatives
2309 Rayburn House Office Building
2107 Rayburn House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515
Washington, DC 20515
The Honorable Kevin Brady
The Honorable Greg Walden
U.S. House of Representatives
U.S. House of Representatives
1011 Longworth House Office
Building
2185 Rayburn House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515
Washington, DC 20515
Dear Chairman Neal, Chairman Pallone, Ranking Member Brady, and Ranking
Member Walden:
We are pleased to respond to your discussion draft of legislation to
reform and improve the Medicare Part D program. We look forward to
continuing to work with you on public policy solutions to lower drug
costs for Medicare Part D beneficiaries.
Humana is an integrated health and wellness company focused on
providing value to seniors by operating a holistic, health outcomes-
driven model that is beneficiary-centric, focuses on chronic care and
includes locally-integrated health capabilities. Humana currently
provides Medicare prescription drug coverage to more than 8.4 million
seniors across all 50 States, with approximately 4 million Medicare
Advantage (MA) members and 4.4 million Medicare Prescription Drug Plan
(PDP) members. We also provide medical coverage for approximately 1.5
million commercial customers, more than 340,000 Medicaid beneficiaries,
and 5.9 million TRICARE enrollees in the eastern United States. Humana
is unique in that our pharmacy and medical teams are tightly integrated
and focused solely on serving our own members--not those of other
payers. As a result, the savings achieved by our pharmacy programs,
such as through manufacturer rebates and discounts, accrue directly to
our members in the form of lower premiums and improved benefits.
Humana's integrated approach to serving seniors delivers a personalized
and simplified experience through a value-based health ecosystem that
improves clinical outcomes. This ecosystem includes 233 owned, jointly-
owned, or allied primary care facilities; an ownership interest in the
Nation's largest home health and hospice providers;\8\ as well as
initiatives to address social determinants of health.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Forty percent stake in Kindred at Home and CURO Health
Services.
We value this opportunity to provide our views on the Part D Program
and the high cost of prescription drugs for a subset of the Medicare
population. Your leadership in this area is appreciated, and we stand
ready to work with you as a partner on our shared goal of using smart,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
effective policy changes to lower prescription drug costs.
Our comments on the discussion draft center around three themes:

Part D is highly successful and complex: Since its inception,
the prescription drug program has played a pivotal role in supporting
America's seniors. Currently over 80 percent of seniors have out-of-
pocket costs of less than $275 annually, and 85 percent of seniors
state that they are satisfied with their prescription drug plan.\9\,
\10\ However, the program and its funding structures are extremely
complex. As changes are made, there is risk for unintended consequences
that could undermine the success of the benefit, especially when it
comes to the potential for increased premiums. As such, it is important
to consider the complexities of the Part D program and the unique
funding mechanisms that have been established for different populations
in each phase of the benefit.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ ``10 Essential Facts About Medicare Prescription Drug
Spending:'' https://www.kff.org/infographic/10-essential-facts-about-
medicare-and-prescription-drug-spending/.
\10\ 2017 CMS Stars Report Card Master Table. Notes: ``Rating of
Drug Plan.''

Manufacturers should have accountability for beneficiary costs
and government reinsurance: At a high level, it is imperative to
recognize that drug manufacturers alone set list prices for
prescription drugs. Any policies that are implemented to address
beneficiary and government costs should address the actions of and
incentives for drug manufacturers. This proposal does not attempt to
moderate the price setting practices of manufacturers nor does it
address the current policies that have created these challenges in the
market. The committees should modify manufacturers' pricing incentives
by increasing their liability in the catastrophic phase of the benefit
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
and by establishing a maximum-out-of-pocket (MOOP) cap.

Discussion draft will have a minimal impact on committee goals:
The committees state that the draft legislation will ``improve the
Medicare Part D prescription drug program for beneficiaries and
taxpayers alike.''\11\ An analysis of the proposed policy indicates
that it will result in $84 billion in additional government spending
while only generating savings for 2.2 percent of Part D beneficiaries
through the drug spending cap.\12\, \13\ Furthermore,
beneficiaries will essentially be paying for government reinsurance
savings in the catastrophic phase of the benefit through a premium
increase of $5.9 billion.\14\ While the proposal shifts incentives and
protects some seniors, we believe that there are alternative policies
that should be explored that will allow for greater savings to the Part
D program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Committee Leaders Announce Call for Comments on Bipartisan
Medicare Part D Pricing Legislation. House Committee on Energy and
Commerce. May 23, 2019. Available here: https://
energycommerce.house.gov/newsroom/press-releases/committee-leaders-
announce-call-for-comments-on-bipartisan-medicare-part-d.
\12\ Oliver Wyman. ``Part D Catastrophic Coverage--Financial
Implications of Restructuring Liability.'' May 2019. Available here:
https://www.ahip.org/wp-content/uploads/Restructuring-the-CMS-Federal-
Reinsurance-Program.pdf.
\13\ MedPAC. ``March 2019 Report to the Congress: The Medicare
Prescription Drug Program Status Report.'' March 2019. Available here:
http://medpac.gov/docs/default-source/reports/
mar19_medpac_ch14_sec.pdf?sfvrsn=0.
\14\ Oliver Wyman. ``Part D Catastrophic Coverage--Financial
Implications of Restructuring Liability.'' May 2019. Available here:
https://www.ahip.org/wp-content/uploads/Restructuring-the-CMS-Federal-
Reinsurance-Program.pdf.
Less than 15 years ago, Americans did not have access to an outpatient
prescription drug benefit under Medicare. As the committees have noted,
today more than 46 million seniors have access to life-improving
medicines through Part D. At the inception of the Medicare Part D
program, Congress designed a competitive marketplace where PDP sponsors
competed with one another, primarily based on premiums. Seniors
enrolled in prescription drug coverage have gained significant value
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
from the program's focus on market competition including:

Stable premiums through the 13 years of the program, averaging
approximately $30 per month negotiating rebates to lower costs for all
seniors;\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ ``10 Essential Facts About Medicare Prescription Drug
Spending:'' https://www.kff.org/infographic/10-essential-facts-about-
medicare-and-prescription-drug-spending/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Generic dispensing rates near 90 percent;\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

An average of more than 26 Part D plan sponsor options;\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

A 50-percent reduction in medication non-adherence due to
affordability;\18\ and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Diebold, Jeffrey. ``The Effects of Medicare Part D on Health
Outcomes of Newly Covered Medicare Beneficiaries.'' The Journals of
Gerontology: Series B, Volume 73, Issue 5, July 2018, pages 890-900:
https://academic.oup.com/psychsocgerontology/article/73/5/890/2631953.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Beneficiary satisfaction rates near 90 percent.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ 2017 CMS Stars Report Card Master Table. Notes: ``Rating of
Drug Plan.''
Despite the benefits realized by Part D beneficiaries, there are still
seniors who struggle with the increasing cost of prescription drugs.
This is especially true for the one million beneficiaries who are not
eligible for the low-income subsidy (LIS) and reach the catastrophic
phase of the benefit each year. These individuals generally spend an
additional $3,041 annually in out-of-pocket costs for their
prescription drug needs while in the catastrophic phase.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Kaiser Family Foundation. ``No Limit Medicare Part D Enrollees
Exposed to High Out-of-Pocket Drug Costs Without a Hard Cap on
Spending:'' https://www.kff.org/report-section/no-limit-medicare-part-
d-enrollees-exposed-to-high-out-of-pocket-drug-costs-without-a-hard-
cap-on-spending-issue-brief/; Kaiser Family Foundation. ``10 Essential
Facts About Medicare and Prescription Drug Spending.'' January 29,
2019: https://www.kff.org/infographic/10-essential-facts-about-
medicare-and-prescription-drug-spending/; Kaiser Family Foundation.
``Medicare Part D in 2016 and Trends Over Time.'' September 16, 2016:
https://www.kff.org/report-section/medicare-part-d-in-2016-and-trends-
over-time-section-4-the-low-income-subsidy-program/. Part D enrollment
figures reflect 2016 enrollment.
As the committees contemplate changes to the Part D benefit, we
respectfully request an examination of all policy tradeoffs to achieve
the goal of reducing drug costs for beneficiaries and taxpayers. It is
again imperative to recognize that drug manufacturers alone set list
prices. Without robust policy changes that increase competition and
provide plans with additional tools and negotiating leverage, as well
as the development of new funding mechanisms to address the
unsustainable costs of sole source specialty drugs, well-intended
components of the discussion draft, aimed at reducing drug costs for
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
beneficiaries and taxpayers, will fall short.
Specifically, while we support the committees' intention to protect
beneficiaries from unaffordable out-of-pocket costs by establishing a
MOOP in Part D, it is vital that this addition is thoughtfully
designed. We strongly urge the committees to use earlier well-intended
consumer-centric policy changes, such as the protected classes and The
Orphan Drug Act, as a frame of reference for potential unintended
consequences that could impact the market Both of these policies have
limited competition, produced exorbitantly high drug list prices, and
resulted in a refusal by manufacturers to entertain negotiated price
concessions. Likewise, if manufacturers are not held responsible for
the costs associated with establishing a Part D MOOP and restructuring
reinsurance, manufacturer pricing strategies related to specialty drugs
will continue their upward trajectory.
Humana's Efforts to Support Beneficiaries With Prescription Drug Costs
Humana is focused on providing seniors with the best care possible. As
part of that goal, Humana has developed innovative solutions for
ensuring that our members are informed when making decisions about
their prescription drugs to reduce costs and improve health outcomes
including:

IntelligentRx: Humana was the first Part D plan to provide real-
time access to drug cost and formulary information to physicians and
their patients through our IntelligentRx tool. IntelligentRx enables
physicians and their patients to make joint treatment decisions based
upon efficacy and cost for 3.1 million prescriptions annually. The tool
is currently available to all 10 million Humana members, including
individuals with Medicare, Medicaid, and employer coverage.

Maximize Your Benefits (MYB) Program: Humana continuously
analyzes our members' prescription drug claims to identify
opportunities for them to save money by switching to a lower-cost drug
or by pointing them to other savings programs such as foundation-based
cost-sharing assistance. Based upon that analysis, we proactively reach
out to our members and provide instructions on how to maximize their
savings opportunities. We estimate that the program saved our members
almost $200 million in 2018.

Clinical Pharmacy Programs: Humana also ensures that seniors are
taking the right combination of drugs necessary to improve their health
through our clinical programs--medication therapy management (MTM) and
medication reconciliation during transitions of care from facility to
home. Through these programs, we help seniors by eliminating
duplicative drugs, identifying lower-cost options, supporting
medication adherence, and identifying possible adverse drug
interactions. As a result of these initiatives, beneficiaries have
increased medication adherence by as much as 13 percent and have
experienced reduced emergency room visits, urgent care visits, and
hospital admissions.
In the sections below we provide our assessment of current policy
challenges facing Part D, our viewpoints on the specific policy
questions and issues on which the committees are seeking feedback, and
our recommendations on additional legislative actions the committees
should contemplate as part of any proposal to modernize Part D. We look
forward to hearing your feedback and to answering any questions you
might have.
Sincerely,
Douglas Stoss
Vice President, Federal Affairs
Humana, Inc.
______
I. The Policy Challenges in Part D and the Prescription Drug Market
Policy Challenge #1: Impact of High Cost Specialty Drugs in Part D
The Kaiser Family Foundation analyzed the expected annual cost to
beneficiaries related to select specialty drugs for cancer, hepatitis
C, multiple sclerosis, and rheumatoid arthritis. Results of the
analysis show that out-of-pocket costs to beneficiaries taking these
medications could be as high as $16,551 a year.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Kaiser Family Foundation. ``10 Essential Facts About Medicare
and Prescription Drug Spending.'' January 29, 2019. Available here:
https://www.kff.org/infographic/10-essential-facts-about-medicare-and-
prescription-drug-spending/.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.015
Humana's experience reflects the overall Part D program challenges
highlighted in the Kaiser Family Foundation analysis. In 2016, 46
percent of drugs on Humana's specialty tier triggered catastrophic
coverage on the first fill. In 2018, two percent of Humana
beneficiaries who utilized specialty drugs comprised 36 percent of
total Part D spending. In 2 years, Humana projects that seniors
utilizing specialty drugs could account for as much as 50 percent of
total Part D spending. Additionally, research has demonstrated that the
price of oral specialty drugs has increased by 20.6 percent between
2008 and 2016 with 71.1 percent of that increase attributable to drugs
that are new to the market.\23\ This trend of increasingly high launch
prices has further exacerbated the challenges associated with specialty
drugs in the Part D program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Ibid.
\23\ Hernandez I. et. al. ``The Contribution of New Product Entry
Versus Existing Product Inflation in the Rising Cost of Prescription
Drugs.'' Health Affairs. 2019 38:1 available from: https://
www.healthaffairs.org/doi/abs/10.1377/hlthaff.2018.05147.
Additionally, seniors who reach the catastrophic phase are commonly
taking high cost specialty drugs with little to no competition. The
most recent Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC) Report to the
Congress from March 2019 echoed the challenges for the population of
seniors with high drug costs:\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ ``March 2019 Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment
Policy:'' http://medpac.gov/docs/default-source/reports/
mar19_medpac_ch14_sec.pdf?sfvrsn=0.
Ten times the number of seniors reached the catastrophic phase
on first fill in 2016: The number of seniors who reached the
catastrophic phase through a single claim increased from 33,000
in 2010 to 360,000 in 2016. Non-LIS beneficiaries were more
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
likely to have this experience than LIS beneficiaries.
Spending on specialty drugs accounted for four times as much of
total spend in 2017 compared to 2007: Specialty-tier drugs
accounted for 25 percent of Part D overall gross spending in
2017, an increase from 6 percent in 2007.
Some observers have suggested that Part D plan sponsors need to have
more ``skin in the game'' through changes such as point-of-sale
rebates. Even if point-of-sale rebates were instituted in Part D, there
would still be a high degree of reinsurance spend because of the ever-
increasing launch prices of specialty drugs.
Policy Challenge #2: Anti-competitive Behavior by Drug Manufacturers
As numerous congressional hearings have highlighted, a major factor
contributing to the increase in drug spending is the list price of
prescription drugs. Drug manufacturers alone set the list price of
prescription drugs. Drug manufacturers have also historically engaged
in a host of tactics meant to delay generic competition, including
preventing generic manufacturers from obtaining drug samples, utilizing
the Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) process to block
timely entry of generics, utilizing loopholes in the patent system to
delay and thwart the market entry of lower cost competitors, and paying
generic manufacturers to delay market entry. According to the Federal
Trade Commission (FTC), these anti-
competitive ``pay-for-delay'' actions alone increase costs for seniors
and American taxpayers by $3.5 billion annually.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ See https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/reports/
pay-delay-how-drug-company-pay-offs-cost-consumers-billions-federal-
trade-commission-staff-study/100112payfor
delayrpt.pdf.
There are numerous additional examples where a brand drug manufacturer
has delayed competition to preserve its monopoly, resulting in
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
astronomically high drug prices:

Humira, the highest-selling drug in the world, has received six
different orphan drug designations since 2005. Its price increased by
200 percent from 2012 to 2018, to $38,000 per patient.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\
FDA, https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/opdlisting/oopd/
listResult.cfm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The REMS for Thalomid, an earlier iteration of Celgene's top-
selling cancer drug Revlimid, has been patented over 14 times in order
to delay the development of generics. The price for Revlimid rose from
$6,195 in 2006 to $16,691 in 2017.\27\ The Medicare program spent an
average of $88,437 per beneficiary for a year of Revlimid treatment in
2017.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Alison Kodjak, ``How a Drugmaker Gamed the System to Keep
Generic Competition Away,'' NPR, May 17, 2018.
\28\ CMS 2017 Part D Drug Spending Dashboard, available here:
https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-
Trends-and-Reports/Information-on-Prescription-Drugs/
MedicarePartD.html.
These actions by brand drug manufacturers weaken the ability of plan
sponsors to negotiate lower costs for prescription drugs. Plan sponsors
have been most successful negotiating lower drug costs on behalf of
beneficiaries when there is sufficient competition in the market. In
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the past 2 years:

Federal spending on retail prescription drugs has remained flat:
For the second consecutive year, retail prescription drug growth has
decreased; the 0.4-percent growth has been driven by a continued shift
to lower-cost generic drugs and declines in generic drug prices.\29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ CMS Office of the Actuary Releases 2017 National Health
Expenditures, available online at: https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-
releases/cms-office-actuary-releases-2017-national-health-expenditures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cost of drugs with limited competition has increased at double
the rate of all drugs: Conversely, there have been significant price
increases for drugs subject to limited or no competition. In 2016, the
cost of single-source drugs with no generic alternatives increased at
more than double the rate of average annual drug spending.\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ Blue Health Intelligence. ``Rising costs for patented drugs
drive growth of pharmaceutical spending in the U.S.'' May 2017.
Available here: https://www.bcbs.com/the-health-of-america/reports/
rising-costs-patented-drugs-drive-growth-pharmaceutical-spending-us.
The trend of increasing list prices for prescription drugs with limited
competition is seen for prescription drugs administered in both
clinical settings, where drugs are typically covered by Medicare Part B
and generally considered specialty drugs, and those dispensed at the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
pharmacy counter, where drugs are typically covered by Medicare Part D.

90 percent of the Medicare B drugs with the highest expenditures
have no generic: A 2017 study performed by the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) found that Medicare Part B drugs with the
highest expenditures are predominantly single-sourced (84 percent)
without a generic option (90 percent).\31\ This has resulted in a
market where eight of the top ten high cost Part B drugs have an annual
cost of $10,000 to $30,000.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ GAO, ``Medicare Represented at Least Half of the Market for 22
of the 84 Most Expensive Drugs in 2015,'' GAO-18-83: Published: Dec.
18, 2017, available online at: https://www.gao.gov/assets/690/
689082.pdf.
\32\ MedPAC, ``Medicare and the Healthcare Delivery System,''
available online at: http://www.medpac.gov/docs/default-source/reports/
jun17_reporttocongress_sec.pdf?sfvrsn=0.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

List prices increase beyond inflation for Part D drugs produced
by fewer than five manufacturers: An analysis of 2017 Part D
prescription drug spending found that prescription drugs with less
competition were more likely to have list price increases than drugs
with five or more manufacturers.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Based on Humana analysis of the CMS 2017 Part D Drug Spending
Dashboard and Data, available online at: https://www.cms.gov/Research-
Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Information-
on-Prescription-Drugs/MedicarePartD.html. The CMS dashboard includes
all Part D organizations and plan types. Part D PDE records were
summarized by drug by linking National Drug Codes (NDCs) available in
the PDE data to a commercially available database and aggregated across
all strengths, dosage forms, and routes of administration to the drug
brand name and generic name. CMS did not provide NDCs in the public use
file. Over-the-counter drugs in the PDE data are excluded as well as
NDCs with fewer than 50 claims in the current (2017) or previous year
(2016). In addition, NDCs with large variations in reported units from
year to year were reviewed by CMS on a case-by-case basis and data
anomalies were excluded. Drug spending metrics for Part D drugs are
based on the gross drug cost, which includes ingredient cost,
dispensing fees, sales tax, and applicable vaccine administration fees.
Part D drug spending represents total spending for the prescription
claim, including amounts paid by the Medicare Part D plan and
beneficiary payments. The Part D spending metrics do not reflect any
manufacturers' rebates. For purposes of this analysis, we removed Part
D covered supplies, such as syringes and alcohol swipes for diabetics,
and weighted average change in spending per dosage unit by 2017 claim
volume. Average 2017 inflation rate is sourced from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics website.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Year Over Year Growth in Prescription Drug Costs Decreases With
Competition in Part D
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.016
Policy Challenge #3: Unintended Consequences of Well-Intended Drug
Policy Decisions That Have Affected Part D
Price competition for drugs in the Part D market has been inhibited by
the unintended consequences of well-intended policy decisions. Policies
crafted to maintain access have caused near-market failure for the
population of drugs with little to no competition--ultimately providing
manufacturers with a licensed monopoly to impose astronomically high
prices on the American taxpayer. In these cases manufacturers have no
incentive to lower prices, and plan sponsors, who have a mandate to
cover the drugs, no longer have the tools to manage the cost of drugs.
This is especially true when compared to the commercial market, where
there is far more flexibility in formulary development. Some of the
policies that contributed to this market reality include:\34\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ Ibid.

FDA Accelerated Drug Approval: Due to the increasing costs of
specialty drugs, clinically meaningful outcomes that result in actual
savings to the health care system are essential for all new products
being reviewed by the FDA. Manufacturers have historically focused drug
development on safety and clinical efficacy compared to a placebo for
regulatory approval. FDA accelerated approval is often based on
surrogate markers as opposed to outcomes data which are directly tied
to improvements in patient health. This is a very real issue in the
treatment of oncologic diseases where products are approved with
limited phase 2 clinical trial data which are not designed to assess
outcomes for a broad patient population or long-term. In a review of
the 93 cancer drug indications granted accelerated approval since 1992,
only 19 drugs (20 percent) had improvement in overall survival while 19
drugs (20 percent) simply met the original surrogate end point used in
the accelerated approval.\35\ To support better health outcomes, the
FDA approval process should be transformed from accelerated approval
based on surrogate endpoints to a system based on outcomes and value
that improves health. Such a shift in FDA approval of high cost
specialty drugs would facilitate payment and reimbursement subject to a
Coverage with Evidence Development (CED). CED would allow Medicare
Advantage and Part D plans to provide coverage and reimbursement based
on shared risk drug manufacturers with the condition that additional
data is systemically produced by manufacturers through prospective
registries or additional controlled trials to assess actual health
outcomes that may be produced. Once sufficient data is reported,
permanent coverage and reimbursement based on longer term health
outcomes would be established.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ JAMA Intern Med. Published online May 28, 2019. doi:10.1001/
jamainternmed.2019.0462.

Orphan Drugs: In order to incentivize manufacturers to invest in
treatments for orphan drugs, longer exclusivity periods are provided as
a result of the Orphan Drug Act of 1983. However, this policy has been
abused by manufacturers who will obtain multiple orphan drug
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
designations for the same drug in order to delay competition.

Requirement of Two Drugs per Class: The Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) currently requires Part D plan sponsor
formularies to cover at least two drugs in every Part D covered
therapeutic category and class as long as there are at least two drugs
available. When two drugs are mandated to be covered in a class,
manufacturers of a drug with only one other competitor typically refuse
to negotiate rebates or discounts in Medicare Part D because they know
their products must be covered. The existing policy increases costs to
the plan sponsor, which are passed through not only to individuals in
the form of higher premiums, but also to the Federal Government in
terms of increased direct subsidy payments.

Protected Classes: CMS requires that there must be multiple
treatment options in the protected classes. When negotiating with
manufacturers for drugs in the protected classes, there are few tools
that health plans can employ to lower prices. The drugs in the
protected classes include treatments for conditions such as cancer and
HIV, which are typically treated by high cost specialty drugs like
Revlimid.

Pharmacy Network Access Standards: CMS's current network
adequacy standards focus on ensuring that beneficiaries have broad
access to a wide range of pharmacies within two to fifteen miles of a
beneficiary's residence. However, given the consolidation in the retail
pharmacy market, the shift to consumers preferring online shopping and
delivery, and the shift to the use of mail order pharmacies for
convenience, these standards are now over inflating the size of the
network due to the need to contract with most major retailers and
community pharmacies to meet CMS's defined network access standards.
The artificial inflation in pharmacy network size also comes with
inflated costs that impact the cost of the program for both
beneficiaries and taxpayers.
II. The Committees' Draft Legislative Changes to Improve
Part D
Proposal #1: Establishing a Part D Maximum Out-of-Pocket (MOOP)
The discussion draft contemplates a new maximum out-of-pocket (MOOP) on
prescription drugs costs for Medicare beneficiaries in Part D based on
the current catastrophic threshold. This policy is aimed at addressing
the high costs created for the 8 percent of seniors who reach the
catastrophic phase each year, mainly due to the use of high cost
specialty drugs. Of those seniors who reach the catastrophic level,
only 2.2 percent are non-LIS beneficiaries who do not currently have a
MOOP in the Part D benefit.\36\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ MedPAC. ``March 2019 Report to the Congress: The Medicare
Prescription Drug Program Status Report.'' March 2019. Available here:
http://medpac.gov/docs/default-source/reports/
mar19_medpac_ch14_sec.pdf?sfvrsn=0.
The implementation of a MOOP is most likely to help non-LIS seniors who
take patent-protected drugs that treat hepatitis C, diabetes, cancer,
and various autoimmune disorders. Oliver Wyman modeled the cost
implications of the implementation of a MOOP with $0 cost sharing for
beneficiaries once they hit the catastrophic phase. The analysis
estimates that adding a MOOP to the Part D benefit would result in a
$59.3-billion decrease in OOP cost sharing over 10 years for the 2.2
percent of non-LIS beneficiaries who reach the catastrophic phase of
the benefit.\37\ Offsetting these savings, all beneficiaries would see
a premium increase of $20 billion over 10 years resulting in a net
$39.3 billion in savings for beneficiaries. Meanwhile, government
spending would increase significantly with an additional $84.7 billion
in spending over a 10-year period. The MOOP, while beneficial to 2.2
percent of all Part D beneficiaries, will result in government spending
over $2 for every $1 in beneficiary savings.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ Oliver Wyman. ``Part D Catastrophic Coverage--Financial
Implications of Restructuring Liability.'' May 2019. Available here:
https://www.ahip.org/wp-content/uploads/Restructuring-the-CMS-Federal-
Reinsurance-Program.pdf.
Table 1. Estimated Costs Associated With Part D MOOP \38\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Change
(in
Liability
Billions)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Premium
$20.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ Ibid.
Cost Sharing
$(59.3)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Beneficiary Costs
$(39.3)
========================================================================
Direct Subsidy
$63.8
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reinsurance
$34.3
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Low-Income Premium Subsidy
$(22.7)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Low-Income Cost Sharing Subsidy
$9.3
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Government Cost
$84.7
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Furthermore, according to CMS and HHS OIG guidance drug ``manufacturers
may sponsor patient assistance programs (PAPs) that provide financial
assistance or drug free product (through in-kind product donations) . .
. to augment any existing prescription drug coverage.'' In other words,
with some restrictions, PAPs can assist Part D enrollees.\39\ While
these dollars do not contribute to the technical CMS Part D true-out-
of-pocket cost (TrOOP) calculation for plan payment purposes and
determining the member's Part D phase progression (i.e., deductible
phase vs initial coverage limit, etc.) they do shield the beneficiary
from literally paying out of their own pocket.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ CMS, ``Pharmaceutical Manufacturer Patient Assistance Program
Information,'' available online at: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/
Prescription-Drug-Coverage/PrescriptionDrugCovGen
In/PAPData.html; and HHS OIG Advisory Opinion No. 06-03, available
online at: https://oig.hhs.gov/fraud/docs/advisoryopinions/2006/
AdvOpn06-03F.pdf.
Available data indicates that manufacturers spend considerable amounts
on PAPs. According to the Congressional Research Service, the Abbvie
Patient Assistance Foundation received $1 billion in 2015; the Johnson
& Johnson Patient Assistance Foundation received $662 million; and the
Bristol Myers Squibb Patient Assistance Foundation received $620
million.\40\ One independent analysis of tax records indicates that
manufacturers spend approximately $7 billion per annum on PAPs.\41\
Manufacturers must be substantively responsible for financing a Part D
MOOP or they will realize a windfall profit by transferring their PAP
spending liabilities onto the Medicare Trust Fund, plans, and America's
seniors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\40\ Congressional Research Service, ``Prescription Drug Discount
Coupons and Patient Assistance Programs (PAPs) R44264,'' available
online at: https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44264.
\41\ Frerick, Austin. ``The Cloak of Social Responsibility:
Pharmaceutical Corporate Charity.'' Tax Notes 153.9 (2016): 1151.
As the committees consider how to fund the MOOP for beneficiaries who
exceed the catastrophic threshold, it is critical that any proposal is
paired with prescription drug pricing reforms that meaningfully reduce
prescription drug costs by improving competition in the pharmaceutical
market. Without these types of reforms, it is likely the current trend
in inflationary pricing will be exacerbated as there will continue to
be fewer incentives for manufacturers to lower prices when beneficiary
OOP costs are capped for high costs drugs that progress beneficiaries
to the catastrophic phase of the benefit. Stated another way, the costs
of implementing a Part D MOOP should be borne by the pharmaceutical
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
industry.
As the committees have stated and we mention previously, the goal of
the draft improvements to Part D is to decrease costs for beneficiaries
and the Medicare Trust Fund. The MOOP proposal adds additional pressure
to the Medicare Trust Fund through $84.7 billion in increased
expenditures to reduce out-of-pocket costs for 2.2 percent of
beneficiaries.\42\ The proposal does not address the true policy
challenges in Part D--the role of specialty drugs, anti-competitive
practices by manufacturers, and the impacts of past policy decisions.
Once again, drug manufacturers alone set the list price of prescription
drugs; nothing in the discussion draft compels drug manufacturers to
lower the list price of drugs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ Ibid.
Recommended legislative actions to lower list prices and address anti-
competitive behavior
The examples of anti-competitive pricing and the importance of
competition require innovative policy approaches to enhance competition
in the market, especially for specialty drugs. Humana strongly supports
the introduction of HR. 965, the Creating and Restoring Equal Access to
Equivalent Samples (CREATES) Act, as well as HR. 2375, the Preserve
Access to Affordable Generics and Biosimilars Act. We believe the
enactment of these bills will encourage the development of generic and
biosimilar drugs that will infuse additional competition into the
market, prevent brand drug manufacturer REMS abuses that block generic
competition, and penalize brand drug manufacturers for engaging in pay-
for-delay agreements.
Furthermore, Humana strongly urges the committees to encourage CMS and
other Federal agencies to remove barriers to prescription drug
competition and regulations that are abused in anticompetitive ways and
are harmful to affordable drug access for beneficiaries. We
specifically have recommended that the administration take the
following actions to address abuses of regulations and anticompetitive
behaviors:

Leverage CMS data to illustrate the cost impacts of
anticompetitive behaviors such as patent ``evergreening''--CMS is best-
positioned to leverage its claims from Parts A, B, and D to empirically
illustrate the Medicare Trust Fund and beneficiary impacts associated
with these and other anticompetitive behaviors.

Issue information regarding manufacturers' drug pipelines and
anticipated drug prices prior to market launch--It is critical for Part
D and MA plan sponsors and the CMS Office of the Actuary (OACT) to be
aware of anticipated new drugs, new drug indications, and their
potential launch prices. These data are necessary to make critical
decisions about MA and Part D bidding parameters, to make special
updates to the MA and Part D risk adjustment models, and for OACT to
perform its long-term program cost estimation duties for the Medicare
Trustees. With the right information, this decision-making will have a
significant impact on our ability to provide lower drug costs and
premiums for beneficiaries. While we understand there are proprietary
data provisions and general uncertainty around approvals of new
therapies, we believe that, between clinicaltrials.gov and PubMed,
there is a notable opportunity to produce a transparent summary
dashboard of the drug pipeline in one place. We ask that HHS ensure
that the FDA works toward this goal and provides CMS and plan sponsors
with this necessary information.
Proposal #2: Changes to Part D Plan Reinsurance Liability
The discussion draft contemplates a structure for Part D plans to
better manage costs by reducing the government's share of catastrophic
coverage from 80 percent to 20 percent over four years which has also
been recommended by MedPAC and the President's FY 2019 and 2020
budgets. These proposals have typically been accompanied by a
recommendation to provide Part D plan sponsors with additional
negotiating tools to lower costs. We note that the discussion draft
does not include such proposals.
We also note a growing misunderstanding that, somehow, Part D plan
sponsors are not negotiating with manufacturers to the fullest extent
possible because the plans only have 15-percent liability in the
catastrophic phase. We want to point out that even 15-percent plan
liability in the catastrophic phase is significant. Under the current
Part D structure, Humana does not negotiate any less vigorously for the
lowest net drug cost because certain drugs may propel a beneficiary
into the catastrophic phase of the benefit. Price concessions are
negotiated with manufacturers 6 to 12 months in advance of a given plan
year and enrollment and drug utilization is uncertain at the time of
these negotiations. Nonetheless, plans are competitively motivated to
have the lowest premium and we strive for the greatest price
concessions that can be achieved to reach that goal regardless of the
phase of the benefit in which drug utilization occurs.
Given our earlier comments and the significant role that manufacturers
play in creating this issue in the first place, manufacturers must bear
a significant percentage of the cost if Congress pursues policy changes
in Part D reinsurance. In particular, if a MOOP is also implemented in
the Part D benefit, such a policy is likely to be inflationary for
pharmaceutical prices as there is essentially no incentive to lower
prices without significant manufacturer liability.
Humana believes this reinsurance policy change would fail to address
high cost specialty drugs, the primary Part B and D trend drivers, and
would create a significant destabilization of the program, increase
beneficiary premiums, and exacerbate incentives to avoid enrollment of
high-cost beneficiaries without new tools and levers to manage
utilization. Without any meaningful changes to the current Part D
program rules to increase plan flexibility, Oliver Wyman estimates this
proposal in isolation would increase Part D program costs for the
government by $6.90 billion over 10 years.\43\ According to the
analysis, the increase in spending will primarily be driven by plan
sponsors factoring in additional risk margin due to the larger share of
liability in the catastrophic phase of the benefit and smaller health
plans purchasing private reinsurance to protect from a larger share of
new risk. In this scenario, the analysis projects that beneficiary
costs would also increase by approximately $5.9 billion over the same
period--essentially further cannibalizing any savings incurred by the
Part D program.\44\ In this scenario, beneficiaries are essentially
paying for government savings in the catastrophic phase of the benefit
through a premium increase of $5.9 billion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\43\ Oliver Wyman. ``Part D Catastrophic Coverage--Financial
Implications of Restructuring Liability.'' May 2019. Available here:
https://www.ahip.org/wp-content/uploads/Restructuring-the-CMS-Federal-
Reinsurance-Program.pdf.
\44\ Ibid.
Table 2. Estimated Costs Associated With Part D Reinsurance Reallocation
\45\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Change
(in
Liability
Billions)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Premium
$5.90
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\45\Ibid.
Cost Sharing
$0.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Beneficiary Costs
$5.90
========================================================================
Direct Subsidy
$733.70
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reinsurance
$(724.20)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Low-Income Premium Subsidy
$(2.60)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Low-Income Cost Sharing Subsidy
$0.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Government Cost
$6.90
------------------------------------------------------------------------
While the 4-year phase-in of increased plan liability in the
catastrophic phase of the benefit should soften beneficiary premium
increases and program disruption, increasing plan reinsurance liability
without adding additional tools to manage the benefit will not reduce
program costs. The proposed mechanism to offset these increased Part D
program costs is increased plan incentive to manage high cost drugs to
remain competitive. It is important to note that while the funding
mechanism varies through the benefit phases, the benefit itself and the
coverage requirements do not. For example, the formulary and
utilization management policies are not altered when a beneficiary
enters the catastrophic phase. By changing the reinsurance liability,
plan sponsors will not gain any additional flexibility to better manage
the use of high cost drugs. Many high cost drugs are sole source and
required to be covered due to CMS protected class status, must be
covered due to Part D formulary outlier rules, and have limited
utilization management opportunities. In addition, the LIS population
comprises a significant proportion of high cost drug utilization where
cost sharing is statutorily limited and cannot be meaningfully used to
manage utilization.
As the committees have stated previously, the goal of the proposed
improvements to Part D is to decrease costs for beneficiaries and the
Medicare Trust Fund. The proposed changes to plan reinsurance liability
achieve neither of these goals in a substantive way as proposed_they
only fuse more risk into the market and shift current government
liabilities to seniors.
Policy Recommendations for Additional Plan Flexibility
Any changes to the allocation of reinsurance should be accompanied by
additional tools to support the management of high cost drugs, lessen
barriers to outcomes based contracting, and allow for additional
formulary flexibility. We recommend the following policy actions:
Providing Seniors With More Options

Allow Plan Sponsors to Offer More Than Three PDPs: Proprietary
market research performed on behalf of Humana indicates that
beneficiaries are interested in greater variation in the products
offered in Part D. The research found that beneficiaries believe the
optimal number of choices in Part D would include five different PDPs
spanning across health status complexity and customer service
variation. An increasing number of seniors have indicated that they are
interested in a more convenient and service oriented PDP. Conversely,
there was still a significant portion of beneficiaries who were driven
by lowest possible cost. These findings were reinforced by market
actions in 2019 when 28 percent of PDP enrollees in regions with new
products were enrolled in a new PDP offered as a result of elimination
of the meaningful difference requirement for enhanced alternative (EA)
PDPs.\46\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\46\ Humana analysis of CMS State County Contract Enrollment File
from January 2019, available here: https://www.cms.gov/Research-
Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/
MCRAdvPartDEnrolData/Monthly-PDP-Enrollment-by-State-County-
Contract.html.

High Cost Specialty Drugs: As discussed previously, two percent
of our beneficiaries who utilized specialty drugs comprised 36 percent
of total Part D spending in 2018. In two years, Humana projects that
seniors utilizing specialty drugs could account for as much as 50
percent of total Part D spending. We welcome the opportunity to explore
potential solutions for alternative pooling or funding mechanisms for
this growing category of products.
Lessening Barriers to Outcome-Based Contracting

Outcome (or Value-Based) Contracts: Outcome-based contracting
should be leveraged and reserved for disease states with limited or no
competion and serve as a feedback loop to answer the uncertainies that
exist around first-in-class agents, accelerated approval drugs, and
orphan drugs approved in small populations in order to inform future
formulary and coverage decisions. Three disease states account for 70
percent of the pharmaceutical industry's drug pipeline--oncology,
infectious diseases, and central nervous system (CNS) disorders.\47\
And the proportion of new therapies approved as orphan drugs has
ballooned. In 2015, 21 orphan drugs were approved, accounting for 47
percent of all new medicines, up from just 29 percent in 2010; in 2016,
nine more orphans won approval, 40 percent of the total.\48\ These
drugs are typically fast tracked, offered breakthrough status, and
approved on phase 2 trials without the rigorous standards other drug
classes are held to. These are the areas of focus where outcome-based
contracting would be most helpful. Lastly, as more and more drugs with
$500k-$1M price tags reach the market, there is a need to ensure that
the prices of such drugs are commensurate with their benefits. While
the reward may be curing a genetic disease or cancer, and failures may
be limited (i.e., less than 5 percent), it is critical that payers
gather data and identify which specific populations fail to benefit
from a given therapy and that manufacturers cover costs where therapies
fail to deliver the intended health outcomes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\47\ See https://www.clinicalleader.com/doc/top-three-therapy-
overall-pharmaceutical-industry-pipeline-gbi-research-0001.
\48\ See https://khn.org/news/drugmakers-manipulate-orphan-drug-
rules-to-create-prized-monopolies/.

Manufacturers Should Take on Meaningful Risk in Outcome-Based
Contracting: Our experience is that the vast majority of manufacturers
are only willing to enter into outcome-based contract arrangements that
align with a product's clinical trial data and FDA approval. As such,
the findings from such agreements add little or nothing to the existing
evidence base and virtually assure a positive outcome for the
manufacturer. In most cases, manufacturers seek outcome-based contracts
for products in drug classes where robust competition already exists,
indicating that the manufacturer is more interested in gaining a
competitive advantage or preferred formulary access as opposed to
advancing the medical evidence around the safety and efficacy of their
product in a real-world environment. It is our view that outcome-based
contracting remains the exception--and not the norm--in determining the
ultimate value of prescription drugs. They do not produce the best
arrangement in every situation. In competitive disease areas where
multiple drug manufacturers offer well-established treatments or where
generics are prevalent, such as the markets for oral diabetes drugs,
multiple sclerosis, and hepatitis C, the ordinary effects of
traditional price concession negotiations afforded by robust
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
competition produce the lowest costs.

Medicaid Best Price Is a Barrier to Outcome-Based Contracting:
In our negotiations with drug manufacturers, they often cite Medicaid
Best Price as the primary reason for refusing to take on more
significant downside risk in outcome-based contracts. Although we
cannot empirically validate that Best Price is a limiting barrier--only
drug manufacturers can speak to that question--just over 30 percent of
our executed outcomes-based contracts apply solely to our Medicare Part
D plans, which are statutorily excluded from manufacturers' Best Price
calculations. The products associated with these outcomes-based
contracts are predominantly high-cost specialty drugs and include
therapies for auto-immune/inflammatory conditions (rheumatoid
arthritis, psoriasis), cardiovascular disease, diabetes, infectious
disease, and cancer. The remaining 70 percent of our outcome-based
contracts apply equally to our commercial and Medicare lines of
business. Recently published reports have found that though Medicaid
Best Price is an understandable concern for manufacturers determining
whether to pursue value-based contracts, particularly in the commercial
market, its effect can be mitigated and is not the immutable obstacle
to value-based contracting that some manufacturers' claim.\49\ We
encourage CMS to review this research and determine if additional
guidance is necessary to clarify the treatment of outcome-based
agreements relative to manufacturer calculations of Best Price. CMS may
also wish to consider using its demonstration authority to explore
opportunities to ameliorate manufacturers' concerns regarding the
impact of outcome-based contracting on Medicaid Best Price
calculations. For example, CMS could develop a limited pilot program to
test whether excluding outcome-based contracts from Medicaid Best Price
results in manufacturers taking on more significant downside risk, and
whether that in turn creates net savings for the Federal Government and
beneficiaries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\49\ Sachs, Bagley, and Lakdawalla, ``Innovative Contracting for
Pharmaceuticals and Medicaid's Best-Price Rule,'' Journal of Health
Politics, Policy, and Law (2018) 43 (1): 5-18, https://doi.org/10.1215/
03616878-4249796; Duke Margolis Center for Health Policy, ``Overcoming
the Legal and Regulatory Hurdles to Value-Based Payment Arrangements
for Medical Products,'' White Paper (December 2017), https://
healthpolicy.duke.edu/sites/default/files/atoms/files/
overcoming_legal_and_regulatory_hurdles_to_value-
based_payment_arrangements_for_medical_
products.pdf?_sm_au_=iHV1FMvjM0SN08HN.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Providing Additional Formulary Flexibility

Modernize Protected Classes: Humana has long supported these
policy changes and has identified opportunities to create competition
in the market and lower drug costs for beneficiaries. Internal analysis
estimates that the lack of competition due to the protected class
policy collectively increased beneficiary premiums by an estimated
$2.79 per-beneficiary per-month (PBPM, $34 per-beneficiary-per-year) in
2018. Additional flexibility with respect to formulary development will
enable sponsors to effectively drive competition in the market and
lower drug costs for their beneficiaries.

Eliminate the Requirement That Part D Plan Sponsors Cover at
Least Two Drugs in Each Therapeutic Category or Class: CMS's current
policy to cover at least two drugs in every Part D covered therapeutic
category and class as long as there are at least two drugs available
limits the ability of plan sponsors to negotiate with manufacturers.
Since two drugs are mandated to be covered in a class, manufacturers of
a drug with only one other competitor typically refuse to negotiate
rebates or discounts in Medicare Part D because they know their
products must be covered. This policy ultimately increases costs across
the system.
III. Committees' Request for Additional Information
Question #1 and #2: Elimination of the Coverage Gap and Associated
Liability in the Catastrophic Phase
The discussion draft solicits comments on fundamentally changing the
structure of the Part D benefit by changing or eliminating the
distinction between the initial coverage phase and the coverage gap
discount program while reallocating the share of costs attributed to
the government, Part D plans, and manufacturers in the catastrophic
phase.
As discussed previously, two percent of our beneficiaries who utilized
specialty drugs comprised 36 percent of total Part D spending in 2018.
In two years, Humana projects that seniors utilizing specialty drugs
could account for as much as 50 percent of total Part D spending. In
2018, only 6.9 percent of Humana's total membership reached the
catastrophic phase of the benefit (2.5 percent of non-Low-Income
Subsidy members and 18.4 percent of Low-Income Subsidy members). We
welcome the opportunity to explore potential solutions for alternative
pooling or funding mechanisms for this subset of Part D beneficiaries.
We recommend that the committees employ the following guiding
principles:

Establish a MOOP through policy changes to curb anti-competitive
actions: Protect beneficiaries from excessive out-of-pocket costs
associated with specialty drug costs through a Part D MOOP that is
funded from policy changes that curb and eliminate anti-competitive
drug manufacturer pricing practices.

Maintain affordable premiums: Ensure that changes to improve
Part D, mitigate any premium increases, and hold manufacturers
accountable by discouraging manufacturer price increases and high
specialty drug launch prices.
Additionally, it is important to consider the complexities of the Part
D program and the unique funding mechanisms that have been established
for different populations in each phase of the benefit. As changes are
made--as with all policy decisions--there is risk for unintended
consequences that could undermine the success of the benefit for the
majority of seniors who participate in the program. Once again, we
would welcome the opportunity to have detailed discussions with the
committees.
Question #3: Rewards and Incentives for Low-Income Part D Beneficiaries
for Out-of-Pocket Costs Below the Catastrophic
Level and All Beneficiaries Above a Part D Maximum
Out-of-Pocket
The Part D program provides ``extra help'' to dual-eligible and other
low-income beneficiaries to make prescription medications more
affordable. While the subsidy makes prescription drugs accessible and
affordable to a vulnerable population, it has created some
disincentives that result in excessive or inefficient utilization of
brand name drugs, increasing costs for the Medicare program and
beneficiaries who aren't eligible for the low income subsidies. The
generous subsidies negate conventional benefit design mechanisms
employed by plan sponsors to improve the quality and affordability of
care. For example, cost sharing for low income beneficiaries is
subsidized based on whether a drug is a brand or generic (in 2020, for
a full-benefit dual eligible below 100 percent of the FPL, generic
drugs cost $1.30 and brand drugs cost $3.90). While these low member
cost shares help patients afford prescription medications, they do
little to encourage utilization of lower cost choices. One option for
increasing the use of lower cost alternatives is to allow rewards and
incentives in Part D for LIS beneficiaries. In some cases, rewards or
incentives may be able to reduce financial burdens while also
increasing the health and wellness of beneficiaries. Any reward or
incentive system must be based on the desired behavior change to be
economically feasible. However, generic dispensing rates for LIS
members are still above 85 percent. The rewards and incentives would
not result in savings if they were applied to the total population that
is already taking a generic. In addition, any rewards and incentives
tests would need to closely monitor any initial conversions that
subsequently converted back to the higher cost drug. In some cases,
this may be warranted, but in general, sponsors should reward based on
long term behavior change that results in an increase in medication
adherence. Since the LIS program within Part D is unique, and since
rewards and incentives are not currently allowed in Part D, there is
not a set of baseline data to predict the success of any reward or
incentive programs. As such, sponsors could be given the flexibility to
test alternate strategies and designs to determine what best drives
sustainable, long-term behavior change. Examples of potential reward
and incentive programs include:

Gift cards at the point of sale: Gift cards would likely provide
the greatest incentive for LIS beneficiaries to switch to lower-cost
alternatives. This could either be done at the point of sale (in
conjunction with the pharmacy), or administered by plan sponsors by
sending the reward to the member soon after claims adjudication.
Although this option would likely provide an immediate impact,
precautions would need to be taken to assure the system did not drive
excess utilization, or could otherwise be manipulated or abused. An OIG
waiver would likely be needed to avoid potential violation of
inducement regulations.

Provide other health-related rewards: While not as motivating as
gift card equivalents, health related rewards still provide meaningful
incentives for LIS beneficiaries to utilize lower cost alternatives. In
addition, the focus on health items limits exposure to potential abuse.
It also allows the flexibility to provide near immediate feedback and
maximize the impact to behavior change.

Create a point system/rewards program: In addition to
encouraging lower cost alternatives, such a program could also strongly
promote other healthy behavior changes such as healthy foods, exercise,
etc. Many of these programs are already operational relative to MAPD
and commercial business, which may speed up any implementation. The
risk of abuse is also low for this model and the focus on longer term
goals may mitigate issues related to a one-time action. While a rewards
program encourages appropriate behavior change, the delay between the
action and the reward may limit the effectiveness of the program
relative to other alternatives.
______
Prepared Statement of Hon. Chuck Grassley,
a U.S. Senator From Iowa
Good morning. This hearing will come to order. Today, the committee
continues its look at why prescription drug costs are so high and what
can be done to bring them down.
I'd like to welcome our witnesses, who are top executives from
major pharmacy benefit managers, or PBMs.
Medicare prescription drug plans hire PBMs to manage Part D
benefits. In Medicaid, State and managed care organizations also employ
PBMs. We know that drug companies set the list price, and our February
hearing with CEOs of major manufacturers focused on those high prices.
We now turn our attention to PBMs.
PBMs negotiate with the drug companies, as well as pharmacies, to
arrive at a price for a drug and its ultimate cost. This system of
private entities negotiating is what I envisioned as an author of the
Part D program. I still believe this is absolutely the right approach.
I oppose any effort to undue the ``non-interference clause'' currently
in statute. However, it's our duty to understand how the system is
working today and what we can do to improve it.
In addition to negotiating prices, PBMs also determine what drugs
are covered and what patients pay out of pocket. Despite this vast
influence over what often amounts to life and death, many consumers
have very little insight into the workings of PBMs. PBMs report rebates
and other price concessions to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS), but the statute severely restricts what can be done
with that information. More transparency is needed.
The current system is so opaque that it's easy to see why there are
many questions about PBMs' motives and practices. One question we must
ask is whether PBMs prefer a high-cost drug with big rebates over a
cheaper drug. Some even argue that PBMs force drug companies to raise
their list price.
Senator Wyden and I are investigating pricing and rebating
practices related to insulin. This will help us more broadly determine
whether PBMs and manufacturers today are focused on patients or their
own bottom line. Mergers and vertical integration is another area that
has increasingly prompted concern. All of the PBMs here today are owned
by or affiliated with an insurance plan. In many cases, the combined
company also owns pharmacies and other players in the health industry.
It's important we look to see whether such integration actually
helps patients and consumers, or whether it just opens the door for
anti-competitive behavior. Last year I sent the Federal Trade
Commission a letter on this very issue and asked them to keep me
apprised of their work. I am putting my letter and the response into
the record.
I realize I've raised many issues. I look forward to hearing the
witnesses providing insight and helping us find solutions.
Ranking Member Wyden and I are committed to working on a bipartisan
basis to bring drug costs down. Our next step is to work with committee
members to develop policies to help Medicare and Medicaid patients and
protect the taxpayers.
______
United States Senate
committee on the judiciary
washington, dc 20510-6275
August 17, 2018
The Honorable Joseph Simons
Chairman
Federal Trade Commission
600 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20580
Dear Chairman Simons:
I write with regard to the Federal Trade Commission's recent
inquiry into intermediaries in the pharmaceutical supply chain,
including pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) and group purchasing
organizations (GPOs). As you know, the pharmaceutical supply chain is
currently witnessing significant consolidation and vertical
integration, by way of the proposed mergers of Cigna Corp. with Express
Scripts Holding Co. and CVS Health Corp. with Aetna Inc. The resulting
entities would have considerable market share in the provision and
management of prescription drug benefits.
According to a new report from the Kaiser Family Foundation, the
two combined entities, along with UnitedHealth and Humana, would cover
71% of all Medicare Part D enrollees and 86% of stand-alone drug plan
enrollees.\1\ Moreover, these transactions would result in substantial
vertical integration within the pharmaceutical supply chain, with the
three largest PBMs all vertically integrated with insurance companies.
Vertical integration, like the proposed transactions, can often result
in increased efficiencies and consumer benefits, and should be
evaluated accordingly.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Juliette Cubanski, Anthony Damico, and Tricia Neuman,
``Medicare Part D in 2018: The Latest on Enrollment, Premiums, and Cost
Sharing'' (May 17, 2018), available at https://www.kff.org/medicare/
issue-brief/medicare-part-d-in-2018-the-latest-on-enrollment-premiums-
and-cost-sharing/.
Such integration, however, can also lead to higher barriers to
entry for competition in each standalone market, leading to further
consolidation. These risks have been highlighted by key administration
stakeholders. According to President Trump's Council of Economic
Advisers, ``[p]olicies to decrease concentration in the PBM market and
other segments of the supply chain (i.e., wholesalers and pharmacies)
can increase competition and further reduce the price of drugs paid by
consumers.''\2\ Further, Food and Drug Administration Commissioner
Scott Gottlieb recently warned that ``consolidation and market
concentration make the rebating and contracting schemes [of PBMs] all
that more pernicious. And the very complexity and opacity of these
schemes help to conceal their corrosion on our system--and their impact
on patients.''\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The Council of Economic Advisers, ``Reforming Biopharmaceutical
Pricing at Home and Abroad'' (February 2018), available at https://
www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/CEA-Rx-White-Paper-
Final2.pdf.
\3\ FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb, M.D., ``Capturing the Benefits
of Competition for Patients'' (March 7, 2018), available at https://
www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Speeches/ucm599833.
htm (emphasis added).
Accordingly, it is critical for Congress to understand the FTC's
perspective on these issues, including the potential impact of
concentration on the marketplace, and more broadly, whether the
presence of PBMs and other intermediaries in the pharmaceutical supply
chain tends to reduce, control, or increase the cost of health care in
the United States. In the past, the FTC has asserted that allowing
competition among PBMs will yield more benefits than contract terms
mandated by government.\4\ Further, a 2005 FTC study of PBMs that own
mail-order pharmacies found that such ownership arrangements
``generally did not disadvantage plan sponsors'' and that ``competition
in this industry can afford plan sponsors with sufficient tools to
safeguard their interests.''\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ FTC Staff Comment to the Honorable James L. Seward Concerning
New York Senate Bill 58 on Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs) (March 31,
2009), available at https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
advocacy_documents/ftc-staff-comment-honorable-james-l.seward-
conceming-new-york-senate-bill-58-pharmacy-benefit-managers-pbms/
v090006newyorkpbm.pdf.
\5\ FTC, ``Pharmacy Benefit Managers: Ownership of Mail-Order
Pharmacies'' ii (August 2005), available at http://www.ftc.gov/reports/
pharmbenefit05/050906pharmbenefitrpt.pdf.
The pharmaceutical industry, however, has experienced significant
changes and consolidation in the intervening years. In light of these
changes, and of the Commission's recent roundtable discussion on these
complex issues, I respectfully request written answers to the following
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
questions by no later than September 17, 2018.
1.
At its November 2017 roundtable entitled ``Understanding
Competition in Prescription Drug Markets: Entry and Supply Chain
Dynamics,'' the FTC invited comment on the following question:
a.
What role do intermediaries, such as pharmacy benefit
managers (PBMs) and group purchasing organizations (GPOs) play in
prescription drug pricing, consumer access, and quality? What are the
benefits and costs of intermediaries in the pharmaceutical supply
chain? Has consolidation affected price, access, or quality?
What specific conclusions has the FTC drawn from the comments
and dialogue it received in response to the above question?
2.
At its November 2017 roundtable, the FTC invited comment on
the following question:
a.
How do companies assess the benefits, costs, and risks of
contracting with intermediaries? How well do consumers understand
intermediaries' roles? Is more information necessary?
What specific conclusions has the FTC drawn from the comments
and dialogue it received in response to the above question?
3.
What specific actions does the FTC intend to take as a result
of its November 2017 roundtable? Please provide a detailed description
of any relevant forthcoming actions--including policy proposals,
additional research or roundtable discussions, consumer education
efforts, or enforcement actions--that Congress should be aware of at
this time.
4.
Based on recent market consolidation and integration efforts,
does the FTC believe there is sufficient competition in the various
markets of the pharmaceutical supply chain?
5.
What specific legal or regulatory obstacles, if any, is the
FTC currently facing in its efforts to ensure a competitive and
transparent marketplace in the pharmaceutical supply chain, including
but not limited to the PBM marketplace?
6.
What specific legislative actions, if any, should Congress be
considering at this time to increase transparency in the pharmaceutical
supply chain and to best ensure that cost savings or efficiencies are
actually passed onto consumers?
Thank you for your attention to this matter, and I look forward to
your response. If you have any questions, please contact Ryan Dattilo
or Kyle McCollum of my Judiciary Committee staff at 202-224-5225.
Sincerely,
Charles E. Grassley
Chairman
Committee on the Judiciary
______
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, DC 20580
September 27, 2018
The Honorable Charles E. Grassley
Chairman
Committee on the Judiciary
U.S. Senate
Washington, DC 20510
Dear Chairman Grassley:
Thank you for your letter regarding the Federal Trade Commission's
recent inquiry into intermediaries in the pharmaceutical supply chain,
including pharmacy benefit managers (``PBMs'') and group purchasing
organizations (``GPOs''). As you have recognized, a number of changes
are occurring in this sector. I appreciate your concerns about the
potential impact on competition and consumers. Although I cannot
comment on any particular acquisition or company, I assure you that the
Commission continues to examine competition in pharmaceutical markets,
and this will remain a high priority under my leadership.
As you mentioned, the Commission hosted a workshop in November
2017, ``Understanding Competition in Prescription Drug Markets: Entry
and Supply Chain Dynamics.'' The purpose of that workshop was to
identify continuing obstacles to generic competition in prescription
drug markets. Thirty years ago, Congress passed the Hatch-Waxman Act to
expedite generic entry. In 2010, Congress enacted the Biologics Price
Competition and Innovation Act (``BPCIA'') to expedite biosimilar drug
approval. The Hatch-Waxman Act has largely succeeded in lowering
patent-related entry barriers for small-molecule generic drugs, and
biosimilars are slowly proceeding through the BPCIA pathway. Still,
concerns about rising drug prices have led the FTC and others to
question whether other obstacles, beyond patents, are suppressing
generic and biosimilar entry.
With this question in mind, participants at the November 2017
workshop examined considerations that may limit entry into generic drug
markets after relevant patents have expired. The program included a
keynote address by FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb, as well as panel
discussion featuring a number of academics, researchers, and industry
stakeholders. In addition, the FTC received and reviewed more than 600
public comments. Panelists and commenters identified issues related to
niche patient populations, complex manufacturing processes,
consolidation, drug shortages, and Risk Evaluation and Mitigation
Strategies (``REMS'') restrictions. They also evaluated how contractual
relationships between intermediaries, manufacturers, and health plan
sponsors can affect the prices that consumers pay for prescription
drugs. Participants discussed the unique market structures through
which drugs get to consumers, which include manufacturers, wholesalers,
retailers, pharmacy benefit managers, group purchasing organizations,
and health plans.
These panel discussions, and review of the related comments,
offered the FTC a better understanding of modem competitive dynamics,
which in turn has informed the agency's enforcement, policy, and
advocacy efforts. For example, the FTC relied on this learning when
developing our response to the Department of Health and Human Services'
(``HHS'') call for public comments on the Blueprint to Lower Drug
Prices and Reduce Out-of-Pocket Costs.\1\ Among other things, the FTC
comment identified how branded pharmaceutical manufacturers' misuse of
REMS may impede pharmaceutical competition, which was a topic raised at
our workshop. We continue to analyze the workshop record and consider
next steps.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Statement of the Federal Trade Commission to the Department of
Health and Human Services Regarding the HHS Blueprint to Lower Drug
Prices and Reduce Out-of-Pocket Costs (July 16, 2018), https://
www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/advocacy-documents/statement-
federal-trade-commission-department-health-human-services-regarding-
hhs-blueprint-lower/v180008_
commission_comment_to_hhs_re_blueprint_for_lower_drug_prices_and_costs.p
df.
I particularly appreciate your concerns about market consolidation
and the potential for anticompetitive conduct in the health care
sector. I share your belief that vigorous antitrust enforcement is
critical to ensuring competitive markets and protecting consumers. One
of the FTC's highest priorities is enforcing the antitrust laws against
anticompetitive mergers and conduct among firms throughout the
pharmaceutical supply chain. The FTC has brought many cases challenging
mergers among pharmaceutical companies and distributors, and has been
at the forefront of challenging anticompetitive conduct--such as
reverse payment settlements or sham litigation--that creates obstacles
to generic competition.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ For a summary of the FTC's antitrust actions in the
pharmaceutical industry, see ``Overview of FTC Antitrust Actions in
Pharmaceutical Products and Distribution'' (April 2017), https://
www.ftc.gov/system/files/attachments/competition-policy-guidance/
overview_pharma_april_20
17.pdf.
During my nomination process, I expressed my concerns about whether
merger enforcement has been too lax. As I stated then and continue to
believe now, the FTC may need to take corrective action if close study
reveals that the Commission has indeed been too cautious in challenging
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
mergers, including those involving PBMs that resulted in actual harm.
The Commission therefore is conducting an ambitious program of
Hearings on Competition and Consumer Protection in the 21st Century.
These public hearings are designed to seek input on whether broad-based
changes in the economy, business practices, and technology, as well as
international developments, require any adjustments to competition and
consumer protection enforcement and policy. This effort harkens back to
the Global Competition and Innovation Hearings undertaken in 1995
during the Chairmanship of Robert Pitofsky. As part of this project,
the Commission is inviting public comment on a broad range of antitrust
and consumer protection topics, including evaluating the state of
antitrust law and enforcement, evaluating the competitive effects of
corporate acquisitions and mergers, best approaches for performing
merger retrospective studies, and identifying industries that are
conducive to these analyses. We will keep you apprised regarding any
recommendations or other initiatives that come out of our hearings
project.
Thank you again for your interest in promoting effective
competition in U.S. pharmaceutical markets. If you have any questions,
please feel free to have your staff call Jeanne Bumpus, the Director of
our Office of Congressional Relations, at (202) 326-2195.
Sincerely,
Joseph J. Simons
Chairman
______
Prepared Statement of Mike Kolar, Interim President
and CEO, Prime Therapeutics, LLC
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss how pharmacy
benefit managers (PBMs) and, in particular, Prime Therapeutics LLC,
provide value to the health-care system.
I am Mike Kolar, and I serve as the Interim President and CEO of
Prime. At Prime, our mission is to make health care work better by
helping people get the medicine they need to feel better and live well.
We do this by managing pharmacy benefits for health insurers,
employers, and government programs including Medicare and Medicaid. Our
goal is to ensure that the members and beneficiaries of these plans and
programs get the medication most appropriate for their condition at a
cost that is the most affordable in the context of their overall
insurance benefit. This mantra of ``right drug, for the right person,
at the right time, and at the right cost,'' guides our actions every
day.
We appreciate the committee's efforts to thoroughly examine issues
related to the problem of high drug costs. We see firsthand the
challenges that these costs cause for our plans, for their members and
beneficiaries and for taxpayers. In 2018, drug costs represented 27
percent of total health-care costs for our commercial clients. A
portion of this increased spend results from newly introduced
therapies, which have the potential to improve outcomes and avoid
medical costs for payers and individuals. But it is the price and value
of these new therapies as well as existing therapies, as set by pharma
and pharma alone, that needs to be effectively questioned, checked and
balanced. As a unique, transparent pharmacy benefits manager, our value
lies in applying our clinical expertise to serve as an effective hedge
against otherwise unmitigated pricing behaviors and to make medication
more affordable.
We agree that high drug costs present a problem for individuals and
society. We look forward to sharing more about our how our unique,
transparent approach and the clinical value we provide addresses the
problem as it exists today. We will provide our thoughts on how the key
issues of transparency and manufacturer rebates should be viewed in
framing solutions to the problem of high drug costs. And we will share
our views on other effective means of reducing the high cost of
prescription drugs for the benefit of plans, employers, patients and
taxpayers.
prime represents a unique pbm model
Prime Therapeutics was formed in 1998 by two Blue Cross and Blue
Shield Plans seeking to more effectively manage plan and member drug
costs. Starting with only a few million members, Prime has grown over
the last 20 years to provide pharmacy benefits to over 28 million
individuals, from 23 Blue Cross Blue Shield plans as well as Federal
employees served by the Federal Employee Program (FEP').
Prime's growth has been driven by our ability to effectively manage
drug costs for these plans and their members as a trusted, transparent
partner. Our integration with our Blue Cross and Blue Shield clients
allows us to leverage our view into both pharmacy and medical data to
improve care and reduce costs. This helps our plans to best serve the
specific needs of their respective local communities.
Today Prime is owned and controlled solely by 18 not-for-profit
Blue Plan clients. This makes us the only major PBM with a primary
mission focused on driving savings instead of margins. We are not
beholden to the short term, quarterly need to report earnings to Wall
Street shareholders. We are free to focus on delivering the lowest net
cost on prescription medicines and driving lowest overall cost of care
for our clients and their members. We are driven to get the right drug,
for the right person, at the right time, and at a cost that is as
affordable as possible in the context of a member's overall insurance
benefit to help ensure sustainability and optimal health outcomes.
prime applies extensive clinical expertise to reduce drug costs
The core value we provide our clients and their beneficiaries is
based upon our deep clinical pharmacy expertise. We employ pharmacists
and physicians and engage an independent Pharmacy and Therapeutics
(P&T) Committee made up of 26 actively practicing, nationally
recognized medical and pharmacy experts to evaluate the safety,
efficacy, and value of existing and emerging drug therapies. This
expertise allows us to advise our plan clients regarding drug coverage
decisions, utilization policies, and adherence, intervention and
therapy management programs to lead to better patient outcomes, ensure
quality and patient safety, and manage costs. The common misperception
that Prime and other PBM's are simply transactional ``middlemen''
entirely ignores the immense value we provide in helping to ensure
clinically appropriate drug utilization to drive better outcomes.
The retail prices of some of the most popular prescription drugs
older Americans take to treat everything from diabetes to high blood
pressure to asthma increased by an average of 8.4 percent in 2017, far
exceeding the 2.1-percent inflation rate for other consumer goods and
service.\1\ Rising costs from specialty drugs and high prices of new
specialty drugs have had an even more significant impact on overall
drug prices. These specialty drugs treat complex, chronic conditions,
like multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis. These drugs are
usually injected or infused. They require careful oversight from a
health-care provider and require special handling. Over half of all
drugs approved by the FDA in 2018 were specialty drugs.\2\ According to
a recent report from the Pharmacy Benefit Management Institute, less
than 5 percent of commercially insured patients use specialty
medications, but they constitute half of overall drug costs.\3\ Prime
predicts that specialty drugs will be 60 percent of all drug spend by
2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Bunis, Dena. ``Retail Prices of Brand-Name Drugs Continue to
Skyrocket,'' September 26, 2018, AARP, https://www.aarp.org/health/
drugs-supplements/info-2018/prices-rising-for-name
-brand-drugs.html.
\2\ Healthinsurance.org ``Glossary,'' https://
www.healthinsurance.org/glossary/specialty-drug/ and https://
www.pcmanet.org/pcma-cardstack/what-is-a-specialty-drug/.
\3\ Pharmacy Benefit Management Institute, ``2019 Trends in
Specialty Drug Management,'' https://www.pbmi.com/
ItemDetail?iProductCode=SPECIALTY_2019&Category=SPECIALTY.
While pharmaceutical companies keep introducing new drugs at high
prices and raising prices on existing drugs, we work hard to counter
these rising costs by appropriately managing utilization and
negotiating for lower net reimbursement. Prime's management tools are
critical to managing both drug trend and quality. The results of our
efforts can be shown by the savings we generate. Despite rising costs
overall, Prime's programs delivered nearly $3.4 billion in incremental
value to our health plan clients in 2018. In an environment of rising
prices and new, high-cost drug introductions, Prime has a long track
record of successfully managing overall drug trend. Trend defines the
difference of drug spend between one year and the next. It is affected
by the number of people using which drugs (utilization) and the prices
of those drugs. Prime's commercial clients experienced a drug trend of
only 3.3 percent in 2018, and experienced a negative trend in 2017.
Prime was similarly successful in managing drug trend in government
program markets. Here, where full utilization of our clinical and
negotiating tools is significantly limited by current regulations, we
achieved a 4.7 percent trend in Medicare and 7.3 percent in Medicaid
for 2018, and -0.8 percent and -5.4 percent, respectively for
2017.\4\, \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ ``Prime Therapeutics Keeps High Drug Cost Trends at Bay: Annual
Trend Reports Released,'' March 19, 2019, https://
www.primetherapeutics.com/en/news/pressreleases/2019/release-2018-drug-
trend.html.
\5\ ``Prime Releases Proves PBM's Value: Delivers Negative Drug
Trend in 2017,'' February 20, 2018, https://www.primetherapeutics.com/
en/news/pressreleases/2018/drugtrend-2017-release.html.
We achieve these results by leveraging our clinical expertise to
advance quality, optimize utilization and manage net price for our
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
clients and their members and beneficiaries through:

Formulary management, including pipeline management and
formulary development. Our P&T Committee evaluates the clinical
efficacy and safety of new and existing medications and
approves and regularly reviews our clinical recommendations for
each drug, including coverage, clinical appropriateness and
safety. Our P&T Committee meets quarterly and reviews all drug
categories annually. We also make formulary recommendations
regarding preference or ``tiering'' using a lowest net drug
cost approach. That occurs only after our initial clinical
safety and efficacy determinations, and with an additional
concern for minimizing member impacts across any transitions.

Utilization management, including prior authorization, step
therapy, and quantity limits.
When a provider prescribes a drug that could
potentially be misused in an unsafe or ineffective manner,
prior authorization serves as an additional check, in
collaboration with the care provider, to confirm that the drug
is appropriate for the particular patient and their condition.
This is done to ensure safety and avoid unnecessary costs for
the plan and the patient.
Step therapy programs similarly help avoid
unnecessary costs for the payer and patient by recommending
effective, lower cost, ``first line'' therapies prior to
administration of a costlier alternative.
Quantity limits also help avoid waste and
manage cost for all parties by recommending limited initial
trial quantities of a medication to ensure it achieves the
intended outcome and/or does not result in harmful side effects
before additional doses are dispensed and paid for by the plan
and patient.

Our GuidedHealthTM program, promoting optimal
member medication management through retrospective drug
utilization reviews. GuidedHealth (GH360) is a population
health database and clinical rules engine that uses integrated
medical and pharmacy data to identify opportunities to lower
drug and medical costs. Prime identifies these opportunities
and intervenes with doctors, members and pharmacies through a
multi-channel communication strategy (e.g., pharmacist case
management, direct messaging to prescribers via electronic
medical records (EMR), phone, text, email, mail) to help guide
better drug therapy. Examples of opportunities include
medication non-
adherence, gaps in care, drug safety concerns, drug/condition
management issues, high cost specialty drug management
interventions and chronic disease management programs. In our
experience, each dollar spent on these types of programs yields
up to $8 in cost savings for our plan clients and their members
or beneficiaries, totaling more than $350M in savings, and
growing, each year.

Pharmacy network management, designed to ensure access,
quality and affordability for beneficiaries and plans. Prime
maintains contracts with over 60,000 retail pharmacies
nationwide representing in aggregate over 91 percent of all
pharmacies in the United States. Prime highly values the role
of the local pharmacist in serving patients and ensuring
appropriate medication therapy, including pharmacists' role in
counseling patients on drug administration, interactions,
adherence and safety. We partner closely with pharmacists and
local pharmacies in these activities. In constructing networks
of local pharmacies to serve members and beneficiaries, we
drive both higher quality and more affordable costs for the
benefit of patient.

Fraud, waste, and abuse (FWA) programs that aggressively
combat activities that burden plans, members and taxpayers with
costs that are wholly unnecessary, and not infrequently, have a
basis in criminal activity. Our activities in rooting out
fraud, waste and abuse resulted in $268M in savings in 2018
alone for our clients, their members and beneficiaries.

Value-based contracting (VBC), designed to hold a
pharmaceutical manufacturer accountable for the overall
effectiveness of its drug. Prime's goal with VBC strategies
includes evaluating the effectiveness and value that a drug has
on a member's total cost of care, including both pharmacy and
medical costs. Our value-based contracts focus on all aspects
of care, including channel management, persistency and
compliance, health monitoring, diagnostic testing, and health
outcomes assessments. We signed our first VBC contract in 2010.
Since then, we have contracted with pharmaceutical
manufacturers for value-based arrangements in therapeutic areas
that affect large groups and gaps in care (e.g., diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, chronic migraine) as well as those that
are high cost for our clients' members (e.g., hepatitis,
rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative colitis, multiple sclerosis).
One example of our value-based contracting is
our arrangement with the manufacturer of an oral type 2
diabetes medicine indicated to reduce the risk of
cardiovascular death in adults with type 2 diabetes and
established cardiovascular disease. Our contract evaluates the
incidence and total cost of care for certain cardiac events
among patients taking this medication and links payment for the
drug to improved outcomes. We believe that this type of
evidence-based, outcome-driven reimbursement model underscores
the unique value that Prime can bring in the drug market to
ensure that prices become more aligned with quality and
economic value.
We believe that these capabilities and additional capabilities
under development provide significant value for our clients and their
members and beneficiaries. We welcome opportunities to expand the
application of our programs to drive additional savings in government
programs. Specifically, Prime supports the August 2018 CMS change that
allows plans to create indication-based formularies--formularies that
cover specific drugs for specific indications--for Medicare beginning
in 2020. Indication based formularies are currently used in our
commercial business. The ability to bring this expertise to Medicare
will provide plans additional flexibility and choice in formulary
design, and will improve drug affordability for plans and
beneficiaries.
Beyond cost control, our clinical expertise plays a key role in
patient safety. PBMs are the entities in the health-care system that
are best situated to know and to coordinate all the medications that a
patient takes. Neither pharmacies nor physicians are currently
guaranteed to see the entire spectrum of a patient's prescriptions. A
2012 study found slightly more than one-third of patients use multiple
pharmacies to fill their prescriptions.\6\ A more recent study of Part
D patients reported that even more--38 percent--used multiple
pharmacies.\7\ Individual physicians may also not know all the
medication their patients use. According to a recent Consumer Reports
survey, over half (53 percent) of Americans who take prescription drugs
get them from more than one health-care provider, which increases the
risk of adverse drug effects.\8\ PBMs like Prime play an important role
in identifying inappropriate utilization and adverse drug interactions.
Prime's concurrent drug utilization program screens medicines at the
point of sale for potential drug therapy problems such as drug-to-drug
interactions, inappropriate refill timing and potential overuse or
misuse. If an issue is flagged, Prime collaborates with the local
pharmacist to address the issue with the patient and to provide
clinically appropriate guidance on how to proceed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Eder, Rob, ``Why Patients Use Multiple Pharmacies,'' Drugstore
News, August 28, 2012, https://www.drugstorenews.com/news/why-patients-
use-multiple-pharmacies/.
\7\ Z.A. Marcum et al., ``Impact of Multiple Pharmacy Use on
Medication Adherence and Drug-drug Interactions in Older Adults With
Medicare Part D,'' J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014 Feb.; 62(2): 244-252.
Downloaded from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4115075/.
\8\ ``Americans Taking More Prescription Drugs Than Ever,''
HealthDay Reporter, August 3, 2017, https://www.webmd.com/drug-
medication/news/20170803/americans-taking-more-prescription-drugs-than-
ever-survey.
As health care becomes more complicated, and as personalized
medicine and companion diagnostics (i.e., a laboratory genomic test
whose result determines therapy) become more prevalent, we see
additional opportunities to use our clinical expertise to collaborate
with physicians and allied health professionals to manage medication
therapies. The clinical expertise and tools of a PBM like Prime can
help to continue to ensure the right patient gets the right therapy at
the right time even as science and research continue to advance.
prime believes in transparency
From our inception 20 years ago, our business model was built on
transparency, and we understand the importance of transparency in the
health-care system overall. We believe that the right kind of
transparency within the PBM model can improve outcomes and lower costs
for members and beneficiaries. We would caution, however, that the
wrong kind of transparency will ultimately lead to higher drug prices.
In Prime's view, there are five audiences for the right kind of
transparency:
(1) client transparency;
(2) patient transparency;
(3) government transparency;
(4) physician/prescriber transparency; and
(5) pharmacy transparency.
Client Transparency: Client transparency is the hallmark of Prime's
unique business model. Unlike the clients of other PBMs, Prime's
clients see their respective drug costs at a unit cost level. Prime
also shows clients all the savings Prime generates on their behalf,
including pharmacy savings and rebates. Savings are passed back to
clients to offset the cost of services and to help keep premiums
affordable. To be clear, Prime's model is to send the entire rebate
back to our clients.
Enrollee/Patient Transparency: Prime believes it is vitally
important that its members make informed choices. Presently, Prime has
tools that are available to patients to enable them to more easily
understand their pharmacy benefits. We maintain a website at
MyPrime.com that allows members access to pharmacy benefit information.
MyPrime.com is a personalized platform where members can find
pharmacies, understand coverage and tiering, and find actual prices for
prescription drugs, including their applicable cost share. We share
information about MyPrime.com with members upon plan enrollment and
thereafter in other beneficiary communications.
We also support efforts to advance adoption of a real-time benefit
tool (RTBT). This provides an easy-to-use, complete view of a
beneficiary's prescription benefit information including cost,
formulary alternatives, and utilization management requirements at the
point of prescribing. This allows both the patient and his or her
prescriber to make informed decisions using both clinical and pricing
information. To drive rapid adoption and widespread use, we believe
that RTBTs should be based upon a standardized platform, such as the
in-process standard being finalized by the National Council for
Prescription Drug Programs (NCPDP). This standard will provide the
guardrails to ensure consistent, thorough, and quality communication of
prescription benefit information. This will aid practitioners and
patients in making informed, real-time drug decisions at the point of
prescription, eliminating surprises and delays that adversely impact
medication utilization and adherence, and, ultimately, health outcomes.
Government Transparency: The Center for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) collects very detailed information from PBMs about Part
D transactions through its mandatory Direct and Indirect Remuneration
(DIR) reporting. CMS has a thorough line of sight into all rebates,
fees, and payment adjustments, which are reported to CMS as DIR on a
drug by drug basis. Further, each plan submits bids annually to CMS by
the first Monday in June. Those bids reflect the plan's expected
benefit payments plus administrative costs after they deduct expected
Federal reinsurance subsidies, and the level of CMS payment to plan
sponsors is derived from actual plan bids.
Prime supports legislation recently introduced by Senators Cornyn,
Cortez Masto, Carper, and Cassidy that would allow the Medicare Payment
Advisory Commission and the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access
Commission access to CMS's DIR data to inform Congress's decision-
making on Part D policy. Our support is based upon the important
protections for proprietary data included in the legislation that will
mitigate the risk of adverse, anti-competitive consequences that could
cause drug prices to increase.
Physician and Allied Health Professional Prescriber Transparency:
Prime provides prescribers with access to formularies and regularly
communicates changes in formularies and other coverage information, and
we believe that adoption of RTBTs will provide an enhanced user
experience and more rapid transparency to aid prescribers in making
informed prescription decisions.
In addition to supporting RTBTs, we also support electronic
prescribing directly to patients' pharmacies. This vastly improves
efficiency for health-care professionals and pharmacy interactions for
patients. We were pleased that last year's SUPPORT Act, Pub. L. 115-
271, included a requirement that Part D plans use electronic prior
authorization (ePA).
Pharmacy Transparency: In our relationships with pharmacies we seek
to ensure quality by scoring pharmacy performance on key metrics as
such as medication adherence and generic dispensing rates, which aid in
improving a member's health outcomes and reduce costs. Prime provides
quarterly results to the pharmacies and includes data for
reconciliation. In our quality based networks, pharmacies earn
incentives based upon their performance on key metrics that are
relevant to the CMS Stars ratings. Prime uses EQUIPP, an industry
standard dashboard that allows pharmacists to track their performance
and predict their likely results. Prime meets with pharmacies monthly
to review their performance and discuss improvement options. Price
concessions earned because of underperformance on quality metrics are
remitted in full to our plans for member-facing premium reductions and
quality programs, and for reporting to CMS.
Misguided Transparency: Many aspects of transparency are laudable.
These are already fully present in Prime's business model, and aid in
better managing drug spend for clients and their members and
beneficiaries. But we believe proposals that would require disclosure
or visibility into actual negotiated rebates would have an adverse
impact and would likely result in an increase in overall drug costs.
Our view is supported by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), which
has studied the issue and found that such disclosure creates a risk for
anti-competitive behavior by manufacturers that would increase prices.
Currently, manufacturer rebates to PBMs are confidential, and competing
manufacturers do not know the rebate offered by their competitors. When
rebates are disclosed, the FTC warns that this type of price
transparency may ``allow competitors to figure out what their rivals
are charging, which dampens each competitor's incentive to offer a low
price or increases the likelihood that they can coordinate on higher
prices.'' \9\ In the brand drug market, where a limited number of
manufacturers offer similar products within a therapeutic class, net
price transparency may cause these manufacturers to raise prices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Koslov, TI, Jex, E, ``Price transparency or TMI?,'' Federal
Trade Commission, July 2, 2015, https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/blogs/
competition-matters/2015/07/price-transparency-or-tmi.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
rebates effectively offset, rather than cause, high list prices
One of the key PBM levers for creating competition and value is
drug rebates. A rebate is an after-the-fact (usually quarterly),
percent reduction off the full list price of a drug given to the end
purchaser whether that be a government entity, an employer or an
insurer. They are a powerful tool used by PBMs to offset the list
prices set by pharma. The 2018 Medicare Trustees' report credited PBM-
negotiated rebates, in part, for bringing Part D spending lower than in
the Trustees' 2017 Report.\10\ Similarly, a recent Oliver Wyman study
found that Part D plan-negotiated manufacturer rebates have resulted in
$34.9 billion in premium savings for enrollees from 2014 to 2018.\11\
As rebates are an effective tool to manage and mitigate pharma pricing
behaviors for the benefit of plans and members, we strongly believe
that they cannot and should not be curtailed or eliminated without
viable, concrete and equally effective means of placing similar
competitive pressure on manufacturers and holding them accountable for
drug pricing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/medicare-trustees-
report-shows-lower-spending-projections-medicare-part-d.
\11\ Oliver Wyman, ``Premium Impact of Removing Manufacturer
Rebates From the Medicare Part D program,'' July 6, 2018, downloaded
from https://www.pcmanet.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/OW-Part-D-
Manufacturer-Rebate-Premium-Impact-FINAL.pdf.
While rebates are an important savings tool, they are not Prime's
first consideration in making formulary recommendations. Prime's
formulary selection process is tied to safety and efficacy
consideration before accounting for competitive pricing. In considering
competitive pricing, we take a ``low net cost'' approach: Prime will
often forgo rebates on a certain drug in favor of a clinically
equivalent, lower-cost medication. In Medicare Part D, Prime has more
than a 90 percent generic dispensing rate, and generic drugs generally
do not offer rebates. In situations in which a rebated drug is covered
and rebates are earned, Prime's model is to pass back 100 percent of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the value of rebates we negotiate to our clients.
The relationship of rebates to drug prices and the role of rebates
is very much misunderstood. Prime disputes the idea that rebates are
the primary cause of high list prices. Indeed, many drugs have high and
significantly increasing list prices without offering any rebates. The
HHS OIG found that 39 percent of Part D drugs offered no rebates in
2015.\12\ Additionally, there are very limited rebates in Part B, and
Part B has nonetheless seen significant price increases in the drugs
the program covers, including drugs that increased in price from 2012
to 2017 by between 76 and 3,449 percent.\13\ Pharmaceutical companies
could lower list prices on these drugs today but have generally not
chosen to do so. Where pharmaceutical companies have lowered list
prices, there is generally little effect on net costs to the payer or
the products are ``minor.''\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ HHS OIG, ``Increases in Reimbursement for Brand-Name Drugs in
Part D,'' Data Brief OEI-03-15-00080, June 4, 2018, downloaded from
https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-03-15-00080.asp.
\13\ Visante, ``Reconsidering Drug Prices, Rebates, and PBMs,''
downloaded from https://www.pcmanet.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/
Reconsidering-Drug-Prices-Rebates-and-PBMs-08-09-18.pdf.
\14\ Thomas, Katie, ``Merck Is Lowering Drug Prices. There's a
Catch,'' New York Times, July 18, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/
07/19/health/merck-trump-drug-prices.html.
Instead of rebates making drugs less affordable, the lack of
rebates for certain drugs makes them less affordable. In general,
pharmaceutical manufacturers do not pay rebates on cancer drugs since
plans typically do not implement traditional formulary management tools
for these therapies. However, we continue to experience increases in
price. As an example, in Medicare Part D in 2018, Prime's clients saw
the greatest increase in spending for oral cancer drugs stemming from
both an increase in price and utilization. The trend grew from 3.3
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
percent in 2017 to 19.4 percent in in 2018 for this class.
As this cancer example illustrates, there is no correlation between
rebate levels and manufacturer list prices.\15\ The determining factor
of whether a given brand drug will offer a rebate is the
competitiveness of the therapeutic class.\16\ As MedPAC states in its
March 2019 report:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Visante, ``Reconsidering Drug Prices, Rebates, and PBMs,''
downloaded from https://www.pcmanet.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/
Reconsidering-Drug-Prices-Rebates-and-PBMs-08-09-18.pdf.
\16\ Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, Report to the Congress:
Medicare Payment Policy, March 2019, Chapter 14: ``The Medicare
prescription drug program (Part D): Status report.''
In general, the extent to which a manufacturer of a specific
drug can raise its price depends on many factors--for example,
whether there are generics or brand therapeutic alternatives,
how many competitors there are in the given market, and whether
their competitors cover all the same indications. Competition
within a therapeutic class can result in restraint in list-
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
price growth or in higher post sale rebates and discounts.
Where there is no competition in a therapeutic class or if a drug
demonstrates clinical superiority over existing therapies, there may
either be no rebate or just a very small rebate.\17\ In Medicare's
protected classes, plan sponsors have limited options to not cover or
restrict access to certain drugs. When there are limited options to
treat a specific disease state, PBMs have little ability to influence
pharma pricing. Drugs in high-cost specialty classes like oncology,
hemophilia, and hereditary angioedema generally do not have rebates. In
classes where products are deemed clinically interchangeable, such as
insulins, diabetes medications (SGLT, DPP-IV), and respiratory drugs to
treat asthma and COPD, competition drives greater rebates that can be
leveraged for the benefit of payers, members and beneficiaries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, Report to the Congress:
Medicare Payment Policy, March 2019, Chapter 14: ``The Medicare
prescription drug program (Part D): Status report.''
One of the concerns over rebates is that patient cost-sharing in
certain plan designs is determined by the list price of a drug rather
than the net price. Over the past decade, the patient's role in sharing
in prescription drug costs has evolved considerably. The advent of
high-deductible health plans and greater use of coinsurance has
increased the proportion of health-care costs consumers must pay out of
pocket. While such benefit designs were intended to give beneficiaries
more control, a very real consequence has been increased exposure to
the extreme drug pricing behavior of manufacturers. Patients are
justifiably frustrated with the unacceptably high drug prices and
unjustified price increases set by pharma, which drive up their costs
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
without providing additional health value.
Prime offers commercial health plan clients and employer groups the
option to adjust the prices of drugs in their benefit plans to reflect
rebate savings, including the option of applying the rebate savings at
the point of sale when a member receives a prescription from a
pharmacy. This plan offering allows members with high deductibles and
coinsurance to benefit from rebates at the point of sale, but there is
a trade-off between premiums and a point-of-sale rebates. Point-of-sale
rebates help those who face high coinsurance or deductibles but may
cause an increase in premium.
In the commercial market, the majority of members served by Prime
are not affected by high list price influenced cost-sharing. They pay
flat dollar copays rather than coinsurance (i.e., a percentage of the
list price). Indeed, only 1 percent of the commercial membership served
by Prime is subject to coinsurance with no out-of-pocket maximum, while
56 percent of the members we serve are enrolled in plans with a flat
copay without a deductible and 4 percent are in plans with a flat copay
with low deductibles. Neither of these latter two groups are
meaningfully affected by the list price of a drug.
Similarly, in Medicare Part D, many beneficiaries do not face
significant cost-sharing. Cost-sharing is minimized for the 29 percent
of Part D beneficiaries that receive low-income subsidies, also called
``Extra Help,'' who pay flat, nominal amounts for drugs including
brands.\18\ Prime realizes that a small percentage of beneficiaries are
challenged by the current Part D benefit design due to the high cost of
certain medications. As MedPAC reports, in 2016, approximately 360,000
Part D beneficiaries filled a prescription for which a single claim
would meet the maximum out-of-pocket threshold, up from 33,000 in
2010.\19\ Prime welcomes the opportunities to work with policymakers,
beneficiaries and plans to help Part D enrollees who face high cost-
sharing. At the same time, we recognize that that Part D enrollees are
very premium sensitive, and are generally pleased with their benefit: a
recent nationwide survey found that 85 percent of Part D enrollees are
satisfied with their Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage, with
over 8 out of 10 also saying that their Part D plans provide ``good
value.'' The same survey research indicates that 78 percent of seniors
feel that their copays and coinsurance are affordable.\20\ Another
recent survey of seniors in Part D found that they are satisfied with
their out-of-pocket costs by a 67 percent to 30 percent margin.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ J. Cubanski, A. Damico, and T. Neuman, ``Medicare Part D in
2018: The Latest on Enrollment, Premiums, and Cost Sharing,'' May 17,
2018, downloaded from https://www.kff.org/medicare/issue-brief/
medicare-part-d-in-2018-the-latest-on-enrollment-premiums-and-cost-
sharing/.
\19\ Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, Report to the Congress:
Medicare Payment Policy, March 2019, Chapter 14: ``The Medicare
prescription drug program (Part D): Status report.''
\20\ http://medicaretoday.org/2018/08/85-percent-of-u-s-seniors-
are-satisfied-with-their-medicare-part-d-prescription-drug-coverage-
according-to-nationwide-survey/.
\21\ North Star Opinion Research, National Survey of Seniors
Enrolled in Part D, March 2019, https://www.pcmanet.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/03/NSO-PCMA-Senior-Part-D-Survey-Memo-March-6.pdf.
As we work towards policy solutions to further address high drug
costs, we believe that the important role rebates play in managing cost
requires careful study. The lack of a proven link between list price
and rebates, the need for plan flexibility in designing benefits and
keeping premiums low, and the need for an equally effective means of
holding pharma accountable must all be considered before enacting
measures that would mandate redirection or cause rebates to be
curtailed or eliminated.
prime offers policy solutions
Prime welcomes the opportunity to partner with the committee and
other Federal policymakers to advance initiatives to lower drug prices
and improve health care. For instance, we support changes to anti-
kickback law and Medicaid best price that would catalyze further value-
based contracting and provide greater regulatory certainty around such
contracts.
We believe that high list prices are the central issue driving the
drug cost problem, and that PBMs are the most effective organizations
capable of bringing down drug costs for payers and patients. An
optimally competitive drug marketplace helps us to fully deploy our
tools to lower costs for our plans, for their members and beneficiaries
and for taxpayers. We therefore support such policies as:

Addressing Part D's protected classes: Designating ``classes
of clinical concern'' in Part D, where all or substantially all
drugs in a class must be covered allows drug manufacturers to
name their price. CMS already applies careful plan formulary
coverage checks to assure proper coverage in all drug classes.
Prime supports a CMS proposal to moderate the effect of
protected classes--not eliminate them--that would save $2
billion over 10 years.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Owermohle, Sarah, Politico Prescription Pulse, ``CMS Takes on
`Protected Classes in Part D,' '' November 27, 2018, https://
www.politico.com/newsletters/prescription-pulse/2018/11/27/cms-takes-
on-protected-classes-in-part-d-431017.

Modify the requirement for two drugs per class. The
requirement that Part D plans cover two drugs per class is
outmoded. It has encouraged manufacturers to argue for ever
more granular classes and reduced competition, increasing Part
D costs. Modifying the requirement by requiring plans to ensure
access to therapies based on conditions or disease states
instead would reduce costs without reducing access to needed
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
drugs.

Apply Part D management tools to Part B drugs. PBM tools
such as value-based formularies, manufacturer negotiation,
prior authorization, and step therapy have proven indispensable
in improving patient safety and lowering costs in outpatient
prescription drug plans like Part D. Adding Part D management
tools to the Medicare fee-for-service program and building on
efforts in Medicare Advantage for Part B drugs would make drugs
more affordable on Medicare's medical side. We also believe
policymakers should explore using economic value assessments to
ensure that payments for drugs are based on cost savings and
quality outcomes for patients.

Eliminate pay-for-delay agreements: Patent settlements
involving ``pay-for-delay'' agreements allow drug patent
holders to pay off potential competitors who would otherwise
produce a competing generic or biosimilar drug. These anti-
competitive agreements should be eliminated.

End risk evaluation and mitigation strategy (REMS) abuses.
Brand drug manufacturers have withheld drug samples from would-
be generic manufacturers by citing REMS compliance as an
excuse. Enacting the CREATES Act or similar legislation would
prohibit these abusive practices used by a small minority of
brand drug manufacturers to keep competitors off the market.

Address orphan drug exclusivity abuses. Orphan drug
exclusivities are meant to encourage research into therapies to
address rare diseases. However, the exclusivities afforded by
orphan status have been abused. In fact, six of the eight best-
selling biologic drugs in 2017 have orphan approvals, but the
drugs have been widely used for non-orphan indications. Orphan
exclusivity periods should apply to only those drugs originally
approved by FDA under an orphan indication and only for the
orphan indication itself.

Tackle patent ``ever-greening'' or patenting a small change
in an existing drug to prevent generic competition. The advent
of generic drugs, and particularly multiple generic drugs
brings down drug prices, and ever-greening blocks this
competition, keeping prices unnecessarily high. Brand patents
should not result in near-permanent exclusivity.

Encourage faster FDA approval of ``me-too'' brands:
Increasingly the drugs FDA reviews and approves are reviewed
under accelerated approval to address ``unmet needs.'' The
imperative for greater competition to lower drug prices should
also be considered a type of unmet need.

Promote biosimilar interchangeability: The FDA has yet to
finalize guidance on interchangeability. Such guidance would
allow substitution of biologics with biosimilars just as
pharmacists do today with brand name drugs to lower costs for
patients.

Eliminate the tax deduction for direct-to-consumer (DTC)
drug ads. While DTC drug ads may encourage some people to see a
doctor, they drive up unnecessary utilization and the cost of
drug benefits and often encourage patients to demand a brand
name over a generic. Tax deductions should end for ads
mentioning a specific product.
conclusion
We appreciate the committee's interest in our perspectives on the
problem of high drug costs, the role that PBMs and Prime play in
helping to manage those costs, and our views on the issues of
transparency, rebates and potential policy solutions that can
effectively address the drug cost issue.
We believe that the clinical expertise and solutions we offer
create significant value for our clients and their members and
beneficiaries by ensuring that the right drugs are accessible and
affordable, in the context of overall benefit designs, at the right
time and for the right patients.
We are a unique PBM. We are owned solely by Blue plans and are
designed to serve their needs through a transparent, lowest net cost
model to enable them to serve their members and communities. We are
hopeful that our perspective is useful in the dialogue and in leading
to constructive solutions.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to Mike Kolar
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
collection, use, and sharing of personal health information
Question. Consumers are becoming more and more concerned about the
data collection and sharing practices of companies. While these issues
have been most prevalent in the social media and tech industry,
companies in the pharmaceutical supply chain also have access to
tremendous amounts of sensitive, personal health information of the
individuals they serve. For example, the company Livongo partners with
CVS Caremark to provide low-cost or no-cost blood sugar meters to
diabetic patients. The meters are always ``connected'' to Livongo's
``Diabetes Response Specialists.'' As the company's website states,
``When readings are out of range, our Diabetes Response Specialists
call or text [the individual] within minutes.'' While these innovations
may be highly beneficial for individuals in managing their health, it's
also important for this committee to fully understand what types of
information is collected, how or why it's stored or shared, and for
what purposes PBMs themselves and other affiliated drug supply chain
participants (such as insurers) use the information.
Health information is extremely sensitive. It's the most personal
of all the information we share. So I want to know more about each of
your companies' data collection, sharing, and protection practices.
Does your company collect and store health information from the
end-users of the prescriptions you provide? For example, information or
records of a diabetic individual's blood sugar levels.
Answer. Yes. While facilitating a patient's pharmacy benefit, Prime
may receive and store protected health information about that patient.
Prime has policies designed to ensure that any use or disclosure of
health information occurs only as permitted by HIPAA and as directed by
patients and Prime's health plan clients.
Question. Does your company make any treatment, cost, or coverage
decisions based on the health information you collect from an
individual?
Answer. Yes, we may make utilization management decisions in
accordance with the health plan's pharmacy benefit. Such information
can result in approval of a drug that had been subject to prior
authorization thereby expediting patient access to appropriate therapy.
Question. Does your company share health information with third
parties? And, if so, does your company profit from that sharing?
Answer. Yes to the first question and no to the second. Prime
shares health information with third parties only as authorized by
HIPAA and as necessary to facilitate services Prime provides to
patients and Prime's health plan clients. Prime's customers
contractually limit and control the ways in which Prime may use health
information. Prime does not sell data, and does not profit from sharing
data.
Question. Do you believe customers are fully aware of your
information collection and sharing practices?
Answer. Yes. Prime is owned by many of its health plan customers.
Prime's customers contractually limit the ways in which Prime may use
health information.
impact of vertical integration between pbms and insurance companies
Question. The PBM industry has experienced significant
consolidation within the past 10 years, which has contributed to
concerns about the potential abuse of market power, barriers to market
entry, and exclusionary practices. In 2012, for example, Express
Scripts acquired Medco Health Solutions--a nearly $30-billion
transaction that merged two of the country's three largest PBMs.\1\
More recently, PBMs are also vertically integrating with insurers/
payers, reflected by the 2018 acquisitions of Express Scripts Holding
Co. (a PBM) by Cigna Corp. (a payer) and of Aetna Inc. (a payer) by CVS
Health Corp. As a result, the three largest PBMs are all vertically
integrated with insurance companies. According to a report from the
Kaiser Family Foundation, the two combined entities, along with
UnitedHealth and Humana, will cover 71 percent of all Medicare Part D
enrollees and 86 percent of stand-alone drug plan enrollees.\2\
Vertical integration can result in increased efficiencies and consumer
benefits. I can also, however, lead to higher barriers to entry for
competition, leading to further consolidation. FDA Commissioner Scott
Gottlieb recently warned that ``consolidation and market concentration
make the rebating and contracting schemes [of PBMs] all that more
pernicious. And the very complexity and opacity of these schemes help
to conceal their corrosion on our system--and their impact on
patients.''\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See ``FTC Closes Eight-Month Investigation of Express Scripts,
Inc.'s Proposed Acquisition of Pharmacy Benefits Manager Medco Health
Solutions, Inc.,'' Federal Trade Commission (April 2, 2012), available
at https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2012/04/ftc-closes-
eight-month-investigation-express-scripts-incs.
\2\ Juliette Cubanski, Anthony Damico, and Tricia Neuman,
``Medicare Part D in 2018: The Latest on Enrollment, Premiums, and Cost
Sharing'' (May 17, 2018), available at https://www.kff.org/medicare/
issue-brief/medicare-part-d-in-2018-the-latest-on-enrollment-premiums-
and-cost-sharing/.
\3\ FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb, M.D., ``Capturing the Benefits
of Competition for Patients'' (March 7, 2018), available at https://
www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Speeches/ucm599833.htm.
I'd like to talk about consolidation, including the recent
integration of PBMs with insurance companies. Last year, I wrote to the
Justice Department on this issue. It's reported that the three largest
PBMs--who are before us today--now cover 71 percent of Medicare Part D
enrollees and 86 percent of stand-alone drug plan enrollees.\4\ Such
market power has raised concerns. FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said,
``the consolidation and market concentration make the rebating and
contracting schemes [of PBMs] all that more pernicious.''\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Juliette Cubanski, Anthony Damico, and Tricia Neuman,
``Medicare Part D in 2018: The Latest on Enrollment, Premiums, and Cost
Sharing'' (May 17, 2018), available at https://www.kff.org/medicare/
issue-brief/medicare-part-d-in-2018-the-latest-on-enrollment-premiums-
and-cost-sharing/.
\5\ FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb, M.D., ``Capturing the Benefits
of Competition for Patients'' (March 7, 2018), available at https://
www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Speeches/ucm599833.htm.
I want to hear briefly from each of you on whether the PBM industry
is competitive. For example, are there high barriers to entry for new
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
competitors?
Answer. Yes, the PBM industry is competitive. Despite
consolidation, there continue to be more than 30 PBMs operating today
in the U.S.\6\ (not including the multitude of other related players,
e.g., specialty drug management carve-out vendors.) Additionally, new
players regularly enter the market, including recent technology-focused
PBMs like RxAdvance and SmithRx, in addition to Flipt in 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Drug Channels Institute (2019, March), The 2019 Economic Report
on U.S. Pharmacies and Pharmacy Benefit Managers.
Question. I'm also interested in what effect the most recent
consolidations of PBMs and insurers has had on the bottom line for the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
government and consumer.
Do these arrangements result in a lower cost to the government--as
a payer--and the consumer? Please explain.
Answer. The health-care industry is facing an unprecedented amount
of change via a variety of market trends, all with the potential to
both individually and jointly impact government and consumer costs. In
addition to consolidation, other key market forces include: rising
consumerism in health care, movement towards outcomes-based models, and
adoption of new technologies--e.g., artificial intelligence.
Given the varying intertwined market dynamics, it is nearly
impossible to isolate the effects of consolidation. However, data shows
PBMs have and are expected to continue to leverage strategies,
including consolidation, to help control the rising cost of drugs.
Recent drug trend reports show that Prime and several other PBMs
are controlling pharmacy costs at low, single-digit levels,\7\ while
health-care costs overall are inflating.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Drug Channels Institute (May 22, 2019), ``Which PBM best
managed drug spending in 2018: CVS Health, Express Scripts, MedImpact,
or Prime Therapeutics?'' Retrieved from https://www.drugchannels.net/
2019/05/which-pbm-best-managed-drug-spending-in.html.
\8\ PwC Health Research Institute (June 2018), ``Medical cost
trend: behind the numbers.'' Retrieved from https://www.pwc.com/us/en/
industries/health-industries/library/behind-the-numbers.html.
Integrated Managed Care Organization (MCO) + PBM models are also
aimed at creating more efficiency and driving to the lowest net cost of
care. The recent wave of MCO + PBM consolidation is essentially aimed
at attempting to duplicate the same integrated and cost-efficient Blue
+ Prime model that Prime pioneered over 20 years ago. Today, through
organic growth and strategic alignment with other system players, this
model continues to evolve and deliver high quality pharmacy benefit
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
management and care while effectively controlling costs.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
manufacturer money
Question. What is the total dollar amount that you obtain from
pharmaceutical manufacturers in any form such as rebates, fees, etc.?
What is the total dollar amount that you remit to health plans?
Answer. Prime's default business model passes through 100 percent
of manufacturer rebates and administrative fees to clients, except in
instances where clients have negotiated to have Prime retain a portion
of manufacturer administrative fees to offset fees that Prime's clients
pay it for PBM services.
biosimilars
Question. Managed Care Organizations are on record as widely
supportive of the potential of biosimilars. However, most MCOs have
continued to support originator brand products and have not preferred
and often excluded less expensive biosimilars. For example, most MCOs
have kept Remicade (a treatment for rheumatoid arthritis and other
diseases) as the preferred agent on their formularies, and in most
cases to the exclusion of its biosimilar, Infliximab.
Why do you tout support for biosimilars while, at the same time,
inhibiting adoption of these less expensive products?
Answer. Prime has encouraged the use of biosimilars. Prime manages
drugs to the lowest net cost for our health plans, and there may be
instances where biosimilars will not be the lowest net cost product.
Biosimilars are treated the same way as brands for purposes of
formulary consideration (e.g., evaluated for safety, efficacy, and then
for lowest net cost and member transition considerations).
Other factors outside a PBM's control often inhibit adoption of
less expensive products such as regulations (e.g., interchangeability,
step therapy rules), provider buy-and-bill practices, patient
acceptance, and prescriber practices.
The FDA has just recently approved final guidance on
interchangeability. Only one manufacturer has submitted an application
for this designation. Without interchangeability designation, a
provider must write a prescription for a specific biosimilar product.
This slows adoption of biosimilar use. Furthermore, many biosimilar
agents are indicated for chronic conditions, where patients have been
stable on the branded product for many years. Patients and physicians,
alike, are resistant to the idea of switching stable patients to a
different therapy, even biosimilars.
Step Therapy Legislation: If the review of a medical policy or
utilization management policy results in an approval of a branded
product for a certain timeframe, it can be difficult to switch patients
while they are covered under that approval. Without an
interchangeability designation, each product must be considered a
unique brand and the patient can remain on that therapy for the
duration of the policy approval. This too, slows the adoption of
biosimilar use. In addition, some States have enacted step therapy
mandates that prohibit plans from requiring members to utilize low-cost
effective medications prior to being approved on high cost branded
medications.
Physician buy-and-bill contracts: Physician groups often have their
own contracts with manufacturers. If their billing practices make it
more lucrative to dispense the brand, it can be difficult to move
market share.
Question. HHS may broaden the scope of its proposed rule and
eliminate rebates between Medicare Advantage plans and manufacturers
for Part B drugs.
Would this realign incentives to encourage preferred access for
lower-cost drugs, such as biosimilars?
Answer. No, the removal of rebates will not encourage access to
lower-cost drugs because there is no guarantee that pharma will lower
their list prices. Prime will always recommend the lowest net cost drug
inclusive of rebates.
Question. What changes can we recommend/make to help you prefer
lower-cost drugs, such as biosimilars, without rebates?
Answer. Prime would support the following changes to increase the
adoption of lower cost biosimilar drugs by its health plan clients:
(1) Interchangeability: Designation being granted upon biosimilar
drug approval.
(2) Removal of the following anti-competitive practices that delay
biosimilars from coming to market: (a) pay-for-delay deals between
brand and biosimilar manufacturers (currently there are pay-for-delay
deals between brand and biosimilar manufacturers; (b) patent thickets;
(c) branded manufacturers preventing biosimilar manufacturers from
obtaining samples for testing; and (d) sham citizen petitions.
Question. Why is there such a disparity in reimbursed pharmacy
prices for specialty generic drugs in Part D (e.g., Imatinib)? Does
ownership of specialty pharmacy influence your reimbursement decision?
Answer. Under CMS guidelines there is no current definition of a
``specialty pharmacy,'' which means that any pharmacy regardless of
pharmacy type, services offered or accreditation may dispense a
specialty medication.
While Medicare guidelines require standard terms and conditions for
pharmacies to participate in a Medicare network, the CMS guidelines do
not require each pharmacy to agree to the same financial terms. In
fact, CMS has acknowledged that pharmacies may have different financial
terms due to their purchasing power or rural location.
Prime has implemented a specialty fee schedule for medications
dispensed by participating network pharmacies that aligns with the
pricing that Prime negotiated with the specialty pharmacy in which
Prime has joint ownership. Many pharmacies in the retail network have
refused to agree to the additional specialty drug fee schedule and
therefore are reimbursed at their retail rates. Prime's pharmacy
agreement outlines reimbursement for any drug dispensed by the pharmacy
and not the type of drug (specialty or traditional) in the situation
when the pharmacy did not agree to the specialty drug fee schedule. The
negotiation schedule also varies with pharmacies based upon each
pharmacy's renewal date which can create variability in pricing.
In addition, Prime's agreement with pharmacies establishes that
Prime will pay the pharmacy the lesser of the (a) pharmacy's usual and
customary price; (b) the pharmacy's submitted cost plus dispensing fee;
(c) the maximum allowable cost plus a dispensing fee; or (d) the
negotiated price plus a dispensing fee. Prime's goal is to ensure that
the member pays the lowest price (amount) possible. Therefore,
depending upon how the pharmacy prices the drug and our lesser of
logic, the same drug may be reimbursed differently by the pharmacy.
Prime's goal is always to offer the lowest net cost to our clients,
members and health plans. Prime implemented a specialty drug fee
schedule for medications dispensed by a participating network pharmacy
that was in addition to our standard financial terms that would align
with the pricing that Prime negotiated with the specialty pharmacy in
which Prime has joint ownership. In fact, Prime's joint ownership of a
specialty pharmacy enables Prime to have clearer insight into the
marketplace pricing of a drug by manufacturers and wholesalers to
establish pricing models that are effective for members, health plans
and pharmacies.
Question. I'm concerned with the recent trend of PBM's allowing
brand companies to ``pay for position'' on insurance formularies, which
results in seniors losing access to lower-cost generics and
biosimilars.
Do you ever exclude generic or biosimilar competitors from
formulary placement, or place these lower-cost drugs in higher cost-
sharing tiers that are generally reserved for non-preferred or brand
drugs?
Answer. Prime's clients may exclude generic or biosimilar
competitors from a formulary if there are safety concerns or the
generics or biosimilars are not the lowest net cost relative to the
brand or base biologic.
With regards to high-cost generics, formulary evaluation of new-to-
market generics is the same as the evaluation for any new drug. The
Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) Committee considers safety, efficacy,
and uniqueness, and then the drug is evaluated based on cost. In
certain circumstances, the net cost of a generic drugs may be
significantly higher than the brand because of the lack of generic
competition in the market. In these circumstances, the generic may be
placed at a higher tier than the brand until more lower cost generic
competition is available to avoid an increase in cost to the health
plan. Once the generic is available at a lower cost than the brand, the
health plan may add the generic to formulary or the drug tier lowered.
In these scenarios members pay the lowest net cost, regardless of brand
or generic status and the tier placement of the medication. Thus, the
plan ensures the most cost-effective medication at the best price is
available to the member. With regards to medications with potential
safety concerns, brand and generic medications may be excluded to
minimize adverse health outcomes and encourage the use of clinically
effective safer alternatives available.
delays and denials in cancer treatment
Question. I have received stories of cancer patients facing delays
or denials for their treatment due to PBM actions. Data shows that
breast cancer patients who experienced a 3-month or more delay in
treatment had a 12-percent lower 5-year survival rate compared with
breast cancer patients with only a 0- to 3-month delay.
What percent of patients experience a 14-day or longer delay in
receiving an oral oncolytic prescribed by their oncologist?
Answer. When medications are subject to prior authorization,
reviews are completed and decisions rendered, on average, within 4 days
for standard requests and 1 day for request marked as urgent. Outcomes
are communicated to the providers either through electronic prior
authorization (ePA) or fax over 95 percent of the time.
Question. What are the primary reasons patients experience delays
or denials for their treatments?
Answer. The primary reasons a patient may experience delays include
off-label, non-FDA approved use or for use in cancers that are not
addressed in guidelines. Our health plan clients' utilization
management policies allow for use of oncology medications for
indications approved in FDA labeling and/or supported by National
Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN), Drugs and Biologics compendia with
a category 1 or 2A recommendation, AHFS (http://
www.ahfsdruginformation.com/about-us/), or DrugDex level of evidence of
1 or 2A.
Question. What percent of determinations to delay or deny treatment
for cancer patients are made by an oncologist or health-care
professional with oncology training?
Answer. Any determination or delay in care is based on the
formulary and utilization management for drug safety and efficacy
concerns and published FDA appropriate uses for the drug (i.e., either
label or recognized compendia). In general, initial reviews are not
specifically reviewed by an oncology specialist. A specialist will
review any appeal level of review.
Question. Why is a PBM-owned specialty pharmacy better qualified to
manage a cancer patient's adherence and side effects than a community
cancer clinic with a medically integrated pharmacy?
Answer. The PBM-owned specialty pharmacy has view of all the
members medications via data from the PBM; this gives a comprehensive
view of the member that may have additional issues other than cancer
and seeing multiple physicians. A larger national based pharmacy such
as a PBM-owned specialty pharmacy will use clinically reviewed
assessment algorithms to address side effects and to track adherence
and also work very closely with the drug manufacture in reporting back
any trends that may be seen with a broad number of patients. The
pharmacy can also update the teaching and training for the member based
on new information being reviewed. Oncology centers should have oral
oncology medication management practices (education, toxicity
management, financial, etc.) in place for these patients, regardless of
where care is delivered as part of both nursing and oncologist society
quality measures standards. Depending on resources, the extent and
quality of those services vary greatly. This is where a specialty
pharmacy can consistently delivery these resources to every patient.
Increasing touch points and access to healthcare providers for these
services to patients, especially education, only enhances the care
being delivered.
direct and indirect remuneration (dir) fees
Question. Many community-based cancer clinics have established
medically integrated pharmacies so patients can access their oral
chemotherapy prescriptions or other medications at the point of care.
These practices are often assessed large DIR which are based on certain
quality measures targeted toward primary care.
Shouldn't pharmacies be evaluated on the type of drug dispensed and
disease managed rather than a one-size fits-all approach?
Answer. Under current law, there is no easy way to distinguish
among types of pharmacies. CMS regulations allow any participating
pharmacy in a Part D plan's Medicare network to dispense both
traditional (non-specialty) and specialty medications. Prime's pharmacy
price concessions models (DIR) applies the same metrics to all
participating pharmacies in our Medicare networks to be consistent with
the CMS any willing provider provisions. Therefore, a specialty
pharmacy that participates in Prime's Medicare network must meet the
same terms and conditions as a non-specialty pharmacy.
Question. Does assessing large DIR fees on medically integrated
pharmacies drive patients to PBM-owned specialty pharmacies?
Answer. No. Most patients pay fixed copayments amounts for the
patient cost share portion and these copayments do not vary by
pharmacy. In addition, if the patient utilizes an out of network
pharmacy, the patient may pay more as there are no contracted
negotiated prices with an out of network pharmacy.
Question. According to CMS, from 2012 to 2017 PBMs imposed a 45,000
percent increase in the amount of DIR fees pharmacies had to pay PBMs
and PDPs under Part D, and revenues earned from these fees increased
225 percent per year during this period.\9\ I thought PDPs and PBMs
were supposed to pay pharmacies for dispensing drugs to patients. Why
do pharmacies have to pay DIR fees to PBMs at all?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ CMS Proposed Rule: Modernizing Part D and Medicare Advantage to
Lower Drug Prices and Reduce Out-of-Pocket Expenses, 83 Fed. Reg.
62152, 62174 (November 30, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Why are pharmacies forced to pay DIR and other fees to PBMs?
Answer. DIR is a technical term created by CMS that is specific to
the Medicare Part D program to account for performance and quality
measures that cannot be reasonably determined at point of sale (POS)--
i.e., at the time a medicine is dispensed. DIR is reported to CMS after
the contract year to which the DIR relates. As a performance-based
assessment program, DIR helps drive high quality clinical and pharmacy
performance. Metrics vary but can include generic dispensing rates,
medication adherence, reducing inappropriate drug use (such as high-
risk medicines e.g., controlled substances), diabetes disease
management, audit performance and error rates, cost-effective
dispensing rates, and align with Medicare Star Ratings that Part D
plans are held to. CMS annually issues DIR reporting guidance and
provides careful oversight to the program. DIR fees are utilized for
quality programs including lower member premiums by the plan. Prime
passes 100 percent of the DIR fee to the health plan and the DIR fee is
reported to CMS. DIR fees are part of the larger movement to measure
quality across the provider spectrum of care.
Question. According to CMS, PBMs justify DIR fees as adjustments to
improve quality. CMS also found that PBMs and PDPs withhold
substantially more in reductions in payments than as rewards paid to
pharmacies.\10\ Aren't so-called ``quality adjustments'' that collect
more for ``poor performance'' than they pay out for ``high
performance'' just another way for PBMs to collect even more money from
pharmacies?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Id. at 62174.
Why do PBMs collect more in quality payment adjustment than they
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
pay pharmacies under Part D?
Answer. For Prime's clients, there are many claims where less is
taken in pharmacy adjustments than what the pharmacies are paid under
Part D. There are some low-cost claims, where more is collected than
they were paid, and lastly, there are some claims paid at Usual and
Customary Rates, where no DIR adjustments are made.
DIR fees help to reduce premiums and improve quality. A 2017
Milliman report, ``Value of Direct and Indirect Remuneration (DIR):
Impact on Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Plan (PDP) Program
Stakeholders'' found that by encouraging pharmacies to meet contractual
``pay-for-performance'' standards based on measures such as the generic
dispensing rate (GDR), pharmacy DIR can have a significant effect on
savings. For instance, a one percentage point increase in the GDR for
prescription drug plans would have saved the Part D program and its
beneficiaries an estimated $15.3 billion since the inception of the
program. Over the next 10 years, that savings increases to an estimated
$68.9 billion for a 1 percentage-point improvement in the GDR. Gaps in
the standards of quality and treatment patients receive ultimately
increases the burden of illness and health costs nationwide.
formulary placement/generic tiering
Question. In 2011, 71 percent of generic drugs in Part D were on
the lowest tier designed for generics; by 2019, that number decreased
to only 14 percent of generics. According to an Avalere study, this
practice cost seniors $22 billion in higher out-of-pocket costs since
2015, costs that could have been avoided through the proper formulary
placement of lower-cost generics. This practice, known as ``paying for
position,'' allows brands to block uptake of lower-cost generics and
biosimilars, thereby unnecessarily increasing out-of-pocket costs for
seniors.
Do you ever exclude generic or biosimilar competitors from
formulary placement, or place these lower-cost drugs in higher cost-
sharing tiers that are generally reserved for non-preferred or brand
drugs? Do you ever consider portfolio or bundled rebates with brand
manufacturers?
Answer. Prime evaluates all drugs including new-to-market generics
for clinical efficacy, safety, and member transition issues before
considering costs. Prime's clients may exclude and/or place drugs on
higher tiers based on cost or safety concerns. In certain
circumstances, generic drugs remain at a higher net cost relative to
the brand due to a lack of generic competition. In these instances,
Prime may recommend to our clients that the generic be delayed until
more lower cost generic competition is available. Once the generic is
available at a lower cost than the brand, the generic is added to
formulary. In scenarios where the brand is preferred over the generic
Prime recommends that the member's cost share for the brand is set
equal to the lower generic cost sharing tier. Prime may consider the
added incremental benefit from a package of drugs, but this bundling is
not a primary driver of decision-making.
Question. When you place generics on your formularies, do you place
that generic favorably to brand products--in other words, on generic-
only tiers?
Answer. Prime evaluates all drugs including generics for clinical
efficacy, safety and member transition issues before considering costs.
Generics are generally given a favorable status over their brand
counterpart on Prime's clients' formularies assuming that they are the
lower net cost products.
Question. When a generic becomes available, do you place it on your
formularies immediately?
Answer. Formulary placement of a new generic product will depend on
whether or not the brand is currently covered on the formulary. If the
branded product is currently on formulary, the generic is immediately
added if it is available at a lower net cost to the plan. If the
branded product has been excluded or non-formulary, the generic would
also not be available until it is reviewed by the P&T Committee. In
scenarios where the brand is preferred over the generic Prime
recommends that the member's cost share for the brand is set equal to
the lower generic cost sharing tier.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. John Thune
Question. You've all shared your ability to leverage technology
such as real-time benefit tools to help patients and providers
understand drug costs at the point of prescribing, as well as how
technology can be used to help identify opportunities to provide
enhanced support and medication management for enrollees. What policies
can we consider to incentivize greater uptake of these tools?
Answer. On May 23, 2019, CMS released a final Part D rule,
``Modernizing Part D and Medicare Advantage to Lower Drug Prices and
Reduce Out of Pocket Expenses'' (CMS-4180-F) requiring all Medicare
plans to have a real-time benefit tool in place and connected to one
EHR by January 1, 2021. This is a great start for Medicare but many
additional steps are necessary to ensure universal access,
interoperability, and adoption.
Additional policy is necessary to require accessibility of real
time benefit tools across Medicare, Medicaid, Commercial, and
Marketplace plans so all citizens can benefit from the technology. The
Medicare rule sets a threshold requiring connectivity to one EHR.
Members whose providers use other EHRs will not have access to the
information. There are no requirements in the rule to ensure access at
the members preferred provider or to require provider group
connectivity to a solution. This may limit the availability of
information at the point of prescribing. Developing these connectivity
requirements would ensure that plans are connected to the EHR systems
and provider groups that their members use.
Interoperability is a challenge in the current environment because
the plan/PBM must establish connectivity with multiple vendors due to
exclusivity contracts that are in place between EHRs and vendors that
provide real time benefit inquiry solutions. To provide thorough and
complete access to all beneficiaries at any physician they choose, PBMs
will need to contract and connect to many vendors. Limiting the use of
exclusivity agreements and clearly defining connectivity and access
requirements is necessary.
The largest barrier to adoption at the provider level is
inconsistent and inaccurate information being presented at the point of
prescribing. This issue is the result of varying proprietary methods of
real time benefit inquiry that exist in the industry. Mandating
provider and plan use of the National Council for Prescription Drug
Programs, (NCPDP) standard for real time benefit check currently in
development would ensure all relevant information is presented in real
time including: coverage, pricing for the selected drug, therapeutic
alternatives, and alternate pharmacy channels. Standardization would
allow the use of real time benefit information to be measured so
providers can be incentivized to act on the information and prescribe
the lowest-cost drug.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Richard Burr
Question. Pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) offer a variety of
contract designs to health insurance plans, allowing the insurer or
client to choose the best structure for their customers. During the
Finance Committee hearing on April 9, 2019, each witness stated that,
in the contracts structured to allow for the passthrough of rebate
dollars at the point of sale, PBMs do not keep any portion of the
rebate. If the PBM does not keep a portion of the rebate, what type of
revenue do PBMs receive from these contracts? What percent of your
contracts are point of sale and what percent utilize a structure
providing a percentage of the rebate back to the PBM?
Answer. Prime offers commercial health plan clients and employer
groups the option to adjust the prices of drugs in their benefit plans
to reflect rebate savings, including the option of applying the rebate
savings at the point of sale when a member receives a prescription from
a pharmacy. When clients deploy a partial POS rebate, Prime's general
practice is to return the remainder of the rebate to the client. As
Prime's general business model to pass through all revenue received
from manufacturers to clients, Prime's primary source of revenue is
client administrative fees. However, in some cases, clients have
negotiated to have Prime retain a portion of manufacturer
administrative fees to offset fees that Prime's clients pay it for PBM
services.
In the commercial market, the majority of members served by Prime
are not affected by high list price influenced cost-sharing. They pay
flat dollar copays rather than coinsurance (i.e., a percentage of the
list price). Indeed, only 1 percent of the commercial membership served
by Prime is subject to coinsurance with no out of pocket maximum, while
56 percent of the members we serve are enrolled in plans with a flat
copay without a deductible and 4 percent are in plans with a flat copay
with low deductibles. Neither of these latter two groups are
meaningfully affected by the list price of a drug.
Similarly, in Medicare Part D, many beneficiaries do not face
significant cost sharing. Cost sharing is minimized for the 29 percent
of Part D beneficiaries that receive low-income subsidies, also called
``Extra Help,'' who pay flat, nominal amounts for drugs including
brands.
It is Prime's business model to pass back 100 percent of the
manufacturer rebates we negotiate to our health plan clients. For some
clients we may retain a portion of the rebates in lieu of a higher
administrative fee. Clients use these rebates to help offset premiums.
If a client chooses to offer POS rebates directly to all or any subset
of their members, that is the client's decision. POS rebates are a
newer offering and currently only a couple of our clients have chosen
to adopt our POS product. While the majority of plan sponsors continue
to use rebates as an effective mechanism to control premium costs or
reducing costs for all members through benefit designs such as lower
copays, POS rebates are used by approximately 5 percent of our
commercial clients' members today. It presents flexibility and an
alternative for those who want to do to so. However, it should be noted
that not all branded drugs receive rebates, so the reduced pricing is
limited to select brand medications and not every member may realize
the benefits. Currently, we do not have a POS rebate option in Medicare
Part D.
Question. It is our understanding that contracts with
pharmaceutical manufacturers may also take a variety of forms. In
calendar years 2016, 2017 and 2018, what was the total dollar amount
that you obtained from pharmaceutical manufacturers in any form such as
rebates, fees, etc.? What is the total dollar amount that was passed on
to health insurance plans with which you have an agreement or contract?
Answer. This question requests proprietary data. Prime's default
business model passes thru 100 percent of manufacturer rebates and
administrative fees to clients, except in instances where clients have
negotiated to have Prime retain a portion of manufacturer
administrative fees to offset fees that Prime's clients pay it for PBM
services.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Tim Scott
Question. One challenge that I see, when considering the medical
treatment marketplace, is that we have a new wave of life-saving
treatments--of incredible cures we could never have dreamed of, even 10
or 15 years ago--for which cost, by necessity, is going to be a major
issue. You look, for instance, at a condition like sickle cell disease.
For the average SCD patient who reaches age 45, lifetime treatment
costs are at roughly $1 million--and there are complications that can
make that figure even higher. Now that we see therapies coming down the
pipeline that could erase those long-term costs and drastically improve
the quality of life for sickle cell patients, the question becomes, how
can our current payment systems adapt to--and absorb--the high costs
necessary to bring treatments like these to market and to ensure that
we continue to see innovations like these ones moving forward?
Answer. Prime believes value based agreements (VBA) are a promising
approach to ensuring high cost treatment, especially one-time
treatments like gene therapies, are bringing value commensurate to the
price. As these high cost therapies have unknown durability and long-
term safety, VBAs that allow for a value warranty ameliorate some of
the price to value concern and create acceptability for the up-front
high cost. In developing VBAs, Prime engages all aspects of member care
such as health monitoring/diagnostic testing, appropriate therapy,
adherence, health outcomes, and total cost of care. However, current
Medicaid best price rules and limited anti-kickback safe harbors
restrain and limit the value of these arrangements. We recommend
Congress and/or HHS create a VBA safe harbor to protect innovative,
value based arrangements and address the Medicaid best price rules.
A potential adaptation of the current payment system for high cost
one-time treatments is to have separate federally subsidized program
like those created for End Stage Renal Disease and Vaccination Injury
Compensation Program. These programs ensure continued access to life
saving vaccines and dialysis, when costs are substantial.
Another potential adaptation is the ``Netflix'' model, in which a
single-source manufacturer is contracted to provide a specific drug to
an entire population's utilization in exchange for a monthly capitated
payment set using a baseline utilization rate. This model also employs
a manufacturer rebate to reimburse the contracting entity for claim
payments exceeding the capitated rate. This model is actively being
piloted in Medicaid State programs in Louisiana and Washington State.
Application outside of Medicaid may require an exemption from Medicaid
Best Price calculation.
Question. And along the same lines, beyond creating some much-
needed clarity around value-based arrangements--which I've been working
with Senators Cassidy and Warner to accomplish legislatively--are there
steps that Congress could take to facilitate these innovative payment
models?
Answer. Please see response to the previous question. In summary,
Prime requests VBAs be exempt from Medicaid Best Price calculations or
a Medicaid Best Price Safe Harbor be created. Currently, there is no
anti-kickback statue safe harbor or Medicaid Best Price safe harbor for
VBA. We urge you to have the HHS create safe harbors, or for Congress
to enact legislation allowing exempting VBAs from anti-kickback
statutes and Medicaid Best Price calculations.
Question. I'm also interested in the role that technology can play
in helping to drive down drug costs--as well as to increase medication
adherence. Some estimates suggest that between 50 and 75 percent of
patients don't take their medications as prescribed, and that one in
five new prescriptions go unfilled. And study after study shows that
cost is a key factor here. As a consequence, we see roughly 125,000
deaths from non-adherence every year, along with more than $100 billion
in excess costs to the health-care system. To what extent can
technology help providers and patients to make more informed and cost-
effective choices about prescriptions--and to then adhere to these
prescriptions?
Answer. Prime is using technology to provide real time, member-
specific benefit coverage and drug cost information to providers,
patients and pharmacists, helping all of them make better, more cost-
effective decisions. Specifically, for new prescriptions, patients can
use smart phone or web sites to access their own benefit plan, see if a
particular drug is covered and, if so, at what amount they will have to
pay out of pocket and what price they will pay at local pharmacies or
via mail order. From this electronic source, patients can evaluate what
a drug would cost if it were filled today--and see any other lower
cost, covered drugs that might also be available under their benefit
plan. When doctors go to start a new prescription for a patient, Real
Time Benefit Check (RTBC) will show the member specific coverage and
benefit information for the selected drug, as well as for therapeutic
alternatives that may also be covered. By presenting lower cost,
covered drugs and the cost associated with each, prescribers can also
help save cost for their patients and the insurance payers.
For existing prescriptions, before a scheduled doctor appointment,
Prime evaluates the complete list of drugs taken by that patient,
looking for lower cost options that are covered by the patient's
benefit plan. The doctor is sent a report of drug savings
opportunities, based on that member's drug list. Then, during that
patient's appointment the doctor can review this with the patient and
assess (and make) changes based on the lower cost covered drugs that
address the member's condition.
Prime is piloting technology to proactively review long term
prescriptions to assess if lower cost options might be available for
patients. If a lower cost alternative is found, then the savings
opportunity is presented to the patient--who can request their
prescription be changed to the new, lower cost drug.
Technology makes it easier for patients and providers to track
adherence to medications. One tool Prime is testing shows a member's
cost share and any additional steps needed for filling the original or
alternative drug, enabling providers to discuss options with members
and make informed decisions together at the point of care. This
technology helps providers select the most cost-effective drug the
first time and helps members better manage their drug spend. Providing
everyone in the delivery system with access to real-time prescription
cost and benefit information can not only reduce unnecessary cost
surprises when filling a prescription, but it can also drive medication
adherence.
Question. And maybe more to the point, to the extent that these
technological tools are out there, what steps are you and your clients
taking to encourage physicians and patients to use them?
Answer. Prime is making prescribers and the health systems aware of
the tools we offer, encouraging adoption of the technology. We work
with our clients and partners to communicate the technology offerings
described in response to Senator Scott's question above. In addition,
Prime is training patients and providers on the new technology and the
benefits of using the technology, and lastly Prime offers incentives to
some provider groups via performance based incentives around medication
adherence, lowering cost of care and drug spend. Where applicable,
these tools are added incentives for providers to participate and
utilize technology cost savings tools like these.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Bill Cassidy
Question. Are there ever cases where a patient in your health plan
or one of the health plans for whom you negotiate as a PBM pays more
for a medicine than the plan spends on a net basis, when you reimburse
the pharmacy for that same medicine? In those cases, what entity
receives the benefit of the difference between the amount the patient
pays and the net amount the plan pays?
Answer. Yes, depending on the benefit design there may be
situations where a patient pays more for a medicine than the plan
spends on the net basis. In those cases, the health plan receives the
full benefit of the difference that can be used to manage premiums,
benefit design and member programs.
Question. In calendar years 2015, 2016, and 2017, what percent of
your revenue was from fees paid by plans, fees paid by manufacturers,
other fees, pharmacy spread, or rebates? Same question as to profits.
Of all revenue generated from part D contracts, what percent did you
retain?
Answer. Part D regulations require all pharmacy discounts and all
rebates be accounted for in what the plan paid the PBM. The pharmacy
paid amount, by regulation, matches the amount charge to the plan (pass
through). All rebates are reported on the annual DIR report that plans
submit to CMS. CMS audits plans' financials, including the
administrative fees charged to plan clients.
Question. Should a patient ever pay more out of pocket for a
medicine than what you pay the pharmacy for that medicine?
Answer. Depending on the benefit design there may be situations
where a patient pays more for a medicine than the plan spends on the
net basis. In those cases, the health plan receives the full benefit of
the difference that can be used to manage premiums, benefit design and
member programs.
Question. PBM revenue from fees has risen, illustrated below.
Further, PBM's retained revenue as a percent of net retail drug spend
has consistently increased. What do you attribute this increase to?
Answer. As drug costs have risen, PBM fees have generally increased
because they are a percent of a higher number. Prime is not focused on
generating revenue, but on generating savings, and our default model is
to pass 100 percent of rebates back to our owner clients.
Question. How are bona fide service fees established? What was your
revenue generated in part D by bona fide fees in 2015, 2016, and 2017?
Answer. Prime does not collect any bona fide services fees in Part
D. All manufacturer administrative fees are reported as DIR because
they are passed back to clients directly or indirectly in lieu of
higher PBM administrative fees.
Question. A Health Affairs article suggests plans may prefer paying
PBMs using rebates instead of fees, as ``Using retained rebates to
cover PBM costs in lieu of fees could artificially lower reported
administrative costs and make it easier to meet government medical loss
ratio (MLR) requirements.'' Is it true that paying the PBM a percent of
rebates would keep that revenue from counting towards a plan's MLR?
Answer. Prime is not a health plan and not in a position to comment
on internal MLR accounting matters.
Question. Would you support an industry-wide standard set of
performance metrics by which a PBM would set its pharmacy contracts,
which would be tailored based on regional patient populations, to give
certainty for local pharmacies?
Answer. Prime would support the implementation of a standard set of
quality measures using the Pharmacy Quality Alliance as the measure
steward. See https://www.pqaalliance.org/our-story for more information
about PQA and its multi-stakeholder membership. PQA is a public-private
partnership with CMS. However, the PQA measures should be considered a
standard baseline measure set and not prevent plans from competing on
other measures that would encourage plans' development of innovative
contracting strategies and experimenting with additional measures that
can improve quality.
Prime values measuring a pharmacy's quality performance to
determine the pharmacy's effective management of their patients on such
metrics as medication adherence, cost management, and health outcomes.
We currently utilize the PQA measures for measuring and monitoring a
pharmacy's quality performance. The pharmacy performance results on
these PQA measures determine the amount of pharmacy price concessions
that a pharmacy pays as well as the amount of incentive payments that a
pharmacy receives from a plan.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Steve Daines
Question. In Medicare Part D, beneficiaries' deductible and
coinsurance payments are calculated based on the price negotiated
between the PBM and the pharmacy.
Does this take into account rebates and discounts the PBM
negotiates separately with pharmaceutical manufacturers?
If yes, what percentage of the time is this the case?
Answer. No, given the retrospective nature of rebates, the
deductible and coinsurance does not take into account rebates and
discounts the PBM negotiates separately with pharmaceutical
manufacturers.
Question. In calendar years 2016, 2017, and 2018, what share of
brand prescriptions covered by the Part D plans you contract with were
filled in the deductible or required beneficiaries to pay coinsurance?
What was the total amount beneficiaries spent out-of-pocket for those
prescriptions? What would beneficiaries' total out-of-pocket spending
have been under the same cost sharing structure if their payments were
based on the net price to the Part D plan, inclusive of rebates and
other price concessions, rather than the price negotiated between your
PBM and the pharmacy?
Answer. In calendar year 2016, based on the standard CMS Part D
Benefit, 100 percent of brand prescriptions filled required a member to
pay a copay or coinsurance. Of all prescriptions filled, 10 percent
were brand. The total amount of beneficiaries' out-of-pocket spend for
those prescriptions accounted for $635 million in drug spend. The
beneficiaries out of pocket spend based on the net price to Prime would
have been $519 million. This accounts for an 18.4-percent decrease in
cost per Rx, reducing the cost from $564 to $460.
In calendar year 2017, based on the standard CMS Part D Benefit,
100 percent of brand prescriptions filled required a member to pay a
copay or coinsurance. Of all prescriptions filled, 9 percent were brand
prescriptions. The total amount of beneficiaries' out-of-pocket spend
for those prescriptions accounted for $689 million in drug spend. The
beneficiaries out of pocket spend based on the net price to Prime would
have been $555 million. This accounts for a 19.5-percent decrease in
cost per Rx, reducing the cost from $637 to $513.
In calendar year 2018, based on the standard CMS Part D Benefit,
100 percent of brand prescriptions filled required a member to pay a
copay or coinsurance. Of all prescriptions filled, 9 percent were brand
prescriptions. The total amount of beneficiaries' out-of-pocket spend
for those prescriptions accounted for $724 million in drug spend. The
beneficiaries out of pocket spend based on the net price to Prime would
have been $562 million. This accounts for a 22.4-percent decrease in
cost per Rx, reducing the cost from $698 to $542.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
spread pricing in medicaid
Question. A PBM practice that has come up quite a bit recently is
the practice of spread pricing. Spread pricing occurs when PBMs charge
health plans more for prescription drugs than they actually reimburse
pharmacies, and then pocket the different as profit.
Do you engage in spread pricing practices?
Answer. We do not engage in spread pricing in Medicaid.
rebate demands
Question. The use of rebates as a negotiating tool has led to
problematic incentives in the prescription drug supply chain. For
example, drug companies have argued that they increase list prices in
response to demands from PBMs for high or increasing rebates.
Does your company currently have, or has your company had since
January 2013, any agreements with drug manufacturers that:
Require equivalent rebates, even in the case of a drug for which
the list price has been lowered.
Answer. No.
Question. Require advance notice of changes in the list price of
drugs, including reductions or increases in list price?
Answer. No.
revenue sources
Question. Please provide an annual breakdown of the following
components of the revenue you received from drug manufacturers from
January 1, 2013 through December 31, 2018: dollar amount and percent of
revenue from rebates; dollar amount and percent of revenue from
administrative fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from
distribution fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from marketing
fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from clinical case
management fees; and all other sources of revenue from manufacturers
not listed above.
Answer. The answers to these questions require proprietary data.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. Should the CREATES Act become law, what commitment can
your company making to covering generics as soon as they are approved
and passing those savings on to patients?
Answer. Prime has long supported the CREATES Act. Prime evaluates
all drugs including new to market generics for clinical efficacy,
safety and member transition issues before considering costs, in the
context of their impact to health plan costs and the premiums their
members pay. In certain circumstances, generic drugs remain at a higher
tier relative to the brand due to a lack of generic competition and
significantly higher price point. In these instances, Prime may
recommend to our clients that the generic be maintained at a higher
tier or excluded until more lower cost generic competition is available
to avoid an increase in member premiums. Once the generic is available
at a lower cost than the brand, the generic is added to formulary or
the drug tier lowered. In these scenarios members pay the lowest net
cost, regardless of brand or generic status and the tier placement of
the medication. Thus, the plan ensures the most cost-effective
medication at the best price is available to the member. With regards
to medications with potential safety concerns, brand and generic
medications may be placed on a higher tier or excluded to minimize
adverse health outcomes and encourage the use of clinically effective
safer alternatives available.
Question. What are your concerns with point-of-sale rebates, and
what alternatives do you propose to such rebates to improve consumer
savings at the pharmacy counter?
Answer. If the full value of the rebate is passed on, there is the
potential for pharmaceutical competitors to determine the value of a
rebate given by competitors and create a situation rife with the
opportunity for tacit collusion.
Point-of-sale rebates help those who face high coinsurance or
deductibles but may cause an increase in premium. In the commercial
market, the majority of members served by Prime are not affected by
high list price influenced cost-sharing. They pay flat dollar copays
rather than coinsurance (i.e., a percentage of the list price). Indeed,
only 1 percent of the commercial membership served by Prime is subject
to coinsurance with no out-of-pocket maximum, while 56 percent of the
members we serve are enrolled in plans with a flat copay without a
deductible and 4 percent are in plans with a flat copay with low
deductibles. Neither of these latter two groups are meaningfully
affected by the list price of a drug.
Question. What are the specific steps your company is taking to
move PCSK9 inhibitors off the specialty tier in Medicare Part D and to
fixed copay tiers given that prices went down by 60 percent and are no
longer above the specialty tier threshold?
Why haven't your plans moved it already, given that CMS allows
plans to make positive mid-year formulary changes that improve patient
access and affordability?
Answer. Repatha is on Prime's clients' Medicare formulary on a
preferred brand tier.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Benjamin L. Cardin
drug rebate rule and higher part d premiums
Question. In January, the Department of Health and Human Services
released a proposal to reform prescription drug rebates paid by
pharmaceutical manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers under
Medicare Part D. The OIG proposal attempts to ban most rebates by
eliminating their regulatory protections and creating two new safe
harbor provisions: one to expressly protect discounts applied directly
at the point-of-sale (POS) for consumers, and another to protect
certain service fees that manufacturers pay to PBMs for services
furnished to health plans. The only service fees that would be
permissible under the proposal are those that are fixed, and not based
on a percentage of sales and not based on volume or the value of other
business generated between the parties. The proposed rule was designed
to address the Department's concerns with the current rebate system,
which HHS believes rewards high list prices, discourages the use of
generics and biosimilars, and does not reflect patient out-of-pocket
costs. For consumers, this proposal may result in lower costs at the
pharmacy counter, but Part D premiums may increase as a result.
Could you explain which Part D beneficiaries could see savings on
their drug costs at the pharmacy counter and which Part D beneficiaries
could not see lower drug costs?
Answer. Point-of-sale rebates help those who face high coinsurance
or deductibles but may cause an increase in premium.
In Medicare Part D, many beneficiaries do not face significant
cost-sharing. Cost-sharing is minimized for the 29 percent of Part D
beneficiaries that receive low-
income subsidies, also called ``Extra Help,'' who pay flat, nominal
amounts for drugs including brands.\11\ Prime realizes that a small
percentage of beneficiaries are challenged by the current Part D
benefit design due to the high cost of certain medications. As MedPAC
reports, in 2016, approximately 360,000 Part D beneficiaries filled a
prescription for which a single claim would meet the maximum out-of-
pocket threshold, up from 33,000 in 2010.\12\ Prime welcomes the
opportunities to work with policymakers, beneficiaries and plans to
help Part D enrollees who face high cost-sharing. At the same time, we
recognize that Part D enrollees are very premium sensitive, and are
generally pleased with their benefit. A recent nationwide survey found
that 85 percent of Part D enrollees are satisfied with their Medicare
Part D prescription drug coverage, with over eight out of 10 also
saying that their Part D plans provide ``good value.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ J. Cubanski, A. Damico, and T. Neuman, ``Medicare Part D in
2018: The Latest on Enrollment, Premiums, and Cost Sharing,'' May 17,
2018, downloaded from https://www.kff.org/medicare/issue-brief/
medicare-part-d-in-2018-the-latest-on-enrollment-premiums-and-cost-
sharing/.
\12\ Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, Report to the Congress:
Medicare Payment Policy, March 2019, Chapter 14: ``The Medicare
prescription drug program (Part D): Status report.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
perverse incentive to place more expensive drugs on formularies
Question. In a Senate Finance Committee hearing had a few weeks
ago, many pharmaceutical companies argued that the current rebate
structure incentivizes high list prices. These companies argue that the
higher the list price of the drug, the greater the rebates, and
therefore, the more profit the PBM earns. While contracts between PBMs,
Part D Plans, and pharmaceutical companies require PBMs to pass through
100 percent of the negotiated rebate back to insurance plans, I worry
that this structure could incentivize PBMs to favor a more expensive
drug on the formulary because they could get a higher rebate.
Is there an incentive for a PBM to place a higher cost drug on the
Part D formulary because the PBM receives a larger rebate for that more
expensive drug? Why or why not?
Answer. No, Prime does not have such an incentive, but we cannot
speak for all PBMs. While rebates are an important savings tool, they
are not Prime's first consideration in making formulary
recommendations. Prime's formulary selection process is tied to safety
and efficacy consideration before accounting for competitive pricing.
In considering competitive pricing, we take a ``low net cost''
approach: Prime's clients will often forgo rebates on a certain drug in
favor of a clinically equivalent, lower-cost medication. In Medicare
Part D, Prime has more than a 90-percent generic dispensing rate, and
generic drugs generally do not offer rebates. In situations in which a
rebated drug is covered and rebates are earned, Prime's model is to
pass back 100 percent of the value of rebates we negotiate to our
clients.
direct and indirect remuneration fees
Question. I have heard from independent pharmacies in Maryland that
have struggled with Pharmacy Benefit Managers and direct and indirect
remuneration (DIR) fees. According to independent pharmacies, there are
times when DIR fees are based on performance, and these fees range from
$2-$7 for certain types of maintenance prescriptions and are often
collected retroactively--weeks or even months after a prescription was
filled. A PBM can take money back from the pharmacy when the pharmacies
haven not met a PBM's performance standard. In these instances, the PBM
claws back money and creates a situation where the pharmacy does not
receive adequate reimbursement to cover its costs. As a result, DIR
fees can be a significant financial loss to pharmacies and an
additional cost burden to patients.
Could you explain what performance measures are considered when
determining a DIR fee?
Answer. Prime includes performance metrics that are related to CMS
Star ratings such as adherence to statin medications, statin use in
persons with diabetes, adherence to auto immune medications, adherence
to multiple sclerosis medications and metrics relative to cost such as
generic dispensing rates and 90-day supply fill rates.
Question. How is that performance measure communicated to the
pharmacy?
Answer. Performance measures are part of Prime's contracts with
pharmacies either directly or through their pharmacy service
administrative organizations (PSAOs). Prime uses EQUIPP, an industry
standard dashboard that allows pharmacists to track their performance.
Performance scores are communicated to pharmacies during the quarterly
reconciliation process. In addition, Prime utilizes a national pharmacy
quality platform that hosts the pharmacy performance score on the
adherence metrics, and statin use in person with diabetes on which the
pharmacy can view their performance.
Question. How much does your company receive in DIR fees?
Answer. One hundred percent of the collected performance related
DIR fees in Part D are passed on to the health plan and reported to
CMS.
Question. How much does your company receive in performance-related
DIR fees?
Answer. One hundred percent of the collected performance related
DIR fees in Part D are passed on to the health plan and reported to
CMS.
Question. Are those fees passed on to the consumer? If so, how?
Answer. These fees are used to lower the premiums Medicare
beneficiaries pay. A 2017 Milliman report, ``Value of Direct and
Indirect Remuneration (DIR): Impact on Medicare Part D Prescription
Drug Plan (PDP) Program Stakeholders,'' found that by encouraging
pharmacies to meet contractual ``pay-for-performance'' standards based
on measures such as the generic dispensing rate (GDR), pharmacy DIR can
have a significant effect on savings. For instance, a one percentage
point increase in the GDR for prescription drug plans would have saved
the Part D program and its beneficiaries an estimated $15.3 billion
since the inception of the program. Over the next 10 years, that
savings increases to an estimated $68.9 billion for a one percentage
point improvement in the GDR.
drug shortages
Question. Currently there are over 270 drugs in shortage. Drug
shortages happen for many reasons such as manufacturing and quality
problems, natural disasters, and inventory practices of wholesalers and
pharmacies. Drug shortages cause harm to providers, hospitals, and most
importantly patients. Pharmacists and providers must spend significant
amounts of time on researching alternative drug treatments for the
patient, which may not always be the most optimal therapies.
As a Pharmacy Benefit Manager, you have contractual agreements with
pharmaceutical companies in order to place their drugs on a plan's
formulary. While I understand that drug shortages happening in both the
inpatient and outpatient settings, there may be a role PBMs can play in
protecting patients.
For the prescription drugs you negotiate to cover on a plan
formulary, could you use your negotiating power to ensure a drug is
available to a patient? Why or Why not?
Answer. It is Prime's understanding from the FDA fall 2018 meeting
on drug shortages that the majority of drug shortages occur in the
hospital setting. Prime only negotiates drug discounts for the
outpatient setting. Many shortages result from manufacturer
deficiencies, which are beyond the reach of the PBM.
Question. What do you do to ensure that patients have the drugs
they need?
Answer. When the preferred product is no longer available, we will
generally recommend that our health plan clients move a previously non-
preferred drug into preferred status.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown
biosimilars
Question. During the hearing, each of you expressed support for
biosimilars, and most of you indicated you try to take advantage of
available biosimilars to help lower costs. When I asked each of you to
identify solutions to help ensure a robust biosimilar marketplace here
in the U.S, most of you mentioned things Congress or the administration
could do to help ensure uptake of biosimilars--from lowering the
exclusivity period for biologics to finalizing guidance on
interchangability at the FDA. However, none of you offered any
solutions or ideas for what your company could do to help ensure timely
uptake of biosimilars, a robust U.S. biosimilars market, and a
resulting cost savings to patients to taxpayers.
Most of the biosimilars currently approved and on the market in the
U.S. are reimbursed through the medical benefit. What are the
similarities and differences in how rebates are passed onto patients
and providers in the medical benefit versus pharmacy benefit. In your
answer, please describe these similarities and differences across each
of your books of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare, Medicaid).
Answer. Prime has encouraged the use of biosimilars and has placed
them in a parity position across our standard formularies. Prime
manages drugs to the lowest net cost for our health plans and there may
be instances where biosimilars will not be the lowest net cost product.
Prime, along with the clients we support, evaluate market dynamics and
ability to move market share in determining the lowest net cost
products. There is not a significant difference in lines of business.
Prime's general business model is to pass 100 percent of the rebates
back to our clients regardless of benefit--medical or pharmacy.
Question. Do any of your plans require the use of a higher list
price, branded product over the use of a therapeutically equivalent
lower list price generic or biosimilar product? Why? If a plan
restricts the use of a biosimilar or generic product in lieu of an
innovator or brand name product, do patients pay more out-of-pocket
than they would if the biosimilar was preferred?
Answer. In certain instances this may occur. Biosimilars may not
have the lowest net cost product compared to the branded drug. In
addition, moving enough market share to the biosimilar may be difficult
and result in monetary losses for the health plan. Simply removing
rebates may not result in the overall lowering of drug costs as there
are many factors that impact biosimilar adoption in the market place
such as interchangeability guidelines, ASP pricing, provider buy-and-
bill practices, resistance to migrating patients from stable therapies
to a biosimilar and product availability.
Question. Recognizing most biosimilars are paid for via medical
benefit, please explain whether you use step-therapy to restrict access
to biosimilars for your patients in any medical benefit you manage
across each of your books of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare,
Medicaid). What role do rebates playing in your consideration for
patient access to biosimilars in each of these instances?
Answer. Step therapy is a tool to ensure appropriate use of high-
cost therapies where there are potential lower-cost therapeutic
alternatives, regardless of whether a drug is a branded biologic or
biosimilar. Prime has encouraged the use of biosimilars and has
recommended that our client's place them in a parity position across
our standard formularies. Prime manages drugs to the lowest net cost
for our health plans and there may be instances where biosimilars will
not be the lowest net cost product. Prime, along with the plans we
support, evaluate market dynamics and ability to move market share in
determining the lowest net cost products.
Question. How can and will your company help ensure a robust
biosimilars market here in the U.S.?
Answer. Prime is currently supporting the biosimilar market in
several ways. We are working with biosimilar manufacturers to help
ensure they are aware of our low net cost strategies. Next, we work
with our health plans to develop medical policy and utilization
management policies that can utilize step therapy as a lever to move
market share to preferred products. Prime works with our health plans
to manage other strategies that can move utilization to preferred
products (e.g., site of care policies, reimbursement solutions).
Finally, Prime is actively working to promote legislation that supports
interchangeability at the State and Federal level.
Question. I have heard concerns that ``rebate walls'' are
responsible for keeping new biosimilars off of formularies, where a
manufacturer offers conditional rebates on a bundle of their products
in order to incentive PBMs to exclude a new biosimilar competitor from
their formularies. Have you ever decided to place a drug on a preferred
tier because of the rebates you receive for other drugs from that
manufacturer? If you do not do this, do you support this practice being
carried out by your competitors?
Answer. Prime first uses our Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee to
make all clinical recommendations. Only after clinical and safety
factors are considered do issues of cost arise. Our clients base
decisions on the clinical evaluation of the drug and lowest net cost.
We also assess the member disruption effects of making any formulary
change. We consider each drug on its own merits or do not consider
drugs in bundles in making financial recommendations.
We cannot speak to our competitors' strategies.
Question. What more can and will you do to counteract efforts to
rebate-block or bundle rebates to block biosimilar formulary placement?
Will you commit to taking these actions as more biosimilars become
available in Part D?
Answer. All decisions are made based on the clinical evaluation of
the drug and lowest net cost. We do not consider products in bundles
but consider drugs on a drug by drug basis after considering clinical
and safety factors and issues of patient disruption first.
rebates vs. fees
Question. During the hearing, Senator Cassidy asked each of you
about the trend in PBM contracting where a larger share of your
reimbursement and payment is a result of ``fees'' which you are able to
pocket, as opposed to ``rebates'' which must be passed back to the
plan/consumer.
Please define the word ``rebate.'' As part of your definition,
please clarify whether or not you consider administrative fees,
inflation payments, product discounts, prospective rebates, care
management fees, procurement fees or any other type of fee or payment
that isn't a retrospective rebate to be a rebate.
Answer. ``Rebate(s)'' means a retrospective discount paid by a
pharmaceutical manufacturer to a PBM on behalf of a client for the
pharmaceutical manufacturer's products dispensed to a member of a
client's plan. Rebates do not include any manufacturer administrative
fees paid to a PBM by a pharmaceutical manufacturer. All other
remuneration that Prime receives from pharmaceutical manufacturers are
included in this definition including inflation protection rebates.
``Manufacturer administration fee'' means fees paid to a PBM by a
pharmaceutical manufacturer for rebate services performed by the PBM on
the pharmaceutical manufacturers' behalf.
Question. Please provide, across your books of business (i.e.,
commercial, Medicare, Medicaid), a list of each of the different types
of rebates, charges, and/or fees that you incorporate into your
contracts.
Answer. In each of these lines of business, Prime receives in the
agreements with pharmaceutical manufacturers both Rebates and
Manufacturer Administrative Fees as defined in the question above.
Question. Rebates, by definition, must be passed along to the
employer, health plan, or consumer. Please provide, across your books
of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare, Medicaid), details on which of
the rebates/fees detailed in my prior question are passed along to the
consumer and/or plan and which are kept by the PBM.
Answer. Prime's model is to pass through 100 percent of the rebates
to owner clients and retain a portion of the manufacturer admin fees to
offset costs for the PBM services provided to clients.
fiduciary duty
Question. Each of you have argued that you are the one entity in
the drug supply chain that exists to help lower the cost of
prescription drugs. You claim that your value comes in saving
taxpayers, plans, and consumers money.
Would you be willing to accept a fiduciary standard in your
contracts? In other words, do you believe you have a fiduciary duty to
the plan or employer you contract with--to act in their best interest
and not your own? If not, why not?
Answer. Prime contracts primarily with Blue Cross Blue Shield non-
profit insurance companies. Prime provides a variety of services to
these and other Clients at their direction through separate contracts.
These contracts do not generally provide that Prime will have any
fiduciary obligations. Prime does not believe that the law imposes
fiduciary duties upon PBMs apart from the written terms of their
contracts with clients and, therefore, imposing a blanket fiduciary
responsibility on PBMs would be contrary to its contractual agreements
with its clients and inconsistent with established law surrounding
fiduciaries. Such regulation may also disrupt the reasonable
expectations of clients that have contracted with Prime, and
potentially increase Prime's costs in providing services to clients and
the premiums that individual members pay for insurance.
paying pharmacists
Question. Following a series of reports in The Columbus Dispatch,
Ohio has taken a number of actions over the past year to crack down on
several PBM practices. Efforts to date have included investigations,
lawsuits, and policy changes to address the egregious use of spread-
pricing, alleged breaches of contract, accusations of anti-competitive
behavior, a misuse of taxpayer dollars, and a general lack of
transparency.
PBMs are responsible for creating pharmacy networks, setting the
price patients and health plans pay for prescription drugs,
adjudicating claims, and reimbursing pharmacies for dispensed drugs. In
addition, nearly all PBMs own proprietary pharmacies that directly
compete with the PBM-created retail network. Do you design plans that
incentivize or require patients to use a pharmacy owned by your
affiliate over a competing retail pharmacy. If yes, do you believe this
represents a conflict of interest? If yes, how do you ensure there is
no resulting anticompetitive misuse of pharmacy and patient data?
Answer. Some of Prime's clients have adopted benefit plans that
offer lower member cost-share for preferred mail order and specialty
pharmacies, including AllianceRx Walgreens Prime in which Prime has a
45-percent ownership interest. Prime has policies and controls in place
to prevent anticompetitive misuse. We do not believe this is a conflict
of interest, and the FTC has concurred. See https://www.ftc.gov/news-
events/press-releases/2005/09/ftc-issues-report-pbm-ownership-mail-
order-pharmacies.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Michael F. Bennet
Question. Can you answer the following questions to help us
understand the pharmacy benefit manager business model and how you make
formulary decisions?
What percent of rebates are passed to the consumer under Medicare
Part D?
Answer. Prime passes 100 percent of rebates to its Medicare Part D
plan sponsor clients who may use the rebates to lower premiums and
benefit the consumer. In Medicare Part D, many beneficiaries do not
face significant cost sharing. Cost sharing is minimized for the 29
percent of Part D beneficiaries that receive low-income subsidies, also
called ``Extra Help,'' who pay flat, nominal amounts for drugs
including brands.
Question. What percent of rebates are passed to the consumer in the
private insurance market?
Answer. Prime offers commercial health plan clients and employer
groups the option to adjust the prices of drugs in their benefit plans
to reflect rebate savings, including the option of applying a portion
of the rebate savings at the point of sale when a member receives a
prescription from a pharmacy. This plan offering allows members with
high deductibles and coinsurance to benefit from rebates at the point-
of-sale, but there is a trade-off between premiums and a point-of-sale
rebates. Point-of-sale rebates may help those who face high coinsurance
or deductibles but may also cause an increase in premium. Whether a
member benefits from point-of-sale rebates is highly dependent on the
member's specific benefit plan, as well as the member's overall medical
and pharmacy expenses.
In the commercial market, the majority of members served by Prime
are not affected by high list price influenced cost-sharing. They pay
flat dollar copays rather than coinsurance (i.e., a percentage of the
list price). Indeed, only 1 percent of the commercial membership served
by Prime is subject to coinsurance with no out of pocket maximum, while
56 percent of the members we serve are enrolled in plans with a flat
copay without a deductible and 4 percent are in plans with a flat copay
with low deductibles. Neither of these latter two groups are
meaningfully affected by the list price of a drug.
It is Prime's business model to pass back 100 percent of the
manufacturer rebates we negotiate to our health plan clients who may
use the rebates to offset premiums. If a client chooses to offer POS
rebates directly to all or any subset of their members, that is the
client's decision and Prime is indifferent to it. POS rebates are a
newer offering and currently only a couple of our clients have chosen
to adopt our POS product that passes rebates back through POS to
members. While the majority of plan sponsors continue to use rebates as
an effective mechanism to control premium costs or reducing costs for
all members through benefit designs such as lower copays, POS rebates
is available for approximately 5 percent of our commercial clients'
members today. It presents flexibility and an alternative for those who
want to do so. However, it should be noted that not all branded drugs
receive rebates, so the reduced pricing is limited to select brand
medications and not every member may realize the benefits. Currently,
we do not have a POS rebate option in Medicare Part D.
Question. Do you have any comments on how health plans should use
their share of the rebates to lower drug prices for patients with high
deductibles?
Answer. We believe that health plan sponsors should have the
flexibility to use rebate dollars in setting benefit designs and
premiums in ways that best serve their respective members and market
needs.
Question. What is the process of deciding on which tier a generic
will be placed in your formularies?
Answer. For all drugs including generics, Prime's formulary
selection process is tied to safety and efficacy consideration before
accounting for competitive pricing. In considering competitive pricing,
we take a ``low net cost'' approach: Prime will often recommend that
clients forgo rebates on a certain drug in favor of a clinically
equivalent, lower-cost medication.
Question. Are generics always tiered as preferred (versus branded
drugs)?
Answer. In general, generics are given a favorable status on
Prime's clients' formularies. However, there are a few exceptions made
with regards to high cost generics and those with potential safety
concerns.
With regards to high cost generics, Prime evaluates new to market
generics in the context of their impact to health plan costs and the
premiums their members pay. In certain circumstances, generic drugs
remain at a higher tier relative to the brand due to a lack of generic
competition and significantly higher price point. In these instances,
Prime may recommend to our clients that the generic be maintained at a
higher tier or excluded until more lower cost generic competition is
available to avoid an increase in member premiums. Once the generic is
available at a lower cost than the brand, the generic is added to
formulary or the drug tier lowered. In these scenarios members pay the
lowest net cost, regardless of brand or generic status and the tier
placement of the medication. Thus, ensuring the most cost-effective
medication at the best price available to the member. With regards to
medications with potential safety concerns, brand and generic
medications may be placed on a higher tier or excluded to minimize
adverse health outcomes and encourage the use of clinically effective
safer alternatives available.
Question. How quickly are generics placed on formularies once FDA
clears them?
Answer. Formulary placement of a new generic product will be
dependent on if the brand is currently covered on the formulary and
available at a lower net cost since patent cliff strategies can add to
costs. If the branded product is currently on formulary, the generic is
immediately added. If the branded product has been excluded or non-
formulary, the generic would also not be available until it is reviewed
by the P&T.
Question. Given the struggles we hear about patients accessing
insulin, what measures are you taking to ensure that diabetes products
and different types of insulin are placed on a preferred tier when
establishing a formulary?
Answer. Insulins are highly similar across branded products.
Prime's clients ensure that there are adequate formulations available
to treat the needs of all diabetic patients. Approving biosimilar
insulin products will help provide even more options at a lower cost
for these patients.
Through our clinical evaluation process, Prime recommends to our
clients that there are adequate formulations available on our
formularies. We work towards coverage on health savings account (HSA)
preventive drug lists and with pharmaceutical manufacturers to pull
through clinical support programs such as free diabetes meter programs.
Prime also has a number of adherence programs that ensure continued
use.
Prime members have seen relatively flat out of pocket payments over
the past 5 years and have generally not been exposed to list prices in
the news.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert P. Casey, Jr.
transparency, rebates, and spread pricing
Question. During the hearing, I asked an initial question on spread
pricing and wanted to follow up here. According to the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), total gross spending in 2017 on
prescription drugs was $154.9 billion in Medicare Part D, $30.4 billion
in Part B, and $67.6 billion in Medicaid.
One of the main challenges in lowering the price of prescription
drugs is that there is a disturbing lack of transparency all along the
supply chain, from research and development to what the patient is
expected to pay at the counter. Further, the out-of-pocket costs for
drugs varies greatly and unpredictably from patient to patient. That is
why Senate Special Committee on Aging Chairwoman Collins and I
introduced legislation that would codify the Drug Spending Dashboards
at the CMS. The dashboards provide cost and spending information for
drugs in the Medicaid, Medicare Part B, and Medicare Part D
programs.\13\ With regards to transparency in the prescription drug
supply chain, please provide answers to the following questions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ S. 709, 116th Congress, Prescription Drug Pricing Dashboard
Act, online at: https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-
bill/709?q=%7B%22search%22%3A%22drug+dash
board%22%7D&s=1&r=1. Accessed April 23, 2019.
Is it the policy and practice of your company to negotiate with
drug manufacturers in good faith and obtain the best and lowest prices
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
possible for patients and American taxpayers?
Answer. Yes.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company that
patients, providers, researchers, policymakers, and the American people
in general, know how taxpayer dollars are being spent in the Medicare
and Medicaid programs?
Answer. Prime supports transparency that is actionable and does not
create risk to competition.
CMS collects very detailed information from PBMs about Part D
transactions through its mandatory Direct and Indirect Remuneration
(DIR) reporting. CMS has a thorough line of sight into all rebates,
fees and payment adjustments, which are reported to CMS as DIR on a
drug by drug basis. Further, each plan submits bids annually to CMS by
the first Monday in June. Those bids reflect the plan's expected
benefit payments plus administrative costs after they deduct expected
Federal reinsurance subsidies, and the level of CMS payment to plan
sponsors is derived from actual plan bids.
Prime supports legislation introduced by Senators Cornyn, Cortez
Masto, Carper, and Cassidy that would allow the Medicare Payment
Advisory Commission and the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access
Commission access to CMS's DIR data to inform Congress's decision-
making on Part D policy. Our support is based upon the important
protections for proprietary data included in the legislation that will
mitigate the risk of adverse, anti-competitive consequences that could
cause drug prices to increase.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company to disclose
how much a drug costs, broken down by manufacturer list price?
Answer. Our model is transparent as to rebates and costs, and we
provide this information to our clients in the normal course of our
business.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company to disclose
how much a drug costs, broken down by rebate paid by the manufacturer
to you (the PBM)?
Answer. Our model is transparent as to rebates and costs, and we
provide this information to our clients in the normal course of our
business.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company to disclose
how much a drug costs, broken down by the amount reimbursed to
pharmacies by the PBM?
Answer. Our model is transparent as to rebates and costs including
pharmacy costs, and we provide this information to our clients in the
normal course of our business.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company to disclose
how much a drug costs, broken down by the amount insured and uninsured
patients pay out of pocket before coupons, discounts, and other forms
of patient assistance offered at the point of sale?
Answer. Patients who have Prime's drug coverage can see what they
will pay out of pocket on MyPrime.com. Medicare Plan Finder can also be
used by Part D members shopping our clients' plans, and we provide
accurate price information to help inform beneficiaries' choices. We do
not have a relationship with uninsured patients.
Question. If so, please provide useful and easily accessible links
to where policymakers and the public can find such information. If not,
please disclose how much each drug you work with clients to provide
costs, broken down by: manufacturer list price; rebate paid by the
manufacturer to you (the PBM); the amount reimbursed to pharmacies by
the PBM; and the amount insured and uninsured patients pay out of
pocket, before coupons, discounts, and other forms of patient
assistance offered at the point of sale.
Answer. As a PBM, we do not have a relationship with uninsured
patients, and do not know what they pay. Pharmaceutical companies alone
set list prices and could lower them for the benefit of all patients.
Question. Please provide a list of actions your company has taken
to ensure that pharmacists are enabled and allowed to communicate to
patients how they can pay the lowest out-of- pocket cost possible for
their prescription drugs.
Answer. Prime does not currently and has not used gag clauses.
Prime assists its clients in the development of the benefit plan so
that, at the point of purchase, members pay the lower amount of either
the pharmacy's submitted price or the amount of the applicable member
cost share, as specified in the member's benefit plan.
______
Prepared Statement of Steve Miller, M.D., Executive Vice President
and Chief Clinical Officer, Cigna Corporation
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, thank you for inviting me to testify at this hearing. I am
Steve Miller, M.D., executive vice president and chief clinical officer
at Cigna Corporation.
I am a former transplant nephrologist and former vice president and
chief medical officer for Washington University and Barnes Jewish
Hospital. From 2005 to 2018, I served as senior vice president and
chief medical officer at Express Scripts, leading the company's
clinical, policy, quality, and performance efforts. In that role and
currently as chief clinical officer at Cigna, I engage with all
participants in the supply chain, ensuring that clinical quality and
efficacy are a key focus of the company's negotiations with drug
manufacturers. I also work closely with many of our clients, which
include large employers, small businesses, labor unions, health plans,
the Federal Government, and States, to find unique and innovative
solutions to enable them to continue providing affordable and high
quality coverage options.
The United States drives the most innovation in health services. At
Cigna, we believe we can do better by our citizens to achieve better
health, with greater choice, affordability, and predictability. We
challenge ourselves every day to identify solutions that achieve those
goals. I appreciate the opportunity to testify on affordability and
access to prescription drugs in the United States. Cigna supports the
committee's efforts to make prescription drug prices more affordable,
and new innovations more accessible, to all patients and payers in the
United States.
Cigna is a global health services company; our subsidiaries are
major providers of medical, pharmacy, dental, disability and related
products and services in more than 30 countries and jurisdictions
around the world, including South Korea, China, India, the Middle East,
and Europe. Cigna is also the largest provider of expatriate benefits
in the world. In the United States, Cigna is one of the largest health
services providers. We emphasize whole-person health and clinical
quality to deliver choice, affordability and enhanced quality of life
for our customers and clients. Key enablers of our success are
collaborative relationships with providers, an emphasis on outcomes-
and value-based reimbursement, robust patient support services, and
transparency tools for customers and clients to make informed decisions
that address their specific needs. We strive to be a constructive
participant in public policy discussions and to contribute workable
solutions to societal challenges in all of the countries, markets and
jurisdictions in which we operate.
Cigna completed its combination with Express Scripts in December
2018. Express Scripts helps more than 80 million Americans achieve
better care at a lower cost. We are proud to serve TRICARE, the health
program for 9.4 million uniformed service members, retirees and their
families, for more than 10 years. Express Scripts' tools include an
innovative specialty pharmacy care model for costly and complex drugs;
clinically based drug utilization reviews; clinically based formulary
management; medical and drug data analysis; and specialized Therapeutic
Resource Centers, with pharmacists specially trained on conditions such
as diabetes, oncology, inflammatory conditions, multiple sclerosis, and
pulmonary hypertension.
The combination brings together industry-leading capabilities that
are uniquely positioned to deliver better care, expanded choice, and
greater affordability. Our combined company's 74,000 employees come to
work every day to enhance the health, well-being and peace of mind of
the more than 160 million customer relationships we serve globally.
In an environment where many proposals would narrow or restrict
choice in order to drive affordability, Cigna sees an opportunity to
further expand customer choice, and to make it easier for people to
access the health services they need, whether in a doctor's office, an
urgent care center, a retail pharmacy setting, or employer clinic; or,
for more acute needs, at a hospital or outpatient center. As customers
increasingly choose to access health-care services at home or through
digital platforms, we see these expanded, personalized engagement and
delivery channels as a tremendous opportunity to expand choice and
simplify health care.
Pharmacy is the most frequently consumed aspect of health care for
Americans. On average, people use their pharmacy benefit 11 times a
year, making it the most widely used benefit employers and health plans
offer. For illnesses that were once treated with surgery, prescription
drugs have emerged as an effective front-line option. However,
prescription drug spending is forecast to grow at 5.5 percent per year,
on average, between 2018 and 2027.\1\ Over the past 10 years, the
Consumer Price Index (CPI) has increased 15 percent.\2\ During that
same time period, the prices for generic drugs have dropped by an
average of 60 percent; conversely, these savings have been subsumed by
an astonishing 208 percent increase in the cost of branded drugs.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-systems/
statistics-trends-and-reports/nat
ionalhealthexpenddata/downloads/forecastsummary.pdf.
\2\ https://www.statbureau.org/en/united-states/inflation.
\3\ http://lab.express-scripts.com/lab/drug-trend-report//media/
29f13dee4e7842d6881b7e034f
c0916a.ashx.
Innovation can yield exciting and life-changing new therapies and
treatments. But innovation often comes with a high price tag,
especially in the pharmaceutical sector. At Cigna, we are focused on
accelerating solutions that support both innovation and price
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
stability.
We are already making good progress. Cigna and Express Scripts'
solutions for driving lower drug spending and fostering the use of
lower net cost treatments are making medications more accessible for
Americans. In 2018, Express Scripts'
clinical-first approach returned $45 billion in savings to our
clients--employers, health plans, government programs, unions, and
others.\4\ Because of our innovative solutions and approach to pharmacy
care, our clients achieved the lowest drug trend in 25 years, just 0.4
percent across employer-sponsored plans. Further, we delivered an
unprecedented 0.3 percent decline in drug spending across Medicare
plans. The average 30-day prescription cost Americans only 6 pennies
more than in 2017. All of this was accomplished in an environment where
manufacturers raised list prices 7.3 percent. We guide patients to
effective, lower-cost therapies, and secure deep discounts from
manufacturers and pharmacies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ http://lab.express-scripts.com/lab/drug-trend-report/2018-drug-
trend-report.
With that context as background, our statement today focuses on the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
following topics:

Our efforts to drive improved affordability, predictability,
and accelerate value-based care for patients;

The role of rebates in prescription drug costs; and

Legislative and regulatory solutions to lower drug costs for
patients and payers.
our efforts to drive improved affordability, predictability,
and accelerate value-based care for patients
Cigna has a range of world class capabilities that promote clinical
quality, reduce costs, and expand access to needed medications. We are
focused on accelerating solutions that support both innovation and
price stability, including:

Treating the Whole Person. We support our clients in
maintaining or improving their health; emphasize early
intervention; and focus on treating the whole person through
medical, pharmacy, and behavioral health services.

Consumer Support and Personalized Choices. Our combined
clinical and care teams support an individual's end-to-end
health journey by coordinating care and explaining choices
along the way. Our innovative tools allow us to personalize
options, simplify care, and expand choice.

Partner of choice for providers. We work closely with
physicians and other providers to close gaps in care through
real-time information sharing and support that enables better
health outcomes.

Value-based payment. Cigna prioritizes payment arrangements
with health-care providers and pharmaceutical manufacturers
that are outcomes-based. These arrangements enhance Cigna's
value-based provider collaboratives and Express Scripts' value-
based manufacturer and retail collaborations, which improve
health outcomes at a lower cost.

Lower total cost of care. We provide better tools and
information to keep people healthier and ensure they receive
efficient and effective care.
At Cigna, we focus on the pursuit of value through integrated
offerings that reduce costs and promote improved health outcomes:

In the United States, 85 percent of our medical customers
are currently in transparent administrative services only
relationships.

Through value-based arrangements, Cigna realized medical
cost savings of more than $600 million between 2013 and
2017.\5\ These efforts have allowed us to maintain the
industry's lowest medical trend for the past 6 years.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Cigna January 2019 analysis of national Accountable Care
program groups with effective dates from 2013 through 2017.
Reimbursements already paid to groups are subtracted from the savings
to reflect overall investment.
\6\ Cigna Corporation investor presentation, February, 1, 2019,
https://www.cigna.com/assets/docs/about-cigna/CI-investor-kit.zip.

The 2018 Cigna Value of Integration Study shows that clients
with Cigna medical, pharmacy, and behavioral benefits reduce
annual medical costs by an average of $645 for each person with
an identified health improvement opportunity--savings that can
increase to nearly $10,000 for individuals with certain chronic
conditions.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.cigna.com/newsroom/news-releases/2018/cigna-study-
shows-improved-health-well-being-and-affordability-for-individuals-
with-integrated-medical-behavioral-and-pharmacy-benefits.
Express Scripts uses their clinical expertise to negotiate lower
drug costs with drug manufacturers, leveraging competition to help
drive savings for their clients, which include employers, labor unions,
health plans, the Federal Government, and States. These negotiations
serve to create competition in the market for prescription drugs. The
savings ultimately benefit patients in the form of lower premiums and
reduced out-of-pocket costs. Additional savings are realized when
clients take advantage of Express Scripts' clinical support services,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
which enable individuals to lead healthier and more productive lives.
When it comes to prescription drugs, our goal is to achieve
improved clinical outcomes at lower costs. Express Scripts offers
several innovative programs to help us achieve that goal:

Our SafeGuardRxSM programs allow us to help our
clients closely manage high-cost drug classes through a
holistic approach that combines clinical care with advanced
analytics, and patient engagement supported by technology.
Through SafeGuardRx Solutions, we have leveraged value-based
arrangements to take on some of the most challenging therapy
classes, including hepatitis C, high cholesterol, cancer,
inflammatory conditions, pulmonary conditions, and multiple
sclerosis.

One of our SafeGuardRx programs--The Diabetes Care Value
Program--improves pharmacy care while controlling plan costs
for people with diabetes. Developed with drug makers and
launched in 2017, the program has reduced diabetes drug
spending by 19 percent--a total savings of $42.6 million. The
program combines specialized diabetes pharmacy care with
benefit strategies, such as utilization management and quality
pharmacy networks, and improved compliance with recommended
treatment guidelines.

Our National Preferred Flex Formulary is a unique approach
that provides employers and health plans with the flexibility
to take advantage of the possibility of a drug manufacturer
choosing to lower the price of a drug by offering an authorized
generic alternative. Should the manufacturer offer an
authorized generic, that product can be added to the formulary.
This is a pathway to help give cash-paying patients immediate
access to more affordable medications. In the end, we care most
about the lowest net cost of a drug, not the rebate. We welcome
manufacturers lowering their list prices so that patients can
have greater access to medications.

SmartShareRxSM offers employers and plan sponsors
more flexibility in how they use rebate savings. The program
was established to share estimated rebate savings on eligible
medications to combat patients' primary pain point: cost-
sharing in the deductible phase. However, the program has
evolved to apply estimated rebate value to eligible medications
filled in all phases of the pharmacy benefit to reduce
patients' out-of-pocket costs at the pharmacy counter. Despite
the availability of point-of-sale rebate benefit designs in the
commercial market for years, we have had few employers and plan
sponsors take up this option. For more than 10 years, we have
offered the option to clients to provide rebate value at the
point-of-sale.

Inside RxSM is a prescription savings program
launched in partnership with GoodRx to expand affordable access
to brand and generic medications for patients with no
insurance, high deductibles, or high out-of-pocket costs, by
offering discounts to these patients at the point-of-sale.
Since the launch of the program in May 2017, we have helped
patients save an estimated $400 million.
Express Scripts builds products that fit a wide variety of use
cases, working to uniquely partner across the health-care ecosystem to
uncover opportunities, take action, and deliver better outcomes. Real-
time clinical alerts that reach physicians through electronic
prescribing systems can turn data into actionable patient intelligence,
helping people stay on their therapy regimen and avoid dangerous drug-
drug interactions. Express Scripts' Real Time Prescription Benefit,
launched last November, helps to simplify the patient's experience with
their prescriber and improve the transparency of drug costs. We provide
patient-specific information and pricing information directly into the
physician's Electronic Health Record (EHR) within seconds. Physicians
using electronic prescribing can see the following information to
inform prescribing decisions:

Alternative drugs and associated details, such as generic
versus brand pricing;

Coverage information, including electronic prior
authorization requirements, step therapy requirements, or
quantity limits; and,

The patient's cost through each pharmacy dispensing channel:
retail, home delivery or specialty pharmacy.
By providing drug cost information and reconciling coverage issues
at the point of prescribing, we are eliminating confusion and pain
points for patients at the pharmacy counter. A 2018 annual report by
Surescripts on price transparency found that provider adoption of Real-
Time Prescription Benefits has grown by 1,338 percent, with monthly
benefit checks growing to over 6 million by December 2018.\8\
Surescripts' data shows that Real-Time Prescription Benefits saved
patients as much as $8,032 in out-of-pocket costs on a single
prescription.\9\ These systems are delivering measurable savings to
patients at the pharmacy counter, while ensuring providers and patients
are communicating to make better-informed medication choices.
Electronic prior authorization capabilities are improving as well,
allowing prescribers to switch the drug 28 percent of the time and
eliminating over 158,000 hours of potential wait time in December 2018,
according to Surescripts' report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://surescripts.com/news-center/press-releases/!content/
new-data-from-surescripts-shows-that-patients-are-getting-more-
affordable-prescriptions-faster-and-with-less-hassle.
\9\ https://surescripts.com/news-center/press-releases/!content/
price-transparency-at-the-point-of-care-boosts-patient-savings-and-
prescriber-efficiency.
Cigna and Express Scripts also provide patients real-time pricing
information, customized to their individual plans, via our websites and
mobile apps, so patients can choose the pharmacy that provides the most
affordable dispensing option. Our innovations help better inform
patients of their cost exposure and treatment options, improving
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
affordability and predictability for patients.
As we look ahead to gene therapies, a growing category of expensive
drugs, we are actively developing new value-based payment models. For
example, we have periodic payment agreements with manufacturers that
are structured as value-based contracts to reward efficacy. Simply put,
if a drug is working, the company gets a payment. If not, the payment
stops. Similarly, we have worked to develop ``discontinuation'' payment
arrangements that require payment to be returned if a patient does not
see a benefit from the drug.
Express Scripts' innovative pharmaceutical and pharmacy solutions
position Cigna to offer even greater value to our clients, public
health program partners, and patients. The combined company integrates
Express Scripts' pharmacy benefit management with Cigna's health-care
products and services.
For example, over seven million Americans diagnosed with diabetes
use insulin. For some patients, the increasing price of insulin limits
access and adherence. When Cigna and Express Scripts announced the
merger, we clearly stated we would improve choice, affordability, and
predictability. Within the first 100 days of our combination, we were
able to launch a new Patient Assurance Program which will bring
additional affordability and predictability to customers who rely on
insulin to manage their diabetes. Furthering Cigna and Express Scripts'
respective historical efforts in diabetes disease management, the
Patient Assurance Program establishes a lower fixed out-of-pocket cost
for covered insulins, ensuring customers will pay no more than $25 out-
of-pocket when filling a 30-day insulin prescription at a retail
pharmacy or through home delivery. This is an early example of the
accelerated change and innovation our new company is positioned to
drive in the financing and delivery of care.
the role of rebates in the prescription drug supply chain
Approximately 90 percent of all prescriptions we fill are generics.
The remaining 10 percent are branded drugs, which represent 70 percent
of the spending on prescription drugs. We believe there are targeted
solutions to address this 70 percent. We work to do this through
sophisticated, evidence-based negotiations for clinically equivalent
therapies.
Solutions for driving lower drug spending and fostering the use of
lower net cost treatments often include negotiating discounts or
rebates. The role of rebates in prescription drug pricing has been
mischaracterized. Rebates are not the cause of increasing drug prices.
Rebates are discounts paid by drug manufacturers after a patient
receives a manufacturer's drug. In the system today, rebates are used
to reduce health-care costs for consumers. Today, employers and others
use the value of discounts to help keep premiums affordable, lower out-
of-pocket costs, and offer workplace wellness programs, just to name a
few ways they put discounts to work.
Most drugs do not involve a rebate structure. For example, rebates
are not typically offered for generic medications, for drugs without
market competition (i.e., sole-source brand drugs), or for drugs
administered by a physician. According to a study of drugs covered
under Medicare Part D by the actuarial firm Milliman, 81 percent of all
drugs analyzed do not offer rebates and 64 percent of brand drugs
analyzed do not offer rebates.\10\ Many sole-source, highly expensive
specialty drugs, like drugs to treat cancer, do not offer rebates and
continue to be priced higher and higher:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Milliman, ``Prescription Drug Rebates and Part D Drug Costs.''
July 16, 2018. The Milliman analysis focused on approximately 1,300
drug and therapeutic class combinations, reflecting 97 percent of 2016
Part D gross drug spending.

In 2017, non-rebated drugs treating depression, high-
cholesterol, infertility, and other conditions all registered
price increases of more than 15 percent.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Express Scripts, ``Let's Talk About Rebates,'' May 15, 2018,
http://lab.express-scripts.com/lab/insights/industry-updates/lets-talk-
about-rebates.

List prices for oral oncology medications, which are not
rebated or discounted to any significant extent, doubled
between 2011 and 2016, from $20 per unit to $40 per unit.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Express Scripts, ``The Cost of Hope: 5 Things to Know About
the Cost of Cancer Drugs.'' May 30, 2017, http://lab.express-
scripts.com/lab/insights/industry-updates/the-cost-of-hope-5-things-to-
know-about-the-cost-of-cancer-drugs.

Looking at the 39 oral oncology medications on the market in
2010, six experienced 100-200 percent inflation between 2010
and 2016; one was greater than 300 percent and another one was
greater than 800 percent.\13\ Rebates are not available on
these drugs, but the manufacturers continue to increase list
prices. Under the recently proposed rebate rule, beneficiaries
using non-preferred and specialty drugs will see premiums
increase, and will not see a reduction in cost at the pharmacy
counter.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ http://lab.express-scripts.com/lab/insights/industry-updates/
sharing-smarter.
Restricting or eliminating rebates does not assure improved
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
affordability for patients or taxpayers:

A study by the actuarial firm Oliver Wyman found that
rebates reduced overall costs in Medicare Part D by $34.9
billion from 2014 to 2018, and eliminating rebates would have
driven Part D premiums higher by 52 percent in 2018 alone.\14\
From 2014 to 2018, the national average Part D premium
increased less than 2 percent per year. Manufacturer rebates
are one of the major contributors to holding premiums
relatively flat over the last 5 years.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Oliver Wyman, ``Premium Impact of Removing Manufacturer
Rebates From the Part D Program.'' July 2018, https://www.pcmanet.org/
wp-content/uploads/2018/07/OW-Part-D-Manufacturer-Rebate-Premium-
Impact-FINAL.pdf.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services' (CMS) Office
of the Actuary (OACT), in reviewing the Department of Health
and Human Services' (HHS) recently proposed rule addressing
rebates in Medicare Part D and Medicaid, estimates that Part D
premiums will increase by as much as 25 percent and that
Federal spending will increase by $196 billion over 10
years.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ https://aspe.hhs.gov/system/files/pdf/260591/
OACTProposedSafeHarborRegulationIm
pacts.pdf.

Data released by CMS for 2019 Part D premiums, and national
average plan bids, show a negative trend for the first time in
more than a decade.\16\ CMS cites drug manufacturer and
pharmacy price concessions as a factor driving lower costs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ 2019 Medicare Advantage ratebook and prescription drug rate
information, https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Health-Plans/
MedicareAdvtgSpecRateStats/Ratebooks-and-Supporting-Data-Items/
2019Rates.html?DLPage=1&DLEntries=10&DLSort=0&DLSortDir=descending.

A Health Affairs analysis of the most recent National Health
Expenditures prescription drug forecast for 2017-2026 concluded
that increased rebates ``contributed to lower net prices for
many prescription drugs in recent years and are expected to
have dampened prescription drug spending growth in 2017.''\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Health Affairs, ``National Health Expenditure Projections,
2017-26: Despite Uncertainty, Fundamentals Primarily Drive Spending
Growth.'' February 14, 2018, https://www.health
affairs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.2017.1655.

The actuarial firm Milliman found that on average, the
highest cost drugs have the lowest manufacturer rebates (as a
percentage of gross drug cost), for brand drugs with
rebates.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Milliman, ``Prescription Drug Rebates and Part D Drug Costs.''
July 16, 2018.
In the Medicare Part D program, rebate savings are passed to Part D
plan sponsors and are responsible for saving enrollees and taxpayers
billions of dollars each year since the Part D program began. CMS
requires plans to show how they are using rebates to deliver Part D
coverage to their members. All Part D plan sponsors must submit to CMS
detailed annual reporting of rebate amounts by drug and Part D plan. In
addition to reporting individual drug rebates, plan sponsors must also
report to CMS how much of the rebate amounts were retained by the
pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) rather than being shared with the
sponsor, rebate guarantee amounts, rebate amounts reflected at the
point-of-sale, third-party payer claim rebate amounts, and any other
rebate amounts not already reported. Not only are plan sponsors
required to report these rebate amounts to CMS, but they must also
report what the rebates are for, such as formulary or tier placement,
market share targets, volume targets, inflation rebates, or rebate
guarantees. Finally, plan sponsors must report any administrative fees
charged to manufacturers.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Final Medicare Part D DIR Reporting Requirements for 2017.
Accessed March 4, 2019 at: https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-
Data-and-Systems/Computer-Data-and-Systems/HPMS/HPMS-Memos-Archive-
Weekly-Items/SysHPMS-Memo-2018-May-30th.html.
In the commercial market, rebates are an effective tool that
employers and health plans use to generate more savings for
prescription drugs. Employers and other plan sponsors that work with
Cigna and Express Scripts choose how rebates are used. Some use them to
lower premiums and cost sharing, others choose to expand access, fund
wellness programs, or provide discounts to consumers at the point of
sale. Nearly half of Express Scripts' clients have opted for 100
percent pass-through of rebates. Express Scripts passes approximately
95 percent of rebates, discounts, and price reductions back to its core
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PBM commercial and health plan clients and their customers.
Cigna welcomes the opportunity to work with policymakers to bring
down drug costs for patients at the pharmacy counter. There are a
number of opportunities to address high list prices and patient
exposure at the pharmacy counter that address competition, access to
generics, and benefit designs. However, legislative or regulatory
efforts to eliminate or restrict the ability of plan sponsors or PBMs
to negotiate lower overall costs will lead to higher drug prices not
only for Medicare beneficiaries and taxpayers, but also for millions of
individuals who access health benefits through their employers.
We believe there are more direct and effective ways to deliver
relief to patients most in need without disrupting coverage for
millions. For example, in addition to the policy opportunities
discussed later, we believe a better way to address patient out-of-
pocket costs is to allow payers and their PBMs to use the power of
benefit designs to limit beneficiary exposure while ensuring payers
continue to have all of the tools at their disposal to negotiate lower
costs. For individuals in high-deductible health plans, this could
include changes to the tax code to allow coverage of chronic care
treatments and other services pre-deductible, for example.
Additionally, many have discussed possible changes to the Medicare Part
D benefit design to achieve lower patient out-of-pocket costs, and
Cigna and Express Scripts welcome the opportunity to be a constructive
participant in those efforts for both Medicare Part D beneficiaries and
patients in the commercial market.
legislative and regulatory solutions to lower drug costs for patients
We support efforts by Congress and the administration to use
market-based solutions that put downward pressure on prescription drug
prices through competition, consumer choice, and open and responsible
drug pricing. For example, last year we endorsed legislation authored
by Senators Stabenow, Cassidy, Ranking Member Wyden, and others to
ensure patients are told the lowest cost option available to them at
the pharmacy counter. We were pleased the legislation became law, and
included a provision to provide more transparency into so-called ``pay-
for-delay'' agreements that prevent biosimilar drugs from entering the
marketplace.
Looking to the future, we believe efforts to address out-of-control
drug pricing through legislative and regulatory actions should include:

Speeding generics and biosimilars to market:
Enacting the Creating and Restoring Access to
Equivalent Samples (CREATES) Act, introduced by Chairman
Grassley, which aims to lower drug prices by ending restricted
access to samples by manufacturers of brand-name drugs, and
help to speed generics to market. According to the
Congressional Budget Office, its passage would save $3.9
billion over 10 years.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2018-09/s974.pdf.
Prohibiting patent settlements that include
so-called ``pay-for-delay'' arrangements, which delay the
availability of lower-cost generics and biosimilars.
Legislation to address these arrangements was recently
introduced by Senators Klobuchar and Grassley, and we hope
Congress will enact authority to block these anti-competitive
agreements, removing barriers to competition and expanding the
availability of lower-cost generics and biosimilars. According
to a Federal Trade Commission (FTC) study, these
anticompetitive deals cost consumers and taxpayers $3.5 billion
in higher drug costs every year.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/media-resources/mergers-
competition/pay-delay.
Encouraging the FDA to finalize guidance on
biosimilar naming standards, improve the efficiency of the
biosimilar product development and approval process, and
develop effective communication tools to educate providers and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
patients about the safety and efficacy of biosimilars.
Preserving the ability of the Inter Partes
Review (IPR) process at the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office to
invalidate patents that do not represent true innovation.
Legislative and regulatory efforts to weaken this process will
extend patent monopolies for pharmaceutical and biological
products, resulting in higher prices for patients.
Considering changes to provisions in the
United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) that would extend
exclusivity for biological products in Mexico and Canada for 10
years. These provisions will limit the ability of Congress to
address the 12-year exclusivity period for brand-name
biologics.

Advancing price transparency for patients and providers in
public programs:
We strongly support the concept of providing
information about the price of drugs, therapies, and the cost
of care to beneficiaries and their providers as a means of
improving price transparency, educating consumers, and
incentivizing the efficient use of care throughout the health-
care system. We support efforts by CMS to move toward a system
in which Part D enrollees and their providers have access to
real-time benefit check and electronic prior authorization
tools, while ensuring appropriate standardization and time
frames for implementation.

Advancing value-based arrangements in public programs:
It is essential to bring the benefit of
value-based payment to spending in public programs. Such
arrangements may involve outcomes-based payments that cannot be
determined until well after the plan year concludes. Changes to
existing laws and/or regulations would allow for such
arrangements in all settings and help improve the overall value
of national spending for pharmaceuticals. The specific changes
Cigna believes are needed include:
Modifying Medicaid Best Price (MBP) rules to
exclude outcomes-based pharmaceutical contracts from inclusion
in MBP calculations in certain situations where failure to
achieve a desired outcome leads a manufacturer to refund the
full (or majority) cost of the drug, or where payment is
contingent on the health outcomes of individual patients;
Creating additional flexibility under the Anti-
Kickback Statute (AKS) to support value-based contracts and
other innovative programs; and,
Revising Part D regulations to explicitly permit
and provide guidance for how outcomes-based contracting should
be accounted for in plan bids or between plan sponsors when the
outcome measurement period spans plan years, or when outcomes
can only be measured at the end of a plan year.

Prioritizing reforms to lower costs and protect patient
access in Medicare:
Public programs must have the ability to
leverage the commercial market's successful utilization
management tools that lower costs while protecting patient
access. We support efforts to modify the six protected
``classes of clinical concern'' in Part D, where all or
substantially all drugs in a class must be covered, allowing
drug manufacturers to name their price with little negotiation.
CMS's plan to only moderate the effect of protected classes--
not eliminate them--would save $2 billion over 10 years.
There are also clear opportunities to achieve
savings in the Medicare Part B program, including introducing
Part D utilization management tools into Part B and potentially
shifting some Part B drugs to Part D. Because of the complexity
involved with identifying the ``candidate'' drugs for moving
into Part D, along with assessing the consequences and impacts
of doing so for both programs, we strongly recommend CMS engage
stakeholders through a work group-type process where sample,
de-identified data could be shared for mutual evaluation.
We also support efforts to ensure the
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC) and the Medicaid
and CHIP Payment and Access Commission (MACPAC) have access to
de-identified information currently submitted by PBMs, Part D
sponsors, and Medicare Advantage plans to CMS. Legislation to
address this issue was recently introduced by Senators Cortez
Masto, Cornyn, Carper, and Cassidy.

Stopping Orphan Drug Act abuses:
Pharmaceutical manufacturers have been
accused of abusing the Orphan Drug Act, which was introduced to
incentivize drug manufacturers to prioritize the development of
``orphan drugs,'' drugs used to treat an illness or disease
that affects fewer than 200,000 people. We support efforts to
ensure that this pathway is used for true orphan designations,
and not, as some observers say, as a legal cover to seek
specious orphan drug designations.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ https://khn.org/news/drugmakers-manipulate-orphan-drug-rules-
to-create-prized-monopolies/.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today, and for the
consideration of our views. We look forward to working with you and
others to ensure medical innovation continues to be a hallmark of the
United States. Many of the proposals highlighted in my testimony are
achievable if we work collaboratively, throughout the system, to
overcome the challenges facing public and private stakeholders, and the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
health of our Nation.
I welcome the opportunity to discuss these issues with you and look
forward to your questions.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to Steve Miller, M.D.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
impact of vertical integration between pbms and insurance companies
Question. The PBM industry has experienced significant
consolidation within the past 10 years, which has contributed to
concerns about the potential abuse of market power, barriers to market
entry, and exclusionary practices. In 2012, for example, Express
Scripts acquired Medco Health Solutions--a nearly $30-billion
transaction that merged two of the country's three largest PBMs. More
recently, PBMs are also vertically integrating with insurers/payers,
reflected by the 2018 acquisitions of Express Scripts Holding Co. (a
PBM) by Cigna Corp. (a payer) and of Aetna Inc. (a payer) by CVS Health
Corp. As a result, the three largest PBMs are all vertically integrated
with insurance companies. According to a report from the Kaiser Family
Foundation, the two combined entities, along with UnitedHealth and
Humana, will cover 71 percent of all Medicare Part D enrollees and 86
percent of stand-alone drug plan enrollees. Vertical integration can
result in increased efficiencies and consumer benefits. It can also,
however, lead to higher barriers to entry for competition, leading to
further consolidation. FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb recently warned
that ``consolidation and market concentration make the rebating and
contracting schemes [of PBMs] all that more pernicious. And the very
complexity and opacity of these schemes help to conceal their corrosion
on our system--and their impact on patients.''
I'd like to talk about consolidation, including the recent
integration of PBMs with insurance companies. Last year, I wrote to the
Justice Department on this issue. It's reported that the three largest
PBMs--who are before us today--now cover 71 percent of Medicare Part D
enrollees and 86 percent of stand-alone drug plan enrollees. Such
market power has raised concerns. FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said,
``the consolidation and market concentration make the rebating and
contracting schemes [of PBMs] all that more pernicious.''
I want to hear briefly from each of you on whether the PBM industry
is competitive. For example, are there high barriers to entry for new
competitors?
Answer. As you are aware, Cigna completed a merger with Express
Scripts in December 2018. Our combination was premised on our deep
belief that while neither company on its own could achieve the change
needed to the U.S. health-care system, together we can make significant
improvements to current approaches to caregiving, moving from episodic
to holistic, disconnected to connected, and--critically--complicated to
simple. The combined companies bring together approximately 74,000
employees around the world with a joint mission to drive predictable,
affordable, and high-quality care through connected, personalized
solutions.
We believe that PBMs operate in an incredibly competitive market,
with over 60 \1\ different entities competing to deliver cost savings
to customers, employers, and health plans. Employers and health plans
therefore have a number of choices in contracting and designing
pharmacy benefit options in the market, and we are constantly evolving
and innovating with our offerings to remain competitive and affordable.
Our transaction was subject to the review and approval of the
Department of Justice and State regulators.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.pcmanet.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Competitive-
PBM-Marketplace.pdf.
Question. I'm also interested in what effect the most recent
consolidations of PBMs and insurers has had on the bottom line for the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
government and consumer.
Do these arrangements result in a lower cost to the government--as
a payer--and the consumer? Please explain.
Answer. The combination of Cigna and Express Scripts is
accelerating the pace of positive changes we are bringing to the
system. Together, the combined company is seeking to transform health
care service--reducing costs, while improving the customer experience,
care quality, and health outcomes. By bringing together the medical,
behavioral, and health engagement (wellness) insights of Cigna and the
broad pharmacy, specialty pharmacy, and clinical insights of Express
Scripts, we can create integrated customer solutions that offer better
care, reduce medical and pharmaceutical costs, and flatten the cost
curve for health care to be in line with that of other consumer goods.
For example, over 7 million Americans diagnosed with diabetes use
insulin. For some patients, the increasing price of insulin limits
access and adherence. When Cigna and Express Scripts announced the
combination, we clearly stated we would improve choice, affordability,
and predictability. Within the first 100 days of our combination we
were able to launch a new Patient Assurance Program, which will bring
additional affordability and predictability to customers who rely on
insulin to manage their diabetes. Furthering Cigna and Express Scripts'
respective historical efforts in diabetes disease management, the
Patient Assurance Program establishes a lower, fixed out-of-pocket cost
for covered insulins, ensuring eligible customers in participating
plans will pay no more than $25 out of pocket when filling a 30-day
insulin prescription at a retail pharmacy or through home delivery.
This is an early example of the accelerated change and innovation our
new company is positioned to drive in the financing and delivery of
care.
collection, use, and sharing of personal health information
Question. Consumers are becoming more and more concerned about the
data collection and sharing practices of companies. While these issues
have been most prevalent in the social media and tech industry,
companies in the pharmaceutical supply chain also have access to
tremendous amounts of sensitive, personal health information of the
individuals they serve. For example, the company Livongo partners with
CVS Caremark to provide low-cost or no-cost blood sugar meters to
diabetic patients. The meters are always ``connected'' to Livongo's
``Diabetes Response Specialists.'' As the company's website states,
``When readings are out of range, our Diabetes Response Specialists
call or text [the individual] within minutes.'' While these innovations
may be highly beneficial for individuals in managing their health, it's
also important for this committee to fully understand what types of
information is collected, how or why it's stored or shared, and for
what purposes PBMs themselves and other affiliated drug supply chain
participants (such as insurers) use the information.
Health information is extremely sensitive. It's the most personal
of all the information we share. So I want to know more about each of
your companies' data collection, sharing, and protection practices.
These are ``yes'' or ``no'' questions for all of you. Does your
company collect and store health information from the end users of the
prescriptions you provide? For example, information or records of a
diabetic individual's blood sugar levels.
Answer. The PBM is subject to the requirements of the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) in its role as a
HIPAA Business Associate to PBM clients, which are HIPAA Covered
Entities. The collection, storage, and use of health information is
essential for a variety of services provided to the PBM clients, by way
of example, processing claims and appeals; providing services that
support safety reviews, such as Drug Utilization Review; and member
prescription adherence. For example, to help members manage insulin
adherence, the PBM can assist members by monitoring blood sugar levels,
as provided by the patient's physician, and then offer tailored support
for improved care. For diabetes and other chronic conditions, we look
for ways to engage with members and their health-care providers to
achieve the best outcomes.
Question. Does your company make any treatment, cost, or coverage
decisions based on the health information you collect from an
individual?
Answer. Benefit design, including coverage decisions, are
determined by the PBM client, whether that is an employer in the
private market, a State, a union, or the Federal Government. As
mentioned earlier, an individual's health information is necessary to
pay claims and decide appeals. In addition, tracking patients'
prescription adherence assists Express Scripts in developing tools to
prevent or minimize non-adherence. In particular, clinical standards
and models, in combination with personalized clinical services and
interventions, are used to attempt to prevent or minimize non-
adherence. Information, such as geographic location/address, smoking
status, drug cost, co-morbidities or potential clinical concerns, and
other factors are gathered for the model to anticipate a patient's
potential obstacles to prescription adherence and healthy outcomes.
Using this data, a tailored approach is developed--through personal
clinical services and outreach, for example, via providing
consultations with licensed pharmacists--to reduce or prevent the
likelihood of non-adherence and support outcomes.
Question. Does your company share health information with third
parties? And, if so, does your company profit from that sharing?
Answer. In compliance with HIPAA requirements, health information
is shared with HIPAA Business Associates consistent with the HIPAA
``minimum necessary'' standard and pursuant to the provisions of a
written Business Associate Agreement to allow these third parties to
support and assist in providing PBM services. Additionally, the PBM
shares health information with health care professionals, such as
physicians and pharmacies, for purposes of supporting treatment
provided by those professionals.
The sharing of protected health information (PHI) with Business
Associates does not provide the PBM with a source of revenue; Business
Associates are vendors that are compensated for their services. Use
disclosure of PHI is limited as agreed to in the Business Associate
Agreement and governed by applicable HIPAA requirements.
Question. Do you believe customers are fully aware of your
information collection and sharing practices?
Answer. We make individuals aware of their privacy rights via the
HIPAA Notice of Privacy Practices, which is available, as required by
HIPAA, on our website, where they can learn how to request an
accounting of disclosures of their PHI other than for treatment,
payment, or health-care operations.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
rebate demands
Question. The use of rebates as a negotiating tool has led to
problematic incentives in the prescription drug supply chain. For
example, drug companies have argued that they increase list prices in
response to demands from PBMs for high or increasing rebates.
Does your company currently have, or has your company had since
January 2013, any agreements with drug manufacturers that require
equivalent rebates, even in the case of a drug for which the list price
has been lowered?
Answer. As noted during the hearing, manufacturers alone make and
set prices for their products; rebates are retroactive discounts
negotiated by PBMs with manufacturers to defray the price of drugs paid
by health plans. The availability of any/several competitor brand drugs
within a therapeutic class will affect the amount of discount
obtainable--if any--by a PBM, among a host of other variables.
Health plans and payers choose how to use rebate value. In Medicare
Part D, for example, all of the rebate value is passed through to plan
sponsors. In situations where a manufacturer lowers the list price of
one of its products, maintaining the ``equivalent'' rebates for that
drug results in an even lower negotiated price for plans and patients.
Hence, a PBM negotiating ``equivalent'' rebates in the face of lower
list prices actually helps drive a lower drug cost for payers.
We welcome and encourage manufacturers to lower list prices
independent of whatever discounts we negotiate with them.
Question. Does your company currently have, or has your company had
since January 2013, any agreements with drug manufacturers that require
advance notice of changes in the list price of drugs, including
reductions or increases in list price?
Answer. Many sole-source, high-priced specialty drugs, such as
those treating cancer, do not offer rebates and continue to rise in
cost over time. For example:
In 2017, non-rebated drugs treating depression, high-cholesterol,
infertility, and other conditions all registered price increases of
more than 15 percent.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Express Scripts, ``Let's Talk About Rebates,'' May 15, 2018,
http://lab.express-scripts.com/lab/insights/industry-updates/lets-talk-
about-rebates.
List prices for oral oncology medications, which are not rebated or
discounted to any significant extent, doubled between 2011 and 2016,
from $20 per unit to $40 per unit.\3\ Looking at the 39 oral oncology
medications on the market in 2010, six experienced 100-200-percent
inflation between 2010 and 2016; one was greater than 300 percent and
another one was greater than 800 percent.\4\ Rebates are not available
on these drugs, but the manufacturers continue to increase list prices.
Under the recently proposed rebate rule, beneficiaries using non-
preferred and specialty drugs will see premiums increase, and will not
see a reduction in cost at the pharmacy counter.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Express Scripts, ``The Cost of Hope: 5 Things to Know About the
Cost of Cancer Drugs.'' May 30, 2017, http://lab.express-scripts.com/
lab/insights/industry-updates/the-cost-of-hope-5-things-to-know-about-
the-cost-of-cancer-drugs.
\4\ http://lab.express-scripts.com/lab/insights/industry-updates/
sharing-smarter.
\5\ http://lab.express-scripts.com/lab/insights/industry-updates/
sharing-smarter.
In the end, we focus on the lowest net cost of a drug, not the
rebate. Again, we welcome manufacturers lowering their list prices so
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
that patients can have greater access to medications.
Question. If the answer to either of the above is ``yes,'' please
provide details regarding each of these requirements in each instance
in which they were in place: the required rebate amount or percent; the
amount of notice required for list price change notifications,
specifically for increases and decreases; any penalties for
noncompliance with rebate or notification requirements by the drug
manufacturer.
Answer. In situations where a manufacturer lowers the list price of
one of its products, maintaining the ``equivalent'' rebates for that
drug results in an even lower negotiated price for plans and patients.
Hence, a PBM negotiating ``equivalent'' rebates in the face of lower
list prices actually helps drive a lower drug cost for payers.
revenue sources
Question. Please provide an annual breakdown of the following
components of the revenue you received from drug manufacturers from
January 1, 2013 through December 31, 2018: dollar amount and percent of
revenue from rebates; dollar amount and percent of revenue from
administrative fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from
distribution fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from marketing
fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from clinical case
management fees; all other sources of revenue from manufacturers not
listed above.
Answer. Revenues generated by Express Scripts segments can be
classified as either tangible pharmacy revenues or other pharmacy
service revenues. We earn tangible pharmacy revenues from the sale of
prescription drugs by retail pharmacies in our retail pharmacy networks
and from dispensing prescription drugs from our home delivery and
specialty pharmacies. Other pharmacy service revenues include
administrative fees associated with integrated medical benefit
management solutions, the administration of retail pharmacy networks
contracted by certain clients, informed decision counseling services
and certain specialty pharmacy services.
part d negotiation
Question. The PBM market has changed dramatically over the past
several years. Many Part D health plans also operate as PBMs, including
your companies. While Part D has done a great job offering Medicare
beneficiaries drug coverage they did not have access to before, Part D
has not been successful at keeping up with the growing cost of
medicines. PBMs and Part D plans claim they bargain to get lower
prices, but the HHS Inspector General found that almost 4 in 10 brand
name drugs in Part D offered no rebate or discount to Part D plans.
Why have Part D plans been ineffective at bringing down the cost of
almost half of brand-name medicines?
Answer. According to a study of drugs covered under Medicare Part D
by the actuarial firm Milliman, 81 percent of all drugs in the
program--including 64 percent of brand drugs analyzed--do not offer
rebates.\6\ In most cases, the reason for this can be traced down to
the absence of competitor or therapeutically equivalent (generic) drugs
that PBMs can use as negotiating leverage with manufacturers. In other
instances, Medicare regulations prevent use of step therapy or prior
authorization for drugs that fall within the six protected classes, or
are the only drug in a class. In such cases, mandatory coverage
requirements remove any negotiating leverage PBMs could otherwise exert
on the manufacturer.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.ahip.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/AHIP-Part-D-
Rebates-20180716.pdf.
Many have discussed possible changes to the Medicare Part D benefit
design to achieve lower patient out-of-pocket costs, and our company
welcomes the opportunity to be a constructive partner in efforts to
address these program shortcomings for Medicare Part D beneficiaries.
The testimony provided in front of the Senate Finance Committee on
April 9, 2019 included several policy options that inject greater
competition into the prescription drug market and also give plans and
PBMs further utilization management and negotiation tools to work with
in Medicare.
pbm profits
Question. At the hearing, witnesses spoke about the ways in which
they seek to get the best price for patients. However, behind this is
the reality that PBMs are driven by their bottom line.
Researchers at Johns Hopkins University found that 72 percent of
formularies in Part D charge lower cost-sharing for a brand name drug
compared to the cheaper generic equivalent.\7\ This occurs because the
more expensive brand name drugs are able to give bigger rebates, but we
can never know for sure because rebate information is kept secret.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/article-
abstract/2728446.
How can the public have confidence that they're getting the lowest
price and not the price that gives you the biggest rebate to your
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
business?
Answer. Every formulary decision we make is based first and
foremost on clinical guidance, not on cost. Our National Preferred
Formulary (NPF) is developed by an independent Pharmacy and
Therapeutics (P&T) Committee comprised of independent practicing
physicians, other clinicians and academics representing multiple areas
of clinical expertise. Their decisions are based solely on whether
clinical evidence shows that a drug must be covered. Only after
products are evaluated from a clinical perspective are net cost and
other factors considered. Financial impact to Express Scripts is
expressly excluded and prohibited from consideration in the formulary
development process.
Further, we note that plan sponsors are not obligated to adopt our
NPF, but can accept, reject, or modify it as they deem fit or even
create their own custom drug formulary. A formulary becomes part of a
plan sponsor's benefit only after adoption by the client. Like
formularies, copay tiers and other elements of benefit design are
ultimately determined by our clients. Plan sponsors use PBMs to manage
their drug benefits, however, because our services are effective and
result in savings to their plans and ultimately, for patients.
Competition among PBMs is fierce and clients--who are sophisticated and
often advised by expert consultants--leverage that dynamic to secure
the greatest savings from their bidders.
spread pricing in medicaid
Question. A PBM practice that has come up quite a bit recently is
the practice of spread pricing. Spread pricing occurs when PBMs charge
health plans more for prescription drugs than they actually reimburse
pharmacies, and then pocket the different as profit.
Do you engage in spread pricing practices?
Answer. Spread pricing is one option Express Scripts' clients--
including Medicaid Managed Care Organizations (MCOs) where authorized
by a State--may elect in structuring their overall drug pricing
arrangement. Certain clients opt to utilize spread pricing, while other
clients opt to use pass-through arrangements. It is important to note
that our clients (payers) always decide whether or not to use spread
pricing.
Spread pricing encourages active and aggressive rate negotiations
by harnessing market forces to achieve the lowest drug prices through
negotiation. Put more simply, spread pricing allows PBMs to offer
client plan sponsors more favorable discounts and reduced
administrative costs as compared to ``pass-through'' or ``cost-plus''
arrangements. Notably--and contrary to the views of many industry
critics--spread pricing is favored by many clients because it
represents the greatest alignment of interests between the PBM and
client; specifically, that the PBM is compensated for driving the
lowest net cost for the plan sponsor.
Question. If yes, do you engage in such practices in Medicaid?
Answer. Yes. Express Scripts has contracts with Medicaid managed
care plans in which the client has chosen to utilize spread pricing.
Question. List each State you operate in where you have a contract
with a Medicaid managed care plan where you employ spread pricing.
Answer. We have arrangements with clients who operate under rules
established by State Medicaid agencies and we encourage the committee
to work with States to understand and examine the specifics of
contracts within their State.
Question. List each Medicaid managed care plan you have contracts
with where you employ spread pricing.
Answer. We have arrangements with clients who operate under rules
established by State Medicaid agencies and we encourage the committee
to work with States to understand and examine the specifics of
contracts within their State.
Question. Describe whether and how you disclose the use of such
practices to the plans.
Answer. Our clients decide which pricing structure to select and
are provided robust disclosures. Further, we give plans full audit
rights to ensure we are performing according to the terms of our
contracts with them.
Question. Describe whether you disclose such practices directly to
the State.
Answer. Express Scripts does not contract directly with any State
Medicaid agencies, but instead the Medicaid Managed Care Organization
contracted with the State.
Question. List any States where you have direct contracts with the
State Medicaid agency as a PBM for fee-for-service individuals.
Answer. Express Scripts does not contract directly with any State
Medicaid agencies as a PBM.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
Question. What is the total dollar amount that you obtain from
pharmaceutical manufacturers in any form such as rebates, fees, etc.?
Answer. Manufacturers ultimately decide whether to offer a rebate
discount, and if so, what rebate to offer. When there are multiple
therapies with similar clinical efficacy, Express Scripts is able to
leverage competition to drive lower costs for its clients and
customers. Conversely, rebates are not typically offered for drugs
without market competition (i.e., sole-source brand drugs), drugs that
have obtained ``orphan'' designation, or drugs administered by a
physician. Rebates are typically only offered on brand drugs. The
amount of rebate discounts varies significantly based on utilization
and a plan's benefit design.
Question. What is the total dollar amount that you remit to health
plans?
Answer. In 2018, Express Scripts saved its clients $45 billion.
Because of our innovative solutions, our clients achieved the lowest
drug trend in decades, just 0.4 percent across employer-sponsored
plans. Despite rising list prices, the average 30-day prescription cost
only $0.06 more than in the previous year. To Medicare, we delivered an
unprecedented 0.3 percent decline in drug spending across the plans we
serve.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://my.express-scripts.com/rs/809-VGG-836/images/
Express%20Scripts%202018%20
Drug%20Trend%20Report.pdf.
Express Scripts passes approximately 95 percent of rebates,
discounts, and price reductions back to its core PBM commercial and
health plan clients and their customers. Nearly half of Express
Scripts' clients have opted for 100 percent pass-through of rebates. In
Medicare Part D, 100 percent of the rebate value is passed through to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
plan sponsors.
Question. Managed Care Organizations are on record as widely
supportive of the potential of biosimilars. However, most MCOs have
continued to support originator brand products and have not preferred
and often excluded less expensive biosimilars. For example, most MCOs
have kept Remicade (a treatment for rheumatoid arthritis and other
diseases) as the preferred agent on their formularies, and in most
cases to the exclusion of its biosimilar, Infliximab.
Why do you tout support for biosimilars while, at the same time,
inhibiting adoption of these less expensive products?
Answer. We support the lowest net cost, clinically appropriate
option for our clients and members. We fully support efforts to
accelerate adoption of specialty generics and biosimilars. In certain
situations, our formulary offerings may prefer branded products when
doing so results in a lower net cost to our client plan sponsors.
Question. HHS may broaden the scope of its proposed rule and
eliminate rebates between Medicare Advantage plans and manufacturers
for Part B drugs. Would this realign incentives to encourage preferred
access for lower cost drugs, such as biosimilars?
Answer. We believe that part of the cause for escalating drug costs
in the Part B program today includes a lack of utilization management
tools that exert downward pressure on net costs. There are clear
opportunities to achieve savings in the Medicare Part B program,
including introducing Part D utilization management tools into Part B
and potentially shifting some Part B drugs to Part D. Because of the
complexity involved with identifying the ``candidate'' drugs for moving
into Part D, along with assessing the consequences and impacts of doing
so for both programs, we strongly recommend CMS engage stakeholders as
they develop their policy.
Question. What changes can we recommend/make to help you prefer
lower-cost drugs, such as biosimilars, without rebates?
Answer. After clinical factors are evaluated, Express Scripts
considers the lowest net cost drugs as part of developing formulary
offerings for its clients, where competition exists. Lowest net cost
can be achieved through lower list price, rebates, or both. We welcome
manufacturers lowering their list prices so that patients can have
greater access to medications. Solutions for driving lower drug
spending and fostering the use of lower net cost treatments often
include negotiating discounts or rebates.
The role of rebates in prescription drug pricing has been
mischaracterized. Rebates are not the cause of increasing drug prices.
Rebates are discounts paid by drug manufacturers after a patient
receives a manufacturer's drug. In the system today, rebates are used
to reduce health care costs for consumers. The amount of discount/
rebate per drug attainable is affected by the relative bargaining power
of the PBM negotiating to drive down costs for its plan sponsor
clients.
PBMs compete among themselves to obtain the greatest rebates/
discounts for health plan sponsors. The ability to help drive lower net
drug costs for plan sponsors, in addition to the quantity and quality
of other clinical and administrative services provided by the PBM, will
determine its success in the marketplace. Today, employers and others
use the value of discounts to help keep premiums affordable, lower out-
of-pocket costs, and offer workplace wellness programs, just to name a
few ways they put discounts to work.
Question. Why is there such a disparity in reimbursed pharmacy
prices for specialty generic drugs in Part D (e.g., Imatinib)? Does
ownership of specialty pharmacy influence your reimbursement decision?
Answer. Our ownership of Accredo specialty pharmacy does not
influence reimbursement decisions with respect to other pharmacies.
Question. I'm concerned with the recent trend of PBM's allowing
brand companies to ``pay for position'' on insurance formularies, which
results in seniors losing access to lower-cost generics and
biosimilars.
Do you ever exclude generic or biosimilar competitors from
formulary placement, or place these lower-cost drugs in higher cost-
sharing tiers that are generally reserved for non-preferred or brand
drugs?
Answer. The process Express Scripts uses to develop formularies has
been constructed to ensure that clinical considerations are paramount
and fully taken into account before cost considerations. Formulary
management is a highly effective strategy that pharmacy plan sponsors
can implement to maintain a safe, affordable and meaningful benefit for
patients. When a manufacturer launches a lower-cost authorized
alternative to a branded medication currently on the market, Express
Scripts will evaluate the product for placement on the National
Preferred Flex Formulary. If clinically appropriate, the authorized
alternative product will be added to the Flex formulary with preferred
or possibly non-preferred status. The innovator brand-name product, and
potentially other products in the therapy class, then will be excluded
from coverage.
In our experience to date, we have not seen manufacturers of
authorized alternatives offer a rebate that would result in a net cost
lower than that of the brand. Moreover, until recent changes to current
biosimilar interchangeability guidance were released by the FDA, and
pending further implementation of those policies, the ability of plan
sponsors to make clinically appropriate therapeutic substitutions has
been severely limited. We are hopeful as more biosimilars enter the
U.S. market that, under these new guidelines, plans will be in a much
better position to take full advantage of the potential these products
can provide.
formulary placement/generic tiering
Question. In 2011, 71 percent of generic drugs in Part D were on
the lowest tier designed for generics; by 2019, that number decreased
to only 14 percent of generics. According to an Avalere study, this
practice cost seniors $22 billion in higher out-of-pocket costs since
2015, costs that could have been avoided through the proper formulary
placement of lower-cost generics. This practice, known as ``paying for
position,'' allows brands to block uptake of lower-cost generics and
biosimilars, thereby unnecessarily increasing out-of-pocket costs for
seniors.
Do you ever exclude generic or biosimilar competitors from
formulary placement, or place these lower-cost drugs in higher cost-
sharing tiers that are generally reserved for non-preferred or brand
drugs? Do you ever consider portfolio or bundled rebates with brand
manufacturers?
When you place generics on your formularies, do you place that
generic favorably to brand products--in other words, on generic-only
tiers?
When a generic becomes available, do you place it on your
formularies immediately?
Answer. Our formulary is a critical driver of both clinical
efficacy and value. Formulary development involves guidance from three
distinct committees: the Therapeutic Assessment Committee (``TAC'');
the Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee (``P&T''); and the Value
Assessment Committee (``VAC''). Each is described briefly below:

TAC is an internal clinical review body consisting of clinical
pharmacists and physicians, who review specific medications following
FDA approval using medical literature and published clinical trial
data.

P&T consists of a group of 15 independent physicians and one
pharmacist from active community and academic practices representing a
broad range of medical specialties.

VAC, which consists of Express Scripts' employees from
formulary management, product management, finance, human resources, and
clinical account management, considers the value of drugs by evaluating
the net cost, market share, and drug utilization trends of clinically
similar medications.
Our formulary development approach for all medications prioritizes
clinical considerations first and foremost before evaluating net cost
to clients. Financial impact to Express Scripts is expressly excluded
and prohibited from consideration in the formulary development process.
The financial impact to clients, however, is considered by the VAC, but
only after all clinical considerations have been taken into account.
When a manufacturer launches a lower-cost authorized alternative to
a branded medication currently on the market, Express Scripts will
evaluate the product for placement on the National Preferred Flex
Formulary. If appropriate, the authorized alternative product will be
added to the Flex formulary with preferred or possibly non-preferred
status. The innovator brand-name product, and potentially other
products in the therapy class, then will be excluded from coverage. In
our experience to date, we have not seen manufacturers of authorized
alternatives offer a rebate that would result in a net cost lower than
that of the brand.
direct and indirect remuneration (dir) fees
Question. Many community-based cancer clinics have established
medically integrated pharmacies so patients can access their oral
chemotherapy prescriptions or other medications at the point-of- care.
These practices are often assessed large DIR which are based on certain
quality measures targeted toward primary care.
Shouldn't pharmacies be evaluated on the type of drug dispensed and
disease managed rather than a one-size fits all approach?
Answer. CMS Star ratings were created with patient outcomes in
mind. That is why Express Scripts chooses to leverage CMS quality
standards to measure pharmacy performance. Express Scripts and our plan
sponsors believe that pharmacies should be held to the same quality
standards as our plan sponsors.
We agree that DIR arrangements should include performance metrics
over which pharmacies have meaningful control and an ability to
influence. We also believe that they should appropriately take into
account whether the pharmacy is a retail pharmacy, specialty pharmacy,
or dispensing physician. Express Scripts DIR arrangements take these
factors into account.
Question. Does assessing large DIR fees on medically integrated
pharmacies drive patients to PBM-owned specialty pharmacies?
Answer. No.
Question. According to CMS, from 2012 to 2017 PBMs imposed a 45,000
percent increase in the amount of DIR fees pharmacies had to pay PBMs
and PDPs under Part D, and revenues earned from these fees increased
225 percent per year during this period.\9\ I thought PDPs and PBMs
were supposed to pay pharmacies for dispensing drugs to patients. Why
do pharmacies have to pay DIR fees to PBMs at all?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ CMS Proposed Rule: Modernizing Part D and Medicare Advantage to
Lower Drug Prices and Reduce Out-of-Pocket Expenses, 83 Fed. Reg.
62152, 62174 (November 30, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Why are pharmacies forced to pay DIR and other fees to PBMs?
Answer. Pharmacies are not forced to enter into DIR agreements with
Express Scripts. DIR agreements are made between plan sponsors and
pharmacies as a way to improve the cost and quality of a Medicare Part
D plan. They are part of the contract that is mutually developed and
agreed upon by the pharmacy and the Part D plan sponsor.
As part of these arrangements, pharmacies become one of the plan's
preferred pharmacies by agreeing to achieve certain performance
metrics. These metrics for the pharmacies are typically aligned with
the Star ratings metrics that CMS uses to judge the performance of Part
D plans. Express Scripts has seen improvement in quality across all
pharmacy types over time, particularly for Pharmacy Services
Administrative Organizations (PSAOs) and independent pharmacies.
Pharmacies are increasingly interested in participating in DIR
arrangements as a way to become a preferred provider within a Part D
plan's retail pharmacy network. Within these narrower pharmacy
networks, patients have lower copays when filling prescriptions at
their plan's preferred pharmacies, and those pharmacies benefit by
gaining access to a larger percentage of the plan's beneficiaries.
Ultimately, it is the decision of the pharmacy whether or not to
enter into a DIR agreement.
Question. According to CMS, PBMs justify DIR fees as adjustments to
improve quality. CMS also found that PBMs and PDPs withhold
substantially more in reductions in payments than as rewards paid to
pharmacies.\10\ Aren't so-called ``quality adjustments'' that collect
more for ``poor performance'' than they pay out for ``high
performance'' just another way for PBMs to collect even more money from
pharmacies?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Id. at 62174.
Why do PBMs collect more in quality payment adjustment than they
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
pay pharmacies under Part D?
Answer. If a pharmacy does not reach the performance metric to
which it agreed to pursue and maintain--e.g., medication adherence
rates for a specific disease category--then that pharmacy is assessed
the DIR fee detailed in the contract between the plan and pharmacy. It
is important to note that all DIR fees go to the Part D plan sponsor
and not to the PBM--100 percent of pharmacy network DIR is passed to
plan sponsors.
In addition to a variable reimbursement based on quality outcomes,
the Express Scripts performance network also includes bonus payments to
top performers at the end of the year to further reward achievement of
high quality outcomes.
delays and denials in cancer treatment
Question. I have received stories of cancer patients facing delays
or denials for their treatment due to PBM actions. Data shows that
breast cancer patients who experienced a 3-month or more delay in
treatment had a 12-percent lower 5-year survival rate compared with
breast cancer patients with only a 0- to 3-month delay.
What percent of patients experience a 14-day or longer delay in
receiving an oral oncolytic prescribed by their oncologist?
Answer. At ESI, we use pharmacists and board certified physicians
for all of our reviews. We respectfully refer to our answer below with
respect to the most common reasons for delays. We are committed to
always providing our clients' patients access to clinically appropriate
medications as quickly, affordably, and safely as possible.
Question. What are the primary reasons patients experience delays
or denials for their treatments?
Answer. A client plan sponsor's formulary design and the
utilization management tools--e.g., prior authorization or step
therapy, etc.--determines how quickly a patient may access certain
prescribed medications. Where there are multiple drugs--both branded or
generic--within a therapeutic class that are similarly effective,
certain of those drugs may be preferred for initial coverage over
others. Formularies are designed based on evidence-based research and
established clinical guidelines. Again, plan sponsors alone determine
their formularies and which utilization management tools to employ as
permitted under applicable law (i.e., Medicare, ERISA, etc.).
Where a prescriber seeks an exception to the plan's preferred drug
option, he/she has the right to appeal and request approval of the
original prescription. For coverage appeals, prescribers are required
to submit all relevant clinical information necessary for the plan to
determine if the request is appropriate under the patient's
circumstances. In these situations, providers act on behalf of patients
when requesting approval of some covered services or medications from
health plans before delivering a particular treatment.
When clinical evidence appropriately provides that alternative
medicines that are similarly effective and cost less have not been
tried first, or additional patient clinical information must be
provided to support their request for coverage, any delays that arise
may be due to any number of factors. The vast majority of any delayed
approvals for exception requests are due to prescribers not providing
complete information at the time the request was submitted. Or the
prescriber does not respond to plan follow-up requests for additional
clinical information necessary to complete a review on their
submissions.
Cigna and Express Scripts have worked to simplify and improve the
prior authorization request experience for prescribers, and have
developed and made available to physicians an ``App'' tool that allows
providers using it to submit electronic prior authorization requests
directly from their smartphones at the moment the prescription is being
ordered, along with possible alternatives that would not require such a
request. Details on this product are discussed further in our response
to questions addressing ``real-time benefit check tools.''
Question. What percent of determinations to delay or deny treatment
for cancer patients are made by an oncologist or healthcare
professional with oncology training?
Answer. We are committed to always providing our clients' patients
access to clinically appropriate medications as quickly, affordably,
and safely as possible.
Question. Why is a PBM-owned specialty pharmacy better qualified to
manage a cancer patient's adherence and side effects than a community
cancer clinic with a medically integrated pharmacy?
Answer. Specialty pharmacies are distinct from traditional
pharmacies because they coordinate many aspects of patient care to more
effectively manage treatment, side effects and interactions with other
therapies. Medications dispensed by specialty pharmacies are often
subject to strict dispensing rules under the FDA REMS program, and
require special storage, handling and packaging prior to dispensing.
These products are usually significantly more expensive than
conventional medications and require additional controls to assure that
patients take them appropriately.
For these reasons, manufacturers of specialty medications
frequently enter into limited distribution arrangements with those
specialty pharmacies fully capable of addressing the unique needs of
their products. This is not a function of whether a specialty pharmacy
is owned by a PBM or not; not all specialty pharmacies (even large ones
based on prescription volume) are owned by PBMs, and often have their
own limited distribution arrangements with manufacturers as well. In
fact we also contract with non-PBM owned specialty pharmacies provided
they meet the same quality and safety accreditation standards followed
by the industry.
At Accredo, our in-house specialty pharmacy, we operate 15
condition-specific Therapeutic Resource Centers (TRCs) that allow us to
deliver a level of expertise and individualized care that is unmatched
in the market. Our clinical model, developed around the TRCs, allows us
to provide patients with the additional resources they need to manage
their condition safely and effectively, including:

Access to 500 specialty pharmacists on the phone and through
video;

550 field-based infusion nurses who meet patients face-to-
face--at home, work, or school--to administer specialty medications for
some of the most complex disease states, such as pulmonary arterial
hypertension and immune disorders;

Nutrition counseling and social worker support;

Therapy management programs to protect patient health and
safety; and

Complete coordination of care between the medical benefit,
pharmacy benefit and physicians.
This unique combination of clinical specialization and personalized
engagement helps patients make decisions that improve adherence,
optimize health outcomes, and reduce costs.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Bill Cassidy
Question. In calendar years 2015, 2016, and 2017, what percent of
your revenue was from fees paid by plans, fees paid by manufacturers,
other fees, pharmacy spread or rebates? Same question as to profits. Of
all revenue generated from part D contracts, what percent did you
retain?
Answer. Per our annual 10-K filings with the SEC:

In 2015, Express Scripts' net profit margin was 2.43 percent.

In 2016, Express Scripts' net profit margin was 3.39 percent.

In 2017, Express Scripts' net profit margin was 4.51 percent.
Question. Should a patient ever pay more out of pocket for a
medicine than what you pay the pharmacy for that medicine?
Answer. Express Scripts employs a ``lesser of logic'' approach at
the point of sale for patients at the retail pharmacy, and pharmacies
in our networks are not permitted to charge a member more for their
copay under their benefit than the pharmacy's cash price. Moreover,
Express Scripts has never used ``gag clauses'' and enthusiastically
supported legislation--passed in the previous Congress--that banned
such practices.
Question. PBM revenue from fees has risen, illustrated below.
Further, PBM's retained revenue as a percent of net retail drug spend
has consistently increased. What do you attribute this increase to?
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.007
Answer. We would first note that this is an industry chart and not
necessarily indicative of our specific business.
We respectfully refer to our answer for the preceding question to
note that while revenues may increase, Express Scripts' profit margin
remained consistently around or below the 5-percent range.\11\ It is
noteworthy that the Express Scripts 2017 margins are roughly a third
less than that of the top Fortune 500 drug manufacturers, who averaged
14.6-percent profit from revenues in that same year (2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.drugchannels.net/2018/06/profits-in-2018-fortune-
500.html.
Following Cigna's combination with Express Scripts, the combined
organization reported a GAAP margin of 3.61 percent for the first
quarter of 2019. We again note the disparity with our counterparts
among the top Fortune 500 drug manufacturers, who averaged 23.9 percent
profit from revenues in 2018.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ https://www.drugchannels.net/2019/06/profits-in-2019-fortune-
500.html.
Question. How are bona fide service fees established? What was your
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
revenue generated in part D by bona fide fees in 2015, 2016, and 2017?
Answer. Express Scripts has served and continues to serve thousands
of clients, which include Medicare Part D sponsors. Express Scripts'
clients, including Medicare Part D sponsors, make benefit design
decisions and individually negotiate contractual provisions such as
service fees.
Question. A Health Affairs article suggests plans may prefer paying
PBMs using rebates instead of fees, as ``Using retained rebates to
cover PBM costs in lieu of fees could artificially lower reported
administrative costs and make it easier to meet government medical loss
ratio (MLR) requirements.'' Is it true that paying the PBM a percent of
rebates would keep that revenue from counting towards a plan's MLR?
Answer. In the Medicare setting, we pass through 100 percent of the
rebate value to our health plan clients.
Question. Would you support an industry-wide standard set of
performance metrics by which a PBM would set its pharmacy contracts,
which would be tailored based on regional patient populations, to give
certainty for local pharmacies?
Answer. We welcome the opportunity to work with you on improving
performance metrics standards. We encourage policies that use informed
metrics that would improve quality of care for all patients.
Question. Are there ever cases where a patient in your health plan
or one of the health plans for whom you negotiate as a PBM pays more
for a medicine than the plan spends on a net basis, when you reimburse
the pharmacy for that same medicine? In those cases, what entity
receives the benefit of the difference between the amount the patient
pays and the net amount the plan pays?
Answer. Yes, there are and in those cases where such differences
occur, the contracting arrangements with the client will dictate how
those amounts are allotted.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Richard Burr
Question. Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs) offer a variety of
contract designs to health insurance plans, allowing the insurer or
client to choose the best structure for their customers. During the
Finance Committee hearing on April 9, 2019, each witness stated that,
in the contracts structured to allow for the pass-through of rebate
dollars at the point of sale, PBMs do not keep any portion of the
rebate. If the PBM does not keep a portion of the rebate, what type of
revenue do PBMs receive from these contracts? What percent of your
contracts are point of sale and what percent utilize a structure
providing a percentage of the rebate back to the PBM?
Answer. In a typical rebate pass-through arrangement with clients,
we are paid an ``administrative fee'' (spelled out in our contract with
the plan sponsor) for adjudicating a prescription drug claim in lieu of
keeping any portion of any rebate dollars remitted to the plan; this is
also known as a ``cost-plus'' arrangement. When selecting between
``spread pricing'' and ``pass-through'' arrangements, clients negotiate
for pricing terms that best suit their needs from a wide range of
options. For more than 10 years, we have offered our clients an option
to provide rebate value at the point-of-sale, and to date only a
handful of clients have chosen to do so. Instead, most clients elect to
use rebate value to offset premiums and offer a more robust benefit.
In Medicare Part D, PBMs are required to pass through all rebates
to the plan sponsor. Client contracts contain financial disclosures in
which Express Scripts provides a detailed overview of its principal
revenue sources, including arrangements with pharmaceutical
manufacturers, wholesale distributors, and retail pharmacies. These
disclosures explain that some of this revenue relates to utilization of
prescription drugs by members of the clients receiving PBM services,
and that Express Scripts may pass through certain manufacturer payments
to its clients or may retain certain of those payments for itself,
depending on the contract terms between Express Scripts and the client.
Terms vary across clients and contracts. Express Scripts' contractual
terms with its clients are confidential and based on those
confidentiality obligations, Express Scripts cannot disclose the
individual financial performance of any specific contract.
Our clients, who are sophisticated entities and are often
represented by benefit consultants and advisors, negotiate the overall
arrangement they believe best suits their pharmacy benefit needs. Terms
vary across clients and contracts, and some clients negotiate to
receive a portion of rebates, as well as manufacturer administrative
fees collected by Express Scripts. Nearly half of Express Scripts'
clients have opted for 100-percent pass-through of rebates.
Question. It is our understanding that contracts with
pharmaceutical manufacturers may also take a variety of forms. In
calendar years 2016, 2017 and 2018, what was the total dollar amount
that you obtained from pharmaceutical manufacturers in any form such as
rebates, fees, etc.? What is the total dollar amount that was passed on
to health insurance plans with which you have an agreement or contract?
Answer. In 2018, Express Scripts' clinical pharmacy benefit
solutions returned $45 billion in savings to our clients,\13\ up from
$32 billion in 2017.\14\ Because of our innovative solutions, our
clients achieved the lowest drug trend in decades, just 0.4 percent
across employer-sponsored plans. Despite rising list prices, the
average 30-day prescription cost only $0.06 more. In Medicare, we
delivered an unprecedented 0.3-percent decline in drug spending across
the plans we serve.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ https://my.express-scripts.com/rs/809-VGG-836/images/
Express%20Scripts%202018%20
Drug%20Trend%20Report.pdf.
\14\ file:///C:/Users/p067734/Downloads/
Express%20Scripts%202017%20Drug%20Trend%20
Report.pdf.
\15\ https://my.express-scripts.com/rs/809-VGG-836/images/
Express%20Scripts%202018%20
Drug%20Trend%20Report.pdf.
Express Scripts passes approximately 95 percent of rebates,
discounts, and price reductions back to its core PBM commercial and
health plan clients and their customers. Nearly half of Express
Scripts' clients have opted for 100 percent pass-through of rebates. In
Medicare Part D, 100 percent of the rebate value is passed through
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
within the program.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Steve Daines
Question. In Medicare Part D, beneficiaries' deductible and
coinsurance payments are calculated based on the price negotiated
between the PBM and the pharmacy.
Does this take into account rebates and discounts the PBM
negotiates separately with pharmaceutical manufacturers?
If yes, what percentage of the time is this the case?
Answer. In Medicare Part D, 100 percent of the rebate value is
passed through within the program. All beneficiaries benefit from
rebates in the form of lower premiums. Most drugs do not involve a
rebate structure. According to a study of drugs covered under Medicare
Part D by the actuarial firm Milliman, 81 percent of all drugs analyzed
do not offer rebates and 64 percent of brand drugs analyzed do not
offer rebates.\16\ In the case of payments made during the deductible
phase of the benefit and when cost-sharing is percentage-based, rebates
and discounts are not factored into beneficiaries' payments at the
point of sale. However, as noted above, all beneficiaries in Medicare
Part D see the value of rebates in the form of lower premiums. This is
part of the reason that the Medicare Part D program remains popular
among seniors, and why participation remains high.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ https://www.ahip.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/AHIP-Part-D-
Rebates-20180716.pdf.
Question. In calendar years 2016, 2017, and 2018, what share of
brand prescriptions covered by the Part D plans you contract with were
filled in the deductible or required beneficiaries to pay coinsurance?
What was the total amount beneficiaries spent out of pocket for those
prescriptions? What would beneficiaries' total out-of-pocket spending
have been under the same cost sharing structure if their payments were
based on the net price to the Part D plan, inclusive of rebates and
other price concessions, rather than the price negotiated between your
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PBM and the pharmacy?
Answer. We do not maintain information in the form requested.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. Should the CREATES Act become law, what commitment can
your company making to covering generics as soon as they are approved
and passing those savings on to patients?
Answer. We strongly support the Creating and Restoring Access to
Equivalent Samples (CREATES) Act, which aims to lower drug prices by
ending restricted access to samples by manufacturers of brand-name
drugs, and help to speed generics to market. According to the
Congressional Budget Office, its passage would save $3.9 billion over
10 years. Express Scripts is committed to leveraging competition to
drive lower drug costs, which is why we support the CREATES Act and
other legislative changes that would speed the entry of generic drugs
into the market. Express Scripts has long been committed to encouraging
generic drug use--including biosimilars where available--as appropriate
to preserve patient access to needed medications in the most cost-
effective manner without sacrificing safety or efficacy.
Question. What are your concerns with point-of-sale rebates and
what alternatives do you propose to such rebates to improve consumer
savings at the pharmacy counter?
Answer. When selecting between spread pricing and pass-through
arrangements, clients negotiate for pricing terms that best suit their
needs from a wide range of options. For more than 10 years, we have
offered our clients an option to provide rebate value at the point of
sale, and to date only a handful of clients have chosen to do so.
Instead, most clients elect to use rebate value to offset premiums and
offer a more robust benefit.
Question. What are the specific steps your company is taking to
move PCSK9 inhibitors off the specialty tier in Medicare Part D and to
fixed copay tiers given that prices went down by 60 percent and are no
longer above the specialty tier threshold?
Answer. Express Scripts focuses on the lowest net cost drugs on
formulary. Plan sponsors always determine their formulary benefit
design including their drug coverage tiers, and always retain the
option to make changes accordingly subject to Medicare rules.
Question. Why haven't your plans moved it already, given that CMS
allows plans to make positive mid-year formulary changes that improve
patient access and affordability?
Answer. Again, we make changes to drug placement on formulary tiers
at the direction of our client plan sponsors. Further, we advise
clients to prefer lowest net cost drugs within their formularies.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Benjamin L. Cardin
drug rebate rule and higher part d premiums
Question. In January, the Department of Health and Human Services
released a proposal to reform prescription drug rebates paid by
pharmaceutical manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers under
Medicare Part D. The OIG proposal attempts to ban most rebates by
eliminating their regulatory protections and creating two new safe
harbor provisions: one to expressly protect discounts applied directly
at the point of sale (POS) for consumers, and another to protect
certain service fees that manufacturers pay to PBMs for services
furnished to health plans. The only service fees that would be
permissible under the proposal are those that are fixed, and not based
on a percentage of sales and not based on volume or the value of other
business generated between the parties. The proposed rule was designed
to address the Department's concerns with the current rebate system,
which HHS believes rewards high list prices, discourages the use of
generics and biosimilars, and does not reflect patient out-of-pocket
costs. For consumers, this proposal may result in lower costs at the
pharmacy counter, but Part D premiums may increase as a result.
Could you explain which Part D beneficiaries could see savings on
their drug costs at the pharmacy counter and which Part D beneficiaries
could not see lower drug costs?
Answer. According to a study of drugs covered under Medicare Part D
by the actuarial firm Milliman, 81 percent of all drugs analyzed do not
offer rebates and 64 percent of brand drugs analyzed do not offer
rebates.\17\ However, the CMS Office of the Actuary's analysis of the
proposed rule shows that all beneficiaries would be harmed by the rule
in the form of higher Part D premiums. Under the recently proposed
rebate rule, many beneficiaries using generic, non-preferred, and
specialty drugs will see premiums increase, and not a reduction in
costs at the pharmacy counter.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ https://www.ahip.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/AHIP-Part-D-
Rebates-20180716.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
perverse incentive to place more expensive drugs on formularies
Question. In a Senate Finance Committee hearing had a few weeks
ago, many pharmaceutical companies argued that the current rebate
structure incentivizes high list prices. These companies argue that the
higher the list price of the drug, the greater the rebates, and
therefore, the more profit the PBM earns. While contracts between PBMs,
Part D Plans, and pharmaceutical companies require PBMs to pass through
100 percent of the negotiated rebate back to insurance plans, I worry
that this structure could incentivize PBMs to favor a more expensive
drug on the formulary because they could get a higher rebate.
Is there an incentive for a PBM to place a higher cost drug on the
Part D formulary because the PBM receives a larger rebate for that more
expensive drug? Why or why not?
Answer. No. Financial impact to Express Scripts is expressly
excluded and prohibited from consideration in the formulary development
process. Our formulary development approach for all medications
prioritizes clinical considerations first and foremost before
evaluating net cost to clients. The financial impact to clients,
however, is considered, but only after all clinical considerations have
been taken into account.
Question. Another complaint that I have heard from physician groups
is that many formularies do not cover newer drugs that they consider to
be necessary for hard-to-treat diseases, even if the drugs are very
well-studied.
With technology changing so rapidly, how do your companies ensure
that you keep up with the medical and surgical experts and new
research, so that your authorization decisions are in line with the
most recent medical innovations and physician standards?
Answer. Express Scripts develops formularies through a four-step
process involving the work of distinct committees: the Therapeutic
Assessment Committee, National Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee,
Value Assessment Committee, and an annual formulary review by the
National Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee.
The Therapeutic Assessment Committee (TAC) is an internal clinical
review body, consisting of clinical pharmacists and physicians who are
employed by Express Scripts. From a formulary development perspective,
the committee is tasked to review specific medications following
approval by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Before discussing a
new drug at TAC, Express Scripts' clinical team conducts a search of
the medical literature, evaluates published data from clinical trials,
and develops comprehensive drug evaluation summary documents. The drug
evaluation documents include, at a minimum: a summary of the
pharmacology, safety, efficacy, dosage, mode of administration, and the
relative place in therapy of the medication under review compared to
other pharmacologic alternatives. Following a review of the drug
evaluation summary document, TAC ultimately provides a formulary
placement recommendation that is shared with the Express Scripts'
National Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) Committee. TAC formulary
recommendations are merely a suggestion and cannot be formally
implemented without the approval of the P&T Committee.
Express Scripts' P&T Committee is a group of independent, actively
practicing physicians and pharmacists who are not employed by Express
Scripts. The P&T Committee is tasked to review medications from a
purely clinical perspective. The committee does not have access to, nor
does it consider, any information regarding Express Scripts' rebates/
negotiated discounts, or the net cost of the drug after application of
all discounts. The committee does not use price, in any way, to make
formulary placement decisions.
The P&T Committee can establish one of the following three
formulary placement designations: include, exclude, or optional from a
formulary. Drugs with a designation of include are recommended for
placement on all formularies. Drugs may be given an include designation
for one or more of the following clinical reasons: unique indication
for use addressing a clinically significant unmet treatment need;
efficacy superior to that of existing therapy alternatives; a safety
profile superior to that of existing therapy alternatives; a unique
place in therapy; and/or drugs which treat medical conditions that
necessitate individualized therapy and for which there are multiple
treatment options. Drugs with an exclude designation are not
recommended for formulary inclusion. Drugs may be given an exclude
designation for one or more of the following clinical reasons: efficacy
inferior to that of existing therapy alternatives; a safety profile
inferior to that of existing therapy alternatives; and/or insufficient
data to evaluate the drug. Medications recalled from the market for
safety reasons take an automatic exclude status, and are formally
reviewed at the next P&T Committee meeting. Drugs may also be
designated as optional on a formulary. Drugs may be given an optional
designation based on the conclusion that they are clinically similar to
other currently available drug alternatives.
Optional medications are forwarded to the Value Assessment
Committee (VAC) for further analysis, which considers the value of
drugs by evaluating the net cost, market share, and drug utilization
trends of clinically similar medications. VAC consists of Express
Scripts employees from various areas. No member of VAC can serve in any
capacity on TAC (and vice-versa). VAC reviews drugs designated as
optional by the P&T Committee, and develops a formulary placement
recommendation.
Finally, on an annual basis, the National P&T Committee will review
the final formulary recommendations, by drug class, for the upcoming
plan year. The committee utilizes this opportunity to ensure adherence
to previously established formulary placement recommendations, and to
recommend any additional changes to ensure that the formulary is
clinically appropriate. The committee also ensures that all Express
Scripts national formularies cover a broad distribution of therapeutic
classes and categories, and that the formularies neither discourage
enrollment by any group of enrollees nor discriminate against certain
patient populations.
Question. I have heard from independent pharmacies in Maryland that
have struggled with pharmacy benefit managers and direct and indirect
remuneration (DIR) fees. According to independent pharmacies, there are
times when DIR fees are based on performance, and these fees range from
$2-$7 for certain types of maintenance prescriptions and are often
collected retroactively--weeks or even months after a prescription was
filled. A PBM can take money back from the pharmacy when the pharmacies
haven not met a PBM's performance standard. In these instances, the PBM
claws back money and creates a situation where the pharmacy does not
receive adequate reimbursement to cover its costs. As a result, DIR
fees can be a significant financial loss to pharmacies and an
additional cost burden to patients.
Could you explain what performance measures are considered when
determining a DIR fee?
Answer. The metrics for the pharmacies are aligned with the Star
ratings metrics that CMS uses to judge the performance of Part D plans.
The metrics are part of the contract that is mutually developed and
agreed upon by the pharmacy and the Part D plan sponsor.
Examples of performance metrics include: generic dispensing rate,
patient adherence rate, prescription refill rate, counselling services,
medication therapy management, dispensing volume, and opioid dispensing
oversight.
Question. How is that performance measure communicated to the
pharmacy?
Answer. Our performance networks use the EQUIPP portal, an industry
standard for quality data, which provides insightful information on
performance and potential opportunities for patient intervention.
Pharmacies and plan sponsors can log in to the quality reporting
tool EQUIPP, managed by our reporting partner Pharmacy Quality
Solutions (PQS), to have visibility into the pharmacy performance and
ranking of the key metrics.
Question. How much does your company receive in DIR fees?
Answer. Pharmacy network DIR fees go to the Part D plan sponsor and
not to the PBM--100 percent of DIR is passed to plan sponsors, who
typically use these fees to help reduce premiums.
If a contracted pharmacy's performance does not meet a mutually
agreed-upon quality metric--as defined in their contract, entered into
voluntarily with us--Express Scripts does not claw back monies already
disbursed to the pharmacy. Again, pharmacies who meet or exceed their
performance metric scores receive bonus payments as a reward for
providing high-quality care to patients.
Question. How much does your company receive in performance-related
DIR fees?
Answer. DIR fees go to the Part D plan sponsor and not to the PBM--
100 percent of DIR is passed to plan sponsors, who typically use these
fees to reduce premiums.
If a contracted pharmacy's performance does not meet up to a
mutually agreed-upon quality metric--as defined in their contract,
entered into voluntarily with us--Express Scripts does not claw back
monies already disbursed to the pharmacy. Again, pharmacies who meet or
exceed their performance metric scores receive bonus payments as a
reward for providing high quality care to patients
Question. Are those fees passed on to the consumer? If so, how?
Answer. Medicare Part D beneficiaries benefit from DIR arrangements
as these fees not only spur pharmacies to provide them with the
highest-quality care and services, but they also lower plan costs in a
number of ways. For example, these collected fees are typically used to
keep premiums low--and across all plans, well below CBO projections
with little increases year-over-year, despite an environment seeing
ever-escalating drug prices. Among other metrics, rewarding pharmacies
that maintain high medication adherence rates reduces the likelihood of
medical interventions and saves the costs of providing such care for
both plans and beneficiaries.
drug shortages
Question. Currently there are over 270 drugs in shortage. Drug
shortages happen for many reasons such as manufacturing and quality
problems, natural disasters, and inventory practices of wholesalers and
pharmacies. Drug shortages cause harm to providers, hospitals, and most
importantly patients. Pharmacists and providers must spend significant
amounts of time on researching alternative drug treatments for the
patient, which may not always be the most optimal therapies.
As a pharmacy benefit manager, you have contractual agreements with
pharmaceutical companies in order to place their drugs on a plan's
formulary. While I understand that drug shortages happening in both the
inpatient and outpatient settings, there may be a role PBMs can play in
protecting patients.
For the prescription drugs you negotiate to cover on a plan
formulary, could you use your negotiating power to ensure a drug is
available to a patient? Why or why not?
Answer. We do not manufacture, set the price of, or control the
supply of a drug. Our contracts assume products will be available for
patients, as it is in our collective interest to have adequate supply
and competition to lower costs and improve quality. Further, there is
rarely a single, predictable reason behind a drug shortage. In many
cases, shortages are the result of disruptions in manufacturing
processes, FDA orders to halt productions, etc., matters for which we
have no control over--even via contract negotiation.
Question. What do you do to ensure that patients have the drugs
they need?
Answer. Preventing drug shortages and ensuring adequate supply of
necessary pharmaceutical products is critical to patient health. The
majority of drug shortages occur in the hospital setting. We have
predictive models that help to show us which drugs might be in short
supply and make adjustments as we are able. In the United States, the
biggest problems with drug shortages occur when there is a single
source manufacturer. Decreasing the amount of time in which generics
get to market can also play a key part in solving this problem.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown
Question. During the hearing, each of you expressed support for
biosimilars and most of you indicated you try and take advantage of
available biosimilars to help lower costs. When I asked each of you to
identify solutions to help ensure a robust biosimilar marketplace here
in the U.S., most of you mentioned things Congress or the
administration could do to help ensure uptake of biosimilars--from
lowering the exclusivity period for biologics to finalizing guidance on
interchange ability at the FDA. However, none of you offered any
solutions or ideas for what your company could do to help ensure timely
uptake of biosimilars, a robust U.S. biosimilars market, and a
resulting cost savings to patients to taxpayers.
Most of the biosimilars currently approved and on the market in the
U.S. are reimbursed through the medical benefit. What are the
similarities and differences in how rebates are passed onto patients
and providers in the medical benefit versus pharmacy benefit. In your
answer, please describe these similarities and differences across each
of your books of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare, Medicaid).
Answer. We believe that part of the cause for escalating drug costs
in the Part B program today includes a lack of utilization management
tools that exert downward pressure on net costs. There are clear
opportunities to achieve savings in the Medicare Part B program,
including introducing Part D utilization management tools into Part B
and potentially shifting some Part B drugs to Part D. Because of the
complexity involved with identifying the ``candidate'' drugs for moving
into Part D, along with assessing the consequences and impacts of doing
so for both programs, we strongly recommend CMS engage stakeholders as
they develop their policy.
In addition, for our commercial business, we have fully insured
arrangements, in which rebates are generally used to lower premiums,
and self-funded arrangements, in which our clients have a choice on how
rebate dollars are used, including to lower administrative costs or
reduce employee contributions. Most self-funded clients elect lower
administrative costs rather than 100 percent pass-through of rebate
dollars due to lower prevalence, fewer rebate dollars, and the
additional complexity of medical claims. Drug rebates in the medical
benefit are typically available only for high-cost specialty drugs.
Rebates do not impact provider reimbursement as it is based on a
percentage of Average Sales Price (ASP). Finally, point-of-sale
capability is not generally an option for drugs covered in the medical
benefit given the differences in processing compared to drugs covered
under a retail pharmacy benefit.
Question. Do any of your plans require the use of a higher list
price, branded product over the use of a therapeutically equivalent
lower list price generic or biosimilar product? Why? If a plan
restricts the use of a biosimilar or generic product in lieu of an
innovator or brand name product, do patients pay more out-of-pocket
than they would if the biosimilar was preferred?
Answer. As we have noted in other responses to similar questions,
our plan clients alone decide what their formulary benefit design will
be for the plan(s). Accordingly, we do not require our client plan
sponsors use higher net cost branded products over lower net cost
drugs, regardless of whether they are on-brand, generic or biosimilar.
While we advise clients to prefer lowest net cost drugs within their
formularies, such decisions are ultimately theirs.
Question. Recognizing most biosimilars are paid for via medical
benefit, please explain whether you use step-therapy to restrict access
to biosimilars for your patients in any medical benefit you manage
across each of your books of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare,
Medicaid). What role do rebates playing in your consideration for
patient access to biosimilars in each of these instances?
Answer. Rebate size is not considered by our P&T Committee when
determining tiering/formulary placement for any drug, whether on-brand
or biosimilar. We always advise clients to pursue lowest net cost for
preferred drug placements in their formularies.
Question. How can and will your company help ensure a robust
biosimilars market here in the U.S.?
Answer. With an expected cost of 15 percent to 40 percent less than
originator products, biosimilars create a significant savings
opportunity across the U.S. health care system. Cigna and Express
Scripts are fully supportive of a robust biosimilars market in the
United States, and believes important first steps toward ensuring such
a market include ending so-called ``pay-for-delay'' arrangements, which
delay the availability of lower-cost generics and biosimilars. We would
also encourage the FDA to finalize guidance on biosimilar naming
standards, improve the efficiency of the biosimilar product development
and approval process, and develop effective communications tools to
educate providers and patients about the safety and efficacy of
biosimilars.
Question. I have heard concerns that ``rebate walls'' are
responsible for keeping new biosimilars off of formularies, where a
manufacturer offers conditional rebates on a bundle of their products
in order to incentive PBMs to exclude a new biosimilar competitor from
their formularies. Have you ever decided to place a drug on a preferred
tier because of the rebates you receive for other drugs from that
manufacturer? If you do not do this, do you support this practice being
carried out by your competitors?
Answer. We negotiate for lowest net cost. Our formulary development
approach for all medications prioritizes clinical considerations first
and foremost before evaluating net cost to clients. Financial impact to
Express Scripts is expressly excluded and prohibited from consideration
in the formulary development process. The financial impact to clients,
however, is considered only after all clinical considerations have been
taken into account.
Question. What more can and will you do to counteract efforts to
rebate-block or bundle rebates to block biosimilar formulary placement?
Will you commit to taking these actions as more biosimilars become
available in Part D?
Answer. We advise clients to prefer lowest net cost drugs within
their formularies.
rebates vs. fees
Question. During the hearing, Senator Cassidy asked each of you
about the trend in PBM contracting where a larger share of your
reimbursement and payment is a result of ``fees'' which you are able to
pocket, as opposed to ``rebates'' which must be passed back to the
plan/consumer.
Please define the word ``rebate.'' As part of your definition,
please clarify whether or not you consider administrative fees,
inflation payments, product discounts, prospective rebates, care
management fees, procurement fees or any other type of fee or payment
that isn't a retrospective rebate to be a rebate.
Answer. At a most basic level, a rebate is simply a retrospective
discount. For over 30 years, Express Scripts has been singularly
focused on helping employers, health plans, labor unions, and public
programs like Medicare expand access to needed medications without
overwhelming payer budgets. In 2018, we helped save employers more than
$45 billion on their prescription drug costs.\18\ Also, we held
prescription drug cost increases for our clients to just 1.5 percent,
the lowest growth rate since we started measuring the trend in the
early 1990s.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ https://my.express-scripts.com/rs/809-VGG-836/images/
Express%20Scripts%202018%20
Drug%20Trend%20Report.pdf.
Express Scripts returns on average 95 percent \19\ of rebates we
negotiate with drug manufacturers directly to our clients. Our clients,
100 percent of the time, decide how rebates will be returned to them.
In turn, clients determine how they will use rebates to lower patient
premiums, cost-sharing, and/or deductibles.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ http://lab.express-scripts.com/lab/insights/drug-options/2019-
national-preferred-formulary-better-access-better-value.
Ninety-six to 98 percent of our clients are projected to stick with
Express Scripts through 2020 because they know the value we bring by
not only driving down costs, but also through improving care and
creating better outcomes. Better value includes working with our
clients to achieve a 90 percent generic-fill rate--and generics are
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
generally not rebated.
Notwithstanding the mistaken blame on rebates as the source of drug
price increases, we note many non-rebated drugs continue to see double-
digit increases. In 2017, non-rebated drugs treating infertility,
depression, high cholesterol, and transplants all registered price
increases above 15 percent.
Question. Please provide, across your books of business (i.e.,
commercial, Medicare, Medicaid), a list of each of the different types
of rebates, charges, and/or fees that you incorporate into your
contracts.
Answer. Our clients--who are sophisticated entities and are often
represented by benefit consultants and advisors--determine the overall
pricing arrangement they believe best suits their pharmacy benefit
management needs. Terms vary across clients and contracts. Express
Scripts' contractual terms with its clients are confidential.
Question. Rebates, by definition, must be passed along to the
employer, health plan, or consumer. Please provide, across your books
of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare, Medicaid), details on which of
the rebates/fees detailed in my prior question are passed along to the
consumer and/or plan and which are kept by the PBM.
Answer. Express Scripts passes approximately 95 percent of rebates,
discounts, and price reductions back to its core PBM commercial and
health plan clients and their customers. Nearly half of Express
Scripts' clients have opted for 100 percent pass-through of rebates. In
Medicare Part D, 100 percent of the rebate value is passed through
within the program to plan sponsors. As noted before, employers and
other plan sponsors that work with Cigna and Express Scripts choose how
any rebates are used. Some use them to lower premiums and cost sharing,
others choose to expand access, fund wellness programs, or provide
discounts to consumers at the point of sale. These decisions are and
should be governed by the particular circumstances of the employer,
health plan, and patients.
fiduciary duty
Question. Each of you has argued that you are the one entity in the
drug supply chain that exists to help lower the cost of prescription
drugs. You claim that your value comes in saving taxpayers, plans, and
consumers' money.
Would you be willing to accept a fiduciary standard in your
contracts? In other words, do you believe you have a fiduciary duty to
the plan or employer you contract with--to act in their best interest
and not your own? If not, why not?
Answer. Fiduciary status for PBMs is not appropriate because the
services that PBMs provide are not fiduciary in nature. While PBMs
provide claims processing and perform other administrative tasks for
plans, they do not make decisions regarding benefit design or exercise
any discretionary authority over the plan or plan assets.
paying pharmacists
Question. Following a series of reports in The Columbus Dispatch,
Ohio has taken a number of actions over the past year to crack down on
several PBM practices. Efforts to date have included investigations,
lawsuits, and policy changes to address the egregious use of spread-
pricing, alleged breaches of contract, accusations of anti-competitive
behavior, a misuse of taxpayer dollars, and a general lack of
transparency.
PBMs are responsible for creating pharmacy networks, setting the
price patients and health plans pay for prescription drugs,
adjudicating claims, and reimbursing pharmacies for dispensed drugs. In
addition, nearly all PBMs own proprietary pharmacies that directly
compete with the PBM-created retail network. Do you design plans that
incentivize or require patients to use a pharmacy owned by your
affiliate over a competing retail pharmacy. If yes, do you believe this
represents a conflict of interest? If yes, how do you ensure there is
no resulting anticompetitive misuse of pharmacy and patient data?
Answer. Unlike some PBM competitors in the industry, our company
does not own or operate a retail pharmacy chain. While we do own and
operate both mail-order and specialty pharmacies, we do not exclude
from our network of pharmacies competitors both large and small,
provided they meet the same industry standard accreditation and safety
standards we follow ourselves. We also reiterate that client plan
sponsors will determine whether any particular pharmacies are preferred
or not.
In the case of specialty pharmacies, however, we note they are
distinct from traditional retail pharmacies because they coordinate
many aspects of patient care to more effectively manage treatment, side
effects, and interactions with other therapies the patient may be
receiving. Medications dispensed by specialty pharmacies are often
subject to strict dispensing rules under the FDA REMS program, and
require special storage, handling, and packaging prior to dispensing.
These products are usually significantly more expensive than
conventional medications and require additional controls to assure that
patients take them appropriately.
For these reasons, manufacturers of specialty medications
frequently enter into limited distribution arrangements with specialty
pharmacies fully capable of addressing the unique needs accompanying
use of their products. This is not a function of whether a specialty
pharmacy is owned by a PBM or not; not all specialty pharmacies (even
large ones) are owned by PBMs. Again, we also contract with non-PBM
owned specialty pharmacies provided they meet the same quality and
safety accreditation standards followed by the industry.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Michael F. Bennet
Question. Can you answer the following questions to help us
understand the pharmacy benefit manager business model and how you make
formulary decisions?
What percent of rebates are passed to the consumer under Medicare
Part D?
Answer. In Medicare Part D, 100 percent of the rebate value is
passed through within the program to Part D plan sponsors. All
beneficiaries benefit from rebates in the form of lower premiums.
Question. What percent of rebates are passed to the consumer in the
private insurance market?
Answer. Express Scripts passes approximately 95 percent of rebates,
discounts, and price reductions back to its core PBM commercial and
health plan clients and their customers. Employers and other plan
sponsors that work with Cigna and Express Scripts choose how rebates
are used. Some use them to lower premiums and cost sharing, others
choose to expand access, fund wellness programs, or provide discounts
to consumers at the point of sale.
Question. Do you have any comments on how health plans should use
their share of the rebates to lower drug prices for patients with high
deductibles?
Answer. Employers and other plan sponsors that work with Cigna and
Express Scripts choose how rebates are used. Some use them to lower
premiums and cost sharing, others choose to expand access, fund
wellness programs, or provide discounts to consumers at the point of
sale. These decisions are and should be governed by the particular
circumstances of the employer, health plan, and patients.
Question. What is the process of deciding on which tier a generic
will be placed in your formularies?
Answer. Our formulary development approach for all medications
prioritizes clinical considerations first and foremost before
evaluating net cost to clients. Financial impact to Express Scripts is
expressly excluded and prohibited from consideration in the formulary
development process. The financial impact to clients, however, is
considered after all clinical considerations have been taken into
account. Further, our clients determine, ultimately, the placement of
any drug on their formularies as it is our purpose to manage the
pharmacy benefit design they select.
Question. Are generics always tiered as preferred (versus branded
drugs)?
Answer. Our National Preferred Formulary (NPF) is developed by an
independent Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) Committee comprised of
independent practicing physicians, other clinicians and academics
representing multiple areas of clinical expertise. Their decisions are
based solely on whether clinical evidence shows that a drug must be
covered. Only after products are evaluated from a clinical perspective
are net cost and other factors considered. Again our focus is on the
lowest net cost for drugs so we can reduce costs for our clients.
Further, we note that plan sponsors are not obligated to adopt our
NPF, but can accept, reject, or modify it as they deem fit or even
create their own custom drug formulary. A formulary becomes part of a
plan sponsor's benefit only after adoption by the client. Like
formularies, copay tiers and other elements of benefit design are
ultimately determined by our clients.
Question. How quickly are generics placed on formularies once FDA
clears them?
Answer. Where a brand drug already has multiple manufacturers of
generic equivalents, no special arrangements need to be made because
this occurs frequently for ``mature'' drugs and the makers of these
generic products can and do change. With regard to a newly approved,
authorized generic, we will add it to our formulary at the direction of
our clients.
Question. Given the struggles we hear about patients accessing
insulin, what measures are you taking to ensure that diabetes products
and different types of insulin are placed on a preferred tier when
establishing a formulary?
Answer. Earlier this year, we were able to launch a new Patient
Assurance Program, which will bring additional affordability and
predictability to customers who rely on insulin to manage their
diabetes. Furthering Cigna and Express Scripts' respective historical
efforts in diabetes disease management, the Patient Assurance Program
establishes a lower, fixed out-of-pocket cost for covered insulins,
ensuring customers will pay no more than $25 out of pocket when filling
a 30-day insulin prescription at a retail pharmacy or through home
delivery. This is an early example of the accelerated change and
innovation our new company is positioned to drive in the financing and
delivery of care.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert P. Casey, Jr.
Question. During the hearing, I asked an initial question on spread
pricing and wanted to follow up here. According to the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), total gross spending in 2017 on
prescription drugs was $154.9 billion in Medicare Part D, $30.4 billion
in Part B, and $67.6 billion in Medicaid.
One of the main challenges in lowering the price of prescription
drugs is that there is a disturbing lack of transparency all along the
supply chain, from research and development to what the patient is
expected to pay at the counter. Further, the out-of- pocket costs for
drugs varies greatly and unpredictably from patient to patient. That is
why Senate Special Committee on Aging Chairwoman Collins and I
introduced legislation that would codify the Drug Spending Dashboards
at the CMS. The dashboards provide cost and spending information for
drugs in the Medicaid, Medicare Part B, and Medicare Part D
programs.\20\ With regards to transparency in the prescription drug
supply chain, please provide answers to the following questions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ S. 709, 116th Congress, Prescription Drug Pricing Dashboard
Act, online at: https://www.
congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/
709?q=%7B%22search%22%3A%22drug+dashboard
%22%7D&s=1&r=1. Accessed April 23, 2019.
Is it the policy and practice of your company to negotiate with
drug manufacturers in good faith and obtain the best and lowest prices
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
possible for patients and American taxpayers?
Answer. We negotiate with manufacturers to achieve the lowest net
cost of prescription drugs for our customers, regardless of whether
they are employers in the commercial market or health plan sponsors
offering Medicare Advantage or Medicaid coverage.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company that
patients, providers, researchers, policymakers, and the American people
in general, know how taxpayer dollars are being spent in the Medicare
and Medicaid programs?
Answer. We strongly support the concept of providing information
about the price of drugs, therapies, and the cost of care to
beneficiaries and their providers as a means of improving price
transparency, educating consumers, and incentivizing the efficient use
of care throughout the health care system. We support efforts by CMS to
move toward a system in which Part D enrollees and their providers have
access to real-time benefit check and electronic prior authorization
tools, while ensuring appropriate standardization and timeframes for
implementation. We also support efforts to ensure the Medicare Payment
Advisory Commission (MedPAC) and the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and
Access Commission (MACPAC) have access to de-identified information
currently submitted by PBMs, Part D sponsors, and Medicare Advantage
plans to CMS. Legislation to address this issue was recently introduced
by Senators Cortez Masto, Cornyn, Carper, and Cassidy.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company to disclose
how much a drug costs, broken down by manufacturer list price; rebate
paid by the manufacturer to you (the PBM); the amount reimbursed to
pharmacies by the PBM; and the amount insured and uninsured patients
pay out of pocket, before coupons, discounts, and other forms of
patient assistance offered at the point of sale?
If so, please provide useful and easily accessible links to where
policymakers and the public can find such information. If not, please
disclose how much each drug you work with clients to provide costs,
broken down by manufacturer list price; rebate paid by the manufacturer
to you (the PBM); the amount reimbursed to pharmacies by the PBM; and
the amount insured and uninsured patients pay out of pocket, before
coupons, discounts, and other forms of patient assistance offered at
the point of sale.
Answer. We are committed to providing transparency and audit rights
to our clients. However, making this information available to the
public involves releasing both proprietary and trade secret
information, the disclosure of which would require us to breach
contracts and harm our ability to negotiate discounts and lower prices
for our clients--and ultimately reduce competition in the marketplace.
Question. Please provide a list of actions your company has taken
to ensure that pharmacists are enabled and allowed to communicate to
patients how they can pay the lowest out-of-pocket cost possible for
their prescription drugs.
Answer. Last Congress, Express Scripts endorsed bipartisan Senate
legislation aimed at stopping so-called PBM ``gag clauses'' that
prohibit a pharmacy from informing a patient that the retail cash price
may be lower than his or her copayment. Express Scripts does not engage
in this anti-consumer practice. We believe our members should be
informed about any out-of-pocket costs in advance. We provide members
real-time pricing information, customized to their individual plans,
via our website and mobile app. Pharmacies participating in our retail
networks are not permitted to charge a member more for their copay
under their benefit than the pharmacy's cash price.
Additionally, our Real Time Prescription Benefit tool, launched
last November, helps to simplify the patient's experience with their
prescriber and improve the price transparency. Real-time clinical
alerts that reach physicians through electronic prescribing systems can
turn data into actionable patient intelligence, helping people stay on
their therapy and avoid dangerous drug-drug interactions. We provide
patient-specific information and pricing information directly into the
physician's electronic health record within seconds. By providing drug
cost information and reconciling coverage issues at the point of
prescribing, we are eliminating confusion and pain points for patients
at the pharmacy counter.
These systems are delivering measurable savings to patients at the
pharmacy counter, while ensuring providers and patients are
communicating to make better-informed medication choices. Electronic
prior authorization capabilities are improving as well, eliminating
hours of potential wait time for prescribers and patients.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Thune
real-time benefit check
Question. You've all shared your ability to leverage technology
such as real-time benefit tools to help patients and providers
understand drug costs at the point of prescribing, as well as how
technology can be used to help identify opportunities to provide
enhanced support and medication management for enrollees. What policies
can we consider to incentivize greater uptake of these tools?
Answer. Thank you for this question and for your continued
willingness to work toward policies that will harness technology to
improve health outcomes and control costs. We would welcome the
opportunity to work with you and your staff on additional policies, but
wanted to highlight the following proposals.
We strongly support the concept of providing information about the
price of drugs, therapies, and the cost of care to beneficiaries and
their providers as a means of improving price transparency, educating
consumers, and incentivizing the efficient use of care throughout the
health-care system. We support efforts by CMS to move toward a system
in which Part D enrollees and their providers have access to real-time
benefit check and electronic prior authorization tools, while ensuring
appropriate standardization and time frames for implementation.
Greater uptake of these tools in public programs, through policies
promulgated by CMS, will lead to greater uptake in commercial markets,
so that all patients and prescribers have the information needed to
improve affordability and predictability.
Question. You referenced legislation in your testimony that I've
worked on with Senator Carper to apply value-based insurance design to
high-deductible health plans for chronic disease management. If
enacted, how do you expect plans to utilize this tool and what will be
the impact on drug prices and health-care spending more broadly?
Answer. This legislation addresses a key affordability issue for
consumers, and for the health-care system, as prevention is a critical
tool to managing future health-care costs. As plan sponsors turn to
CDHPs as a way manage costs and encourage patients to take a more
active role in their health care purchasing decisions, we welcome more
flexibility through health savings accounts (HSAs) to help patients
manage the growth in spending generally, but on chronic conditions in
particular. The ability to cover care related to chronic disease
management prior to a beneficiary reaching their plan deductible
through an HSA could mitigate the financial deterrent posed by
expensive prescriptions and services. If enacted, this legislation
would enable increased patient engagement to improve health outcomes
and potentially reduce costs.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Tim Scott
Question. One challenge that I see, when considering the medical
treatment marketplace, is that we have a new wave of life-saving
treatments--of incredible cures we could never have dreamed of, even 10
or 15 years ago--for which cost, by necessity, is going to be a major
issue. You look, for instance, at a condition like sickle cell disease.
For the average SCD patient who reaches age 45, lifetime treatment
costs are at roughly $1 million--and there are complications that can
make that figure even higher. Now that we see therapies coming down the
pipeline that could erase those long-term costs and drastically improve
the quality of life for sickle cell patients, the question becomes, how
can our current payment systems adapt to--and absorb--the high costs
necessary to bring treatments like these to market and to ensure that
we continue to see innovations like these ones moving forward?
Answer. The current health-care system is built to address chronic
illnesses treated over time, and not built for one-time potentially
curative therapies. We are focused on building a future ecosystem that
helps ensure payers and patients get the most value from new
breakthrough gene and cell therapies. We are focused on providing
appropriate clinical and financial management for gene therapies and
other curative and transformative therapies coming to market. Our
company is working with drug makers, policymakers, patient groups and
payers on innovative approaches to make gene therapies accessible for
patients. Innovative contracting can ensure that payers and patients
are not on the hook when a treatment isn't effective, and discussions
with policymakers can help set an appropriate regulatory framework.
Ultimately, we believe gene therapies will require payment and
patient care systems which are as novel as the medications themselves.
Ideas on the table include paying for a treatment over time,
establishing insurer risk pools and financing one-time payments. A
successful model must address patients who change insurers or
employers, and tracking their health outcomes over time to ensure
treatments are effective.
Question. And along the same lines, beyond creating some much-
needed clarity around value-based arrangements--which I've been working
with Senators Cassidy and Warner to accomplish legislatively--are there
steps that Congress could take to facilitate these innovative payment
models?
Answer. We urge Congress to take steps establishing additional
flexibility under the Anti-Kickback Statute (AKS) to support value-
based contracts and other innovative programs in public programs.
six protected classes proposal and access
Question. This past November, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services released a proposed rule for 2020 to help tackle drug pricing.
Among the proposed changes is one, which would alter the current rules,
governing the ``six protected classes.'' The concept of the protected
classes has been around since the launch of the Medicare Part D
program, and it was instituted to ensure that some of our most
vulnerable patients would have access to their needed drugs by
requiring formularies to cover nearly all protected drugs. These
classes are anticonvulsants, antidepressants, antipsychotics,
immunosuppressants, antiretrovirals, and antineoplastics.
Some people have argued that these protected classes have led to
higher drug prices because formularies are required to include this
prescription coverage, and there are limited tools left to help lower
prices. In an effort to increase competition, this proposed new rule
would do a couple of different things. The first aspect of the
administration's proposal would allow Part D sponsors to implement
broader use of prior authorization and step therapy for protected class
drugs, including to determine use for protected class indications. Any
time there is a mention of plans using prior authorization or step
therapy there is an immediate concern of restricting patient access to
needed drugs or medical services.
Could you explain why your company would favor such utilization
management tools like step therapy or prior authorization?
Answer. We offer an option for plans not implementing exclusions to
utilize step therapies requiring the trial of a clinically appropriate
preferred product before the patient can try a non-preferred drug. Like
formularies, step therapies and other elements of benefit design are
ultimately determined by our clients. Prior authorization is designed
to help prevent individuals from being prescribed medications that are
either clinically inappropriate or that lack evidence demonstrating
that they are safe and effective for a specific condition. It is also a
highly effective tool for health insurance companies to manage costs
for otherwise expensive medications without sacrificing access to
clinically appropriate, lower-net cost, but similarly effective options
for patients.
Question. Do you believe there is a danger that using step therapy
or prior authorization could possibly restrict patients from having
access to medication that has been successful for them? Why or why not?
Answer. Properly managed, they should not. A medical exception
process is always available for the prescribing physician to pursue if
a patient's unique health situation requires a non-preferred product to
be the only option.
Question. If you were to use step therapy or prior authorization
for drugs in the six protected classes, how would you ensure patients
would continue to have access to their needed medications in one of the
six protected classes?
Answer. Cigna supports changes to the six protected classes, in
part because the Part D program includes strong patient protections
that enable beneficiaries to gain access to any drugs subject to
utilization management (UM), when clinically appropriate. Existing
coverage review processes--both standard and expedited--have proven
workable, and plans have demonstrated the use of UM tools can provide
safe access to the most appropriate medications while reducing member
and plan costs. This additional opportunity for interaction and
education with patients and prescribers, and the assessment of the
appropriateness of a prescribed therapy based on either cost or
clinical efficacy, may avoid unnecessary or inappropriate utilization
and should not come at the expense of access.
Question. The second aspect of the administration proposed change
to the six protected classes is the proposal to allow drug coverage
formularies to exclude a protected class drug from a Part D formulary
if the drug represents a new formulation of a single-sourced drug,
regardless of whether the older formulation remains on the market. My
understanding is that this administration is trying to target
pharmaceutical companies who participate in the anticompetitive
practice of ``ever-greening.'' This is a practice where pharmaceutical
companies make slight alterations to a drug's packaging, color, and
formulation without an added or new benefit. However, we also
understand that seemingly small changes to a drug can still make a big
difference to patient well-being. We have heard from Maryland
physicians that the creation of combination antiretroviral pills was a
huge step forward in the fight against HIV. Even though these
combination pills or extended release versions didn't have a new
chemical formula, they made a world of difference to the HIV patients
taking over a dozen pills a day. These vulnerable patients are
obviously very concerned that they could lose coverage for new and
better drugs, especially when their old drugs may no longer be
available. HIV treatments have come a long way in the last few decades,
and proper antiretroviral treatment is vital to ensuring an end to the
HIV epidemic.
Do you think the proposed rule anticipates a situation where a
pharmaceutical company stops producing an older version of a drug when
a new formulation is available, but the newer formulation is not
covered by a Part D plan? Why or Why not?
Answer. Provided that existing formulations of drugs set for
``ever-greening'' by a manufacturer are off-patent, generic
manufacturers should be able to offer alternatives to the ``new''
formulation. It is common practice for manufacturers of the ``brand''
drug to begin offering a new formulation for an existing product near
the end of its patent protection cycle, precisely because it will
likely be facing generic competition. That said, no current statutes
prevent a manufacturer from halting production of an older formulation
in favor of a new, ever-greened version of the same drug.
Question. What would your company do to ensure that patients
continue to have access to their medication in this situation?
Answer. To the extent possible, we will work to provide our
clients' patients with all available supply of such products, and if
necessary, help them find therapeutically similar alternative therapies
that can best approach the clinical efficacy of the discontinued drug.
appeals process in general
Question. Prior authorization and step therapy are some of the most
commonly mentioned concerns from patient groups coming to talk to my
office, second only patients' concerns about out-of-pocket costs. What
has become especially striking in the past few weeks is the number of
physicians explaining how they feel stymied by prior authorization
restrictions by insurance plans. We have heard from one surgeon who
argued for weeks with the insurer to appeal a decision that had been
made to deny a newer type of less-invasive surgery. Someone who was not
a surgical expert made the denial. Eventually, his patient made the
decision to stop waiting and opted for a far more invasive and
dangerous procedure because it was covered by insurance. Other doctors
talk about the hours they spend on the phone waiting to appeal a
decision, only to be told they need to write an extensive report
justifying their medical decision. While the physicians are waiting for
a response, quite often there are patients suffering without their
proper medications, without certain tests, or not getting the surgery
that the expert recommends.
What is your organization doing to improve the appeals process for
patients and physicians, in order to ensure timely medical care and
access to their prescription drugs?
Answer. We work collaboratively with physician partners to identify
where they see opportunities for improvement and we are always looking
to balance timely access with patient safety and effective utilization.
Moreover, we have worked to simplify and improve the prior
authorization request experience for prescribers, and have developed
and made available to physicians an ``App'' tool that allows providers
using it to submit electronic prior authorization requests directly
from their smartphones at the moment the prescription is being ordered,
along with identifying possible alternatives that would not require
such a request. Details on this product are discussed further in our
response to questions addressing ``real-time benefit check tools.''
Question. What do you think is an appropriate wait limit for
emergency medical appeals, and how do you make sure you meet it?
Answer. One way to improve the appeals process and reduce wait
times is increased use of electronic prior authorizations. Currently,
60 percent of our prior authorizations are done electronically and we
aim for that to be even higher. It's faster for the patient and it's
more convenient for the prescriber. Electronic prior authorization
capabilities are improving as well, eliminating over 158,000 hours of
potential wait time in December 2018. As noted in our response above,
we have worked to simplify and improve the prior authorization request
experience for prescribers, and have developed and made available to
physicians an ``App'' tool that allows providers using it to submit
electronic prior authorization requests directly from their smartphones
at the moment the prescription is being ordered, along with possible
alternatives that would not require such a request. Details on this
product are discussed further in our response to questions addressing
``real-time benefit check tools.''
______
Prepared Statement of John M. Prince,
Chief Executive Officer, OptumRx
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, I am honored to be here today on behalf of OptumRx. Our
company has 28,000 dedicated employees--including 5,000 pharmacists and
pharmacy technicians--working every day to deliver value to society,
improve the quality of pharmacy care services, simplify the health-care
experience, and ensure that the individuals we are privileged to serve
have affordable access to the drugs they need.
We reduce the costs of prescription drugs. We negotiate substantial
discounts from drug manufacturers on behalf of our customers. And we
are leading the way to ensure that those discounts directly benefit
consumers. We recently announced that soon all of our new employer-
sponsored drug plans must provide point-of-sale drug discounts to their
employees at the pharmacy counter. This builds on a similar initiative
we launched at scale last year for millions of members in fully insured
employer plans.
Manufacturers are increasing drug prices for one simple reason: a
lack of meaningful competition allows them to. In the absence of
competition, manufacturers often set exceptionally high prices. There
is a vital role for Congress and the administration to play in
addressing this important issue.
I look forward to discussing this issue with the committee. I will
focus on the following points:
1.
OptumRx's pharmacy care services business is achieving
better health outcomes for patients, lowering costs for the
system, and improving the health-care experience for consumers.
2.
OptumRx negotiates better prices with drug manufacturers
for our customers and for consumers.
3.
Drug manufacturers are solely responsible for the high cost
of prescription drugs.
4.
Drug manufacturers are not helping solve the problem by
blaming others in the supply chain and offering so-called
``authorized generics'' that often result in net prices higher
than the brand drugs they replace.
5.
Sensible policy reforms that promote competition and value-
based payment models will help make drugs more affordable.
Let me address these points in order.
1. optumrx's pharmacy care services business is achieving better health
outcomes for patients, lowering costs for the system, and improving the
health-care experience for consumers
Our team delivers pharmacy care services to 250,000 patients each
day. These services improve health outcomes for patients and reduce
costs in the system. Here are some examples:

We communicate with patients (and their physicians) about
how to take their medications, avoid harmful drug interactions,
and access convenient home-
delivery services.

We provide drug infusion services directly in patients'
homes, so they do not need to visit a hospital to obtain the
same, high-quality care, which improves medication adherence
and reduces costs.

We have more than 450 pharmacies embedded in community
mental health centers to serve the behavioral health medication
needs of patients receiving care there. Our ability to deploy
those on-site services has improved medication adherence,
reduced emergency room visits and hospitalizations, and reduced
overall costs by $700 per patient.

We provide special assistance for patients who need help
managing their chronic conditions, including real-time video
consultations with pharmacists.

We are helping to address the opioid crisis by developing
evidence-based programs that help prevent overprescribing by
physicians and detect suspected opioid misuse, as well as
offering medication-assisted treatment to patients with opioid
use disorder. Our customers who have adopted our opioid
management program have achieved a 96 percent adherence rate by
prescribers with the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention's prescribing guidelines.
Our pharmacy care services business is doing important work to
improve health outcomes and lower costs. We are not stopping with those
efforts. We are also developing consumer-friendly tools to make the
health care experience more satisfying and effective for patients. For
example, one of these tools, PreCheck MyScript, is a digital platform
that simplifies the drug prescribing experience by showing the
prescribing physician what the patient's true out-of-pocket cost would
be while the patient is still in the physician's office. PreCheck
MyScript has helped lower consumer out-of-pocket costs by an average
of $135 per prescription filled. This is just one of the ways we are
working to simplify the system.
2. optumrx negotiates better prices with drug manufacturers
for our customers and consumers
OptumRx manages pharmacy benefits on behalf of our customers,
including self-insured employer groups, fully insured health plans,
union funds, Medicare, Medicaid, and Federal and State government
employee plans. In that role, we promote use of clinically effective,
lowest net-cost prescription drugs for consumers when medications are
needed.
This work starts with an independent, clinically based formulary
design process. OptumRx's Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) Committee is
comprised of independent physicians and pharmacists who evaluate
existing and emerging drugs based on scientific evidence, and review
and appraise those drugs in an unbiased and evidence-based way. The P&T
Committee meets regularly, and its deliberations are open and
transparent to OptumRx's customers and prospective customers.
A drug's cost plays no role in the P&T Committee's clinical review.
Cost only becomes relevant after the P&T Committee has identified drugs
in a particular therapeutic class that are clinically effective and
should be covered. If there is more than one drug in a particular
class, OptumRx gives preferable placement on its formulary to the
lowest-net-cost drug. For about 90 percent of prescriptions processed,
OptumRx can identify a generic drug in a particular therapeutic class,
and give that drug preferred placement on its formulary over the more
expensive branded (or ``on-patent'') drug. If there is no generic
product available, there may still be other therapeutically equivalent
branded alternatives. If so, OptumRx negotiates with those competing
brand manufacturers to obtain discounts, and places the drug with the
lowest overall net cost in a preferred position on the formulary.
OptumRx has been effective in driving utilization of clinically
effective low-cost medications. OptumRx's negotiated network discounts
and clinical tools are reducing annual drug costs, on average, by
$1,600 per person for our customers. Even greater savings are achieved
by customers who implement evidence-based utilization management and
other OptumRx clinical programs.
OptumRx also ensures that these cost-savings go to our customers
and consumers. Our customers receive approximately 98 percent of the
value of the discounts we negotiate from drug manufacturers. The
application of discounts is subject to audit and verification by an
independent third-party on behalf of any of our customers. In those
limited instances in which we retain some of the discount, it is
because our customers have chosen to pay us that way.
We have heeded the call for change by taking direct action to
ensure that the discounts we obtain directly lower consumers' out-of-
pocket costs at the pharmacy counter. Last year, we implemented a
point-of-sale discount solution at scale for fully insured group
customers so that consumers receive the benefit of discounts at the
pharmacy counter. This action has already made nearly six million
consumers eligible for point-of-sale discounts. Eligible consumers
filling prescriptions on discounted brand drugs are seeing average
savings of $130 per eligible prescription. We believe it will also
improve prescription drug adherence by as much as 16 percent. By the
end of 2019 we expect more than nine million consumers will be eligible
for these point-of-sale discounts. Last month, we announced a decision
to expand this point-of-sale discount solution to all new employer-
sponsored plans beginning in January 2020.
It is important to recognize that pharmacy benefit managers are the
only stakeholders in the prescription drug supply chain working to
reduce costs for their customers and the only ones able to effectively
negotiate with drug companies. In fact, studies have shown that
pharmacy benefit managers will save the Medicare Part D program over
$900 billion in the next 10 years.\1\ If States fully utilized those
same tools and capabilities, Medicaid could save more than $100 billion
over the next 10 years.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Oliver Wyman, Savings Generated by Pharmacy Benefit Managers in
the Part D Program, June 2017. Available at: http://
www.affordableprescriptiondrugs.org/app/uploads/2018/05/
resources_medicarepartd_report.pdf.
\2\ UnitedHealth Group, Pharmacy Benefit Management Can Save
Medicaid Drug Programs Over $100 Billion, March 2018. Available at:
https://www.unitedhealthgroup.com/content/dam/UHG/PDF/2018/PBM-
Medicaid-Savings-Study040418.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. drug manufacturers are responsible for
the high cost of prescription drugs
Drug manufacturers have continued to increase the prices of their
branded drugs. List prices have increased on the twenty most-prescribed
brand drugs for seniors by an average of 12 percent for each of the
past 5 years.\3\ And from 2017 to 2018, drug manufacturers raised the
list prices on twenty drugs by more than 200 percent.\4\ In January
2019, manufacturers increased prices yet again on 15 of the top 20 most
utilized brand drugs. There appears to be no end in sight. The Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) estimates a faster rate of
growth in prescription drugs than all other health care
expenditures.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ U.S. Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs,
``Manufactured Crisis: How Devastating Drug Price Increases Are Harming
America's Seniors,'' March 2018.
\4\ Pharmacy Benefit Consultants Analysis, AWP Price Increases (12-
2016 to 12-2017), January 2017-March 2018.
\5\ American Academy of Actuaries, March 2018.
Drug manufacturers alone decide what list price to set for their
branded products. If market conditions permit OptumRx to negotiate
better prices for a particular branded product, then we do so. As a
matter of economics, where there is no competition over a branded drug,
or where a drug's ``exclusivity period'' is extended by anti-
competitive tactics, it is difficult to control price-gouging by
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
manufacturers.
There is no better example of the economic calculus driving
manufacturers' drug-pricing decisions than ``specialty'' drugs. These
drugs treat complex conditions like cancer, HIV, rheumatoid arthritis,
immune disorders, and multiple sclerosis, and they often lack
therapeutic equivalents. If a manufacturer sets a very high price for a
specialty drug, it is very difficult to negotiate a better price, since
that drug has no competing therapeutic equivalent.
As a result, the prices of specialty drugs are spiraling out of
control. At least 26 non-discounted specialty drugs cost in excess of
$200,000 per year.\6\ These include Elaprase at $985,000 per year,
Myalept at $889,000 per year, and Cinryze at $626,000 per year.\7\
Today, less than 2 percent of the population takes specialty drugs, yet
those drugs will account for approximately 50 percent of total drug
spending by 2022.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ OptumRx Book of Business, January-March 2019.
\7\ Ibid.
\8\ IQVIA, Medicine Use and Spending in the U.S., April 2018.
Available at: https://www.iqvia.com/institute/reports/medicine-use-and-
spending-in-the-us-review-of-2017-outlook-to-2022.
Drug manufacturers not only set high prices for branded drugs; they
regularly extend the lives of those patented products by using
aggressive, anti-competitive tactics to delay the entry of cheaper
generic alternatives into the marketplace. One such tactic involves
obtaining new patents for products that are not actually new drugs. A
recent academic paper found that ``78 percent of the drugs associated
with new patents were not new drugs, but existing ones, and extending
protection is particularly pronounced among blockbuster drugs.'' \9\
The study further found that ``Adding new patents and exclusivities to
extend the protection cliff is particularly pronounced among
blockbuster drugs. Of the roughly 100 best-selling drugs, more than 70
percent had their protection extended at least once, with almost 50
percent having the protection cliff extended more than once.'' \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Professor Robin Feldman, ``May Your Drug Price Be Evergreen.''
Journal of Law and the Biosciences, December 2018. Available at:
https://academic.oup.com/jlb/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jlb/lsy022/
5232981.
\10\ Ibid.
Drug manufacturers have also engaged in ``pay-for-delay'' tactics
to avoid competition. For example, in November 2018, AbbVie entered
into an agreement with Pfizer to keep Pfizer from marketing a generic
version of AbbVie's top-selling Humira in the U.S. until 2023.\11\ This
agreement represented AbbVie's seventh pay-for-delay deal with a would-
be competitor.\12\ This means that patients in the U.S. will continue
to pay much higher prices for an additional 6 years after Humira's
patent expires before a lower-priced, therapeutically equivalent drug
is available. AbbVie has also secured more than 100 patents on this one
drug.\13\ As a result of these tactics, the list price of Humira--a
drug that was introduced in 2003--has increased by 78 percent over the
last 4 years alone.\14\ Humira is now projected to generate annual
revenues of nearly $20 billion--16 years after its launch.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Eric Sagonowsky, ``AbbVie inks Humira patent deal No. 7,
delaying Pfizer's U.S. biosim launch until late 2023.'' Fierce Pharma,
November 30, 2018. Available at: https://www.fiercepharma.com/pharma/
abbvie-inks-humira-patent-deal-no-7-delaying-pfizer-s-u-s-bio
sim-launch-until-late-2023.
\12\ Ibid.
\13\ Cynthia Koons, ``This Shield of Patents Protects the World's
Best-Selling Drug.'' Bloomberg, September 7, 2017. Available at:
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-09-07/this-shield-of-
patents-protects-the-world-s-best-selling-drug.
\14\ OptumRx Book of Business, 2015-2019.
\15\ Bob Herman, ``Humira sales approach $20 billion.'' Axios,
January 25, 2019. Available at: https://www.axios.com/abbvie-humira-
2018-sales-20-billion-e4039176-baeb-44ff-b4fe-1b6300528
3b9.html.
4. drug manufacturers are not helping solve the problem by blaming
others in the supply chain and offering so-called ``authorized
generics'' that often result in net prices higher than the brand drugs
they replace
Manufacturers have blamed pharmacy benefit managers, health plans,
and hospitals for high drug costs. They contend that the discounts or
rebates we negotiate with them are the root cause of the problem. That
is simply untrue.
We have a proven track record of reducing net costs to our
customers. We negotiate a discount when there are two or more competing
brand drugs in the same therapeutic class. In those circumstances, we
take advantage of the competitive market. We negotiate better prices
with manufacturers, give preferred formulary status to the drug that
offers the best price, and then we provide those savings to our
customers and consumers. That is a formula for reducing costs, not
increasing them.
The data simply does not support the manufacturers' contrary
assertion. If they were right, drug prices would be rising more steeply
for the drugs on which we negotiate discounts. But the opposite is
true. In fact, drug prices are rising the fastest in the area of
specialty drugs, where due to the importance of the drugs and the lack
of clinical alternatives, manufacturers are unwilling to negotiate a
discount. It is no surprise, then, that CMS recently reported that in
2016 and 2017 drug manufacturers raised prices the most on those drugs
that have no discounts.\16\ The related assertion by brand
manufacturers that discounts force them to increase list prices is
simply an attempt to avoid accountability. If market conditions permit
it, OptumRx harnesses the purchasing power of its customers to
negotiate discounts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Sarah Karlin-Smith, Sarah Owermohle, and Janie Boschma,
``Drugs with a single manufacturer drive Medicare, Medicaid spending
increases, CMS says.'' Politico, March 14, 2019.
Drug manufacturers have also responded to criticisms of the high
prices they set for their products by introducing so-called
``authorized generic'' versions of their higher-priced brand products.
To be clear, these are not generic drugs. Their marketing and
production is exclusively controlled and directed by the brand drug
manufacturers. They do nothing to promote competition. Rather, in our
experience, these so-called ``generics'' often result in higher overall
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
cost when compared to the discounted price of the original brand drug.
As an example, consider a hypothetical brand manufacturer that has
set the list price for its brand drug at $100. OptumRx has successfully
negotiated a $70 discount off that list price, resulting in a net
overall cost of $30 for the brand drug. If the brand manufacturer
announces a so-called ``authorized generic'' at a list price of $50,
the list price may be lower, but the overall net price of the
``generic'' is $20 higher than the brand drug. This may result in a
lower cost-sharing obligation for some plan members in the short-term,
but in the long-term it will be more expensive for plans and lead to
higher overall drug costs for everyone, benefiting no one other than
the manufacturers.
5. sensible policy reforms that promote competition and value-based
payment models will help make drugs more affordable
An effective intellectual property environment plays an
indispensable role in both promoting drug discovery and ensuring
innovations are affordable and sustainable. Today's intellectual
property system does not work as intended. The most important step
Congress can take to address the high cost of prescription drugs is to
modernize the intellectual property system for the 21st century and
eliminate drug manufacturers' ability to manipulate the patent and
regulatory system and thereby prevent lower-cost generics and
biosimilars from reaching consumers more quickly. Specifically,
Congress should:

Pass the bipartisan CREATES Act to end the manipulation by
drug manufacturers of the Risk Evaluation and Management
Strategies (REMS) program to block timely entry of generic
competition.

Prohibit ``pay-for-delay'' settlements between manufacturers
that delay the market entry of lower-cost alternatives.

Restrict ``ever-greening'' of patents in which drug
manufacturers make minor changes to their product, or to the
delivery technology for their product, to extend the patent
exclusivity period.

Reduce the exclusivity period for brand and specialty drugs.

Increase patent transparency for biologics (which are
essentially generic equivalents for expensive specialty drugs),
promote biosimilar competition, and bring needed biosimilar
treatments to market faster and at lower cost.
Beyond patent law reform, there are also other policy solutions
that will help lower the net price of drugs, eliminate market barriers,
increase transparency, and promote true competition. In particular, the
Federal Government should:

Continue to support Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
reforms around biosimilars. Specifically, the FDA should adopt
reforms to release these products to the market more quickly
and should finalize guidance to promote substitution of these
products over expensive branded specialty products. As other
countries have shown, these two measures have been proven to
increase competition and lower drug prices.

Finalize Proposed Rules that would modernize the Medicare
Part B and Part D programs by implementing utilization
management tools in Medicare Part B and enabling negotiation in
the six protected classes in Medicare Part D.

Finalize a Proposed Rule that would enable Medicare and
Medicaid to use real-time benefits tools at the point of
prescribing to allow beneficiaries to have meaningful and
actionable information about out-of-pocket drug costs.

Evaluate the entire prescription drug regulatory structure
to identify opportunities to advance value-based payments and
promote comparative effectiveness.
The administration's proposed Safe Harbor Rule does not address the
root cause of rising drug prices. In fact, according to actuaries at
CMS, the Proposed Rule would increase premiums up to 25 percent for
seniors and create a $40 billion windfall for drug manufacturers.
If the administration intends to finalize the Proposed Rule, it
should prevent the disruption of the existing and proven supply chain,
and ensure that pharmacy benefit managers are explicitly authorized to
facilitate discounts at the point of sale for seniors. Today, pharmacy
benefit managers administer point-of-sale discounts, including for
Medicare Part D, through proven, stable, secure, and highly efficient
systems that have evolved through three decades of investment,
innovation, and partnership with key stakeholders. Unless pharmacy
benefit managers facilitate point-of-sale discounts, existing,
negotiated drug discounts will be jeopardized, net prices will
increase, and consumers will experience disruption.
The Proposed Rule potentially would allow these discounts to be
administered by wholesalers. A new, unregulated, and unproven system of
wholesaler-based discounts and service fees to local pharmacies would
be unworkable because:

Wholesalers get paid more if drug prices are high.

It would create a standing conflict of interest for
wholesalers whose subsidiaries help drug manufacturers
undermine formularies.

There is no current Federal structure to regulate
wholesalers' administration of discounts, nor will CMS have
visibility to these discounts and service fees as it currently
does.

Wholesalers lack the underlying claims data to facilitate
these transactions.

Unlike Part D plans and pharmacy benefit managers,
wholesalers and drug manufacturers are not subject to prompt
pay laws.
It is critically important to understand that drug manufacturers
pay wholesalers based on list prices and are not subject to the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services' proposed Safe Harbor reforms.
Because they are paid based on list prices, allowing wholesalers to
begin administering point-of-sale discounts will recreate the very
concern that Congress and the administration are attempting to address.
We appreciate the opportunity to address the committee today, and
share with you the meaningful solutions we are advancing to deliver
value for consumers and bring down prescription drug costs. We are
committed to doing our part to make prescription drugs more affordable
for people and sustainable for the country. I would be pleased to
answer any questions you have.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to John M. Prince
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
collection, use, and sharing of personal health information
Question. Consumers are becoming more and more concerned about the
data collection and sharing practices of companies. While these issues
have been most prevalent in the social media and tech industry,
companies in the pharmaceutical supply chain also have access to
tremendous amounts of sensitive, personal health information of the
individuals they serve. For example, the company Livongo partners with
CVS Caremark to provide low-cost or no-cost blood sugar meters to
diabetic patients. The meters are always ``connected'' to Livongo's
``Diabetes Response Specialists.'' As the company's website states,
``When readings are out of range, our Diabetes Response Specialists
call or text [the individual] within minutes.'' While these innovations
may be highly beneficial for individuals in managing their health, it's
also important for this committee to fully understand what types of
information is collected, how or why it's stored or shared, and for
what purposes PBMs themselves and other affiliated drug supply chain
participants (such as insurers) use the information.
Health information is extremely sensitive. It's the most personal
of all the information we share. So I want to know more about each of
your companies' data collection, sharing, and protection practices.
Does your company collect and store health information from the
end-users of the prescriptions you provide? For example, information or
records of a diabetic individual's blood sugar levels.
Answer. Yes, OptumRx collects and stores health information,
consistent with applicable privacy laws, related to an individual's
prescriptions when a pharmacy submits a claim for processing to our PBM
or a member or provider submits a prior authorization for a
prescription. Additionally, as part of certain clinical programs
offered to customers by the PBM, and with the member's consent, OptumRx
may also access information from an individual, such as a diabetic
individual's glucose testing results.
Question. Does your company make any treatment, cost, or coverage
decisions based on the health information you collect from an
individual?
Answer. OptumRx does not make treatment decisions. Coverage
decisions are made, on behalf of OptumRx's customers, based on the
adjudication of the health information submitted by a pharmacy and also
may be made based on health information submitted by an individual or
their provider when a prior authorization is required by a health plan
for a particular prescription.
Answer. Does your company share health information with third
parties? And, if so, does your company profit from that sharing?
Answer. OptumRx, as a business associate to its customers, uses and
shares data only as authorized by applicable law and its customer
contracts. In addition to sharing data with and on behalf of its
customers, OptumRx shares claims-related health information with
providers about their patients as part of clinical programs. Health
information may be shared with third party vendors of OptumRx in
support of our PBM services pursuant to business associate agreements.
OptumRx does not profit from the sharing of information with its
vendors. OptumRx does have some arrangements to license de-identified
data. Additionally, our pharmacies have service agreements with drug
manufacturers that may involve the sharing of certain data in
accordance with applicable law.
Question. Do you believe customers are fully aware of your
information collection and sharing practices?
Answer. Yes.
impact of vertical integration between pbms and insurance companies
Question. The PBM industry has experienced significant
consolidation within the past 10 years, which has contributed to
concerns about the potential abuse of market power, barriers to market
entry, and exclusionary practices. In 2012, for example, Express
Scripts acquired Medco Health Solutions--a nearly $30 billion
transaction that merged two of the country's three largest PBMs. More
recently, PBMs are also vertically integrating with insurers/payers,
reflected by the 2018 acquisitions of Express Scripts Holding Co. (a
PBM) by Cigna Corp. (a payer) and of Aetna Inc. (a payer) by CVS Health
Corp. As a result, the three largest PBMs are all vertically integrated
with insurance companies. According to a report from the Kaiser Family
Foundation, the two combined entities, along with UnitedHealth and
Humana, will cover 71 percent of all Medicare Part D enrollees and 86
percent of stand-alone drug plan enrollees. Vertical integration can
result in increased efficiencies and consumer benefits. I can also,
however, lead to higher barriers to entry for competition, leading to
further consolidation. FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb recently warned
that ``consolidation and market concentration make the rebating and
contracting schemes [of PBMs] all that more pernicious. And the very
complexity and opacity of these schemes help to conceal their corrosion
on our system--and their impact on patients.''
I'd like to talk about consolidation, including the recent
integration of PBMs with insurance companies. Last year, I wrote to the
Justice Department on this issue. It's reported that the three largest
PBMs--who are before us today--now cover 71 percent of Medicare Part D
enrollees and 86 percent of stand-alone drug plan enrollees.4 Such
market power has raised concerns. FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said,
``the consolidation and market concentration make the rebating and
contracting schemes [of PBMs] all that more pernicious.''
I want to hear briefly from each of you on whether the PBM industry
is competitive. For example, are there high barriers to entry for new
competitors?
Answer. The PBM industry is and will remain highly competitive.
There are currently more than 60 PBMs actively competing for business
from governments, Medicare Part D beneficiaries, unions, health plans,
and large and small employers, and more players are entering the market
on a regular basis.\1\ For example, Anthem started IngenioRx on March
2, 2019, to replace its contract with Express Scripts.\2\ In April
2018, Diplomat Pharmacy launched CastiaRx, a PBM with specialty
pharmacy experience to manage pharmacy and medical benefit plans for
small and midsize payers.\3\ New ventures such as WithMe Health,
Amazon, and Haven have entered or are planning to enter the health
benefits industry with disruptive business models.\4\ Not only can
customers choose from numerous external PBM options, but some
government payers and health plans also can (and do) perform their own
PBM services internally.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Drug Pricing in America: A Prescription for Change, Part
III,'' hearing before the Senate Committee on Finance, 116th Congress,
video at 57:22-27, 57:48-54 (April 9, 2019) (live testimony of Steve
Miller, M.D., executive vice president and chief clinical officer,
Cigna Corporation; live testimony of Derica Rice, executive vice
president, CVS Health and president, CVS Caremark), video available at
https://www.finance.senate.gov/hearings/drug-pricing-in-america-a-
prescription-for-change-part-iii.
\2\ Anthem, Inc., ``Anthem Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year
2018 Results Reflecting Strong Core Performance'' (January 3, 2019),
available at https://ir.antheminc.com/news-releases/news-release-
details/anthem-reports-fourth-quarter-and-full-year-2018-
results?field_nir_
news_date_value[min]=2019; Anthem, Inc., ``Anthem Launches IngenioRx,
New Pharmacy Benefits Manager'' (October 18, 2017), available at
https://ir.antheminc.com/news-releases/news-release-details/anthem-
launches-ingeniorx-new-pharmacy-benefits-manager?field_nir_news_date_
value[min]=2019.
\3\ Diplomat Pharmacy, Inc., ``Diplomat Launches CastiaRx,
Industry-Leading Specialty Benefit Manager,'' PR Newswire (April 30,
2018), https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/diplomat-launches-
castiarx-industry-leading-specialty-benefit-manager-300638735.html.
\4\ Withme.health; Kevin Truong, ``Why a VC Frustrated by the PBM
Industry Decided to Start an Alternative,'' MedCityNews.com (January 6,
2019), https://medcitynews.com/2019/01/why-a-vc-frustrated-by-the-pbm-
industry-decided-to-start-an-alternative/?rf=1.
\5\ Id. at 107 (``The various functions of pharmacy benefit
management can be performed by different entities within the drug
channel system: an employer, a health plan, the government, and an
independent PBM company.''); id. at 115 (``Humana Pharmacy Solutions is
the internal PBM of health insurer Humana. It manages traditional
prescription drug coverage for Humana's individual and employer
groups.'').
At least eight PBMs serve major health plans and large employers,
while others serve regional and smaller customers.\6\ It is OptumRx's
experience when competing for business there are regularly at least 3-5
competitors bidding for the same business.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Adam J. Fein, ``The 2018 Economic Report on U.S. Pharmacies and
Pharmacy Benefit Managers'' (February 2018) at p. 112 Ex. 75.
Question. I'm also interested in what effect the most recent
consolidations of PBMs and insurers has had on the bottom line for the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
government and consumer.
Do these arrangements result in a lower cost to the government--as
a payer--and the consumer? Please explain.
Answer. OptumRx operates in a competitive industry where we must
continually innovate, reduce the total cost of care, and improve
outcomes to win new business and retain existing customers. Our
synchronization of disparate, uncoordinated areas in health care allows
us to focus on these goals. This results in lower costs to government
and consumer payers, on average saving $1,600 per person annually.
Over the next decade, PBMs project that they will save the Medicare
Part D program over $900 billion.\7\ If States fully utilized those
same tools and capabilities, over the same period, Medicaid could save
more than $100 billion.\8\ This adds up to $1 trillion in savings for
Federal and State governments and taxpayers as a direct result of PBMs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ ``Drug Pricing in America: A Prescription for Change, Part
III,'' hearing before the Senate Committee on Finance, 116th Congress
(April 9, 2019) (prepared testimony of John M Prince, CEO, OptumRx)
(citing Oliver Wyman, ``Savings Generated by Pharmacy Benefit Managers
in the Medicare Part D Program'' (June 26, 2017), available at http://
www.
affordableprescriptiondrugs.org/app/uploads/2018/05/
resources_medicarepartd_report.pdf.
\8\ Id.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
manufacturer money
Question. What is the total dollar amount that you obtain from
pharmaceutical manufacturers in any form such as rebates, fees, etc.?
What is the total dollar amount that you remit to health plans?
Answer. OptumRx does not collect an administrative fee from
manufacturers for Medicare or Medicaid plans, or for drugs for which
manufacturers provide no discount. The drugs in this latter category--
the majority of which are generics--constitute approximately 90 percent
of all prescriptions processed by OptumRx. OptumRx's PBM business does
not receive distribution, marketing or clinical case management fees.
OptumRx makes pricing and rebate information available to
customers, and reimbursement and out-of-pocket information available to
pharmacies, subject to appropriate confidentiality provisions. The
information is subject to independent audit by our customers. At the
consumer level, OptumRx provides solutions to help consumers make
better decisions, including our MyScript Finder solution, which
provides members with easy to understand price and benefit
transparency. OptumRx shares with its customers approximately 98
percent of the discounts it obtains from manufacturers. We pass through
an even greater percentage of the discounts we negotiate with
manufacturers to our Medicare Part D and Medicaid plan customers.
Discounts collected on behalf of Medicare Part D customers are reported
to CMS, and discounts collected on behalf of Medicaid customers are
disclosed to those customers for their reporting purposes.
biosimilars
Question. Managed Care Organizations are on record as widely
supportive of the potential of biosimilars. However, most MCOs have
continued to support originator brand products and have not preferred
and often excluded less expensive biosimilars. For example, most MCOs
have kept Remicade (a treatment for Rheumatoid Arthritis and other
diseases) as the preferred agent on their formularies, and in most
cases to the exclusion of its biosimilar, Infliximab.
Why do you tout support for biosimilars while, at the same time,
inhibiting adoption of these less expensive products?
Answer. OptumRx urges action to increase the availability and
adoption of biosimilars and promote true competition. Specifically,
Congress should modernize the intellectual property system for the 21st
century and eliminate drug manufacturers' ability to manipulate the
patent and regulatory system to prevent lower-cost generics and
biosimilars from reaching consumers more quickly. We applaud the FDA's
recent release of interchangeability guidance to promote substitution
of these products over expensive branded specialty products. The FDA
should continue to adopt reforms to release biosimilars to the market
more quickly and promote adoption with prescribers and patients. As
other countries' experiences have shown, these two measures have proven
to increase competition and lower drug prices. There are 51 approved
biosimilars in Europe. To date, however, in the U.S. the FDA has only
approved 19 biosimilars, and of those only seven have launched to
market.
Not all biosimilars are less expensive products, but OptumRx
promotes the inclusion of those biosimilars that are less expensive and
that drive lower net costs on its standard formularies. On our Premium
formulary effective July 1, 2019, for example, we prefer the Infliximab
biosimilars Renflexis and Inflectra, and exclude Remicade; we also
prefer the biosimilar Zarzio, a biosimilar that treats blood disorders,
and exclude Amgen's biologic Neupogen.
Question. HHS may broaden the scope of its proposed rule and
eliminate rebates between Medicare Advantage plans and manufacturers
for Part B drugs.
Would this realign incentives to encourage preferred access for
lower-cost drugs, such as biosimilars?
What changes can we recommend/make to help you prefer lower-cost
drugs, such as biosimilars, without rebates?
Answer. We have heard the bipartisan call for reform and have taken
strong action to reduce drug prices for millions of consumers. Last
year, our company led the way in voluntarily making negotiated
prescription drug discounts available at the point of sale for
UnitedHealthcare's fully insured customers.
Earlier this year, we took action to ensure the prescription drug
discounts we negotiate with drug manufacturers will be passed directly
to consumers at the point of sale for all new employer customers
starting in 2020. Eligible consumers filling prescriptions on
discounted brand drugs are seeing average savings of $130 per eligible
prescription and increased drug adherence by as much as 16 percent.
This action means real out-of-pocket savings for consumers who take
brand drugs with discounts.
These actions underscore that only PBMs have the capability to both
negotiate meaningful discounts from drug manufacturers and ensure those
savings flow directly to consumers at the pharmacy counter.
Our action to provide point-of-sale discounts to employer-sponsored
health plans demonstrates that the private sector is responsive and is
taking a leadership role with its customers to reform the market.
Legislation to eliminate rebates is unnecessary and could put at risk
the ability to negotiate significant discounts from drug manufacturers.
In fact, according to actuaries at CMS, even without broadening its
scope, the CMS' Proposed Rebates Rule would increase premiums up to 25
percent for seniors and create a $40 billion windfall for drug
manufacturers. Broadening it to Medicare Advantage plans would likely
exacerbate this problem.
Congress should take action in ways that promote real competition
to drive down the list prices of prescription drugs. The most important
step Congress can take to address the high cost of prescription drugs
is to modernize the intellectual property system for the 21st century
and eliminate drug manufacturers' ability to manipulate the patent and
regulatory system and prevent lower-cost generics and biosimilars from
reaching consumers more quickly. Specifically, Congress should:

Pass the bipartisan CREATES Act to end the manipulation by
drug manufacturers of the Risk Evaluation and Management Strategies
(REMS) program to block timely entry of generic competition.

Prohibit ``pay-for-delay'' settlements between drug
manufacturers that delay the market entry of lower-cost alternatives.

Restrict ``ever-greening'' of patents in which drug
manufacturers make minor changes to their product, or to the delivery
technology for their product, to extend the patent exclusivity period.

Reduce the exclusivity period for brand and specialty drugs.

Increase patent transparency for biologics.

Continue additional FDA reforms, such as the recently issued
interchangeability guidance, to promote biosimilar competition to bring
needed lower cost biosimilar treatments to market faster and promote
broader adoption with prescribers and patients.
Question. Why is there such a disparity in reimbursed pharmacy
prices for specialty generic drugs in Part D (e.g., Imatinib)? Does
ownership of specialty pharmacy influence your reimbursement decision?
Answer. Preferred network pharmacy options deliver greater drug
cost savings and value to customers and their members through our
pharmacy care services model that is integrated with pharmacies that we
operate. OptumRx is transparent to customers by disclosing our
ownership of pharmacies, and customers ultimately choose the pharmacy
network plan design that best meet their needs.
We offer reasonable terms and conditions for participation in the
various networks we offer on behalf of our Part D customers. While
pricing may differ across networks, we seek to pay all of our Part D
providers market competitive rates. All of our Part D plan customers
have chosen pass-through pricing arrangements. We are not aware of any
reimbursement anomalies related to Imatinib.
Question. I'm concerned with the recent trend of PBM's allowing
brand companies to ``pay for position'' on insurance formularies, which
results in seniors losing access to lower-cost generics and
biosimilars.
Do you ever exclude generic or biosimilar competitors from
formulary placement, or place these lower-cost drugs in higher cost-
sharing tiers that are generally reserved for non-preferred or brand
drugs?
Answer. OptumRx manages pharmacy benefits on behalf of our
customers, including self-insured employer groups, fully insured health
plans, union funds, Medicare, Medicaid, and Federal and State
government employee plans. In that role, we promote the use of
clinically effective, low net-cost prescription drugs for consumers
when medications are needed.
This work starts with an independent, clinically based formulary
design process. OptumRx's Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) committee is
comprised of independent physicians and pharmacists who evaluate
existing and emerging drugs based on scientific evidence and review and
appraise those drugs in an unbiased and evidence-based way. The P&T
committee meets regularly, and its deliberations are open and
transparent to OptumRx's customers and prospective customers.
A drug's cost plays no role in the P&T committee's clinical review.
Cost only becomes relevant after the P&T committee has identified drugs
in a particular therapeutic class that are clinically effective and
should be covered. If the P&T committee determines that more than one
drug in a particular class is clinically effective, OptumRx will
consider net cost--among other factors such as improving adherence,
product availability, market share, potential disruption to patients,
and negotiated price protection guarantees--when negotiating formulary
placement for that therapeutic category.
For about 90 percent of prescriptions processed, OptumRx can
identify a generic drug in a particular therapeutic class, and give
that drug preferred placement on its formulary over the more expensive
branded (or ``on-patent'') drug. If there is no generic product
available, there may still be other therapeutically equivalent branded
alternatives. If so, OptumRx negotiates with those competing brand
manufacturers to obtain discounts, and generally places the drugs that
drive the lowest overall net cost for the therapeutic category in a
preferred position on the formulary.
OptumRx has been effective in driving utilization of clinically
effective low-cost medications. OptumRx's negotiated network discounts
and clinical tools are reducing annual drug costs, on average, by
$1,600 per person for our customers. Even greater savings can be
achieved by customers who implement evidence-based utilization
management and other OptumRx clinical programs.
OptumRx also ensures that these cost-savings go to our customers.
Our customers receive approximately 98 percent of the value of the
discounts we negotiate from drug manufacturers. The application of
discounts is subject to audit and verification by an independent third-
party on behalf of any of our customers. In those limited instances
where we retain some of the discount, it is because our customers have
chosen to pay us that way. Additionally, as noted above, we have led
the industry in promoting point-of-sale discounts for consumers.
delays and denials in cancer treatment
Question. I have received stories of cancer patients facing delays
or denials for their treatment due to PBM actions. Data shows that
breast cancer patients who experienced a 3-month or more delay in
treatment had a 12-percent lower 5-year survival rate compared with
breast cancer patients with only a 0- to 3-month delay.
What percent of patients experience a 14-day or longer delay in
receiving an oral oncolytic prescribed by their oncologist?
Answer. All of our prior authorization and step therapy criteria
are evidence-based and approved by our or the applicable customer's
independent P&T committee process. Step therapies are used to aid in
affordability by encouraging patients to choose clinically appropriate
lower net cost alternative therapies when such therapies exist. Prior
authorizations help ensure treatment is clinically appropriate and
aligned with FDA labeling, and assist in minimizing potential safety
concerns. Time limits for completing the prior authorization process
vary depending upon regulatory and contractual provisions and line of
business. Once the member has initiated the prior authorization
process, OptumRx renders and communicates its decision to the
prescribing physician, utilizing criteria approved by OptumRx's or our
customer's independent P&T committee, within 12 hours, on average.
Delays in actually receiving the prescriptions may be caused by a
number of factors outside of OptumRx's control.
Question. What are the primary reasons patients experience delays
or denials for their treatments?
Answer. OptumRx strives to avoid all unnecessary delays, and
maintains a streamlined process for seeking and obtaining necessary
approvals for a course of treatment. When there are delays in this
process, we have found the primary factor to be that the patient's
physician fails to provide the necessary clinical information in a
timely manner during a prior authorization review. The primary reason
OptumRx, as the plan's administrator, would not approve coverage for a
treatment is that the requested drug is deemed not clinically
appropriate for treatment based on clinical criteria reviewed and
approved by the independent physicians and pharmacists of OptumRx or
the customer's independent P&T committee.
Question. What percent of determinations to delay or deny treatment
for cancer patients are made by an oncologist or health-care
professional with oncology training?
Answer. All criteria used to determine coverage of oncology
therapies are reviewed and approved by the OptumRx independent P&T
committee inclusive of practicing oncologists considered experts in the
field or the customer's P&T committee.
Question. Why is a PBM-owned specialty pharmacy better qualified to
manage a cancer patient's adherence and side effects than a community
cancer clinic with a medically integrated pharmacy?
Answer. OptumRx has 67,000 pharmacies in our networks, including
24,000 independent pharmacies. Our network pharmacies play a valuable
role in providing convenient network access to our customers and their
members. A customer may select a preferred network to help drive
greater drug cost savings and improved outcomes. Our specialty
pharmacies use a multi-faceted approach to clinical management which we
have seen drive higher medication adherence rates and lower medical
costs. OptumRx discloses its ownership of pharmacies, and customers
ultimately choose the pharmacy network plan design that best meets
their needs. In addition, a pharmacy that is connected and integrated
with access to a more complete range of PBM data related to a patient's
therapeutic regimen is able to identify additional opportunities to
improve outcomes and lower health care costs.
direct and indirect remuneration (dir) fees
Question. Many community-based cancer clinics have established
medically integrated pharmacies so patients can access their oral
chemotherapy prescriptions or other medications at the point of care.
These practices are often assessed large DIR which are based on certain
quality measures targeted toward primary care.
Shouldn't pharmacies be evaluated on the type of drug dispensed and
disease managed rather than a one-size-fits-all approach?
Answer. OptumRx operates a performance-based pharmacy network for
Medicare Part D that rewards pharmacies with contingent compensation
based on performance across quality metrics designed to improve
outcomes in disease States including diabetes, hypertension and
cholesterol. These metrics align with measures used by CMS to evaluate
Part D plan performance under the CMS STAR ratings program.
Question. Does assessing large DIR fees on medically integrated
pharmacies drive patients to PBM-owned specialty pharmacies?
Answer. Performance-based compensation structures for network
pharmacies do not incentivize the patient to select any particular
pharmacy.
Question. According to CMS, from 2012 to 2017 PBMs imposed a 45,000
percent increase in the amount of DIR fees pharmacies had to pay PBMs
and PDPs under Part D, and revenues earned from these fees increased
225 percent per year during this period. I thought PDPs and PBMs were
supposed to pay pharmacies for dispensing drugs to patients. Why do
pharmacies have to pay DIR fees to PBMs at all?
Why are pharmacies forced to pay DIR and other fees to PBMs?
Answer. Pharmacies are able to agree or decline to participate in
performance-based pharmacy networks.
Question. According to CMS, PBMs justify DIR fees as adjustments to
improve quality. CMS also found that PBMs and PDPs withhold
substantially more in reductions in payments than as rewards paid to
pharmacies. Aren't so-called ``quality adjustments'' that collect more
for ``poor performance'' than they pay out for ``high performance''
just another way for PBMs to collect even more money from pharmacies?
Why do PBMs collect more in quality payment adjustment than they
pay pharmacies under Part D?
Answer. OptumRx does not retain the contingent performance amounts
withheld from payments to pharmacies as part of its performance-based
pharmacy network. Instead, all contingent performance amounts are
either paid to the high performing pharmacies or are used by the Part D
client to reduce the drug cost for pharmacies that do not meet the
specified quality metrics.
formulary placement/generic tiering
Question. In 2011, 71 percent of generic drugs in Part D were on
the lowest tier designed for generics; by 2019, that number decreased
to only 14 percent of generics. According to an Avalere study, this
practice cost seniors $22 billion in higher out-of-pocket costs since
2015, costs that could have been avoided through the proper formulary
placement of lower-cost generics. This practice, known as ``paying for
position,'' allows brands to block uptake of lower-cost generics and
biosimilars, thereby unnecessarily increasing out-of-pocket costs for
seniors.
Do you ever exclude generic or biosimilar competitors from
formulary placement, or place these lower-cost drugs in higher cost-
sharing tiers that are generally reserved for non-preferred or brand
drugs? Do you ever consider portfolio or bundled rebates with brand
manufacturers?
When you place generics on your formularies, do you place that
generic favorably to brand products--in other words, on generic-only
tiers?
When a generic becomes available, do you place it on your
formularies immediately?
Answer. OptumRx manages pharmacy benefits on behalf of our
customers, including self-insured employer groups, fully insured health
plans, union funds, Medicare, Medicaid, and Federal and State
government employee plans. In that role, we promote use of clinically
effective, low net-cost prescription drugs for consumers when
medications are needed.
This work starts with an independent, clinically based formulary
design process. Our customers may adopt OptumRx's standard formulary or
choose instead to utilize their own custom formularies. OptumRx's
Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) committee is comprised of independent
physicians and pharmacists who evaluate existing and emerging drugs
based on scientific evidence, and review and appraise those drugs in an
unbiased and evidence-based way. The P&T committee meets regularly, and
its deliberations are open and transparent to OptumRx's customers and
prospective customers. Part D customers may designate OptumRx's P&T
committee or leverage their own committees for such purposes.
A drug's cost plays no role in the P&T committee's clinical review.
Cost only becomes relevant after the P&T committee has identified drugs
in a particular therapeutic class that are clinically effective and
should be covered. If the P&T committee determines that more than one
drug in a particular class is clinically effective, OptumRx will
consider net cost--among other factors such as improving adherence,
product availability, market share, potential disruption to patients,
and negotiated price protection guarantees--when negotiating formulary
placement for that therapeutic category.
For approximately 90 percent of prescriptions processed, OptumRx
can identify a generic drug in a particular therapeutic class, and give
that drug preferred placement on its formulary over the more expensive
branded (or ``on-patent'') drug. If there is no generic product
available, there may still be other therapeutically equivalent branded
alternatives. If so, OptumRx negotiates with those competing brand
manufacturers to obtain discounts, and generally places the drugs that
drive the lowest overall net cost for the therapeutic category in a
preferred position on the formulary.
OptumRx has been effective in driving utilization of clinically
effective low-cost medications. OptumRx's negotiated network discounts
and clinical tools are reducing annual drug costs, on average, by
$1,600 per person for our customers. Even greater savings can be
achieved by customers who implement evidence-based utilization
management and other OptumRx clinical programs.
optumrx specific
Question. Attached is a new contract for 2020 that OptumRx sent to
a community oncology practice in my State. It States that if CMS
requires ``100 percent of pharmacy price concessions to be reported at
the point of sale'' then OptumRx will reimburse pharmacy providers 10
percent less for the drugs they dispense.
Please tell me how and why OptumRx justifies reducing reimbursement
on critical cancer drugs if CMS takes away your rebates?
Answer. There is no relationship between drug manufacturer rebates
and what OptumRx pays a participating network pharmacy for dispensing a
particular drug.
Question. What's the valid connection between rebates, which have
been linked to fueling higher drug prices, and reimbursement to
pharmacy providers of cancer medicines?
Answer. There is no relationship between drug manufacturer rebates
and what OptumRx pays a participating network pharmacy for dispensing a
particular drug.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.017
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.018
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.019
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.020
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.022
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.023
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.024
______
Question Submitted by Hon. John Thune
Question. You've shared your ability to leverage technology such as
real-time benefit tools to help patients and providers understand drug
costs at the point of prescribing, as well as how technology can be
used to help identify opportunities to provide enhanced support and
medication management for enrollees. What policies can we consider to
incentivize greater uptake of these tools?
Answer. We have a long history of developing consumer-friendly
tools to lower out-of-pocket costs and make the health-care experience
more satisfying and effective for patients. For example, one of these
tools, PreCheck MyScript, is a digital platform that simplifies the
drug prescribing experience by showing the prescribing physician what
the patient's true out-of-pocket cost would be while the patient is
still in the physician's office. PreCheck MyScript has helped lower
consumer out-of-pocket costs by an average of $135 per prescription
filled. This is just one of the ways we are working to simplify the
system.
OptumRx recently introduced another transparency tool for use by
consumers directly. MyScriptFinder provides drug pricing, coverage, and
therapeutic alternatives information for consumers to discuss with
their physician through a mobile application or the Internet. The
information includes point-of-sale drug pricing information for
consumers filling prescriptions at an OptumRx network pharmacy.
We recommend the committee advance solutions that provide
meaningful transparency to consumers, providers, and customers while
preserving the role of health plans and PBMs to reduce overall net
costs by harnessing the competitive marketplace, including:

Drive interoperability and end information blocking to enable
seamless integration of data into the clinical workflow;

Advance technology solutions for consumers and providers that
promote visibility to the lowest price for any given medication; and

Support business practices that ensure consumers pay low,
transparent out-of-pocket costs at the pharmacy counter.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Richard Burr
Question. Pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) offer a variety of
contract designs to health insurance plans, allowing the insurer or
client to choose the best structure for their customers. During the
Finance Committee hearing on April 9, 2019 each witness stated that, in
the contracts structured to allow for the passthrough of rebate dollars
at the point of sale, PBMs do not keep any portion of the rebate. If
the PBM does not keep a portion of the rebate, what type of revenue do
PBMs receive from these contracts? What percent of your contracts are
point of sale and what percent utilize a structure providing a
percentage of the rebate back to the PBM?
Answer. To meet varying customer needs, we offer flexibility in how
we are compensated for our services. For example, customers can choose
to compensate us through per-member per-month fees, administrative
fees, or they may require us to retain a certain percentage of
discounts we negotiate with drug manufacturers. If a customer allows us
to retain a certain percentage of rebates, the specific amount we
retain will be governed by the terms set forth in our customer
agreement. Already today, approximately 98 percent of discounts we
collect from drug manufacturers are passed on to our customers.
Additionally, for years we have offered the capability to enable point-
of-sale discount solutions and in 2018 we were the first PBM to launch
the solution at scale to ensure that consumers also directly benefit
from our negotiations with drug manufacturers. By the end of 2019 we
expect more than 9 million consumers will be eligible for these point-
of-sale discounts, and beginning January 1, 2020, we will expand this
point-of-sale discount solution to all new employer-sponsored plans.
Question. It is our understanding that contracts with
pharmaceutical manufacturers may also take a variety of forms. In
calendar years 2016, 2017 and 2018, what was the total dollar amount
that you obtained from pharmaceutical manufacturers in any form such as
rebates, fees, etc.? What is the total dollar amount that was passed on
to health insurance plans with which you have an agreement or contract?
Answer. OptumRx does not collect an administrative fee from
manufacturers for Medicare or Medicaid plans, or for drugs for which
manufacturers provide no discount. The drugs in this latter category--
the majority of which are generics--constitute approximately 90 percent
of all prescriptions processed by OptumRx. OptumRx's PBM business does
not receive distribution, marketing or clinical case management fees.
OptumRx makes pricing and rebate information available to
customers, and reimbursement and out-of-pocket information available to
pharmacies, subject to appropriate confidentiality provisions. The
information is subject to independent audit by our customers. At the
consumer level, OptumRx provides solutions to help consumers make
better decisions, including our MyScript Finder solution, which
provides members with easy to understand price and benefit
transparency. OptumRx shares with its clients approximately 98 percent
of the discounts it obtains from manufacturers. We pass through an even
greater percentage of the discounts we negotiate with manufacturers to
our Medicare Part D and Medicaid plan customers. Discounts collected on
behalf of Medicare Part D customers are reported to CMS, and discounts
collected on behalf of Medicaid customers are disclosed to those
customers for their reporting purposes.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Tim Scott
Question. One challenge that I see, when considering the medical
treatment marketplace, is that we have a new wave of life-saving
treatments--of incredible cures we could never have dreamed of, even 10
or 15 years ago--for which cost, by necessity, is going to be a major
issue. You look, for instance, at a condition like sickle cell disease.
For the average SCD patient who reaches age 45, lifetime treatment
costs are at roughly $1 million--and there are complications that can
make that figure even higher. Now that we see therapies coming down the
pipeline that could erase those long-term costs and drastically improve
the quality of life for sickle cell patients, the question becomes, how
can our current payment systems adapt to--and absorb--the high costs
necessary to bring treatments like these to market and to ensure that
we continue to see innovations like these ones moving forward?
And along the same lines, beyond creating some much-needed clarity
around value-based arrangements--which I've been working with Senators
Cassidy and Warner to accomplish legislatively--are there steps that
Congress could take to facilitate these innovative payment models?
Answer. We understand how important these treatments are for
patients facing life-threatening illness. The availability of high cost
gene therapies and cures are increasing, with list prices averaging
$850,000 for such therapies. To date, five gene therapies have been
approved by the Food and Drug Administration, and 20-45 additional gene
therapies will be launched in the U.S. over the next 5 years. Thirty
million Americans have some form of rare disease. If just five percent
are treated at an average list price of $850,000, this would equal
$1.275 trillion--four times the $330 billion the U.S. spends on all
prescription drugs today.
We recommend the committee advance the following policies to stem
this approaching crisis:

Require the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to
issue a National Coverage Determination on each high-cost therapy or
cure.

Use registries to assess the long-term health outcomes of each
high-cost therapy or cure.

Introduce a drug price inflation penalty tied to the Consumer
Price Index, medical cost, or the Medicare growth rate in the
catastrophic phase for all brand, biosimilar, and generic drug covered
in Medicare Part B and Part D.

Study risk mitigation options, such as stop loss programs, for
extremely high-cost products.

Modify Medicaid Best Price, Anti-Kickback Statute, and Stark
requirements that currently impede the full use of value-based
contracting for all drugs and devices.
Question. I'm also interested in the role that technology can play
in helping to drive down drug costs--as well as to increase medication
adherence. Some estimates suggest that between 50 and 75 percent of
patients don't take their medications as prescribed, and that one in
five new prescriptions go unfilled. And study after study shows that
cost is a key factor here. As a consequence, we see roughly 125,000
deaths from non-adherence every year, along with more than $100 billion
in excess costs to the health-care system.
To what extent can technology help providers and patients to make
more informed and cost-effective choices about prescriptions--and to
then adhere to these prescriptions?
Answer. New and emerging technology tools, such as real-time
benefit check (OptumRx's version is known as PreCheck MyScript), are
now delivering the most accurate cost information at one of the most
critical stages of the prescription process--the provider's issuance of
the prescription. These tools enable patients to have a much better
understanding of the costs they will be facing when they go to get
their medication at the pharmacy counter. More importantly, these tools
can drive a critical conversation between patients and their provider
about the cost of medication and the treatment options (e.g., switch to
generics or therapeutic equivalent brands) that will best position the
patient for long-term adherence and optimal condition treatment.
Question. And maybe more to the point, to the extent that these
technological tools are out there, what steps are you and your clients
taking to encourage physicians and patients to use them?
Answer. OptumRx is actively working with prescribers and other
relevant stakeholders across the health-care system to promote adoption
of these new tools. We are also working directly with providers to: (1)
educate on the objectives of these tools; (2) understand how to best
integrate these tools into prescriber's existing work flows; and (3)
assess what further enhancements are needed to ensure maximum clarity
and value for the provider/patient experience. Lastly, OptumRx is
making similar tools available to patients. These patient-facing tools
focus on price comparisons and the different options available for
obtaining medications when patients directly inquire about medication
costs. Information about medication choice is available to patients who
contact OptumRx by phone, web, or mobile applications. We work to
measure and manage adoption of these tools to ensure they are
generating value and lowering cost.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Bill Cassidy
Question. Are there ever cases where a patient in your health plan
or one of the health plans for whom you negotiate as a PBM pays more
for a medicine than the plan spends on a net basis, when you reimburse
the pharmacy for that same medicine? In those cases, what entity
receives the benefit of the difference between the amount the patient
pays and the net amount the plan pays?
Answer. OptumRx does not believe this is currently taking place.
OptumRx encourages its customers to give their members the benefit of
its contracted network reimbursement rates if they are lower than the
members' copayment amounts. However, if there are cases where the
member copayment exceeds the contracted reimbursement rate, the
pharmacy, not OptumRx as the PBM, generally retains the excess.
Question. In calendar years 2015, 2016, and 2017, what percent of
your revenue was from fees paid by plans, fees paid by manufacturers,
other fees, pharmacy spread, or rebates? Same question as to profits.
Of all revenue generated from part D contracts, what percent did you
retain?
Answer. OptumRx does not collect an administrative fee from
manufacturers for Medicare or Medicaid plans, or for drugs for which
manufacturers provide no discount. The drugs in this latter category--
the majority of which are generics--constitute approximately 90 percent
of all prescriptions processed by OptumRx. OptumRx's PBM business does
not receive distribution, marketing or clinical case management fees.
OptumRx makes pricing and rebate information available to
customers, and reimbursement and out-of-pocket information available to
pharmacies, subject to appropriate confidentiality provisions. The
information is subject to independent audit by our customers. At the
consumer level, OptumRx provides solutions to help consumers make
better decisions, including our MyScript Finder solution, which
provides members with easy to understand price and benefit
transparency. OptumRx shares with its clients approximately 98 percent
of the discounts it obtains from manufacturers. We pass through an even
greater percentage of the discounts we negotiate with manufacturers to
our Medicare Part D and Medicaid plan customers. Discounts collected on
behalf of Medicare Part D customers are reported to CMS, and discounts
collected on behalf of Medicaid customers are disclosed to those
customers for their reporting purposes.
Part D revenue and retention information is reported to CMS.
OptumRx does not generate any revenue in Part D via service fees.
Question. Should a patient ever pay more out of pocket for a
medicine than what you pay the pharmacy for that medicine?
Answer. OptumRx encourages its customers to give their members the
benefit of its contracted network reimbursement rates if they are lower
than the members' copayment amounts. However, if there are cases where
the member copayment exceeds the contracted reimbursement rate, the
pharmacy, not OptumRx as the PBM, generally retains the excess.
Question. A recent study shows that PBM revenue from fees has
risen. Further, PBM's retained revenue as a percent of net retail drug
spend has consistently increased. What do you attribute this increase
to?
Answer. OptumRx did not prepare or participate in the study
referenced, nor can it comment on the data sources that formed the
basis for the study. However, the increase in fee revenue may be
attributable to customers increasingly choosing to keep all or a
greater percentage of discounts, or deciding to move to a pass-through
network arrangement and paying PBMs through administrative fees.
Question. How are bona fide service fees established? What was your
revenue generated in part D by bona fide fees in 2015, 2016, and 2017?
Answer. OptumRx does not generate any revenue in Part D via service
fees.
Question. A Health Affairs article suggests plans may prefer paying
PBMs using rebates instead of fees, as ``Using retained rebates to
cover PBM costs in lieu of fees could artificially lower reported
administrative costs and make it easier to meet government medical loss
ratio (MLR) requirements.'' Is it true that paying the PBM a percent of
rebates would keep that revenue from counting towards a plan's MLR?
Answer. OptumRx reports 100 percent of rebates received on behalf
of Part D plans so that Part D plans can accurately complete DIR
reports filed with CMS. In the limited instances that a Part D plan
allows OptumRx to retain a portion of rebates as compensation for
services, the Part D plan must still report 100 percent of the rebates
received on its DIR reports. While we do not have visibility to our
Part D plan customers' MLR filings, we are not aware of any situations
where a Part D plan has reported a PBM's retained rebates as
administrative costs.
Question. Would you support an industry-wide standard set of
performance metrics by which a PBM would set its pharmacy contracts,
which would be tailored based on regional patient populations, to give
certainty for local pharmacies?
Answer. OptumRx is open to evaluating proposals, with a focus on
approaches that reduce health care costs, incentivize improved health
outcomes and improve quality.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Steve Daines
Question. In Medicare Part D, beneficiaries' deductible and
coinsurance payments are calculated based on the price negotiated
between the PBM and the pharmacy.
Does this take into account rebates and discounts the PBM
negotiates separately with pharmaceutical manufacturers?
If yes, what percentage of the time is this the case?
In calendar years 2016, 2017, and 2018, what share of brand
prescriptions covered by the Part D plans you contract with were filled
in the deductible or required beneficiaries to pay coinsurance? What
was the total amount beneficiaries spent out of pocket for those
prescriptions? What would beneficiaries' total out-of-pocket spending
have been under the same cost sharing structure if their payments were
based on the net price to the Part D plan, inclusive of rebates and
other price concessions, rather than the price negotiated between your
PBM and the pharmacy?
Answer. Virtually all brand prescriptions include a member cost
share. CMS has specific requirements and processes to obtain
appropriate data on beneficiary cost sharing. Plan sponsors, working
with their PBM, submit the required data and information to CMS
annually and as requested. We are not able to determine the amount of
member cost share under hypothetical scenarios retroactively.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
spread pricing in medicaid
Question. A PBM practice that has come up quite a bit recently is
the practice of spread pricing. Spread pricing occurs when PBMs charge
health plans more for prescription drugs than they actually reimburse
pharmacies, and then pocket the different as profit.
Do you engage in spread pricing practices?
Answer. Clients choose how they want to pay OptumRx for its
services. Some choose a pass-through model in which the client pays us
an administrative fee for managing prescription claims. If our
customers choose a traditional model, OptumRx bears the risk. Our
clients pay us based on agreed-upon negotiated market rates, which may
or may not be the same as the prices we have negotiated with our
network pharmacies. Some customers prefer the certainty and stability
that a traditional (or spread) model offers.
Question. If yes, do you engage in such practices in Medicaid?
Answer. Yes, when allowed by State law and if the customer chooses
it.
Question. If so, please list each State you operate in where you
have a contract with a Medicaid managed care plan where you employ
spread pricing.
Answer. Arizona, California, Florida, Hawaii, Maryland,
Massachusetts, Nebraska, New Mexico, New York, New Jersey, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, Utah, Virginia, and Washington. State Medicaid plans are
increasingly choosing to move to pass-through pricing arrangements.
Question. List each Medicaid managed care plan you have contracts
with where you employ spread pricing.
Answer. See above.
Question. Describe whether and how you disclose the use of such
practices to the plans.
Answer. OptumRx's contracts with customers describe the financial
model the customer has chosen, whether traditional (spread) or pass-
through.
Question. Describe whether you disclose such practices directly to
the State.
Answer. Except when contracting to provide services to a State's
Medicaid Fee-for-Service program (as noted in the next response),
OptumRx contracts with the various States' Medicaid Managed Care
Organizations, rather than with State Medicaid departments directly.
However, State Medicaid programs have access to those contracts.
Question. List any States where you have direct contracts with the
State Medicaid agency as a PBM for fee-for-service individuals.
Answer. Arizona, Georgia, Indiana, Nevada, South Dakota, and
Washington.
rebate demands
Question. The use of rebates as a negotiating tool has led to
problematic incentives in the prescription drug supply chain. For
example, drug companies have argued that they increase list prices in
response to demands from PBMs for high or increasing rebates.
Does your company currently have, or has your company had since
January 2013, any agreements with drug manufacturers that:
Require equivalent rebates, even in the case of a drug for which
the list price has been lowered?
Answer. See explanation below.
Question. Require advance notice of changes in the list price of
drugs, including reductions or increases in list price?
Answer. See explanation below.
Question. If the answer to either of the above is yes, please
provide details regarding each of these requirements in each instance
in which they were in place: the required rebate amount or percent; the
amount of notice required for list price change notifications,
specifically for increases and decreases; and any penalties for
noncompliance with rebate or notification requirements by the drug
manufacturer.
Answer. Our customers that are Part D plan sponsors consider
contracted-for discounts when setting their premiums. Those premiums
must be submitted with their bids to CMS seven months before each plan
year starts. CMS holds plan sponsors to those premiums for the duration
of their contracts. We believe it is important for plans to be able to
calculate premiums with confidence. For this reason, OptumRx proposed a
Part D contract amendment requesting either advance notice from a drug
manufacturer of list price decreases in the middle of a plan year or,
in the absence of advance notice, a commitment by the manufacturer to
honor its contracted-for discounts for the entire plan year.
If a manufacturer agreed to the terms of the proposed amendment,
and then failed to provide the requested notice, it would be expected
to maintain its contracted-for discounts for the duration of the plan
year for which the discounts were negotiated to provide premium
continuity and stability in the Part D market.
revenue sources
Question. Please provide an annual breakdown of the following
components of the revenue you received from drug manufacturers from
January 1, 2013 through December 31, 2018: dollar amount and percent of
revenue from rebates; dollar amount and percent of revenue from
administrative fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from
distribution fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from marketing
fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from clinical case
management fees; and all other sources of revenue from manufacturers
not listed above.
Answer. OptumRx does not collect an administrative fee from
manufacturers for Medicare or Medicaid plans, or for drugs for which
manufacturers provide no discount. The drugs in this latter category--
the majority of which are generics--constitute approximately 90 percent
of all prescriptions processed by OptumRx. OptumRx's PBM business does
not receive distribution, marketing or clinical case management fees.
OptumRx makes pricing and rebate information available to
customers, and reimbursement and out-of-pocket information available to
pharmacies, subject to appropriate confidentiality provisions. The
information is subject to independent audit by our customers. At the
consumer level, OptumRx provides solutions to help consumers make
better decisions, including our MyScript Finder solution, which
provides members with easy to understand price and benefit
transparency. OptumRx shares with its customers approximately 98
percent of the discounts it obtains from manufacturers. We pass through
an even greater percentage of the discounts we negotiate with
manufacturers to our Medicare Part D and Medicaid plan customers.
Discounts collected on behalf of Medicare Part D customers are reported
to CMS, and discounts collected on behalf of Medicaid customers are
disclosed to those customers for their reporting purposes.
part d negotiation
Question. The PBM market has changed dramatically over the past
several years. Many Part D health plans also operate as PBMs, including
your companies. While Part D has done a great job offering Medicare
beneficiaries drug coverage they did not have access to before, Part D
has not been successful at keeping up with the growing cost of
medicines. PBMs and Part D plans claim they bargain to get lower
prices, but the HHS Inspector General found that almost 4 in 10 brand
name drugs in Part D offered no rebate or discount to Part D plans.
Why have Part D plans been ineffective at bringing down the cost of
almost half of brand-name medicines?
Answer. Drug manufacturers alone set the price of prescription
drugs. A 2018 research study from Visante found that for drugs that
have no or decreasing rebates, prescription drug prices, set by drug
manufacturers, continue to skyrocket. In Medicare Part D, prescription
drugs with no rebates (roughly 40 percent of those prescribed) saw
significant price hikes between 2012 and 2017. In Medicare Part B,
where there are no PBM-negotiated rebates, drug manufacturers increased
the prices of the 10 most-used drugs by a range of 16 to 74 percent.
This research comes on the heels of a study by the Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) Office of the Inspector General, which
similarly found that even after accounting for rebates, the prices of
prescription drugs increased by 62 percent--a dramatic increase from
2011 to 2015.
CBO continues to conclude that the government would not be able to
lower drug prices more effectively than the private sector. Drug
manufacturers are increasing drug prices for one simple reason: a lack
of meaningful competition allows them to do so. In the absence of
competition, drug manufacturers often set exceptionally high prices.
There is a vital role for Congress and the administration to play in
addressing this important issue.
OptumRx supports providing Part D plans with greater flexibility to
negotiate discounts for drugs in the protected classes. Currently, Part
D plans must cover substantially all drugs in six protected classes,
including all drugs to treat cancer, depression, and HIV, many of which
are costly specialty medicines. The current protected class policy
limits the private sector's ability to negotiate meaningful savings on
protected class brand drugs. Today in the commercial market, discounts
for the same protected class drugs can have a negotiated discount of up
to 30 percent compared to an average of a six percent discount on
protected class drugs in Part D. Without sacrificing the availability
of appropriate clinical alternatives, increased flexibility will better
position Part D plans to derive cost savings for the Medicare program
and for beneficiaries, not only through discounts, but also through the
use of biosimilars and generic alternatives. We estimate these
flexibilities specific to protected class drugs could drive savings of
up to 50 percent.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ UnitedHealth Group, Comment Letter on Contract Year (CY) 2020
Medicare Advantage and Part D Drug Pricing Proposed Rule (CMS-4180-P)
(January 25, 2019).
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. Should the CREATES Act become law, what commitment can
your company making to covering generics as soon as they are approved
and passing those savings on to patients?
Answer. OptumRx urges action to increase the availability of
generics and promote true competition. The most important step Congress
can take to address the high cost of prescription drugs is to modernize
the intellectual property system for the 21st century and eliminate
drug manufacturers' ability to manipulate the patent and regulatory
system and thereby prevent lower-cost generics and biosimilars from
reaching consumers more quickly. We support the CREATES Act becoming
law to end the manipulation by drug manufacturers of the Risk
Evaluation and Management Strategies (REMS) program to block timely
entry of generic competition.
Question. What are your concerns with point-of-sale rebates and
what alternatives do you propose to such rebates to improve consumer
savings at the pharmacy counter?
Answer. We have heeded the call for change by taking direct action
to ensure that the discounts we obtain directly lower consumers' out-
of-pocket costs at the pharmacy counter. Last year, we implemented a
point-of-sale discount solution at scale for fully insured group
customers so that consumers receive the benefit of discounts at the
pharmacy counter. This action has already made nearly 6 million
consumers eligible for point-of-sale discounts. Eligible consumers
filling prescriptions on discounted brand drugs are seeing average
savings of $130 per eligible prescription. We believe it can also
improve prescription drug adherence by as much as 16 percent. By the
end of 2019 we expect more than nine million consumers will be eligible
for these point-of-sale discounts. In March of this year, we announced
a decision to expand this point-of-sale discount solution to all new
employer-sponsored plans beginning in January 2020. This action means
real out-of-pocket savings for consumers at the pharmacy counter who
take brand drugs with discounts.
Question. What are the specific steps your company is taking to
move PCSK9 inhibitors off the specialty tier in Medicare Part D and to
fixed copay tiers given that prices went down by 60 percent and are no
longer above the specialty tier threshold?
Why haven't your plans moved it already, given that CMS allows
plans to make positive mid-year formulary changes that improve patient
access and affordability?
Answer. After the independent P&T Committee assessment, OptumRx
seeks to prefer the drugs that drive to the lowest net cost for the
therapeutic category on its standard formularies. In addition to net
cost, OptumRx considers other factors such as improving adherence,
product availability, market share, potential disruption to patients,
and negotiated price protection guarantees.
Tiering of PCSK9 inhibitors is complicated by the fact that newer
and older formulations may share unique coding attributes required by
CMS that make differentiation in claims adjudication systems difficult.
OptumRx expects that, given ongoing market price changes in the PCSK9
category, tiering of PCSK9 inhibitors will change in the future.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Benjamin L. Cardin
drug rebate rule and higher part d premiums
Question. In January, the Department of Health and Human Services
released a proposal to reform prescription drug rebates paid by
pharmaceutical manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers under
Medicare Part D. The OIG proposal attempts to ban most rebates by
eliminating their regulatory protections and creating two new safe
harbor provisions: one to expressly protect discounts applied directly
at the point-of-sale (POS) for consumers, and another to protect
certain service fees that manufacturers pay to PBMs for services
furnished to health plans. The only service fees that would be
permissible under the proposal are those that are fixed, and not based
on a percentage of sales and not based on volume or the value of other
business generated between the parties. The proposed rule was designed
to address the Department's concerns with the current rebate system,
which HHS believes rewards high list prices, discourages the use of
generics and biosimilars, and does not reflect patient out-of-pocket
costs. For consumers, this proposal may result in lower costs at the
pharmacy counter, but Part D premiums may increase as a result.
Could you explain which Part D beneficiaries could see savings on
their drug costs at the pharmacy counter and which Part D beneficiaries
could not see lower drug costs?
Answer. Part D beneficiaries who are not currently taking
medications, who take generic drugs, or who take non-rebated brand
drugs would not be expected to benefit from the shift to point-of-sale
discounts, although premiums would increase for all seniors in Medicare
Part D. Further, CBO and OACT estimate that net prices in Part D for
rebated products would increase.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Congressional Budget Office, ``Incorporating the Effects of
the Proposed Rule on Safe Harbors for Pharmaceutical Rebates in CBO's
Budget Projections--Supplemental Material for Updated Budget
Projections: 2019 to 2029'' (May 2019), available at https://
www.cbo.gov/system/files/2019-05/55151-SupplementalMaterial.pdf;
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary
Analysis on Proposed Safe Harbor Regulation (August 30, 2018),
available at https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/
Research/ActuarialStudies/Downloads/
ProposedSafeHarborRegulationImpact.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
perverse incentive to place more expensive drugs on formularies
Question. In a Senate Finance Committee hearing had a few weeks
ago, many pharmaceutical companies argued that the current rebate
structure incentivizes high list prices. These companies argue that the
higher the list price of the drug, the greater the rebates, and
therefore, the more profit the PBM earns. While contracts between PBMs,
Part D Plans, and pharmaceutical companies require PBMs to pass through
100 percent of the negotiated rebate back to insurance plans, I worry
that this structure could incentivize PBMs to favor a more expensive
drug on the formulary because they could get a higher rebate.
Is there an incentive for a PBM to place a higher cost drug on the
Part D formulary because the PBM receives a larger rebate for that more
expensive drug? Why or why not?
Answer. OptumRx promotes the use of clinically effective, low net-
cost prescription drugs. For Part D consumers electing an OptumRx
standard formulary, this work starts with an independent, clinically
based formulary design process. OptumRx's P&T committee is comprised of
independent physicians and pharmacists who evaluate existing and
emerging drugs based on scientific evidence, and review and appraise
those drugs in an evidence-based way. A drug's cost plays no role in
the P&T committee's clinical review. Cost only becomes relevant after
the P&T committee has identified drugs in a particular therapeutic
class that are clinically effective and should be covered.
If the P&T committee determines that more than one drug in a
particular class is clinically effective, OptumRx will consider net
cost--among other factors such as improving adherence, product
availability, market share, potential disruption to patients, and
negotiated price protection guarantees--when negotiating formulary
placement for that therapeutic category.
For about 90 percent of prescriptions processed, OptumRx can
identify a generic drug in a particular therapeutic class and give that
drug preferred placement on its formulary over the more expensive
branded (or ``on-patent'') drug. If there is no generic product
available, there may still be other therapeutically equivalent branded
alternatives. If so, OptumRx negotiates with those competing brand
manufacturers to obtain discounts, and generally places the drugs that
drive the lowest overall net cost for the therapeutic category in a
preferred position on the formulary.
OptumRx has been effective in driving utilization of clinically
effective low-cost medications. OptumRx's negotiated network discounts
and clinical tools are reducing annual drug costs, on average, by
$1,600 per person for our customers. Even greater savings can be
achieved by customers who implement evidence-based utilization
management and other OptumRx clinical programs.
six protected classes proposal and access
Question. This past November, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services released a proposed rule for 2020 to help tackle drug pricing.
Among the proposed changes is one, which would alter the current rules,
governing the ``six protected classes.'' The concept of the protected
classes has been around since the launch of the Medicare Part D
Program, and it was instituted to ensure that some of our most
vulnerable patients would have access to their needed drugs by
requiring formularies to cover nearly all protected drugs. These
classes are anticonvulsants, antidepressants, antipsychotics,
immunosuppressants, antiretrovirals, and antineoplastics.
Some people have argued that these protected classes have led to
higher drug prices because formularies are required to include this
prescription coverage, and there are limited tools left to help lower
prices. In an effort to increase competition, this proposed new rule
would do a couple of different things. The first aspect of the
administration's proposal would allow Part D sponsors to implement
broader use of prior authorization and step therapy for protected class
drugs, including to determine use for protected class indications. Any
time there is a mention of plans using prior authorization or step
therapy, there is an immediate concern of restricting patient access to
needed drugs or medical services.
Could you explain why your company would favor such utilization
management tools like step therapy or prior authorization?
Answer. All of our prior authorization and step therapy criteria
are evidence-based and approved by our or the applicable customer's
independent P&T committee process. Step therapies are used to aid in
affordability by encouraging patients to choose clinically appropriate
lower net cost alternative therapies when such therapies exist. Prior
authorizations help ensure treatment is clinically appropriate and
aligned with FDA labeling, and assist in minimizing potential safety
concerns.
Question. Do you believe there is a danger that using step therapy
or prior authorization could possibly restrict patients from having
access to medication that has been successful for them? Why or why not?
Answer. All of our prior authorization and step therapy criteria
are evidence-based and approved by our or the applicable customer's
independent P&T committee process. The committee's assessment takes
into account the risks associated with abrupt changes or switching of
medications. Our formulary management program includes a formulary
exception process and prior authorization process that allows a
prescriber to request an alternate, appropriate medication when the
medication identified as first line on the formulary is not appropriate
for an individual patient. This process allows for a case-by-case
review for individual patients.
Question. If you were to use step therapy or prior authorization
for drugs in the six protected classes, how would you ensure patients
would continue to have access to their needed medications in one of the
six protected classes?
Answer. We would utilize our independent P&T committee to evaluate
step therapy or prior authorization protocols in the six protected
classes.
Question. The second aspect of the administration proposed change
to the six protected classes is the proposal to allow drug coverage
formularies to exclude a protected class drug from a Part D formulary
if the drug represents a new formulation of a single-sourced drug,
regardless of whether the older formulation remains on the market. My
understanding is that this administration is trying to target
pharmaceutical companies who participate in the anticompetitive
practice of ``evergreening.'' This is a practice where pharmaceutical
companies make slight alterations to a drug's packaging, color, and
formulation without an added or new benefit. However, we also
understand that seemingly small changes to a drug can still make a big
difference to patient well-being. We have heard from Maryland
physicians that the creation of combination antiretroviral pills was a
huge step forward in the fight against HIV. Even though these
combination pills or extended release versions didn't have a new
chemical formula, they made a world of difference to the HIV patients
taking over a dozen pills a day. These vulnerable patients are
obviously very concerned that they could lose coverage for new and
better drugs, especially when their old drugs may no longer be
available. HIV treatments have come a long way in the last few decades,
and proper antiretroviral treatment is vital to ensuring an end to the
HIV epidemic.
Do you think the proposed rule anticipates a situation where a
pharmaceutical company stops producing an older version of a drug when
a new formulation is available, but the newer formulation is not
covered by a Part D plan? Why or why not?
Answer. In situations where no therapeutically equivalent
alternatives were available, the new formulation would likely be put on
formulary through the OptumRx P&T process, which would require
formulary options for treatment of a condition. As such, the proposed
rule should not lead to a situation where patients did not have access
to a unique treatment option on formulary.
Question. What would your company do to ensure that patients
continue to have access to their medication in this situation?
Answer. OptumRx would recommend a formulary that met CMS
requirements and provided for good and appropriate treatment of a
condition as validated by OptumRx's independent P&T committee. In a
situation where an older formulation was no longer available and no
therapeutic alternatives exist, the new formulation will be placed on
formulary.
appeals process in general
Question. Prior authorization and step therapy are some of the most
commonly mentioned concerns from patient groups coming to talk to my
office, second only patients' concerns about out-of-pocket costs. What
has become especially striking in the past few weeks is the number of
physicians explaining how they feel stymied by prior authorization
restrictions by insurance plans. We have heard from one surgeon who
argued for weeks with the insure to appeal a decision that had been
made to deny a newer type of less-invasive surgery. Someone who was not
a surgical expert made the denial. Eventually, his patient made the
decision to stop waiting and opted for a far more invasive and
dangerous procedure because it was covered by insurance. Other doctors
talk about the hours they spend on the phone waiting to appeal a
decision, only to be told they need to write an extensive report
justifying their medical decision. While the physicians are waiting for
a response, quite often there are patients suffering without their
proper medications, without certain tests, or not getting the surgery
that the expert recommends.
With technology changing so rapidly, how do your companies ensure
that you keep up with the medical and surgical experts and new
research, so that your authorization decisions are in line with the
most recent medical innovations and physician standards?
Answer. All criteria used to make therapy authorization decisions
are reviewed by the independent physicians and pharmacists who comprise
OptumRx's or the applicable customer's independent P&T committee. These
professionals evaluate existing and emerging drugs based on scientific
evidence, and review and appraise those drugs in an unbiased and
evidence-based way. The P&T committee conducts an annual review to
ensure that its evaluation criteria are in line with the most recent
medical innovations and clinical standards. The annual review process
also engages additional independent external physician specialists to
provide additional clinical insights and recommendations for the P&T
committee to consider when making clinical determinations.
direct and indirect remuneration fees
Question. I have heard from independent pharmacies in Maryland that
have struggled with Pharmacy Benefit Managers and direct and indirect
remuneration (DIR) fees. According to independent pharmacies, there are
times when DIR fees are based on performance, and these fees range from
$2-$7 for certain types of maintenance prescriptions and are often
collected retroactively--weeks or even months after a prescription was
filled. A PBM can take money back from the pharmacy when the pharmacies
haven not met a PBM's performance standard. In these instances, the PBM
claws back money and creates a situation where the pharmacy does not
receive adequate reimbursement to cover its costs. As a result, DIR
fees can be a significant financial loss to pharmacies and an
additional cost burden to patients.
Could you explain what performance measures are considered when
determining a DIR fee?
Answer. Our Medicare Part D health plan customers identify DIR
strategies to improve clinical outcomes and affordability. We have the
administrative flexibility to implement the strategies our customers
identify. Performance measures generally include quality metrics
designed to improve outcomes in disease States, including diabetes,
hypertension, and cholesterol, which align with measures used by CMS to
evaluate Part D plan performance under the CMS STAR ratings program.
Question. How is that performance measure communicated to the
pharmacy?
Answer. Performance measures are communicated in writing as part of
the Pharmacy Network Agreement between OptumRx and participating
pharmacies, either directly or through their contracting entity such as
a Pharmacy Services Administrative Organization (PSAO). In addition,
OptumRx provides quarterly and year-end reporting about performance to
improve quality to participating pharmacies.
Question. How much does your company receive in DIR fees?
Answer. With respect to OptumRx's performance-based pharmacy
network, OptumRx does not retain any of the contingent performance
amounts withheld from payments to pharmacies. All such contingent
performance amounts are either paid to the high performing pharmacies,
or are used by the Part D customers to reduce the drug cost for
pharmacies that do not meet the specified quality metrics.
Question. How much does your company receive in performance-related
DIR fees?
Answer. See response above.
Question. Are those fees passed on to the consumer? If so, how?
Answer. OptumRx's performance networks focus on activities that
benefit consumers (such as increased adherence) and the health system
as a whole by improving health outcomes and lowering health-care costs.
Our Part D plan customers determine how to best use DIR amounts to
lower overall costs and improve health outcomes.
drug shortages
Question. Currently there are over 270 drugs in shortage. Drug
shortages happen for many reasons such as manufacturing and quality
problems, natural disasters, and inventory practices of wholesalers and
pharmacies. Drug shortages cause harm to providers, hospitals, and most
importantly patients. Pharmacists and providers must spend significant
amounts of time on researching alternative drug treatments for the
patient, which may not always be the most optimal therapies.
As a pharmacy benefit manager, you have contractual agreements with
pharmaceutical companies in order to place their drugs on a plan's
formulary. While I understand that drug shortages happening in both the
inpatient and outpatient settings, there may be a role PBMs can play in
protecting patients.
For the prescription drugs you negotiate to cover on a plan
formulary, could you use your negotiating power to ensure a drug is
available to a patient? Why or Why not?
Answer. Drug shortages are often related to manufacturing and
quality problems, natural disasters, and inventory practices of
wholesalers and pharmacies. In these situations, drug availability is
outside of OptumRx's control.
Question. What do you do to ensure that patients have the drugs
they need?
Answer. OptumRx works closely with various suppliers to ensure that
they have the supply needed to meet patient demand for prescriptions
dispensed by affiliated pharmacies. Additionally, when drug shortages
take place, OptumRx evaluates the medications and, if necessary,
identifies clinically appropriate alternatives and communicates with
consumers about the availability of those alternatives. This may take
the form of suppressing utilization management criteria, such as step
therapy or prior authorization, and/or moving alternative drugs to a
more favorable tier until the shortage is resolved.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown
biosimilars
Question. During the hearing, each of you expressed support for
biosimilars and most of you indicated you try and take advantage of
available biosimilars to help lower costs. When I asked each of you to
identify solutions to help ensure a robust biosimilar marketplace here
in the U.S., most of you mentioned things Congress or the
administration could do to help ensure uptake of biosimilars--from
lowering the exclusivity period for biologics to finalizing guidance on
interchangability at the FDA. However, none of you offered any
solutions or ideas for what your company could do to help ensure timely
uptake of biosimilars, a robust U.S. biosimilars market, and a
resulting cost savings to patients to taxpayers.
Most of the biosimilars currently approved and on the market in the
U.S. are reimbursed through the medical benefit. What are the
similarities and differences in how rebates are passed onto patients
and providers in the medical benefit versus pharmacy benefit. In your
answer, please describe these similarities and differences across each
of your books of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare, Medicaid).
Do any of your plans require the use of a higher list price,
branded product over the use of a therapeutically equivalent lower list
price generic or biosimilar product? Why? If a plan restricts the use
of a biosimilar or generic product in lieu of an innovator or brand
name product, do patients pay more out-of- pocket than they would if
the biosimilar was preferred?
Recognizing most biosimilars are paid for via medical benefit,
please explain whether you use step-therapy to restrict access to
biosimilars for your patients in any medical benefit you manage across
each of your books of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare, Medicaid).
What role do rebates playing in your consideration for patient access
to biosimilars in each of these instances?
How can and will your company help ensure a robust biosimilars
market here in the U.S.?
I have heard concerns that ``rebate walls'' are responsible for
keeping new biosimilars off of formularies, where a manufacturer offers
conditional rebates on a bundle of their products in order to incentive
PBMs to exclude a new biosimilar competitor from their formularies.
Have you ever decided to place a drug on a preferred tier because of
the rebates you receive for other drugs from that manufacturer? If you
do not do this, do you support this practice being carried out by your
competitors?
What more can and will you do to counteract efforts to rebate-block
or bundle rebates to block biosimilar formulary placement? Will you
commit to taking these actions as more biosimilars become available in
Part D?
Answer. OptumRx promotes the use of clinically effective, low net-
cost prescription drugs for consumers when medications are needed. This
work starts with an independent, clinically based formulary design
process. OptumRx's customers may adopt OptumRx's standard formulary or
choose instead to utilize their own custom formularies.
OptumRx's P&T committee is comprised of independent physicians and
pharmacists who evaluate existing and emerging drugs based on
scientific evidence, and review and appraise those drugs in an
evidence-based way. A drug's cost plays no role in the P&T committee's
clinical review. Cost only becomes relevant after the P&T committee has
identified drugs in a particular therapeutic class that are clinically
equivalent and should be covered.
If the P&T committee determines that more than one drug in a
particular class is clinically effective, OptumRx will consider net
cost--among other factors such as improving adherence, product
availability, market share, potential disruption to patients, and
negotiated price protection guarantees--when negotiating formulary
placement for that therapeutic category.
For about 90 percent of prescriptions processed, OptumRx can
identify a generic drug in a particular therapeutic class, and give
that drug preferred placement on its formulary over the more expensive
branded (or ``on-patent'') drug.
OptumRx has been effective in driving utilization of clinically
effective low-cost medications. OptumRx's negotiated network discounts
and clinical tools are reducing annual drug costs, on average, by
$1,600 per person for our customers. Even greater savings can be
achieved by customers who implement evidence-based utilization
management and other OptumRx clinical programs.
Increasing the number of generic and biosimilars alternatives to
branded drugs is key to increasing competition and lowering drug
prices. OptumRx urges action to increase the availability of
biosimilars and promote true competition. Specifically, Congress should
modernize the intellectual property system for the 21st century and
eliminate drug manufacturers' ability to manipulate the patent and
regulatory system and thereby prevent lower-cost generics and
biosimilars from reaching consumers more quickly. OptumRx applauds the
FDA's recent release of interchangeability guidance to promote
substitution of these products over expensive branded specialty
products. The FDA should adopt reforms to release biosimilars to the
market more quickly and to promote adoption by prescribers and
consumers. As has been successfully done in many therapeutic categories
outside of the U.S., these two measures have been proven to increase
competition in the market and lead to lower drug prices provided that
biosimilars are available and priced competitively, similar to generic
drugs. There are 51 approved biosimilars in Europe. To date, however,
in the U.S. the FDA has only approved 19 biosimilars, and of those only
seven have launched to market.
Not all biosimilars are less expensive products, but OptumRx
promotes the inclusion of those biosimilars that are less expensive and
drive lower net costs on its standard formularies, which can be adopted
by our customers. On our Premium formulary effective July 1, 2019, for
example, we prefer the Infliximab biosimilars Renflexis and Inflectra,
and exclude Remicade; we also prefer the biosimilar Zarzio, a
biosimilar that treats blood disorders, and exclude Amgen's biologic
Neupogen.
rebates vs. fees
Question. During the hearing, Senator Cassidy asked each of you
about the trend in PBM contracting where a larger share of your
reimbursement and payment is a result of ``fees'' which you are able to
pocket, as opposed to ``rebates'' which must be passed back to the
plan/consumer.
Please define the word ``rebate.'' As part of your definition,
please clarify whether or not you consider administrative fees,
inflation payments, product discounts, prospective rebates, care
management fees, procurement fees or any other type of fee or payment
that isn't a retrospective rebate to be a rebate.
Answer. The definition of ``rebate'' is negotiated and documented
in each customer agreement. Such negotiated definitions typically
either expressly include or exclude manufacturer administrative fees or
price protection guarantee amounts (i.e., inflation payments) paid by
drug manufacturers. They generally expressly exclude (i) any purchase
discounts or concessions related to the purchase of pharmaceutical
products to be dispensed by our pharmacies and (ii) fees paid by drug
manufacturers for services or other products we provide directly to
those drug manufacturers.
Question. Please provide, across your books of business (i.e.,
commercial, Medicare, Medicaid), a list of each of the different types
of rebates, charges, and/or fees that you incorporate into your
contracts.
Answer. The following discounts, fees, or other payments are
contemplated by the rebate agreements we have negotiated with drug
manufacturers on behalf of our payer customers: rebates or discounts;
price protection guarantee or inflation payments; and manufacturer
administrative fees.
No manufacturer administrative fees are billed or collected on
Medicare Part D, Medicaid Managed Care, CHIP, and QRPDP utilization.
Additionally, certain rebate agreements contemplate the drug
manufacturer reimbursing OptumRx for expenses incurred in notifying
health care providers and impacted consumers in the event of a
manufacturer drug recall (e.g., printing or postage costs) and payment
of interest penalties for late rebate payments.
Question. Rebates, by definition, must be passed along to the
employer, health plan, or consumer. Please provide, across your books
of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare, Medicaid), details on which of
the rebates/fees detailed in my prior question are passed along to the
consumer and/or plan and which are kept by the PBM.
Answer. For all customers, the definition of ``rebates,'' and any
rights we have to retain a portion of such rebates collected on behalf
of our customers as compensation for our services to such customer, is
negotiated and documented in each customer agreement. In some but not
all of our agreements, customers may require that the value of any
administrative fees paid by drug manufacturers to the PBMs for services
provided by the PBM to the drug manufacturers be passed through, just
like rebates, to the customer and/or directly to the member through
point-of-sale discounts. Based on our agreements with our customers,
our customers have chosen to receive approximately 98 percent of the
value of the discounts we negotiate from drug manufacturers. The
balance is used to compensate OptumRx for its services.
fiduciary duty
Question. Each of you have argued that you are the one entity in
the drug supply chain that exists to help lower the cost of
prescription drugs. You claim that your value comes in saving
taxpayers, plans, and consumers money.
Would you be willing to accept a fiduciary standard in your
contracts? In other words, do you believe you have a fiduciary duty to
the plan or employer you contract with--to act in their best interest
and not your own? If not, why not?
Answer. OptumRx operates in a highly competitive industry where we
must continually innovate, reduce the total cost of care, and improve
clinical care to win new business and retain existing customers. We
serve highly sophisticated customers that hold us accountable for
delivering results and the lowest net cost.
paying pharmacists
Question. Following a series of reports in The Columbus Dispatch,
Ohio has taken a number of actions over the past year to crack down on
several PBM practices. Efforts to date have included investigations,
lawsuits, and policy changes to address the egregious use of spread-
pricing, alleged breaches of contract, accusations of anti-competitive
behavior, a misuse of taxpayer dollars, and a general lack of
transparency.
PBMs are responsible for creating pharmacy networks, setting the
price patients and health plans pay for prescription drugs,
adjudicating claims, and reimbursing pharmacies for dispensed drugs. In
addition, nearly all PBMs own proprietary pharmacies that directly
compete with the PBM-created retail network. Do you design plans that
incentivize or require patients to use a pharmacy owned by your
affiliate over a competing retail pharmacy. If yes, do you believe this
represents a conflict of interest? If yes, how do you ensure there is
no resulting anticompetitive misuse of pharmacy and patient data?
Answer. OptumRx does not believe its ownership of affiliated
pharmacies creates a conflict of interest. Preferred network pharmacy
options deliver greater drug cost savings and value to plans and their
members through our pharmacy care services model that is integrated
with pharmacies that we operate. OptumRx discloses its ownership of
pharmacies to customers, and customers ultimately choose the pharmacy
network plan design that best meets their needs.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Michael F. Bennet
Question. Can you answer the following questions to help us
understand the pharmacy benefit manager business model and how you make
formulary decisions?
What percent of rebates are passed to the consumer under Medicare
Part D?
Answer. OptumRx shares with its customers approximately 98 percent
of the discounts it obtains from manufacturers based on the agreements
we have negotiated with our customers. We pass through an even greater
percentage of the discounts we negotiate with manufacturers to our
Medicare Part D plan customers. Part D plans in turn use those
discounts to help reduce premiums for consumers.
Question. What percent of rebates are passed to the consumer in the
private insurance market?
Answer. We have heeded the call for change by taking direct action
to ensure that the discounts we obtain directly lower consumers' out-
of-pocket costs at the pharmacy counter. Last year, we implemented a
point-of-sale discount solution at scale for fully insured group
customers so that consumers receive the benefit of discounts at the
pharmacy counter. This action has already made nearly 6 million
consumers eligible for point-of-sale discounts. Eligible consumers
filling prescriptions on discounted brand drugs are seeing average
savings of $130 per eligible prescription. We believe it can also
improve prescription drug adherence by as much as 16 percent. By the
end of 2019 we expect more than nine million consumers will be eligible
for these point-of-sale discounts. In March of this year, we announced
a decision to expand this point-of-sale discount solution to all new
employer-sponsored plans beginning in January 2020. This action means
real out-of-pocket savings for consumers at the pharmacy counter who
take brand drugs with discounts.
Question. Do you have any comments on how health plans should use
their share of the rebates to lower drug prices for patients with high
deductibles?
Answer. We encourage our customers to make negotiated prescription
drug discounts available at the point-of-sale, and indeed beginning
January 1, 2020, we will not write new employer-based coverage that
does not provide for point-of-sale discounts.
Question. What is the process of deciding on which tier a generic
will be placed in your formularies?
Answer. OptumRx manages pharmacy benefits on behalf of our
customers, including self-insured employer groups, fully insured health
plans, union funds, Medicare, Medicaid, and Federal and State
government employee plans. In that role, we promote use of clinically
effective, low net-cost prescription drugs for consumers when
medications are needed.
This work starts with an independent, clinically based formulary
design process. OptumRx's Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) committee is
comprised of independent physicians and pharmacists who evaluate
existing and emerging drugs based on scientific evidence and review and
appraise those drugs in an unbiased and evidence-based way. The P&T
committee meets regularly, and its deliberations are open and
transparent to OptumRx's customers and prospective customers.
A drug's cost plays no role in the P&T committee's clinical review.
Cost only becomes relevant after the P&T committee has identified drugs
in a particular therapeutic class that are clinically effective and
should be covered. If the P&T committee determines that more than one
drug in a particular class is clinically effective, OptumRx will
consider net cost--among other factors such as improving adherence,
product availability, market share, potential disruption to patients,
and negotiated price protection guarantees--when negotiating formulary
placement for that therapeutic category.
For approximately 90 percent of prescriptions processed, OptumRx
can identify a generic drug in a particular therapeutic class, and give
that drug preferred placement on its formulary over the more expensive
branded (or ``on-patent'') drug. If there is no generic product
available, there may still be other therapeutically equivalent branded
alternatives. If so, OptumRx negotiates with those competing brand
manufacturers to obtain discounts, and generally places the drugs that
drive the lowest overall net cost for the therapeutic category in a
preferred position on the formulary.
OptumRx has been effective in driving utilization of clinically
effective low-cost medications. OptumRx's negotiated network discounts
and clinical tools are reducing annual drug costs, on average, by
$1,600 per person for our customers. Even greater savings can be
achieved by customers who implement evidence-based utilization
management and other OptumRx clinical programs.
OptumRx also ensures that these cost-savings go to our customers.
Our customers receive approximately 98 percent of the value of the
discounts we negotiate from drug manufacturers. The application of
discounts is subject to audit and verification by an independent third-
party on behalf of any of our customers. In those limited instances in
which we retain some of the discount, it is because our customers have
chosen to pay us that way. Additionally, we have led the industry in
promoting point-of-sale discounts for consumers.
Question. Are generics always tiered as preferred (versus branded
drugs)?
Answer. For approximately 90 percent of prescriptions processed,
OptumRx can identify a low-cost generic drug in a particular
therapeutic class and give that drug preferred placement on its
formulary over a more expensive branded (or ``on-patent'') drug. There
are a small number of instances in which OptumRx may achieve a lower
net cost for its customers and consumers by preferring a branded drug
over its generic alternative. When that occurs, OptumRx works to ensure
that these cost-savings go to our customers. Our customers receive
approximately 98 percent of the value of the discounts we negotiate
from drug manufacturers.
Question. How quickly are generics placed on formularies once FDA
clears them?
Answer. Generics are generally added to our standard formularies
shortly after launch. Generics do not get reviewed by OptumRx's P&T
committee since the FDA's approval signifies that it has determined
that the generic has the same active ingredients as the brand and is
determined to be a bioequivalent of the brand. There are a small number
of instances in which OptumRx may achieve a lower net cost for its
customers and consumers by preferring a branded drug over its generic
alternative. When that occurs, OptumRx works to ensures that these
cost-savings go to our customers. Our customers receive approximately
98 percent of the value of the discounts we negotiate from drug
manufacturers.
Question. Given the struggles we hear about patients accessing
insulin, what measures are you taking to ensure that diabetes products
and different types of insulin are placed on a preferred tier when
establishing a formulary?
Answer. In large part because OptumRx has insulin on its High
Deductible Health Plan (HDHP) preventive drug list, and encourages its
customers to do the same, we have helped our customers keep Out-of-
Pocket (OOP) costs low for insulin products. Indeed, 76 percent of our
customers' enrollees who need insulin pay nothing at the pharmacy
counter, or pay only a fixed copay. Due to policy terms, including the
fact that insulin is on OptumRx's HDHP preventive drug list, the
average OOP cost for a 30-day supply of insulin is approximately $41
per month for our commercial plan and Medicare enrollees, which is less
than eight percent of the average list price for major insulin
products.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert P. Casey, Jr.
transparency, rebates, and spread pricing
Question. During the hearing, I asked an initial question on spread
pricing and wanted to follow up here. According to the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), total gross spending in 2017 on
prescription drugs was $154.9 billion in Medicare Part D, $30.4 billion
in Part B, and $67.6 billion in Medicaid.
One of the main challenges in lowering the price of prescription
drugs is that there is a disturbing lack of transparency all along the
supply chain, from research and development to what the patient is
expected to pay at the counter. Further, the out-of-pocket costs for
drugs varies greatly and unpredictably from patient to patient. That is
why Senate Special Committee on Aging Chairwoman Collins and I
introduced legislation that would codify the Drug Spending Dashboards
at the CMS. The dashboards provide cost and spending information for
drugs in the Medicaid, Medicare Part B, and Medicare Part D programs.
With regards to transparency in the prescription drug supply chain,
please provide answers to the following questions.
Is it the policy and practice of your company to negotiate with
drug manufacturers in good faith and obtain the best and lowest prices
possible for patients and American taxpayers?
Answer. Yes. We would not win new business or retain current
customers if we did not negotiate the best possible prices. PBMs are
the only entity in the supply chain working to drive down costs for
patients and American taxpayers.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company that
patients, providers, researchers, policymakers, and the American people
in general, know how taxpayer dollars are being spent in the Medicare
and Medicaid programs?
Answer. Yes.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company to disclose
how much a drug costs, broken down by manufacturer list price; rebate
paid by the manufacturer to you (the PBM); the amount reimbursed to
pharmacies by the PBM; and the amount insured and uninsured patients
pay out of pocket, before coupons, discounts, and other forms of
patient assistance offered at the point of sale?
If so, please provide useful and easily accessible links to where
policymakers and the public can find such information. If not, please
disclose how much each drug you work with clients to provide costs,
broken down by manufacturer list price; rebate paid by the manufacturer
to you (the PBM); the amount reimbursed to pharmacies by the PBM; and
the amount insured and uninsured patients pay out of pocket, before
coupons, discounts, and other forms of patient assistance offered at
the point of sale
Answer. OptumRx makes pricing and discount information available to
customers, and reimbursement and out-of-pocket information available to
pharmacies, subject to appropriate confidentiality provisions. At the
consumer level, OptumRx provides solutions to help consumers make
better decisions, including our MyScript Finder solution, which
provides members with easy to understand price and benefit
transparency. OptumRx shares approximately 98 percent of all discounts
it negotiates with its customers in accordance with the applicable
agreements. Pharmacy reimbursement figures vary widely based upon the
drugs at issue and applicable pharmacy network provisions. Dollars paid
via patient assistance programs such as discount cards and coupons are
often not known to OptumRx.
Question. Please provide a list of actions your company has taken
to ensure that pharmacists are enabled and allowed to communicate to
patients how they can pay the lowest out-of-pocket cost possible for
their prescription drugs.
Answer. OptumRx does not have gag clauses in pharmacy contracts
that prevent a pharmacist from communicating with patients how they can
pay the lowest out-of-pocket cost possible for their prescription
drugs. Our pharmacy contracts require pharmacies to accurately submit
their usual and customary cash prices to OptumRx. We use this
information when the claim is processed to help ensure the beneficiary
is paying the lowest cost at the pharmacy. OptumRx complies with the
``Patient Right to Know Drug Prices Act'' and the ``Know the Lowest
Price Act of 2018.''
______
Prepared Statement of Derica Rice, Executive Vice President,
CVS Health; and President, CVS Caremark
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to join you today.
My name is Derica Rice, and I am an executive vice president at CVS
Health and president of CVS Caremark. I joined CVS Health because I
believe in the company's vision of helping patients on their path to
better health. We want to make health care more accessible, more
affordable and improve health outcomes for the communities we serve.
We have long been at the forefront of putting our patients' health
first and improving the public health of our communities, through
company-wide initiatives such as removing tobacco from our stores and
waging a multi-front fight against the opioid epidemic. We provide
millions of dollars in charitable support to free clinics and community
health centers--the organizations reaching our Nation's most vulnerable
populations with the care that they need. And it is why, at CVS Health,
we decided to stop selling tobacco products more than 4 years ago--even
at the cost of $2 billion in annual sales revenue.
And our purpose--helping people on their path to better health--is
what drives us to provide more affordable, accessible, and effective
health care, and to deliver better health outcomes, at a lower cost.
Never has our work been more important than today. The rising cost of
health care and prescription drugs affects every household in this
Nation and are critical issues for consumers and policy makers. Our job
is to work with the employers, unions, and government programs we serve
to ensure that when their members get to the pharmacy counter, they get
medicines they need at the lowest possible cost. As drug prices
increase and consumers shoulder more of the burden, we believe we can,
and we must, do more to ensure affordable care.
In the spirit of our common goal of reducing health-care costs for
consumers and the overall system, I'm here today to share what we, as
CVS Caremark, are doing to directly reduce consumers' out-of-pocket
costs at the pharmacy counter, and to discuss polices that would help
further advance that agenda. Our goal as a pharmacy benefit manager
(PBM) is simple: to reduce costs and improve health outcomes. We do
this by negotiating discounts with manufacturers, designing formularies
that encourage the use of generics and biosimilars, and creating new
tools to help bring escalating drug prices under control.
Our work on behalf of our clients to deliver the lowest cost
medicines and the best possible outcomes helps them maintain a healthy
workforce at an affordable price. Over the last 3 years (2016-2018), we
have saved our clients $141 billion in drug costs. At the same time, in
2018 alone, 44 percent of our clients saw their net prescription drug
prices decline and 85 percent of our members utilizing their
prescription benefit spent less than $300 on their prescriptions.
Despite this, we recognize that consumers are often faced with
challenging out-of-pocket costs, so we at CVS Health continue to
develop solutions to help lower how much they spend on prescription
drugs. Manufacturers alone set the price of their medications. What we
do is create value for the employers, health plans and government
programs we serve in four key ways:
First, we negotiate the lowest cost possible on behalf of our
clients and foster competition among drug manufacturers when more than
one clinically equivalent drug is available.
Second, we encourage the use of generics and lower-cost biosimilars
because they are proven to improve adherence and outcomes, while also
lowering costs. Our research shows that use of generics actually
improves outcomes and saves lives, largely because they are more
affordable for patients and therefore increase patient adherence to
their medicines.
Third, we help reduce drug costs by providing physicians with
information that enables them to prescribe the most cost-effective and
clinically appropriate medications for their patients. That means
prescribers can see the actual cost of the drug to the member and up to
five potentially lower-cost options, and make informed decisions that
can help save their patients money. We have also made dramatic strides
in reducing the administrative burden for providers and patients by
broadening availability of electronic tools to help with prescription
management like mobile and online prescription scheduling and reminders
on refills.
Fourth, we have developed additional tools to help bring escalating
drug prices under control. We recently announced our Guaranteed Net
Cost pricing model, a new pricing option that provides our clients with
a guaranteed price for retail, mail and specialty drug products,
regardless of product or price inflation. This heightens our focus on
the lowest actual cost of the drug and under this model 100 percent of
the rebates are passed through.
Rebates are not secret or hidden payments to PBMs--our clients have
full visibility into the amount of the rebates we secure. Over ninety-
eight percent of these discounts are passed directly to plan sponsors,
who typically use them to reduce premiums and other costs for their
members.
Pharmaceutical manufacturers insist that drug price increases are
driven by rebates. This is simply not true. If that was the case,
rebates and list prices should be highly correlated. To the contrary,
data show that in many cases list prices are increasing faster for
drugs with smaller rebates than for medications with substantial
rebates.
We believe strongly that our PBM tools bring tremendous savings and
value to the clients we serve. We focus every day on delivering the
value our clients expect and easing the burden of high drug prices for
their members. To help consumers manage their out-of-pocket costs, we
were among the first to introduce rebates at the point-of-sale in the
commercial market, enabling our clients to pass along the value of
negotiated rebates on branded drugs to their members at the pharmacy
counter. Currently, almost 10 million of our clients' members are in
plans offering these savings.
Two years ago, the administration raised the idea of point-of-sale
rebates in the Medicare Part D program. Given our goal of keeping out-
of-pocket costs lower for American seniors, we were the first Medicare
Part D plan to offer point-of-sale rebates through our SilverScript
Allure plan--which leaves the choice to individual beneficiaries as to
what plan best serves their needs.
We have encouraged clients, particularly those who offer a high-
deductible health plan, to offer benefit plans similar to what we at
CVS Health provide our own employees. Our covered employees have point-
of-sale rebates while they are in the deductible phase, in addition to
zero-dollar copays for medications that prevent disease. This includes
not only generic medications that may prevent the onset of chronic
conditions but also some key brand drugs like insulin. We believe
point-of-sale rebates combined with a zero-dollar copay preventive drug
list are effective in reducing high out-of-pocket costs for members in
high deductible health plans and help increase adherence which improves
health outcomes and keeps costs down. At the end of the day, however,
we believe in the value of providing choices. A one-size-fits-all
approach that limits choice would not be appropriate for every health
plan and their beneficiaries.
For patients in high-deductible plans with a health savings
account, using a preventive drug list to make medications for common
chronic conditions available at a zero-dollar copay can lead to better
adherence and significant cost savings. As I mentioned, we take this
approach with our own employees. CVS Health fully pays for certain
drugs, including a number of generic medications, for its covered
employees and dependents under the preventive drug list even before
they meet their deductible. This has improved our generic dispensing
rate, reducing costs for both our employees and CVS Health.
As a health-care company, we place a high priority on preventive
care, and medication adherence is a key component of achieving better
health outcomes for patients. Our metrics for preventive drug regimens
for conditions such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, heart failure,
diabetes, asthma/COPD and depression show that health-care costs for
patients with these conditions are reduced when they take their
medications as prescribed. For example, for patients with congestive
heart failure, CVS Health found that they spend nearly $8,000 less per
year by adhering to their medication.
We continue to develop additional innovations to help bring
escalating drug prices and costs under control, especially for chronic
conditions.
CVS Health has taken a condition-specific approach through our
Transform Care programs to help manage chronic conditions effectively,
preventing wherever possible more serious adverse events, and improving
clinical outcomes, reducing hospitalizations, emergency care and
overall costs. We also have announced an initiative to improve chronic
kidney disease and dialysis. Not only are we creating new tools to
better identify and manage kidney disease, we are also working to
provide more home dialysis, which studies have shown leads to increased
satisfaction and better outcomes in appropriate patients.
And most recently, we opened our new HealthHUB locations to help
elevate the store into a convenient neighborhood health care
destination that brings easier access to better care at a lower cost.
With personalized support programs and MinuteClinic services, the
HealthHUB teams are focused on improving care for patients managing
chronic conditions, with a focus on recommending next best clinical
actions and driving medical cost savings. This concept combines the
best of today's CVS Pharmacy with the future of accessible, low-cost
health services and offers trusted advice.
In addition to developing these unique and innovative delivery
system reforms, we have launched patient-centered programs to help
consumers save money and increase price transparency across multiple
points of care, thus giving our members far greater access to more
affordable drugs.
As we've interacted with consumers, they have told us that they
want to know whether their drug is covered and what their out-of-pocket
costs are going to be. So, we now provide member-specific information
in the doctor's office, at the pharmacy counter and directly to
consumers on their phones and online. We call this real-time benefits.
That means prescribers can see the actual cost of the drug to the
member based on their current coverage, and up to five potentially
lower-cost options, enabling them to make informed decisions and help
patients save money while improving their care.
Real-time prescription benefits information is integrated directly
into the pharmacist's existing workflow, making it easy for them to
engage CVS Caremark members about potentially lower-cost alternatives,
based on the member's specific formulary coverage. Additionally, our
approximately 30,000 CVS pharmacists can use our proprietary search
tool, Rx Savings Finder, to quickly identify available savings
opportunities for customers.
And customers can use our app and online tool, which lets members
check and compare prescription drug prices on their computer, phone or
other devices. In addition to being able to request refills and view
their prescription history, members are able to use the app to see what
their out-of-pocket costs for a specific medication will be and find
lower-cost alternatives to talk about with their doctor or pharmacist.
More than 230,000 searches per month are conducted in this tool.
But as much as we have been able to accomplish, we also understand
that more must be done. Because of the rise of high deductible health
plans without adequate coverage for preventive drugs, consumers
sometimes do not see the benefit of the discounts PBMs negotiate from
manufacturers at the pharmacy counter, especially in their deductible
phase if they are enrolled in a plan without point-of-sale rebates.
As many of you noted in the last hearing, often there is limited to
no competition on drugs because of the myriad manipulative practices in
our patent system that prevent competition from coming to market and
restrict the FDA from advancing policies that can speed adoption of
biosimilars and generics. We support the FDA's focus on bringing more
lower-cost alternatives to market faster. We also support many of the
policies proposed by members of this committee, including the chairman
and Ranking Member Wyden, that would bring more competition to the
market, create more transparency, and limit out-of-pocket expenses for
seniors.
We have identified specific policy solutions that could lower drug
costs as Congress and the administration consider the range of
solutions and next steps.
First, we believe Medicare and Medicaid programs should be able to
utilize the full breadth of tools that are used in the private
marketplace, including for the plans that cover members of Congress and
Federal employees.
We also believe Congress should require the adoption of real-time
benefits to give doctors and patients transparency and information on
lower-cost options when the prescription is written.
We support transparency proposals, such as the one recently
introduced by a bipartisan group of Senators on this committee to make
the amount of rebates collected and passed through that is now shared
with CMS available to MedPAC and MACPAC as well.
We think Medicare should also encourage Part D providers to include
a point-of-sale rebate option in their plan bids. Point-of-sale rebate
plans do not make sense for everyone, which is why we oppose mandating
it for all plans. But it should be an available option for the seniors
who are facing higher drug costs, so they have the opportunity to
choose a point-of-sale rebate plan if it works for them.
We believe Congress should enact an out-of-pocket spending cap for
Medicare beneficiaries and change the reinsurance component of Medicare
Part D in keeping with what MedPAC has recommended.
Changing the rules governing health savings accounts, or HSAs, by
giving plans the ability to offer more coverage prior to the deductible
being met would make a big difference for consumers. Currently, plans
paired with HSAs are unable to offer first-dollar coverage of services
such as chronic condition management. Medications may only be covered
prior to the deductible being met if they are preventive, and the
government has taken a very limited position on what is considered
preventive.
We support policies, including legislation led by members of this
committee, to allow first-dollar coverage of all preventive
medications, as well as treatment for chronic disease. This one change
could immediately lower out-of-pocket costs for millions of Americans,
while saving the health care system billions of dollars by improving
medication adherence and preventing future costs.
We support increased access to generics and biosimilars.
Biosimilars have the potential to save the health system $54 billion
over 10 years, but we need more of them on the market. In the European
Union, 53 biosimilars have been approved, while only 17 have been
approved in the United States and most of them are not on the market.
We encourage the administration to finalize interchangeability guidance
to improve competition in the biologic market.
Additionally, we support efforts to address anti-competitive
behavior. CVS Health is a longstanding supporter of the CREATES Act,
and we thank Chairman Grassley for his leadership on this issue. The
CREATES Act would address cases where brand manufacturers abuse safety
protocols to keep generic and biosimilar competitors off the market.
We also support ending ``pay-for-delay,'' a tactic that allows
brand manufacturers to pay generic competitors to keep products off the
market and extend market exclusivity.
As you know, the Office of Inspector General at HHS recently
proposed a rule that would require any discount we negotiate for
Medicare Part D plans and Medicaid Managed Care Organizations to be
applied at the pharmacy counter, in effect, providing 100-percent
point-of-sale rebates. We fully support the administration's objectives
to lower drug prices and out-of-pocket costs for consumers. However, we
found that under the proposed rule, if finalized, approximately 15
percent of beneficiaries would benefit, approximately another 15
percent may benefit, and approximately 70 percent of beneficiaries
would have higher costs in increased premiums--increases that would be
higher than any savings they see at the pharmacy counter.
At a time when consumers want more choices, this rule mandates 100-
percent point-of-sale rebates as the only option. It might be right for
some patients, but it will raise health-care costs across the board
while only benefiting a small minority of patients. The question for
policymakers is whether the positives of such a system outweigh the
negatives. From our perspective, they do not.
Today, we pass along effectively 100 percent of the rebates to
Medicare Part D plans, which use them, in general, to lower plan
premiums, reducing costs for both beneficiaries and the government.
This is a tremendously successful program in not only providing a
needed benefit to seniors but keeping premium costs to beneficiaries
stable. The CMS actuaries indicate that the proposed rule would upend
this stability by increasing premiums by 19 percent initially and by 25
percent after the impacts have been fully incorporated into the plans'
costs. If these changes are implemented some seniors will either decide
to drop current Part D coverage or sign up for coverage only when they
are faced with high costs, thereby incurring a penalty.
If rebates are forced at point-of-sale only, it could also undercut
the negotiating power of PBMs to advocate for lower prices from the
drug manufacturers by making competitively sensitive discount
information widely available, therefore reducing manufacturer
willingness to provide deep, differentiated discounts. This will likely
lead to higher net drug prices.
Unfortunately, nothing in this proposal would require drug
manufacturers to lower drug prices by the rebate amounts that exist
today. In fact, the proposed rule provides drug manufacturers with two
windfalls. The CMS actuaries' analysis estimates that manufacturers
will keep 15 percent of the rebates they currently pass along as higher
net drug prices, and second, that manufacturers will pay as much as
$39.8 billion less over 10 years in lower discount payments in the
coverage gap of Part D.
While we oppose the proposed rule, CVS Health is proactively
working with pharmaceutical manufacturers to ensure that the potential
effects of this rule would not have a negative financial impact on Part
D plans and beneficiaries. In March 2019, we sent a letter to leading
drug companies asking them not to increase their net prices for
prescription drugs as a result of the rule, which could cause increases
in premiums and out-of-pockets costs for Part D beneficiaries.
We appreciate this committee's attention and work on the
challenging issue of drug pricing. And, Mr. Chairman, aligned with your
leadership, we continue to advocate for policies that foster
competition, lower consumer costs and restrain anti-competitive
behavior. We look forward to continuing to work with you and every
member of this committee.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to
answer any questions.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to Derica Rice
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
collection, use, and sharing of personal health information
Question. Consumers are becoming more and more concerned about the
data collection and sharing practices of companies. While these issues
have been most prevalent in the social media and tech industry,
companies in the pharmaceutical supply chain also have access to
tremendous amounts of sensitive, personal health information of the
individuals they serve. For example, the company Livongo partners with
CVS Caremark to provide low-cost or no-cost blood sugar meters to
diabetic patients. The meters are always ``connected'' to Livongo's
``Diabetes Response Specialists.'' As the company's website states,
``When readings are out of range, our Diabetes Response Specialists
call or text [the individual] within minutes.'' While these innovations
may be highly beneficial for individuals in managing their health, it's
also important for this committee to fully understand what types of
information is collected, how or why it's stored or shared, and for
what purposes PBMs themselves and other affiliated drug supply chain
participants (such as insurers) use the information.
Health information is extremely sensitive. It's the most personal
of all the information we share. So I want to know more about each of
your companies' data collection, sharing, and protection practices.
Does your company collect and store health information from the
end-users of the prescriptions you provide? For example, information or
records of a diabetic individual's blood sugar levels.
Answer. We do collect limited data on members' drug utilization and
outcomes in order to help our members manage their health. This can
include adherence data and other forms of patient tracking to ensure
that prescribed medicines are having their intended effects.
Question. Does your company make any treatment, cost, or coverage
decisions based on the health information you collect from an
individual?
Answer. We do not. We occasionally have prior authorization or step
therapy requirements that a patient must meet before being authorized
for costly medications, and we may retain that data.
Question. Does your company share health information with third
parties? And, if so, does your company profit from that sharing?
Answer. CVS Caremark does share information with business
associates in compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) and applicable State laws. We do not
monetize Personally Identifiable Health Information (PHI), but do
monetize some anonymized data similar to other companies that cannot be
used to identify or track individuals.
Question. Do you believe customers are fully aware of your
information collection and sharing practices?
Answer. We inform all CVS Caremark clients of our data collection
and sharing practices. Individual members have access to and receive
CVS Caremark's Notice of Privacy Practices. For CVS Caremark websites
and mobile applications, the applicable Privacy Policy is available to
all users.
impact of vertical integration between pbms and insurance companies
Question. The PBM industry has experienced significant
consolidation within the past 10 years, which has contributed to
concerns about the potential abuse of market power, barriers to market
entry, and exclusionary practices. In 2012, for example, Express
Scripts acquired Medco Health Solutions--a nearly $30 billion
transaction that merged two of the country's three largest PBMs.\1\
More recently, PBMs are also vertically integrating with insurers/
payers, reflected by the 2018 acquisitions of Express Scripts Holding
Co. (a PBM) by Cigna Corp. (a payer) and of Aetna Inc. (a payer) by CVS
Health Corp. As a result, the three largest PBMs are all vertically
integrated with insurance companies. According to a report from the
Kaiser Family Foundation, the two combined entities, along with
UnitedHealth and Humana, will cover 71 percent of all Medicare Part D
enrollees and 86 percent of stand-alone drug plan enrollees.\2\
Vertical integration can result in increased efficiencies and consumer
benefits. I can also, however, lead to higher barriers to entry for
competition, leading to further consolidation. FDA Commissioner Scott
Gottlieb recently warned that ``consolidation and market concentration
make the rebating and contracting schemes [of PBMs] all that more
pernicious. And the very complexity and opacity of these schemes help
to conceal their corrosion on our system--and their impact on
patients.''\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See ``FTC Closes Eight-Month Investigation of Express Scripts,
Inc.'s Proposed Acquisition of Pharmacy Benefits Manager Medco Health
Solutions, Inc.,'' Federal Trade Commission (April 2, 2012), available
at https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2012/04/ftc-closes-
eight-month-investigation-express-scripts-incs.
\2\ Juliette Cubanski, Anthony Damico, and Tricia Neuman,
``Medicare Part D in 2018: The Latest on Enrollment, Premiums, and Cost
Sharing'' (May 17, 2018), available at https://www.kff.org/medicare/
issue-brief/medicare-part-d-in-2018-the-latest-on-enrollment-premiums-
and-cost-sharing/.
\3\ FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb, M.D., ``Capturing the Benefits
of Competition for Patients'' (Mar. 7, 2018), available at https://
www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Speeches/ucm599833.htm.
I'd like to talk about consolidation, including the recent
integration of PBMs with insurance companies. Last year, I wrote to the
Justice Department on this issue. It's reported that the three largest
PBMs--who are before us today--now cover 71 percent of Medicare Part D
enrollees and 86 percent of stand-alone drug plan enrollees.\4\ Such
market power has raised concerns. FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said,
``the consolidation and market concentration make the rebating and
contracting schemes [of PBMs] all that more pernicious.''\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Juliette Cubanski, Anthony Damico, and Tricia Neuman,
``Medicare Part D in 2018: The Latest on Enrollment, Premiums, and Cost
Sharing'' (May 17, 2018), available at https://www.kff.org/medicare/
issue-brief/medicare-part-d-in-2018-the-latest-on-enrollment-premiums-
and-cost-sharing/.
\5\ FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb, M.D., ``Capturing the Benefits
of Competition for Patients'' (Mar. 7, 2018), available at https://
www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Speeches/ucm599833.htm.
I want to hear briefly from you on whether the PBM industry is
competitive. For example, are there high barriers to entry for new
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
competitors?
Answer. The PBM industry is an intensely competitive market which
has driven down prices for millions of Americans and for the
businesses, unions and government programs that PBMs serve. PBMs
compete against one another to obtain the lowest prices possible from
the drug manufacturers and promote access to generic drugs and
biosimilars which helps to keep costs down. In addition to providing
services on the client side, they also build competing pharmacy
networks and work to reduce wasteful spending, fraud and abuse within
the system. As a result, PBMs save money for patients on prescription
drug and related medical costs--an average of $941 annually. In fact,
the FTC has described the market in which PBMs operate as ``competitive
. . . characterized by numerous, vigorous competitors who are expanding
and winning business from traditional market leaders.'' A variety of
different PBMs offer businesses, labor, consumers and government a
variety of choices when considering options for best managing their
pharmacy benefit. HHS recently indicated that the estimate there are
approximately 60 PBMs currently operating in the United States.
Question. I'm also interested in what effect the most recent
consolidations of PBMs and insurers has had on the bottom line for the
government and consumer.
Do these arrangements result in a lower cost to the government--as
a payer--and the consumer? Please explain.
Answer. In terms of what the CVS Health acquisition of Aetna has
set out to do for the consumer experience, as a combined company we are
working to connect consumers with the powerful health resources of CVS
Health in communities across the country and Aetna's network of
providers to help remove barriers to high quality care. We are also
building a lasting relationship with consumers, making it easier for
consumers to access the information, resources and services they need
to achieve their best health.
We believe that access is a critical component of building a
simpler and more responsive and affordable health care experience for
consumers. We have already seen that new products and services
developed by the combined company are becoming available to the health
care marketplace, regardless of one's insurer, pharmacy benefit manager
(PBM) or pharmacy of choice. While we cannot speak to every transaction
in the health space, we believe that by fully integrating Aetna and CVS
Health, we can develop new ways to engage consumers in their total
health and wellness through personal contacts and deeper collaboration
with their primary care physicians. As a result, we expect patients
will benefit from earlier interventions and better-connected care,
leading to improved health outcomes and lower medical costs.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
manufacturer money
Question. What is the total dollar amount that you obtain from
pharmaceutical manufacturers in any form such as rebates, fees, etc.?
Answer. Through negotiations with drug manufacturers and other PBM
programs, from 2016-2018, CVS Caremark has saved its clients more than
$141 billion in pharmacy spend, including the delivery of $67 billion
in rebates to clients and their members. We pass through 100 percent of
rebates for Medicare and about 98 percent of rebates for clients in our
other lines of business.
Question. What is the total dollar amount that you remit to health
plans?
Answer. From 2016-2018, CVS Caremark has saved its clients more
than $141 billion in pharmacy spend, including the delivery of $67
billion in rebates to clients and their members. Over the last 3 years
we've kept drug price growth nearly flat, saving our clients and their
members more than $141 billion as a result of PBM management, a 30-
percent cost avoidance on pharmacy spend. Last year, 44 percent of our
clients saw a decline in their prescription drug prices. Our client
arrangements typically include additional fees for services that the
client asks us to provide, in particular, managing and improving
patient adherence since improving adherence to medication is one of the
best ways to manage chronic conditions and keep costs down. In 2018,
Caremark passed through $300 million to our clients in the form of
rebates.
biosimilars
Question. Managed Care Organizations are on record as widely
supportive of the potential of biosimilars. However, most MCOs have
continued to support originator brand products and have not preferred
and often excluded less expensive biosimilars. For example, most MCOs
have kept Remicade (a treatment for rheumatoid arthritis and other
diseases) as the preferred agent on their formularies, and in most
cases to the exclusion of its biosimilar, Infliximab.
Why do you tout support for biosimilars while, at the same time,
inhibiting adoption of these less expensive products?
Answer. We support the development of biosimilars, and believe they
are a critical piece of lowering drug costs for patients and our
clients. With regards to specific formulary decisions, we prefer
products that provide the lowest net cost for our clients. While a
biosimilar may have a lower list price, it is important that they
compete on total costs with the brand to create savings for patients
and plans.
Question. HHS may broaden the scope of its proposed rule and
eliminate rebates between Medicare Advantage plans and manufacturers
for Part B drugs.
Would this realign incentives to encourage preferred access for
lower-cost drugs, such as biosimilars?
Answer. We do not believe this would advantage biosimilars.
Eliminating rebates would not lower the net cost of the drug, and may,
in fact, increase drug costs.
Question. What changes can we recommend/make to help you prefer
lower-cost drugs, such as biosimilars, without rebates?
Answer. Creating an environment that allows for biosimilars to
provide a lower net cost than their competitors is critical. We
therefore urge you to focus on barriers to entry of biosimilars, such
as brand evergreening that make the development of generics and
biosimilars more costly. If it is less costly to bring a competitor to
market generics and biosimilars will have the flexibility to provide
larger discounts on their products.
Question. Why is there such a disparity in reimbursed pharmacy
prices for specialty generic drugs in Part D (e.g., Imatinib)? Does
ownership of specialty pharmacy influence your reimbursement decision?
Answer. Reimbursement for specific products varies by client based
on their contract with Caremark. However, CVS's ownership of our
specialty pharmacy does not influence our reimbursement decisions. All
plans in Part D use transparent pricing with their PBMs for pharmacy
reimbursement.
Question. I'm concerned with the recent trend of PBM's allowing
brand companies to ``pay for position'' on insurance formularies, which
results in seniors losing access to lower-cost generics and
biosimilars.
Do you ever exclude generic or biosimilar competitors from
formulary placement, or place these lower-cost drugs in higher cost-
sharing tiers that are generally reserved for non-preferred or brand
drugs?
Answer. We may exclude a generic or biosimilar if it is not the
lowest net cost product. This practice allows us to provide the lowest
costs to our clients and patients.
delays and denials in cancer treatment
Question. I have received stories of cancer patients facing delays
or denials for their treatment due to PBM actions. Data shows that
breast cancer patients who experienced a 3-month or more delay in
treatment had a 12-percent lower 5-year survival rate compared with
breast cancer patients with only a 0- to 3-month delay.
What percent of patients experience a 14-day or longer delay in
receiving an oral oncolytic prescribed by their oncologist?
Answer. Less than 3 percent of members experience a 14-day or
longer delay in receiving an oral oncolytic prescribed by their
oncologist.
Question. What are the primary reasons patients experience delays
or denials for their treatments?
Answer. Most frequently, members experience an initial denial of
coverage when a treatment is requested for a diagnosis for which the
treatment is not indicated in the labeling approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration and for which there is no support in the
recognized compendia and clinical practice guidelines (e.g., National
Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines) or when the
members' clinical characteristics do not meet the criteria or
guidelines for coverage of the requested treatment (e.g., no
confirmation of HER2-positive breast cancer). Members may also
experience a delay or denial when the initial request does not include
all of the required clinical information.
Question. What percent of determinations to delay or deny treatment
for cancer patients are made by an oncologist or healthcare
professional with oncology training?
Answer. Initial denials of coverage are based on coverage criteria
that have been reviewed by an oncologist or healthcare professional
with oncology training and approved by the CVS Caremark National
Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee. Generally, appeals of initial
denials are reviewed by an oncologist or healthcare professional with
oncology training.
Question. Why is a PBM-owned specialty pharmacy better qualified to
manage a cancer patient's adherence and side effects than a community
cancer clinic with a medically integrated pharmacy?
Answer. Cancer patients are managed by their treating physicians--
whether it's in a cancer clinic or elsewhere--and much of their
treatments are covered under the medical benefit and not the pharmacy
benefit. We think both entities provide services within their
expertise. Specialty pharmacies lead efforts to coordinate patient care
with physicians and other health professionals to avoid gaps in care
and assure that patients are receiving and taking the proper
medications. CVS Health helps make it easier for patients and their
providers to start and stay on specialty therapies. Our high-touch care
management offers patients embedded nurse support through CareTeam
Choice and a seamless patient experience across a continuum of care,
including convenient retail access and digital tools. This whole-
patient management goes beyond the specialty drug regimen to help
improve clinical outcomes while also helping to reduce total health-
care costs.
direct and indirect remuneration (dir) fees
Question. Many community-based cancer clinics have established
medically integrated pharmacies so patients can access their oral
chemotherapy prescriptions or other medications at the point-of-care.
These practices are often assessed large DIR which are based on certain
quality measures targeted toward primary care.
Shouldn't pharmacies be evaluated on the type of drug dispensed and
disease managed rather than a one-size fits all approach?
Does assessing large DIR fees on medically integrated pharmacies
drive patients to PBM-owned specialty pharmacies?
Answer. CVS Health believes that performance criteria should be
meaningful to the practice of retail pharmacy and actionable toward
meeting achievable goals.
Specialty pharmacies have a different set of measurements under our
pay-for-
performance program than retail pharmacies, and all specialty
pharmacies that participate in our networks, whether PBM-owned or not,
have equal opportunities to achieve their goals.
Question. According to CMS, from 2012 to 2017 PBMs imposed a 45,000
percent increase in the amount of DIR fees pharmacies had to pay PBMs
and PDPs under Part D, and revenues earned from these fees increased
225 percent per year during this period.\6\ I thought PDPs and PBMs
were supposed to pay pharmacies for dispensing drugs to patients. Why
do pharmacies have to pay DIR fees to PBMs at all?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ CMS Proposed Rule: Modernizing Part D and Medicare Advantage to
Lower Drug Prices and Reduce Out-of-Pocket Expenses, 83 Fed. Reg.
62152, 62174 (November 30, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Why are pharmacies forced to pay DIR and other fees to PBMs?
Answer. Spending under pharmacy pay-for-performance programs in
Medicare Part D are accounted for under the Direct and Indirect
Remuneration (DIR) form Part D plans have to submit to CMS. Given the
structure of Part D, fees paid by pharmacies to PBMs under pay-for-
performance are passed along to the PBM who then passes along the fees
to the Part D plan. The Part D plans use these fees to reduce premiums.
This is why the CMS actuaries indicated that accounting for these fees
at the point-of-sale would increase Federal spending by $16.6 billion
over 10 years and increase beneficiary premium costs by $5.7 billion
over 10 years. Pay-for-performance is used throughout Medicare
including for hospital, physician and Medicare Advantage payments. CVS
Health believes that pharmacy pay-for-
performance programs increase value for Medicare beneficiaries by
incentivizing pharmacies to improve performance and lower costs.
Question. According to CMS, PBMs justify DIR fees as adjustments to
improve quality. CMS also found that PBMs and PDPs withhold
substantially more in reductions in payments than as rewards paid to
pharmacies.\7\ Aren't so-called ``quality adjustments'' that'' collect
more for ``poor performance'' than they pay out for ``high
performance'' just another way for PBMs to collect even more money from
pharmacies?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Id. at 62174.
Why do PBMs collect more in quality payment adjustment than they
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
pay pharmacies under Part D?
Answer. PBMs do not collect more in quality payments than what they
pay pharmacies. Fees associated with pay-for-performance are a small
percentage of overall pharmacy reimbursement. Any pay-for-performance
fees paid by pharmacies are directly passed to Medicare Part D plan
sponsors who use them to lower beneficiary premiums.
formulary placement/generic tiering
Question. In 2011, 71 percent of generic drugs in Part D were on
the lowest tier designed for generics; by 2019, that number decreased
to only 14 percent of generics. According to an Avalere study, this
practice cost seniors $22 billion in higher out-of-pocket costs since
2015, costs that could have been avoided through the proper formulary
placement of lower-cost generics. This practice, known as ``paying for
position,'' allows brands to block uptake of lower-cost generics and
biosimilars, thereby unnecessarily increasing out-of-pocket costs for
seniors.
Do you ever exclude generic or biosimilar competitors from
formulary placement, or place these lower-cost drugs in higher cost-
sharing tiers that are generally reserved for non-preferred or brand
drugs? Do you ever consider portfolio or bundled rebates with brand
manufacturers?
Answer. We may exclude a generic or biosimilar if it is not the
lowest net cost product. This practice allows us to provide the lowest
costs to our clients and patients. We do not bundle rebates across
multiple products for a manufacturer.
Question. When you place generics on your formularies, do you place
that generic favorably to brand products--in other words, on generic-
only tiers?
Answer. We strive to place generics on the lowest possible tier
when they provide the lowest net cost. We place products in relation to
their higher-cost counterparts in a manner to provide savings to
patients and give them an economic incentive to choose lower-cost
options.
Question. When a generic becomes available, do you place it on your
formularies immediately?
Answer. The time frame for adding generic drugs to a formulary
varies depending on the type of plan and the plan sponsor's formulary
strategy. For CVS Caremark template formularies with an ``open''
formulary strategy, a generic drug may be added to the formulary as
soon as it becomes available in the market and is added to our
adjudication drug file. For template formularies with a ``closed''
formulary strategy, generally generic drugs will be reviewed soon after
their availability in the market. In most cases, a generic drug will be
added to the closed template formularies. However, a generic drug may
not be added to the closed template formularies when the net cost to
clients exceeds the net cost of the reference brand drug or other
alternatives in the same therapeutic class.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Thune
Question. You referenced legislation in your testimony that I've
worked on with Senator Carper to apply value-based insurance design to
high-deductible health plans for chronic disease management. If
enacted, how do you expect plans to utilize this tool and what will be
the impact on drug prices and health care spending more broadly?
Answer. We encourage Congress to enact proposals to allow high
deductible plans with a health savings account (HSA) more options at
providing first dollar drug coverage, especially for those with chronic
diseases. Currently, HSA rules allow employers to cover prescription
drugs at little or no cost under a preventative drug list--this
coverage is allowed outside the patient's deductible. However, once the
patient actually gets sick, the patient has to start paying for drugs
as part of the deductible in their high-deductible plan. CVS Health
supports the Chronic Disease Management Act (S. 2410, 115th Congress),
legislation led by Senator John Thune and Senator Tom Carper, which
would give high deductible health plans paired with HSAs the ability to
offer first dollar coverage for chronic disease management. If this
legislation was enacted, health plans will structure their benefits
differently, and we would foresee plans covering prescription drugs and
some health-care services before the deductible has been met. We
anticipate this could lower health care costs overall and improve
patient outcomes by ensuring access to care and medications for costly
chronic conditions.
Question. You've shared your ability to leverage technology such as
real-time benefit tools to help patients and providers understand drug
costs at the point of prescribing, as well as how technology can be
used to help identify opportunities to provide enhanced support and
medication management for enrollees. What policies can we consider to
incentivize greater uptake of these tools?
Answer. Caremark uses real-time benefits technology to provide
member-specific drug pricing information in the doctor's office, at the
pharmacy counter, and directly to patients through digital tools.
Prescribers using the tool have visibility into a patient's covered
benefits, where they are in their deductible phase, what they will pay
out of pocket for a specific drug, and any lower cost, clinically
appropriate alternatives. Through the Check Drug Cost Tool on the
Caremark member portal and app, patients are using this real-time
benefits information to identify savings. Medicare should drive the
adoption of real time benefits to give beneficiaries and physicians
meaningful, actionable transparency to lower costs. This can be done by
mandating that prescribers use e-prescribing and real-time benefit
tools, or otherwise incentivizing its use.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Richard Burr
Question. Pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) offer a variety of
contract designs to health insurance plans, allowing the insurer or
client to choose the best structure for their customers. During the
Finance Committee hearing on April 9, 2019, each witness stated that,
in the contracts structured to allow for the passthrough of rebate
dollars at the point of sale, PBMs do not keep any portion of the
rebate. If the PBM does not keep a portion of the rebate, what type of
revenue do PBMs receive from these contracts? What percent of your
contracts are point of sale and what percent utilize a structure
providing a percentage of the rebate back to the PBM?
Answer. We cover approximately 10 million lives in the commercial
sector with point-of-sale rebates, out of approximately 60 million
lives covered on the commercial side. In aggregate, we pass along 98
percent of our rebates to clients, and in Medicare Part D effectively
100 percent of the rebates are passed through. Overall, the vast
majority of our clients are receiving 100 percent of the rebates we
collect, and a small number compensate us by allowing us to retain a
portion of rebates. Clients that receive 100 percent of rebates
compensate us for our services in other ways, including per member per
month fees or the use of spread pricing.
Question. It is our understanding that contracts with
pharmaceutical manufacturers may also take a variety of forms. In
calendar years 2016, 2017 and 2018, what was the total dollar amount
that you obtained from pharmaceutical manufacturers in any form such as
rebates, fees, etc.? What is the total dollar amount that was passed on
to health insurance plans with which you have an agreement or contract?
Answer. Over the last 3 years, we've kept drug price growth nearly
flat, saving our clients and their members $142B as a result of PBM
management, a 30-percent cost avoidance on pharmacy spend. Last year,
44 percent of our clients saw a decline in their prescription drug
prices. Our client arrangements typically include additional fees for
services that the client asks us to provide, in particular, managing
and improving patient adherence since improving adherence to medication
is one of the best ways to manage chronic conditions and keep costs
down. In 2018, Caremark passed through $300 million to our clients.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Tim Scott
Question. One challenge that I see, when considering the medical
treatment marketplace, is that we have a new wave of life-saving
treatments--of incredible cures we could never have dreamed of, even 10
or 15 years ago--for which cost, by necessity, is going to be a major
issue. You look, for instance, at a condition like sickle cell disease.
For the average SCD patient who reaches age 45, lifetime treatment
costs are at roughly $1 million--and there are complications that can
make that figure even higher. Now that we see therapies coming down the
pipeline that could erase those long-term costs and drastically improve
the quality of life for sickle cell patients, the question becomes, how
can our current payment systems adapt to--and absorb--the high costs
necessary to bring treatments like these to market and to ensure that
we continue to see innovations like these ones moving forward?
Answer. We believe the best way to absorb the costs of treatment in
the system is by promoting competition to incent manufacturers to
continue to innovate and bring new treatments to market. Therefore, we
believe policies that would lower barriers to entry for generic and
biosimilars provide the best way to mitigate growing costs, and ensure
long-term innovation. These include eliminating gamesmanship of the FDA
REMS program, preventing brand manufacturer ``evergreening'' and
``product hopping,'' ending pay-for-delay settlements, and modernizing
the Orange and Purple Books. All of these improvements would prevent
brand manufacturers from artificially maintaining monopolies and lower-
costs long term.
Question. And along the same lines, beyond creating some much-
needed clarity around value-based arrangements--which I've been working
with Senators Cassidy and Warner to accomplish legislatively--are there
steps that Congress could take to facilitate these innovative payment
models?
Answer. Among the most cost-effective ways to improve health
outcomes that involve beneficiaries in their care is to improve
medication adherence and access to preventive care services. However,
current laws, such as the anti-kickback statute (AKS) and civil
monetary penalties (CMP) law, often inhibit these types of activities
because of their overly broad reach and severe penalties. As a result,
many patient engagement activities that could lead to better health,
including helping with medication adherence and health management, have
been unintentionally limited. To address this, Congress could allow for
broader CMP exceptions and corresponding AKS safe harbors that would
permit incentives for: (1) activities that prevent the exacerbation of
a current condition or illness by recognizing these as a form of
``preventive care,'' and (2) activities that promote compliance with a
treatment regimen by recognizing these as promoting access to care just
as do activities that improve a beneficiary's ability to obtain medical
items and services.
Question. I'm also interested in the role that technology can play
in helping to drive down drug costs--as well as to increase medication
adherence. Some estimates suggest that between 50 and 75 percent of
patients don't take their medications as prescribed, and that one in
five new prescriptions go unfilled. And study after study shows that
cost is a key factor here. As a consequence, we see roughly 125,000
deaths from non-adherence every year, along with more than $100 billion
in excess costs to the health-care system.
To what extent can technology help providers and patients to make
more informed and cost-effective choices about prescriptions--and to
then adhere to these prescriptions?
And maybe more to the point, to the extent that these technological
tools are out there, what steps are you and your clients taking to
encourage physicians and patients to use them?
Answer. Caremark uses real-time benefits technology to provide
member-specific drug pricing information in the doctor's office, at the
pharmacy counter, and directly to patients through digital tools.
Prescribers using the tool have visibility into a patient's covered
benefits, where they are in their deductible phase, what they will pay
out of pocket for a specific drug, and any lower cost, clinically-
appropriate alternatives. Through the Check Drug Cost Tool on the
Caremark member portal and app, patients are using this real-time
benefits information to identify savings. Medicare should drive the
adoption of real time benefits to give beneficiaries and physicians
meaningful, actionable transparency to lower costs. This can be done by
mandating that prescribers use e-prescribing and real-time benefit
tools, or otherwise incentivizing its use.
______
Questions Submitted By Hon. Bill Cassidy
Question. Are there ever cases where a patient in your health plan
or one of the health plans for whom you negotiate as a PBM pays more
for a medicine than the plan spends on a net basis, when you reimburse
the pharmacy for that same medicine? In those cases, what entity
receives the benefit of the difference between the amount the patient
pays and the net amount the plan pays?
Answer. Our contracts with all dispensing pharmacies in our network
require that CVS Caremark members always get the benefit of at least
the lower of the pharmacy's cash price and the plan's copay. If a CVS
Caremark plan member's copay for a drug is greater than the dispensing
pharmacy's contracted rate, it is not our practice to collect that
difference from the pharmacy.
Question. In calendar years 2015, 2016, and 2017, what percent of
your revenue was from fees paid by plans, fees paid by manufacturers,
other fees, pharmacy spread or rebates? Same question as to profits. Of
all revenue generated from part D contracts, what percent did you
retain?
Answer. We do not break down our revenue in this manner. Rather,
our financials are tracked by business sector--retail pharmacy,
pharmacy services, and health-care benefits. The PBM and Part D
businesses are a part of the pharmacy services segment, which also
includes mail and specialty pharmacies. Overall revenues in our
pharmacy services sector increased by 2.7 percent. The company's number
of pharmacy network claims processed increased 5.6 percent compared to
2017. But the comparable average revenue per pharmacy network claim
processed decreased by 2.7 percent during that same period.
Question. Should a patient ever pay more out of pocket for a
medicine than what you pay the pharmacy for that medicine?
Answer. Patient out-of-pocket costs are dictated by the insurance
plans. As a PBM, however, we do encourage our clients with high
deductible health plans to use point-of-sale rebates--and now cover
approximately 10 million lives under point-of-sale rebates. We also
encourage our clients to use a preventive drug list and cover many
drugs on that list at a zero copay as we do in our own health plan.
Moreover, we support expanding the ability of high deductible health
plans to offer first dollar coverage for certain drugs and chronic
conditions, and have worked with Congress and the administration to
advance a change to the rules around high deductible health plans and
health savings accounts.
Question. PBM revenue from fees has risen, illustrated below.
Further, PBM's retained revenue as a percent of net retail drug spend
has consistently increased. What do you attribute this increase to?
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.013
Answer. Over the last 3 years we've kept drug price growth nearly
flat, saving our clients and their members $142B as a result of PBM
management, a 30-percent cost avoidance on pharmacy spend. Last year,
44 percent of our clients saw a decline in their prescription drug
prices. Our client arrangements typically include additional fees for
services that the client asks us to provide, in particular, managing
and improving patient adherence since improving adherence to medication
is one of the best ways to manage chronic conditions and keep costs
down. In the Medicare space, we pass 100 percent of the rebates and any
administrative fees to our Part D plan clients.
Question. How are bona fide service fees established? What was your
revenue generated in part D by bona fide fees in 2015, 2016, and 2017?
Answer. PBMs provide services to the Part D plan sponsor for which
they are paid fees. Manufacturers have also historically paid a service
fee to PBMs for the provision of some or all of the following services:
calculating the amount of rebates payable for products dispensed to the
beneficiaries of each plan sponsor and invoicing the manufacturer for
rebates; providing the manufacturer with reports on product utilization
and rebate calculations; utilizing internal control measures to protect
against payment of unearned rebates, etc. In the Medicare space, we
pass 100 percent of the rebates and any administrative fees to our Part
D plan clients.
Question. A Health Affairs article suggests plans may prefer paying
PBMs using rebates instead of fees, as ``Using retained rebates to
cover PBM costs in lieu of fees could artificially lower reported
administrative costs and make it easier to meet government medical loss
ratio (MLR) requirements.'' Is it true that paying the PBM a percent of
rebates would keep that revenue from counting towards a plan's MLR?
Answer. Based on CMS guidance, this cannot happen. CMS requires all
retained rebates be reported as a reduction in drug spend and are
incorporated into the bid premium.
Question. Would you support an industry-wide standard set of
performance metrics by which a PBM would set its pharmacy contracts,
which would be tailored based on regional patient populations, to give
certainty for local pharmacies?
Answer. CVS Health supports a pay-for-performance pharmacy model
that allows pharmacies to execute using set performance criteria
aligned with Medicare Part D plans' objectives, such as meeting/
exceeding acceptable star ratings for drug adherence as set and agreed
upon by CMS each plan year (health outcomes focused), and also aligned
with benefit plan designs (cost containment focus). We believe such
measures should be actionable by the pharmacy.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Steve Daines
Question. In Medicare Part D, beneficiaries' deductible and
coinsurance payments are calculated based on the price negotiated
between the PBM and the pharmacy.
Does this take into account rebates and discounts the PBM
negotiates separately with pharmaceutical manufacturers?
If yes, what percentage of the time is this the case?
Answer. Other than CVS Health's current Allure plan option (where
some rebates are shared with beneficiaries directly at the pharmacy
counter), rebate dollars are used to reduce premiums in Part D rather
than to reduce deductibles and coinsurance payments.
Question. In calendar years 2016, 2017, and 2018, what share of
brand prescriptions covered by the Part D plans you contract with were
filled in the deductible or required beneficiaries to pay coinsurance?
What was the total amount beneficiaries spent out of pocket for those
prescriptions? What would beneficiaries' total out-of-pocket spending
have been under the same cost sharing structure if their payments were
based on the net price to the Part D plan, inclusive of rebates and
other price concessions, rather than the price negotiated between your
PBM and the pharmacy?
Answer. The Medicare Part D program has been successful in
providing beneficiaries with broad access to pharmacy services and
prescription drugs--all while keeping premiums low, customer
satisfaction high, and consistently operating under budget. We pass
along effectively 100 percent of rebates to Part D plan sponsors.
Research firm Oliver Wyman projected that over the next decade, PBM-
negotiated rebates will save the program more than $600 billion. While
the program is successful, CVS Health has proven to be a leader in
supporting comprehensive Part D reform, like what MedPAC has
recommended, particularly to address beneficiaries' out of pocket
spending. We recommend Congress evaluate the potential benefit of
shifting manufacturer liability to the catastrophic phase from the
current coverage gap discount phase. This will incentivize
manufacturers around their drug costs as they will face liability when
the beneficiary enters the catastrophic phase. We also believe Congress
should establish a true out-of-pocket cap to protect high cost
beneficiaries--similar to the protections afford by MA plans--and
increase plan liability in the catastrophic phase. This type of reform
would realign and improve incentives for plans and manufacturers while
simplifying the benefit structure. To maximize savings, it should be
done as part of a package that enhances PBM formulary tools.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
spread pricing in medicaid
Question. A PBM practice that has come up quite a bit recently is
the practice of spread pricing. Spread pricing occurs when PBMs charge
health plans more for prescription drugs than they actually reimburse
pharmacies, and then pocket the different as profit.
Do you engage in spread pricing practices?
If yes, do you engage in such practices in Medicaid? If so, please
list each State you operate in where you have a contract with a
Medicaid managed care plan where you employ spread pricing; list each
Medicaid managed care plan you have contracts with where you employ
spread pricing; describe whether and how you disclose the use of such
practices to the plans; describe whether you disclose such practices
directly to the State; and list any States where you have direct
contracts with the State Medicaid agency as a PBM for fee-for-service
individuals.
Answer. CVS Caremark contracts with 39 managed care organizations
(MCOs) to help manage Medicaid drug benefits across 35 States and the
District of Columbia. Our PBM does not contract with Medicaid MCOs in
States where all Medicaid benefits (medical and pharmacy) are managed
exclusively under the fee-for-service model, or in States where
Medicaid drug benefits are carved out of MCO coverage. CVS Caremark
does not currently choose to operate solely as a pharmacy benefits
administrator (PBA) for State fee-for-service programs, but could
potentially do so in the future.
While a majority of our Medicaid MCO contracts are ``pass-
through,'' where all PBM services and network costs are paid for
through an administrative fee, CVS Caremark may also contract with an
MCO using the traditional, or spread pricing methodology. ``Spread
pricing'' is simply the term used to describe the difference in pricing
from what a PBM is paid from its clients for claims for their enrollees
to what a PBM reimburses its contracted pharmacies for those claims--no
different than what any business pays its suppliers vs. what it is paid
by its end users. This compensation model is often requested by PBM
clients, including many of the commercial, employer and government
plans PBMs support, because it provides them with stability and
certainty around their drug costs. In its June 2018 report on MCOs and
PBMs operating in Medicaid, following a review of nearly 40 million
claims, the Ohio Department of Medicaid found that MCOs that were using
this traditional pricing model were saving the State $145 million
annually.
Clients, based on the region, State or population they serve, may
choose a distinct contracting model over another, or use a combination
of the two. In every case, the MCO always chooses the model as part of
the RFP and procurement process and dictates the level of pricing
transparency included in the contract, consistent with State and
Federal Medicaid contract and reporting requirements.
MCOs maintain the right to audit PBMs based on contract terms and
conditions, including pricing, and Medicaid MCOs and their
subcontractors, including PBMs, must also comply with State Medicaid
model contracting requirements as well as State and Federal Medicaid
disclosure and reporting requirements, including the 2016 Medicaid and
CHIP Managed Care Final Rule.
rebate demands
Question. The use of rebates as a negotiating tool has led to
problematic incentives in the prescription drug supply chain. For
example, drug companies have argued that they increase list prices in
response to demands from PBMs for high or increasing rebates.
Does your company currently have, or has your company had since
January 2013, any agreements with drug manufacturers that require
equivalent rebates, even in the case of a drug for which the list price
has been lowered?
Answer. No.
Question. Does your company currently have, or has your company had
since January 2013, any agreements with drug manufacturers that require
advance notice of changes in the list price of drugs, including
reductions or increases in list price?
Answer. No.
revenue sources
Question. Please provide an annual breakdown of the following
components of the revenue you received from drug manufacturers from
January 1, 2013 through December 31, 2018: dollar amount and percent of
revenue from rebates; dollar amount and percent of revenue from
administrative fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from
distribution fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from marketing
fees; dollar amount and percent of revenue from clinical case
management fees; and all other sources of revenue from manufacturers
not listed above.
Answer. Our financial disclosures are in Forms 10-Q and 10-K and
can be found on the CVS Health investor relations website (https://
investors.cvshealth.com/investors/sec-filings/default.aspx).
part d negotiation
Question. The PBM market has changed dramatically over the past
several years. Many Part D health plans also operate as PBMs, including
your companies. While Part D has done a great job offering Medicare
beneficiaries drug coverage they did not have access to before, Part D
has not been successful at keeping up with the growing cost of
medicines. PBMs and Part D plans claim they bargain to get lower
prices, but the HHS Inspector General found that almost 4 in 10 brand
name drugs in Part D offered no rebate or discount to Part D plans.
Why have Part D plans been ineffective at bringing down the cost of
almost half of brand-name medicines?
Answer. Pharmaceutical manufacturers set the price of their drugs.
Once they set the price, we negotiate to try to lower those costs. PBMs
are effective managers of drug costs and we kept our overall client
drug price growth trend in 2018 to 1.2 percent. A number of
restrictions on Part D plans contribute to findings of the HHS
Inspector General, including requirements that Medicare Part D plans
cover two drugs from every category or class, and that they cover all
or substantially drugs in the six protected classes.
The mandatory coverage of two drugs in each category or class has
negative effects on a PBM's ability to drive competition between drugs
to gain the largest discounts, and fundamentally undermines the
development of evidence-based formularies. The mandate overrides the
activities of Pharmacy and Therapeutic (P&T) Committees, which make
their own assessments on clinical appropriateness and therapeutic
alternatives. CMS requires Part D plans to have a robust P&T Committee
process in place and should rely on that system to determine the
appropriate medications to be placed on formulary. The protected class
policy increases net drug costs in the program, as it eliminates
manufacturers' incentives to offer discounts--thus removing any form of
price competition for these drugs. The tiering exceptions process also
drug manufacturers to work with physicians to degrade the effectiveness
of PBMs and Part D plans to control drug costs through effective
formulary management. In areas where Part D plans have formulary
flexibility similar to the commercial market, they drive savings
comparable to or even greater than what is done on the commercial side.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. Should the CREATES Act become law, what commitment can
your company making to covering generics as soon as they are approved
and passing those savings on to patients?
Answer. The CREATES Act would prohibit brand manufacturers from
abusing the FDA Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies Program and
other restrictive distribution schemes to delay generic development.
Currently brand manufacturers can use these tricks to keep generic
firms from acquiring the necessary samples to develop generics or
biosimilars. Passing the CREATES Act would get lower cost products to
the market faster and save patients money.
The time frame for adding generic drugs to a formulary varies
depending on the type of plan and the plan sponsor's formulary
strategy. For CVS Caremark template formularies with an ``open''
formulary strategy, a generic drug may be added to the formulary as
soon as it becomes available in the market and is added to our
adjudication drug file. For template formularies with a ``closed''
formulary strategy, generally generic drugs will be reviewed soon after
their availability in the market. In most cases, a generic drug will be
added to the closed template formularies. However, a generic drug may
not be added to the closed template formularies when the net cost to
clients exceeds the net cost of the reference brand drug or other
alternatives in the same therapeutic class.
Question. What are your concerns with point-of-sale rebates and
what alternatives do you propose to such rebates to improve consumer
savings at the pharmacy counter?
Answer. Caremark encourages our commercial clients to use point-of-
sale rebates, as CVS Health does in our own employee health plan. Our
Part D plan, SilverScript also offers a Part D plan with POS rebates
for 2019 (Allure, the only Part D plan sponsor with such an offering).
Caremark covers approximately 10 million lives under point-of-sale
rebates in its commercial business.
We believe that Part D plans should be required to offer a third
option that provides for partial point-of-sale rebates such as our
Allure plan, but this should be an option rather than a mandate. While
it may benefit some patients, it increases premium costs for all
beneficiaries. The unique structure of Part D does not make mandating
point-of-sale rebates the only option for a preferred policy choice.
Such a policy would only benefit approximately 15 to 30 percent of
beneficiaries while making 70 percent of beneficiaries worse off, raise
premiums by 20 to 30 percent, and cost the government close to $200
billion over 10 years in new spending.
Question. What are the specific steps your company is taking to
move PCSK9 inhibitors off the specialty tier in Medicare Part D and to
fixed copay tiers given that prices went down by 60 percent and are no
longer above the specialty tier threshold?
Why haven't your plans moved it already, given that CMS allows
plans to make positive mid-year formulary changes that improve patient
access and affordability?
Answer. CMS generally will not approve mid-year changes that will
cost the plan, and potentially CMS, money.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Benjamin L. Cardin
drug rebate rule and higher part d premiums
Question. In January, the Department of Health and Human Services
released a proposal to reform prescription drug rebates paid by
pharmaceutical manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers under
Medicare Part D. The OIG proposal attempts to ban most rebates by
eliminating their regulatory protections and creating two new safe
harbor provisions: one to expressly protect discounts applied directly
at the point-of-sale (POS) for consumers, and another to protect
certain service fees that manufacturers pay to PBMs for services
furnished to health plans. The only service fees that would be
permissible under the proposal are those that are fixed, and not based
on a percentage of sales and not based on volume or the value of other
business generated between the parties. The proposed rule was designed
to address the Department's concerns with the current rebate system,
which HHS believes rewards high list prices, discourages the use of
generics and biosimilars, and does not reflect patient out-of-pocket
costs. For consumers, this proposal may result in lower costs at the
pharmacy counter, but Part D premiums may increase as a result.
Could you explain which Part D beneficiaries could see savings on
their drug costs at the pharmacy counter and which Part D beneficiaries
could not see lower drug costs?
Answer. As the CMS actuaries point out in the preamble to the HHS
OIG rebate proposed rule, a majority of beneficiaries will face higher
costs under the proposal, as their premium increase will be greater
than any savings they see at the pharmacy counter. Our own estimates
indicate that 70 percent of beneficiaries will likely be financially
worse off if this proposal is adopted, only 15 percent of beneficiaries
would benefit, and another 15 percent may benefit. The beneficiaries
who would benefit are those who take expense drugs that have rebates,
the beneficiaries who would not benefit are those who are taking few to
now drugs, or taking drugs without rebates (such as generics and many
specialty medications).
perverse incentive to place more expensive drugs on formularies
Question. In a Senate Finance Committee hearing had a few weeks
ago, many pharmaceutical companies argued that the current rebate
structure incentivizes high list prices. These companies argue that the
higher the list price of the drug, the greater the rebates, and
therefore, the more profit the PBM earns. While contracts between PBMs,
Part D Plans, and pharmaceutical companies require PBMs to pass through
100 percent of the negotiated rebate back to insurance plans, I worry
that this structure could incentivize PBMs to favor a more expensive
drug on the formulary because they could get a higher rebate.
Is there an incentive for a PBM to place a higher cost drug on the
Part D formulary because the PBM receives a larger rebate for that more
expensive drug? Why or why not?
Answer. No, there is not an incentive because of the rebate. It is
not the size of the rebate that drives the decision making, but whether
the product has the lowest net cost for our clients.
six protected classes proposal and access
Question. This past November, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services released a proposed rule for 2020 to help tackle drug pricing.
Among the proposed changes is one, which would alter the current rules,
governing the ``six protected classes.'' The concept of the protected
classes has been around since the launch of the Medicare Part D
program, and it was instituted to ensure that some of our most
vulnerable patients would have access to their needed drugs by
requiring formularies to cover nearly all protected drugs. These
classes are anticonvulsants, antidepressants, antipsychotics,
immunosuppressants, antiretrovirals, and antineoplastics.
Some people have argued that these protected classes have led to
higher drug prices because formularies are required to include this
prescription coverage, and there are limited tools left to help lower
prices. In an effort to increase competition, this proposed new rule
would do a couple of different things. The first aspect of the
administration's proposal would allow Part D sponsors to implement
broader use of prior authorization and step therapy for protected class
drugs, including to determine use for protected class indications. Any
time there is a mention of plans using prior authorization or step
therapy there is an immediate concern of restricting patient access to
needed drugs or medical services.
Could you explain why your company would favor such utilization
management tools like step therapy or prior authorization?
Answer. Step therapy is a successful and clinically evidence-based
technique used by nearly all Medicare, Medicaid, self-insured
companies, and health insurance plans nationally. It is used by plans
to manage the utilization of drugs that are very high in cost. Pharmacy
benefit programs frequently implement a variety of guidelines and
programs that are designed to ensure that patients receive clinically
appropriate and cost-effective therapies. Sometimes this can involve
programs that promote a generic drug or lower-cost brand-name
alternative drug before higher cost non-preferred drugs are covered.
Without these programs in place, the cost of the benefit will increase
with no corresponding increase in quality.
Question. Do you believe there is a danger that using step therapy
or prior authorization could possibly restrict patients from having
access to medication that has been successful for them? Why or why not?
Answer. No, because exceptions policies are in place to allow
beneficiaries to receive needed drugs.
Question. If you were to use step therapy or prior authorization
for drugs in the six protected classes, how would you ensure patients
would continue to have access to their needed medications in one of the
six protected classes?
Answer. In most of the protected classes there are several
alternatives--for example, there is a wide variety of drugs in the
immunosuppressant class and numerous generics in the antidepressant and
antipsychotic classes. We believe Part D plans' Pharmacy and
Therapeutics (P&T) Committees are well-qualified and structured to
ensure that beneficiaries have an appropriate choice of drugs in these
classes on the plan's formulary. Furthermore, the current exceptions
processes would remain in place.
Question. The second aspect of the administration's proposed change
to the six protected classes is the proposal to allow drug coverage
formularies to exclude a protected class drug from a Part D formulary
if the drug represents a new formulation of a single-sourced drug,
regardless of whether the older formulation remains on the market. My
understanding is that this administration is trying to target
pharmaceutical companies who participate in the anticompetitive
practice of ``evergreening.'' This is a practice where pharmaceutical
companies make slight alterations to a drug's packaging, color, and
formulation without an added or new benefit. However, we also
understand that seemingly small changes to a drug can still make a big
difference to patient well-being. We have heard from Maryland
physicians that the creation of combination antiretroviral pills was a
huge step forward in the fight against HIV. Even though these
combination pills or extended release versions didn't have a new
chemical formula, they made a world of difference to the HIV patients
taking over a dozen pills a day. These vulnerable patients are
obviously very concerned that they could lose coverage for new and
better drugs, especially when their old drugs may no longer be
available. HIV treatments have come a long way in the last few decades,
and proper antiretroviral treatment is vital to ensuring an end to the
HIV epidemic.
Question. Do you think the proposed rule anticipates a situation
where a pharmaceutical company stops producing an older version of a
drug when a new formulation is available, but the newer formulation is
not covered by a Part D plan? Why or why not?
Answer. Brands will sometimes cease production of an older version
of a product in the interest of promoting a new formulation and
preventing uptake of impending generic competition for the old
formulation. This is commonly referred to as ``product hopping'' and
allows them to keep prices artificially high. In instances that you are
describing, if the newer product provides a genuine benefit to patients
we would work to get such products on formulary. Otherwise we would use
traditional utilization management tools to ensure patients have access
to the appropriate drugs.
Question. What would your company do to ensure that patients
continue to have access to their medication in this situation?
Answer. Transition fills are permitted in Part D for those
established on a therapy, and the exceptions process is always in place
for those who require an off-
formulary medication.
appeals process in general
Question. Another complaint that I have heard from physician groups
is that many formularies do not cover newer drugs that they consider to
be necessary for hard-to-treat diseases, even if the drugs are very
well-studied.
With technology changing so rapidly, how do your companies ensure
that you keep up with the medical and surgical experts and new
research, so that your authorization decisions are in line with the
most recent medical innovations and physician standards?
Answer. CVS Caremark has a National Pharmacy and Therapeutics
Committee (P&T) Committee that ensures the appropriate use of
utilization management tools, including step therapy and prior
authorization programs.
The CVS Caremark P&T Committee is an external advisory body of
experts from across the country, composed of 21 independent health care
professionals, including physicians and pharmacists, all of whom have
broad clinical backgrounds and/or academic expertise regarding
prescription drugs. Included in this committee is a physician who is a
medical ethicist that is responsible for assisting in the decision-
making process by facilitating the discussion, as needed, and to
provide unbiased feedback with respect to the logic and appropriateness
of the conclusions drawn and the decisions reached.
The committee meets face-to-face on a quarterly basis, and, as
needed, on an ad hoc basis. It is responsible for formulary
development, reviewing all existing standard formularies, and reviewing
and approving all utilization management criteria (i.e., prior
authorization, step therapy, etc.). It bases its decisions on
scientific evidence, standards of practice, peer-reviewed medical
literature, accepted clinical practice guidelines and other appropriate
information.
direct and indirect remuneration fees
Question. I have heard from independent pharmacies in Maryland that
have struggled with Pharmacy Benefit Managers and direct and indirect
remuneration (DIR) fees. According to independent pharmacies, there are
times when DIR fees are based on performance, and these fees range from
$2-$7 for certain types of maintenance prescriptions and are often
collected retroactively--weeks or even months after a prescription was
filled. A PBM can take money back from the pharmacy when the pharmacies
haven not met a PBM's performance standard. In these instances, the PBM
claws back money and creates a situation where the pharmacy does not
receive adequate reimbursement to cover its costs. As a result, DIR
fees can be a significant financial loss to pharmacies and an
additional cost burden to patients.
Could you explain what performance measures are considered when
determining a DIR fee?
How is that performance measure communicated to the pharmacy?
How much does your company receive in DIR fees?
How much does your company receive in performance-related DIR fees?
Are those fees passed on to the consumer? If so, how?
Answer. Our performance metrics address certain activities such as:
increasing patient participation in Medicare medication therapy
management consultations; comprehensive medication reviews; engaging
and reporting metrics related to diabetes disease management programs;
appropriately reducing high-risk medications in the senior population;
and actively engaging customer satisfaction and service programs.
Under Medicare Part D, financial flows that may be either positive
or negative that cannot be accurately approximated at the point-of-sale
are accounted for under Direct and Indirect Remuneration (DIR)
reporting to CMS. These amounts are factored into CMS's calculation of
final Medicare payments to Part D plans. CVS Caremark provides pharmacy
pay-for-performance metrics clearly in our contracts with pharmacies
and provides informational support to pharmacies to help them
understand the program and achieve their goals.
Pharmacy pay-for-performance fees accounted for under DIR are
directly passed to Medicare Part D plan sponsors who use them to lower
beneficiary premiums. This is why the CMS actuaries indicated that
accounting for these fees at the point-of-sale would increase Federal
spending by $16.6 billion over 10 years and increase beneficiary
premium costs by $5.7 billion over 10 years.
drug shortages
Question. Currently there are over 270 drugs in shortage. Drug
shortages happen for many reasons such as manufacturing and quality
problems, natural disasters, and inventory practices of wholesalers and
pharmacies. Drug shortages cause harm to providers, hospitals, and most
importantly patients. Pharmacists and providers must spend significant
amounts of time on researching alternative drug treatments for the
patient, which may not always be the most optimal therapies.
As a pharmacy benefit manager, you have contractual agreements with
pharmaceutical companies in order to place their drugs on a plan's
formulary. While I understand that drug shortages happening in both the
inpatient and outpatient settings, there may be a role PBMs can play in
protecting patients.
For the prescription drugs you negotiate to cover on a plan
formulary, could you use your negotiating power to ensure a drug is
available to a patient? Why or why not?
Answer. The PBM's role is strictly related to making the lowest
cost available to our plans.
Question. What do you do to ensure that patients have the drugs
they need?
Answer. As a broader enterprise, CVS Health is dedicated to using
its purchasing power to ensure a consistent supply of drugs for
patients across all of our health care entities, by negotiating with
multiple suppliers to protect against unpredictable manufacturing
interruptions.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown
biosimilars
Question. During the hearing, each of you expressed support for
biosimilars and most of you indicated you try and take advantage of
available biosimilars to help lower costs. When I asked each of you to
identify solutions to help ensure a robust biosimilar marketplace here
in the U.S., most of you mentioned things Congress or the
administration could do to help ensure uptake of biosimilars--from
lowering the exclusivity period for biologics to finalizing guidance on
interchangability at the FDA. However, none of you offered any
solutions or ideas for what your company could do to help ensure timely
uptake of biosimilars, a robust U.S. biosimilars market, and a
resulting cost savings to patients to taxpayers.
Most of the biosimilars currently approved and on the market in the
U.S. are reimbursed through the medical benefit. What are the
similarities and differences in how rebates are passed onto patients
and providers in the medical benefit versus pharmacy benefit. In your
answer, please describe these similarities and differences across each
of your books of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare, Medicaid).
Answer. CVS Caremark offers services to manage drug utilization
within the medical benefit for clients.
To the extent that rebates are paid for drug claims processed
through the medical benefit, they are treated in a similar fashion to
rebates paid for claims under the pharmacy benefit. That is 100 percent
of the rebates are passed through to some clients, and other clients
may allow us to retain some an agreed-upon portion of rebates as
compensation for our services. The client who determines how those
rebate dollars are used, often either to reduce premiums or to lower
costs at the point of sale.
As a result of a recent CMS rule that will allow in 2020 limited
use of step therapy in Medicare Advantage plans for Part B covered
drugs, medical rebates may become a consideration for MA plans.
Question. Do any of your plans require the use of a higher list
price, branded product over the use of a therapeutically equivalent
lower list price generic or biosimilar product? Why? If a plan
restricts the use of a biosimilar or generic product in lieu of an
innovator or brand name product, do patients pay more out of pocket
than they would if the biosimilar was preferred?
Answer. CVS Caremark offers services to manage drug utilization
within the medical benefit for clients. In these instances we use
similar strategies to those seen in the commercial benefit (patient and
physician education and communication, prior authorization, preferred
products, etc.). Similar to the pharmacy benefit, we prefer products to
target lower cost strategies for clients for each therapeutic class in
the context of clinical appropriateness and market factors. Rebates can
play a role to the extent that the lowest net cost product may provide
a rebate to the plan sponsor that reduces cost for the plan and
patients.
However, we believe a bigger driver of biosimilar adoption are the
incentives for providers that often lead them to higher-cost products,
such as the ASP+6 percent model in Medicare Part B that pays doctors
more for the use of high cost products with not penalty for forgoing
lower-cost, equally effective treatments.
Question. Recognizing most biosimilars are paid for via medical
benefit, please explain whether you use step-therapy to restrict access
to biosimilars for your patients in any medical benefit you manage
across each of your books of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare,
Medicaid). What role do rebates playing in your consideration for
patient access to biosimilars in each of these instances?
Answer. CVS Caremark offers services to manage drug utilization
within the medical benefit for clients. In these instances, we use
similar strategies to those seen in the commercial benefit (patient and
physician education and communication, prior authorization, preferred
products, etc.). Similar to the pharmacy benefit, we prefer products
that provide the lowest net cost for clients. Rebates can play a role
to the extent that the lowest net cost product may provide a rebate to
the plan sponsor that reduces cost for the plan and patients.
Question. How can and will your company help ensure a robust
biosimilars market here in the U.S.?
Answer. We continue to support the development of a robust
biosimilars marketplace. We support policies such as ending abuses of
FDA's REMS program, eliminating pay-for-delay settlements, and ending
patent ``evergreening'' to get competition to market faster.
Additionally, we will continue to aggressively negotiate on behalf of
our clients and their patients in order to get access to the lowest
net-cost therapies, which we believe will be biosimilars in the long
term.
Question. I have heard concerns that ``rebate walls'' are
responsible for keeping new biosimilars off of formularies, where a
manufacturer offers conditional rebates on a bundle of their products
in order to incentive PBMs to exclude a new biosimilar competitor from
their formularies. Have you ever decided to place a drug on a preferred
tier because of the rebates you receive for other drugs from that
manufacturer? If you do not do this, do you support this practice being
carried out by your competitors?
Answer. CVS Caremark does not negotiate with manufacturers to
obtain rebates that are bundled across multiple products. However,
insulin manufacturers have sometimes offered rebates for an insulin
product that would vary, in part, depending on the formulary coverage
of another insulin product produced by the same manufacturer. For
example, if two insulin products offered by a manufacturer were both
covered on a formulary, then the manufacturer might offer a higher
rebate amount than if only one of the products was covered on a
formulary. The rebate amounts applied would depend on the formulary
that a client chose to utilize.
Question. What more can and will you do to counteract efforts to
rebate-block or bundle rebates to block biosimilar formulary placement?
Will you commit to taking these actions as more biosimilars become
available in Part D?
Answer. We remain committed to biosimilars as an important tool in
reducing costs for our clients and their members. When engaged in
negotiations on competing products we remain committed to providing our
clients with the lowest net cost option, and believe that as more
biosimilars enter the market those negotiations will serve to lower
costs for clients and their members.
rebates vs. fees
Question. During the hearing, Senator Cassidy asked each of you
about the trend in PBM contracting where a larger share of your
reimbursement and payment is a result of ``fees'' which you are able to
pocket, as opposed to ``rebates'' which must be passed back to the
plan/consumer.
Please define the word ``rebate.'' As part of your definition,
please clarify whether or not you consider administrative fees,
inflation payments, product discounts, prospective rebates, care
management fees, procurement fees or any other type of fee or payment
that isn't a retrospective rebate to be a rebate.
Answer. Rebates are simply negotiated discounts off the
manufacturer selected list price of the product. The size or amount of
rebates is based on the formulary placement and plan design features
that are selected by the PBM client. We do include inflation payments
as part of ``rebates.'' Under rebate agreements, we may earn an
administrative fee from manufacturers for the services we provide to
them in connection with rebate billing, collection and distribution. In
the Medicare space, we pass 100 percent of the rebates and any
administrative fees to our Part D plan clients.
Question. Please provide, across your books of business (i.e.,
commercial, Medicare, Medicaid), a list of each of the different types
of rebates, charges, and/or fees that you incorporate into your
contracts.
Answer. Our contracts include formulary rebates, rebates that are
tied to drug inflation, and administrative fees, as are described in
question seven.
Question. Rebates, by definition, must be passed along to the
employer, health plan, or consumer. Please provide, across your books
of business (i.e., commercial, Medicare, Medicaid), details on which of
the rebates/fees detailed in my prior question are passed along to the
consumer and/or plan and which are kept by the PBM.
Answer. As mentioned in question seven, we pass 98 percent of
rebates along to plan sponsors, and at every level these rebates are
typically being used to reduce premium costs to benefit consumers in
accessing coverage. In Medicare Part D, we pass along effectively 100
percent.
fiduciary duty
Question. Each of you has argued that you are the one entity in the
drug supply chain that exists to help lower the cost of prescription
drugs. You claim that your value comes in saving taxpayers, plans, and
consumers money.
Would you be willing to accept a fiduciary standard in your
contracts? In other words, do you believe you have a fiduciary duty to
the plan or employer you contract with--to act in their best interest
and not your own? If not, why not?
Answer. CVS Health believes that including a fiduciary standard in
our contracts with our clients is inappropriate standard, would create
many challenges to creating an drug benefit, and would likely increase
costs for our clients. ERISA defines the term ``fiduciary'' as a person
who (i) exercises any discretionary control respecting management of
such plan or exercises any authority or control respecting management
or disposition of its assets or (ii) has any discretionary authority or
discretionary responsibility in the administration of such plan.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ 29 U.S.C. Sec. 1002(21)(A).
The U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that a person is a fiduciary for
an ERISA plan only ``to the extent'' a person has or exercises such
discretionary authority or control on behalf of a plan. Following this
decision, multiple Federal courts have ruled that the PBM was not
acting in a fiduciary capacity in managing its PBM-related services
(e.g., negotiating with drug manufacturers or retail pharmacies or
managing its formulary), but rather managing its own business which did
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
not involve the discretionary control of plan assets.
In light of this well-settled law, there are many concerns about
the effect that imposing a fiduciary duty on PBMs on behalf of the
ultimate payer would have on the PBMs' ability to negotiate drug
prices. Such a requirement may impact how PBMs interact with their
clients and their beneficiaries depending upon how the fiduciary duty
is defined, and who it applies to (sponsor or beneficiary). Overall,
imposing a fiduciary duty on a PBM would pose a challenge for payers
trying to control costs while the payer is providing a sustainable
benefit to their plan members in an era of rising launch prices for
drugs and ongoing, annual increases in drug prices.
The imposition of a fiduciary duty may reduce the flexibility that
a plan sponsor has with regards to structuring their financial
arrangement with their PBM and could lead to one-size-fits-all
solutions. There may be only one way of contracting that would meet the
definition of a fiduciary without some potential for incurring legal
liability. Additionally, it could restrict payers' ability to uniquely
design their benefit to meet their beneficiaries' specific needs while
implementing ways to provide cost savings, including formulary
preferences, exclusions, and utilization management techniques. There
is also the possibility that it would prevent payers from having their
PBM obtain better pricing from retail pharmacies through use of managed
networks. The reality of the marketplace is that one-size-fits-all plan
designs would not work for everyone because not all payers have the
same level of economic resources or the same size and type of patient
populations.
paying pharmacists
Question. Following a series of reports in The Columbus Dispatch,
Ohio has taken a number of actions over the past year to crack down on
several PBM practices. Efforts to date have included investigations,
lawsuits, and policy changes to address the egregious use of spread-
pricing, alleged breaches of contract, accusations of anti-competitive
behavior, a misuse of taxpayer dollars, and a general lack of
transparency.
PBMs are responsible for creating pharmacy networks, setting the
price patients and health plans pay for prescription drugs,
adjudicating claims, and reimbursing pharmacies for dispensed drugs. In
addition, nearly all PBMs own proprietary pharmacies that directly
compete with the PBM-created retail network. Do you design plans that
incentivize or require patients to use a pharmacy owned by your
affiliate over a competing retail pharmacy. If yes, do you believe this
represents a conflict of interest? If yes, how do you ensure there is
no resulting anticompetitive misuse of pharmacy and patient data?
Answer. CVS Caremark is the pharmacy benefit management (PBM)
business of CVS Health. As a PBM, CVS Caremark administers prescription
drug benefits for our clients who include large employers, health
plans, State government employee plans, and government payors (e.g.,
Medicare and Medicaid), and others. As a PBM, CVS Caremark also manages
the development and maintenance of a vast network of retail pharmacies
across the United States. We're proud of our extensive pharmacy
network, which has nearly 68,000 participating pharmacies, including
independently-owned, community-based pharmacies, other local pharmacies
in grocery stores and mass merchants, as well as regional and national
chains. The pharmacists serving our members are trusted health-care
providers and their interventions help patients take their medications
as directed by their physicians, ultimately improving outcomes and
managing overall health-care costs.
CVS Pharmacy is the retail pharmacy chain of CVS Health and is
probably the most recognizable part of the broader enterprise due to
our presence in 10,000 communities across the U.S. CVS Pharmacy is
focused on providing our customers with convenient access to their
medications as well as other products and services they need to stay
healthy. In addition, CVS Pharmacy participates in pharmacy networks
for health plans and PBMs other than CVS Caremark.
CVS Caremark also partners with pharmacies that directly compete
with CVS Pharmacy. For example, Caremark considers independently-owned
pharmacies to be important partners in creating the networks we offer
our PBM clients to ensure their members have convenient access to their
medications. Independent pharmacies account for about 40 percent of the
CVS Caremark's network of more than 68,000 pharmacies, and the number
of independent pharmacies in our network has remained consistent for
the past 25 years.
Question. After investigating the issues brought to light by The
Columbus Dispatch, Ohio's Medicaid report found that CVS Caremark often
paid CVS pharmacies substantially more than unaffiliated pharmacies for
the same generic drugs under the Medicaid program. An investigation by
the State legislature in Arkansas also found that CVS Caremark was
paying CVS pharmacies a significantly higher price for medications than
they were paying independent pharmacies. You have mentioned that there
is a firewall between the two sides of the company; however, the
results of the State's investigation seem to be less clear. How will
CVS Caremark ensure taxpayers that it isn't using their money to pay
its own stores more to drive competitors out of business in Medicaid or
the Part D program?
Answer. Since CVS Pharmacy and Caremark merged, CVS Health has
maintained stringent firewall protections between our CVS Pharmacy
retail business and our CVS Caremark PBM business. We take these
protections very seriously.
The question regarding whether an effective firewall exists between
CVS's retail and PBM businesses was fully reviewed by the Federal Trade
Commission. The FTC and Federal regulators were satisfied that the two
companies are indeed kept separate. The firewall has detailed and
elaborate privacy and security policies and procedures in place that
ensure that the protected health information (PHI) of each covered
entity (including each health plan) is only accessed and disclosed as
permitted by that covered entity and in accordance with the standards
set forth in the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) and its implementing regulations.
There are many safeguards in place to do this, technical, physical
and administrative as HIPAA requires, preventing the inappropriate
sharing of PHI between the PBM CVS/Caremark and CVS Health, and the
inappropriate use or sharing of PHI generally. The firewall also
prohibits CVS/Caremark from sharing other confidential and competitive
information, such as the reimbursement rates for its pharmacy networks,
with the CVS/pharmacy segment.
Further, a June 2018 report from the Ohio Department of Medicaid
found after a review of over 35 million Medicaid claims adjudicated by
CVS Caremark in 2017-2018 that there was no evidence of anti-
competitive behavior between the retail and PBM business units and that
CVS Caremark reimbursed independent pharmacies at a higher rate than
chains, including CVS Pharmacy.
As with any PBM, overall average reimbursement will vary based on
the mix of drugs being dispensed by a pharmacy. A pharmacy's drug mix
impacts the weighted volume of higher and lower discounted drugs being
dispensed, and therefore the overall average reimbursement levels
across a PBM's pharmacy provider network.
For example, a pharmacy dispensing a greater volume of drugs that
is more deeply discounted (e.g., certain generics) based on its patient
population's disease prevalence would have a reimbursement rate that
reflects its average discount.
setting drug prices
Question. All of you helped me establish a few basic facts during
the hearing on April 9th. First, we established that PBMs do not set
drug prices. Second, we established that nothing in the
administration's proposed rebate rule would require any PhRMA company
to lower the price any drug. And--in fact--no PhRMA company is willing
to commit to lowering the price of their drugs if this rule goes into
effect. We know this because of the answers to QFRs each of the PhRMA
representatives gave to Chairman Grassley and Ranking Member Wyden as a
follow-up to a prior Finance Committee hearing.
Following the administration's proposed rebate rule, CVS Caremark
wrote to several pharmaceutical manufacturers to ask them to commit to
not INCREASING their prices if the Trump rebate rule is finalized. Has
any manufacturer responded to your letter and made a commitment to
keeping their prices at or below where they are today?
Answer. The overwhelming majority of manufacturers who responded to
the survey could not agree without qualifications or caveats. A handful
of smaller pharmaceutical companies did commit.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Michael F. Bennet
Question. Can you answer the following questions to help us
understand the Pharmacy Benefit Manager business model and how you make
formulary decisions?
What percent of rebates are passed to the consumer under Medicare
Part D?
Answer. Effectively 100 percent of rebates are passed on to the
Part D plan sponsor, where they are used to lower premiums for
beneficiaries. This is why the CMS actuaries estimated that costs to
the government would increase by $196 billion over 10 years if rebates
are passed at the point of sale, and that beneficiary premiums would
ultimately increase by 25 percent.
Question. What percent of rebates are passed to the consumer in the
private insurance market?
Answer. In aggregate, we pass along 98 percent of all rebates to
our clients.
Question. Do you have any comments on how health plans should use
their share of the rebates to lower drug prices for patients with high
deductibles?
Answer. We encourage our commercial clients, especially those that
use high-
deductible plans, to use our point-of-sale (POS) rebate option to lower
drug costs at the pharmacy counter for their beneficiaries. CVS
Health's own health plan for our employees uses POS rebates, and across
all our clients we cover approximately 10 million lives under POS
rebates.
Question. What is the process of deciding on which tier a generic
will be placed in your formularies?
Answer. Tier placement for generic products varies depending on the
type of plan (e.g., Medicare, managed Medicaid, fully-insured, self-
funded, etc.) and the plan sponsor's formulary strategy. Generally, for
CVS Caremark template formularies, tier placement is guided by
established business rules appropriate for the type of plan and
formulary strategy. Often generic drugs will be placed on the lowest
cost sharing tier. In some instances, generic drugs may be placed on
higher tiers based on cost or clinical considerations. CVS Caremark
template formularies, including tier placement, are reviewed by the CVS
Caremark National Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee.
Question. Are generics always tiered as preferred (versus branded
drugs)?
Answer. No. In some instances, generics may be higher cost and we
look to provide the lowest net cost to our clients.
Question. How quickly are generics placed on formularies once FDA
clears them?
Answer. The time frame for adding generic drugs to a formulary
varies depending on the type of plan and the plan sponsor's formulary
strategy. For CVS Caremark template formularies with an ``open''
formulary strategy, a generic drug may be added to the formulary as
soon as it becomes available in the market and is added to our
adjudication drug file. For template formularies with a ``closed''
formulary strategy, generally generic drugs will be reviewed soon after
their availability in the market. In most cases, a generic drug will be
added to the closed template formularies. However, a generic drug may
not be added to the closed template formularies when the net cost to
clients exceeds the net cost of the reference brand drug or other
alternatives in the same therapeutic class.
Question. Given the struggles we hear about patients accessing
insulin, what measures are you taking to ensure that diabetes products
and different types of insulin are placed on a preferred tier when
establishing a formulary?
Answer. Although tier placement of particular products may vary by
formulary, all of the CVS Caremark template formularies include at
least one product of each type of insulin (rapid acting, short acting,
intermediate acting, long acting and mixes) on a preferred tier. We
also recognize that rising insulin prices are deeply concerning. Over
the last 3 years, we've see the list price for insulin increase 47
percent. Our job as a PBM is to help blunt the impact of these prices
increases for our clients. When possible we use competition in a drug
category to help drive down costs.
We also offer a clinical program called Transform Diabetes Care
that helps members better monitor and manage their diabetes between
doctor's visits. The program has helped members achieve and maintain a
1-point improvement in A1C over 12 months. To put this result into
perspective, every 1 percentage point improvement in A1C among patients
with uncontrolled diabetes is estimated to save $1,400 per member per
year in medical savings. Fifty percent of patients with uncontrolled
diabetes in the program were moved to controlled status.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert P. Casey, Jr.
transparency, rebates, and spread pricing
Question. During the hearing, I asked an initial question on spread
pricing and wanted to follow up here. According to the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), total gross spending in 2017 on
prescription drugs was $154.9 billion in Medicare Part D, $30.4 billion
in Part B, and $67.6 billion in Medicaid.
One of the main challenges in lowering the price of prescription
drugs is that there is a disturbing lack of transparency all along the
supply chain, from research and development to what the patient is
expected to pay at the counter. Further, the out-of-pocket costs for
drugs varies greatly and unpredictably from patient to patient. That is
why Senate Special Committee on Aging Chairwoman Collins and I
introduced legislation that would codify the Drug Spending Dashboards
at the CMS. The dashboards provide cost and spending information for
drugs in the Medicaid, Medicare Part B, and Medicare Part D
programs.\9\ With regards to transparency in the prescription drug
supply chain, please provide answers to the following questions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ S. 709, 116th Congres, Prescription Drug Pricing Dashboard Act.
Online at: https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/
709?q=%7B%22search%22%3A%22drug+dash
board%22%7D&s=1&r=1. Accessed April 23, 2019.
Is it the policy and practice of your company to negotiate with
drug manufacturers in good faith and obtain the best and lowest prices
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
possible for patients and American taxpayers?
Answer. Yes. Part D is highly competitive and incentivizes Part D
plans to get the best deals possible.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company that
patients, providers, researchers, policymakers, and the American people
in general, know how taxpayer dollars are being spent in the Medicare
and Medicaid programs?
Answer. Both Medicare Part D and Medicaid require extensive
reporting requirements that we comply with, that allow CMS to
understand how the program is working. CVS Health supports legislation
to give MedPAC and MACPAC access to appropriate data. Reporting to CMS
and health plan clients in Part D is very granular as it is done at the
NDC level.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company to disclose
how much a drug costs, broken down by manufacturer list price?
Answer. No, but it is tracked and reported in aggregate to CMS for
Part D plans.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company to disclose
how much a drug costs, broken down by rebate paid by the manufacturer
to you (the PBM)?
Answer. Yes, for Part D.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company to disclose
how much a drug costs, broken down by the amount reimbursed to
pharmacies by the PBM?
Answer. Yes, for Part D.
Question. Is it the policy and practice of your company to disclose
how much a drug costs, broken down by the amount insured and uninsured
patients pay out of pocket, before coupons, discounts, and other forms
of patient assistance offered at the point of sale?
Answer. Yes, for Part D.
Question. If so, please provide useful and easily accessible links
to where policymakers and the public can find such information. If not,
please disclose how for each drug you work with clients to provide
costs, broken down by manufacturer list price.
Answer. PBMs do not set the manufacturer list price. We negotiate
with manufacturers only after they have set the price. PBM
reimbursement to pharmacies is not based upon the manufacturer list
price either.
Question. If so, please provide useful and easily accessible links
to where policymakers and the public can find such information. If not,
please disclose how for each drug you work with clients to provide
costs, broken down by rebate paid by the manufacturer to you (the PBM);
the amount reimbursed to pharmacies by the PBM; and the amount insured
and uninsured patients pay out of pocket, before coupons, discounts,
and other forms of patient assistance offered at the point of sale.
Answer. The information in the questions above is provided to CMS
and health plans via the prescription drug events (PDE) reports and
Direct and Indirect Remuneration (DIR) reports in Medicare Part D.
These are reported retrospectively. The granular information is not
available to the public; however, the public can and extensively does
use the CMS Plan Finder tool. Plan finder details the members monthly
out-of-pocket costs for the specific drugs the member takes by month.
Plan finder pricing is updated every two weeks, so the public has
access to current pricing data. Furthermore, members get monthly
explanation of benefits statements detailing their out of pocket
spending.
Coupons and patient assistance programs are generally not allowed
in Medicare Part D. In any case, PBMs have no insight into those dollar
flows as they are done at the pharmacy counter outside the claim's
process. PBMs do not cover uninsured patients and do not have insight
to their pharmacy costs.
Question. Please provide a list of actions your company has taken
to ensure that pharmacists are enabled and allowed to communicate to
patients how they can pay the lowest out-of-pocket cost possible for
their prescription drugs.
Answer. CVS Caremark does not use so-called ``gag clauses,'' and
CVS Health supported Federal legislation to ban them.
______
Prepared Statement of Hon. Ron Wyden,
a U.S. Senator From Oregon
This morning, the Finance Committee continues our work on
pharmaceutical price-gouging, which does enormous harm to consumers and
taxpayers. There's a lot of work to do in the days ahead, but this
committee has already put points on the board. Just last week, Congress
passed our bipartisan legislation that stopped a blatant scheme big
pharmaceutical companies had used to rip off Medicaid and taxpayers.
This morning, the committee is joined by executives from several
pharmacy benefit managers. I see this hearing as a chance to examine
one of the most gnarled, confounding riddles in American health care
today. Pharmacy benefit managers are among the most profitable
companies in the Nation. What PBMs do to earn all those profits is a
mystery.
The deals they strike with drug makers and insurers are a mystery.
How much they're pocketing out of the rebates they negotiate is a
mystery. With Americans learning about schemes like ``spread pricing''
in Medicaid, whether PBMs bring any real value to taxpayers is a
mystery.
PBMs are supposed to be negotiators who get better deals on
prescription drugs for patients. What they are is middlemen who've
raked in profits while drug prices have shot into the stratosphere. And
as most people will tell you, there are already too many middlemen
taking a cut in the American health-care system.
Let's run through a little history and some basic facts with PBM
101. PBMs first showed up decades ago, back when prescription drugs
were becoming more common. They told insurers, ``We're the ones who
know drug pricing, so we'll handle the negotiations for you.'' But
there is scant evidence PBMs have held drug prices down in a meaningful
way. In fact, most of the evidence shows the opposite.
Pharmacy benefit managers make more money when they pick a higher-
priced drug over a lower-priced drug. The logic on this issue isn't
exactly graduate-level. PBM profits are based on taking their slice of
the prescription drug pie. More expensive drugs mean there's a bigger
pie. When there's a bigger pie, there's a bigger slice for PBMs.
Pharmacy benefit managers guard their operations with greater
secrecy than HBO is guarding the ending of ``Game of Thrones.'' There
has never been more outrage in America over the rising costs of
prescription drugs. If PBMs had clear, hard evidence proving that
they're getting patients a better deal on prescription drugs, they'd be
leafleting the countryside and shouting it from rooftops. Instead, they
work overtime to keep patients and taxpayers in the dark.
Today the committee will be told a thousand different versions of
the same talking point: ``We're all about getting the best possible
price for patients.'' But there won't be actual proof. Bottom line,
PBMs are middlemen who strike deals with drug makers in secret. In my
experience, that kind of negotiation rarely results in an act of
charity for consumers.
Now, because of this committee's special jurisdiction, I want to
look at a few specifics with respect to our Federal health-care
programs.
First on Medicaid: a PBM scheme known as ``spread pricing'' to rip
off taxpayers via Medicaid set off alarm bells in States nationwide.
It's got nothing to do with the cost of cream cheese. Here's how it
works. PBMs are paying one set price to pharmacies for a particular
drug, but they're turning around and charging Medicaid and other
health-care payers far more for that same prescription.
Chairman Grassley and I are digging into this. We've asked the
Health Department Inspector General to take a hard look. If there are
changes that can be made to clamp down on this exploitation of
Medicaid, I hope the committee will consider them. In my view, it's as
clear a middleman rip-off as you're going to find.
Now let's look at Medicare, where there are a few issues to
examine. First, Part D is one of the few health benefits in America
today that does not have an out-of-pocket cap. That means seniors with
catastrophic illnesses could be facing costs of thousands and thousands
of dollars. These are mostly people on fixed incomes, and growing old
in America is already too expensive. This is a flaw that needs to be
fixed, and I've proposed legislation to fix it.
Next, Medicare Part D encourages drug makers and PBMs to push
seniors onto more expensive drugs. That's because, after a certain
amount of spending on drugs, seniors and Medicare are on the hook for
85 percent of the costs. After that point, PBMs pay only 15 percent,
and drug makers are off the hook entirely. So it's good business for
the drug industry when seniors cross that threshold as fast as
possible.
Second, rebates are working against the seniors who need the
benefit most. Drug rebates in Part D get sent straight to insurance
companies. In theory, they use the rebates to lower premiums, which
sounds good if you're healthy. It's not such a great deal for seniors
who are battling illnesses. The amounts they pay for their
prescriptions are based on list prices, not on the prices factoring in
rebates.
That's why I introduced the C-THRU Act, so that patients can
finally see whether these rebates are worth that trade-off. If they
aren't, C-THRU makes sure that the benefit of the rebate goes directly
to seniors at the pharmacy window.
The administration has also proposed new rule changes having to do
with this issue. I'm concerned its solution could produce a windfall
for drug makers and that the administration is unprepared to take the
next steps that rein in drug makers and bring down list prices.
Very briefly in closing, I want to thank Chairman Grassley for
bringing this hearing together. I already mentioned the work he and I
are doing with respect to Medicaid and so-called spread pricing. He and
I are also working together to investigate the role PBMs played in
sending insulin prices through the roof. We sent detailed letters to
several of the witnesses here this morning. We're looking forward to
seeing their responses and the associated documents. And I'm also
looking forward to Q&A today.
______
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0919.006
______
From FiercePharma
UnitedHealthcare Demands Drug Rebates Even if
Pharma Cuts List Prices: Analyst
By Eric Sagonowsky
February 11, 2019
If drugmakers think they can save on rebates if they cut list prices as
politicians and public opinion are demanding--well, forget it, says
UnitedHealthcare, which sent new demands to pharma companies, an
analyst wrote.
The insurance and pharmacy benefits giant is demanding long notices
ahead of any drug price cuts, according to the letter, which two
drugmakers confirmed to Bernstein analyst Ronny Gal. And
UnitedHealthcare expects equivalent rebates whenever list prices are
cut, the analyst wrote in a Friday note to investors.
The news comes as drug companies look to price reductions as a new
strategy to fight high rebates and gain goodwill with lawmakers and the
Trump administration. On Monday, Sanofi announced that it is cutting
its Praluent price by 60%, following Amgen's move to chop Repatha's
list price by the same percentage. The PCSK9 cholesterol drugs are
among many that have a large ``gross-to-net'' price gap, or high list
prices--and high rebates and discounts paid out to the supply chain.
Lowering list prices means smaller costs for patients, but the strategy
would also mean lower revenues for PBMs.
UnitedHealthcare asked for seven quarters' notice--a full 21 months--
when companies intend to lower prices, Gal wrote. The ``drug companies
are not too happy about'' the UnitedHealthcare letter, he added, as
many are considering price reductions.
Gal published another note Monday with UnitedHealthcare's response. The
insurance giant's investor relations team reached out to the analyst
and said they believed the original report on the letter was
misleading. For one, UnitedHealthcare's OptumRx sent the letters in
late December and early January, before the administration's recent
rebate proposal, Gal wrote, adding that they relate only to rebates in
Medicare Part D.
The company explained that Part D contracts ``are done on an annual
basis and must be submitted to CMS six months ahead of coming into
effect,'' Gal wrote. UnitedHealthcare needs the time to calculate drug
cost structures, Gal wrote, summarizing the discussion. And on
maintaining rebates, UnitedHealthcare told the analyst patient premiums
would rise with lower rebates.
An OptumRx spokesman told FiercePharma the company in April 2018 ``led
the way in providing prescription drug discounts at the point of sale
for millions of consumers and OptumRx negotiates with pharmaceutical
manufacturers every day to reduce the prices they charge, including
list prices.''
``Our goal in asking for advance notice of price changes in the lengthy
Part D bid process is to achieve greater transparency and
predictability in consumer premiums and out-of-pocket costs,'' he said.
Plus, the company ``passes the vast majority of Medicare Part D rebates
back to health plans, so our negotiations regarding rebates have
virtually no impact on our bottom line.''
Drug rebates and high list prices have come under growing fire, and the
Trump administration recently unveiled a plan to shake up pricing in
Medicare Part D and Medicaid. The plan involves outlawing rebates and
instead allowing discounts for patients and fee-for-service deals for
PBMs. The PBM industry pushed back, but pharma companies support the
idea. Quickly after rolling out the plan, HHS secretary Alex Azar
called on Congress to extend the proposal to commercial markets.
The letters have not been made public; Gal wrote that he heard of its
existence through conversations with pharma executives.
The new Trump plan is only one out of many in a heated debate over
pricing in recent years. Last week, five pharma CEOs and a top
executive at Johnson & Johnson agreed to testify at an upcoming Senate
committee hearing on drug prices.
Meanwhile, at least one drugmaker is taking a different tack to lower
costs for patients. Gilead Sciences, facing huge rebates in hepatitis
C, previously unveiled a plan to launch authorized generics to its big-
selling drugs Epclusa and Harvoni, rather than cut list prices.
Communications
----------
American Pharmacists Association
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and Members of the Committee,
the American Pharmacists Association (APhA) is pleased to submit the
following Statement for the Record for the U.S. Senate Finance
Committee Hearing ``Drug Pricing in America: A Prescription for Change,
Part III.''
APhA, founded in 1852 as the American Pharmaceutical Association,
represents nearly 60,000 pharmacists, pharmaceutical scientists,
student pharmacists, pharmacy technicians, and others interested in
improving medication use and advancing patient care. APhA members
provide care in all practice settings, including community pharmacies,
physicians' offices, hospitals, long-term care facilities, specialty
pharmacy, community health centers, managed care organizations, hospice
settings and the uniformed services.
Both Congress and the Administration have pointed out ongoing
pharmaceutical benefit manager (PBM) practices in the Medicare program
negatively impacting patient costs, care and access. Additional
proposals from the Administration have emphasized PBMs operate in a
consolidated, opaque space and pose a barrier to pharmaceutical
companies lowering their prices \1\ and spend a significant amount of
effort trying to rectify the negative impact certain PBM practices have
had on patients and pharmacies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ HHS. American Patients First--The Trump Administration
Blueprint to Lower Drug Prices and Reduce Out-of-Pocket Costs. May
2018, available at: https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/
AmericanPatientsFirst.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Build Off a Good Start
APhA appreciates the strong bipartisan support of the Committee for
recent legislation signed into law that prohibits PBMs' use of so-
called pharmacist ``gag clauses'' in Medicare and private health plans,
to support the flow of information between pharmacists and their
patients. These laws increase patients' access to more affordable and
cost-effective medicines by empowering pharmacists to inform patients
that a medication may be less expensive if purchased at the ``cash
price,'' rather than through their insurance plan. For years,
pharmacists have been frustrated by their inability to help their
patients who they knew were struggling with high co-
payments. APhA also looks forward to working with the Committee to
lower patients' out-of-pocket costs.
Similarly, APhA hopes the Committee will build off these bipartisan
results to pass legislation prohibiting Medicare Part D plan sponsors/
PBMs from retroactively reducing payment on clean claims submitted by
pharmacies which would, in turn, increase transparency in drug pricing,
decrease beneficiaries' out-of-pocket costs and Medicare catastrophic
coverage costs.
Address Retroactive DIR Fees
In 2018, APhA's House of Delegates passed a resolution stating ``APhA
opposes retroactive direct and indirect remuneration (DIR) fees and
supports initiatives to prohibit such fees on pharmacies.''\2\ APhA has
long had policy supporting the pharmaceutical industry's adoption of a
``transparent pricing'' system which would eliminate hidden discounts,
free goods, and other subtle economic devices,\3\ like rebates between
manufacturers and PBMs. As recognized by the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS), certain PBM practices, can result in higher
prices at point-of-sale and consequently, higher beneficiary copays.
DIR fees were originally designed to capture rebates and other
mechanisms not included at the point-of-sale. However, DIR fees by PBMs
are now being used beyond their original purpose to retroactively
adjust pharmacies' payment months after the sale, sometimes below the
price paid by the pharmacy. As stated by CMS in the November 2017
proposed Medicare Part D rule, ``[b]etween 2010 and 2015, the amount of
all forms of price concessions received by Part D sponsors and their
PBMs increased nearly 24 percent per year, about twice as fast as total
Part D gross drug costs, according to the cost and price concession
data Part D sponsors submitted to CMS for payment purposes.''\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ APhA. House of Delegates. Current Adopted Policy Statements
1963-2018. (JAPhA 58(4):356 July/August 2018). Pg. 115. Available at:
https://media.pharmacist.com/hod/APhA_Policy_
and_Procedures_2018.pdf.
\3\ APhA. House of Delegates. Current Adopted Policy Statements
1963-2018 (JAPhA NS8:362 July 1968) (JAPhA NS44(5):551 September/
October 2004) (Reviewed 2006) (Reviewed 2011) (Reviewed 2016). Pg. 31.
Available at: https://www.pharmacist.com/sites/default/files/files/
16898%20CURRENT%20ADOPTED%20POLICY%20MANUAL%20-%20FINAL.pdf.
\4\ CMS. Medicare Program; Contract Year 2019 Policy and Technical
Changes to the Medicare Advantage, Medicare Cost Plan, Medicare Fee-
for-Service, the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Programs, and the
PACE Program. Proposed Rule. November 28, 2017. Available at: https://
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2017/11/28/2017-25068/medicare-
program-contract-year-2019-policy-and-technical-changes-to-the-
medicare-advantage-medicare.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Retroactive DIR Fees Increase Costs for Pharmacies and Patients
There is simply no connection between price concessions given by
manufacturers to PBMs and the prices paid by pharmacies to their
wholesalers. Thus, DIR fees ``recovered'' from pharmacies by PBMs are
totally illogical (i.e., recovering money from pharmacies that
pharmacies did not ``receive'' in the first place). Because current
point-of-sale prices or copays paid by beneficiaries can be based on
the contracted price before DIR is extracted, many beneficiaries
actually pay higher out-of-pocket costs. CMS has cited numerous
research that further suggest higher cost sharing can impede
beneficiary access to necessary medications, which leads to poorer
health outcomes and higher medical care costs for beneficiaries and
Medicare. Therefore, APhA strongly urges the Committee to prohibit
PBMs' use of such fees as part of their payment methodology for
pharmacies.
Retroactive DIR Fees Increase Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Costs
As you know, Medicare-enrolled seniors pay pharmacies a copay for
medications, while the full price of the drug is credited against the
patient's coverage limit. The PBM administering Medicare's prescription
benefit decides to use retroactive DIR fees to take back a portion of
the pharmacy's reimbursement for the actual costs of the patient's
medication, often causing pharmacies to ultimately dispense a
medication below cost, which jeopardizes maintenance of patient access.
In addition, the original higher price--not the DIR adjusted price--is
still counted against the patient, pushing them more quickly into
Medicare's ``doughnut hole'' coverage gap in which they become
responsible for a much greater portion of their prescription costs.
Even after the coverage gap closes in 2020, the use of DIR fees
significantly increases costs as these patients enter Medicare's
catastrophic coverage phase, in which taxpayers are now on the hook for
80% of each patient's health care expenses.
Focus on Patient Care Services: Pharmacists Stand Ready to Help
APhA continues to remind HHS when developing mechanisms to lower drug
costs to separately consider the reimbursement of the product cost,
which is fixed for pharmacists, from the cost of dispensing and any
related patient care service or performance incentive payment to
provide adequate reimbursement under a business sustainable model that
improves and does not disrupt our nation's pharmacy distribution
system. Unfortunately, the current system still fails to provide a
specific payment incentive for pharmacies to provide needed patient
care services. A situation the Committee could remedy by passing
legislation enabling beneficiaries to access pharmacist-provided
patient care services under Medicare Part B. Last year, 56 Senators
signed onto S. 109, the Pharmacy and Medically Underserved Areas
Enhancement, a bill that enjoyed the support of many members of the
Finance Committee. Such legislation would help improve health outcomes,
increase quality, reduce costs and consequently, increase the viability
and longevity of the Medicare program. In addition, this legislation
aligns with team-based and cost effective health care by facilitating
opportunities for early intervention so as to minimize long term health
care costs, such as those associated with preventable higher-cost
conditions. Providing coverage for patient care services by
pharmacists, the medication expert on the health care team, would be a
major step forward in making sure medications are appropriate and
taken/ used correctly which would begin to address the $672 billion
spent annually on medication-related problems and nonoptimized
medication therapy, including nonadherence,\5\ and maximize the federal
government's significant investment in Medicare patients' medications.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Watanabe , Jonathan H. et al. Cost of Prescription Drug-Related
Morbidity and Mortality. Annals of Pharmacology. First published March
26, 2018. Available at: http://journals.
sagepub.com/eprint/ic2iH2maTdI5zfN5iUay/full.
APhA would like to thank the Committee for continuing to work with us
and other pharmacy stakeholders to increase transparency of PBM
practices for pharmacies and patients. We appreciate your ongoing
leadership addressing the barriers to innovation which continue to
increase America's rising health care costs. Please contact Alicia
Kerry J. Mica, Senior Lobbyist, at [emailprotected] or by phone to
(202) 429-7507 to arrange a meeting with us to discuss the many
services pharmacists provide to improve patient care, outcomes and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
reduce costs.
______
American Society of Clinical Oncology
2318 Mill Road, Suite 800
Alexandria, VA 22314
T: 571-483-1300
F: 571-366-9530
www.asco.org
April 9, 2019
The Honorable Chuck Grassley
Chair
U.S. Senate
Committee on Finance
Washington, DC 20510
The Honorable Ron Wyden
Ranking Member
U.S. Senate
Committee on Finance
Washington, DC 20510
Dear Chairman Grassley and Ranking Member Wyden,
The American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) appreciates the
committee's ongoing efforts to examine prescription drug pricing and
consider solutions to lower costs for patients. ASCO shares your
concern about the rising cost of prescription drugs and stands ready to
work with you on real solutions that address the affordability of
cancer drugs.
ASCO is the national organization representing more than 45,000
physicians and other health care professionals specializing in cancer
treatment, diagnosis, and prevention. We are committed to ensuring that
evidence-based practices for the treatment of cancer are available to
all Americans.
As the committee continues its ``Drug Pricing in America: A
Prescription for Change'' series of hearings with today's hearing
focused on pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs), ASCO offers for your
review the ``ASCO Position Statement: Pharmacy Benefit Managers and
Their Impact on Cancer Care.''
We hear serious concerns from our members about the negative effects of
certain PBM practices on patients and the cancer care system. These
include errors in filling prescriptions, treatment doses being altered
without consultation with oncology care providers, duplicate patient
copays due to incomplete dispensing, and drug waste resulting from
incorrect doses or treatments being sent directly to a patient's home.
ASCO members also express frustration with utilization management
techniques used by PBMs, especially prior authorization and step
therapy. ASCO's ``Policy Statement on the Impact of Utilization
Management Policies for Cancer Drug Therapies'' goes into further
detail on ASCO's recommendations around prior authorization and step
therapy.
If you have questions on any issue involving the care of individuals
with cancer or would like to be directed to ASCO's thoughts on a
specific issue related to drug pricing, please contact Jennifer
Brunelle at [emailprotected]
Sincerely,
Monica M. Bertagnolli, M.D., FACS, FASCO
President, American Society of Clinical Oncology
______
American Society of Clinical Oncology Position Statement:
Pharmacy Benefit Managers and Their Impact on Cancer Care
Introduction
Cancer drugs are a critical component of treatment for many cancer
types as well as for the prevention and control of symptoms. They also
represent an increasing component of cancer care cost. Prescription
drugs now account for 10% to 17% of national healthcare
spending.\1\, \2\ Spending on cancer drugs in the United
States has increased substantially over the last 5 years, from $28
billion in 2013 to $51 billion in 2017, and is expected to continue
this upward trend.\3\ The arrival of new, more expensive prescription
drugs has contributed to this increase, a trend that is likely to
continue. ASCO has weighed in on the rising cost of cancer care several
times, including position statements on the affordability of cancer
drugs and utilization management.\4\, \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Sood N, Shih T, Van Nuys K, Goldman D. The Flow of Money
Through the Pharmaceutical Distribution System. USC Shaeffer--Leanord
D. Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics. June 2017, http://
healthpolicy.usc.edu/documents/USC%20Schaeffer_Flow%20of%20
Money_2017.pdf.
\2\ National Academy of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine. 2017.
Making Medicines Affordable: A National Imperative. Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press, https://doi.org/10.17226/24946.
\3\ IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics. Medicines Use and
Spending in the U.S. April 2018, https://www.iqvia.com/-/media/iqvia/
pdfs/institute-reports/medicine-use-and-spending-in-the-us-a-review-of-
2017-and-outlook-to-2022.pdf.
\4\ American Society of Clinical Oncology. American Society of
Clinical Oncology position statement on addressing the affordability of
cancer drugs. J Oncol Pract 14(3): 187-192, 2017.
\5\ American Society of Clinical Oncology. American Society of
Clinical Oncology policy statement on the impact of utilization
management policies for cancer drug therapies. J Oncol Pract 13:758-
762, 2017.
With cancer care costs rising, new strategies have emerged in the
public and private sectors to curb spending while also aiming to
preserve and improve quality. One such strategy is utilization of
pharmacy benefit manager companies (PBMs), third-party administrators
of prescription drug programs used by a variety of sponsors including
commercial health plans, self-insured employer plans, Medicare Part D
plans, the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program, and others. The
PBM industry has grown exponentially since its inception in the 1980s
and has become highly concentrated. The three largest PBMs (Express
Scripts, OptumRx, and CVS Caremark) collect more than $200 billion a
year to manage prescription services for 266 million Americans in both
public and private plans. They cover 85% of the market.\6\
Additionally, each of these PBMs own a specialty pharmacy company.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ National Academy of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine. 2017.
Making Medicines Affordable: A National Imperative. Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press. Available at https://doi.org/10.17226/24946.
PBMs were originally created to serve as third-party administrators of
pharmacy claims, but now leverage their market power to obtain lower
prices on drugs. Employers and other plan sponsors also use PBMs to
outsource the complicated work of designing and maintaining formularies
to those with more specialized expertise. Although PBMs have the
potential to generate cost savings for payers and plan sponsors, it is
not clear those savings necessarily accrue to patients.\7\ Stakeholders
have been challenged in achieving detailed understanding of this issue
because of the proprietary and confidential environment in which PBMs
operate.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Robert Goldberg. Drug Costs Driven by Rebates. Center for
Medicine in the Public Interest, http://bionj.org/wp-content/uploads/
2015/11/drug-costs-driven-by-rebates.pdf.
\8\ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Medicare Part D--
Direct and Indirect Remuneration (DIR). 2017, https://www.cms.gov/
newsroom/mediareleasedatabase/fact-sheets/2017-fact-sheet-items/2017-
01-19-2.html.
ASCO members and others in the oncology community have also shared
experiences and voiced concerns about a potentially negative role PBMs
can have on patient care. Members of ASCO's State Affiliate Council and
other ASCO members have expressed concern that, while employing certain
cost containing practices, PBMs may in some cases be interfering with
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the doctor-patient relationship and lowering the quality of care.
As the leading organization for physicians and oncology professionals
caring for people with cancer, ASCO is committed to promoting access to
high quality, high value cancer care. Given the enormous leverage PBMs
have over the delivery of cancer care--and in view of concerns raised
by leaders of state hematology oncology societies across the country--
the ASCO Board of Directors has placed a priority on understanding and
addressing the role of PBMs in oncology and its effect on patient care.
The purpose of this ASCO Position Statement is to provide a summary of
issues our members have raised about the role of PBMs in oncology, to
share questions that have surfaced about PBM practices and their impact
on physicians and patients, to assert ASCO's immediate position on key
issues, and to highlight areas of concern the Society plans to explore
more deeply as part of a focused policy effort.
The recommendations put forth in this statement are as follows:

PBMs and the payers with whom they work for should take
immediate steps to address quality of care concerns related to the
cancer patients they serve, including assuring that changes to
prescribed therapy for patients with cancer are made only in the
context of prior consultation and approval of their physician.

Pharmacies should not be prevented from sharing with patients
their most cost-effective option for purchasing needed medications
(i.e., gag clauses). To this end, CMS should eliminate contractual
requirements that prevent pharmacists from sharing with patients their
most cost-effective option for purchasing required medications.

CMS should leverage its regulatory authority to: (1) require
that PBMs provide detailed accounting of DIR fees, and (2) instruct
contractors and PBMs to discontinue application of current Star
performance ratings and related DIR claw backs on oncology dispensing
physicians and practice-based pharmacies, instead relying on measures
and standards that are more appropriate to the specialty.

CMS should enforce its ``Any Willing Provider'' provision in
Medicare Part D, preventing PBMs from excluding qualified in-office
dispensing or provider led pharmacies from its networks.

CMS should consider extending use of the JW modifier to better
identify sources and cost of waste related to chemotherapy drugs in
both Part B and Part D. Such data should be made public. Private payers
should consider similar strategies.

Pharmacy and Therapeutics committees should include full and
meaningful participation by oncology specialists.
PBMs and Cancer Care: Overview of the Issues
PBMs are responsible for developing and managing prescription drug
benefits in the public and private insurance sectors. Their role
includes processing prescription drug claims and negotiating contracts
with pharmacies and pharmaceutical manufacturers. The expansion of
prescription drug benefits, particularly with implementation of
Medicare Part D, has created a higher demand for management and
administration of prescription drugs for health plans, employers, and
government entities (referred to in this statement collectively as
``plan sponsors''). PBMs also own and operate specialty and mail-order
pharmacies.
Because PBMs now participate in plans that cover so many lives, they
naturally have significant influence over the way patients access their
medications.\9\ Recently two major PBMs announced plans to merge with
large insurers. Pending approval by the federal government, CVS Health
is set to acquire Aetna Inc. and Cigna is set to acquire Express
Scripts. If approved, this will lead to greater market integration and
an ever-increasing role of PBMs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ PBM DIR Fees Costing Medicare and Beneficiaries: Investigative
White Paper on Background, Cost Impact, and Legal Issues. Prepared by
Frier Levitt, LLC. Commissioned by the Community Oncology Alliance.
January 2017.
As for-profit companies, PBMs generate revenue in various ways from
pharmaceutical manufacturers, pharmacies and plan sponsors. PBMs obtain
revenue from pharmaceutical manufacturers in the form of rebate
payments for ``preferred'' formulary status, which results in increased
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
market-share by encouraging utilization of the drugs chosen.
Negotiated contracts defining reimbursement to pharmacy network
providers (including chain and community pharmacies, physician
dispensers and physician practices with on-site pharmacies) also serve
as a source of revenue for PBMs. The ``spread'' or price difference
generated by what is charged to plan sponsors and reimbursed to
pharmacies for the same prescription has resulted in significant
revenue for PBMs.
From plan sponsors, PBMs generate revenue through contracts for
administration of prescription drug benefits within the health plans.
PBMs charge administration and service fees to plan sponsors for
processing prescriptions, creating and managing formularies, and
processing claims. These are often managed separately from the rest of
an employer's health plan.
PBMs assert there is no link between drug price growth and the rebates
they are receiving.\10\ The lack of transparency around rebate
arrangements prevents verification of such claims. Regardless, the
impact of PBMs on oncology care providers and patient quality of care
is increasingly apparent. The American Medical Association (AMA) has
adopted Resolution 225-A-18 which asks the AMA to assess the impact
PBMs have on patient's timely access to medications, patient outcomes,
and the ``erosion of physician-led medication therapy management.''
\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Pharmaceutical Care Management Association. No Correlation
Between Increasing Drug Prices and Manufacturer Rebates in Major Drug
Categories, https://www.pcmanet.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Visante-
Study-on-Prices-vs.-Rebates-By-Category-FINAL-3.pdf.
\11\ American Medical Association. House of Delegates Resolution
225-A-18, https://policysearch.ama-assn.org/policyfinder/detail/
pharmacy%20benefit%20manager?uri=%2FAMA
Doc%2Fdirectives.xml-D-120.933.xml
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Role of PBMs in Utilization Management
As PBMs have grown, so have their restrictions and requirements on
pharmacies, providers and patients. ASCO previously identified concerns
about certain utilization management practices, the burden they often
represent to both physicians and patients, and their potential to erode
access and quality of care.These include: (i) prior authorization
requirements, (ii) restrictive formularies, (iii) step therapy (fail-
first) requirements, and (iv) specialty tiers.\12\ While PBMs are more
of an intermediary or agent for payers, ASCO's concerns about--and
opposition to--certain utilization management practices also apply to
PBMs that employ these same policies. ASCO members have reported that
some patients have had their medication or dosage changed by PBMs
without prior approval by--or consultation with--the treating
physician. They have also reported increasing administrative burdens
that require additional staff and resources--solely to navigate prior
authorization requirements and patient financial assistance programs.
The issue has drawn attention across the medical community: the
American Medical Association (AMA) has identified this as a priority
and has issued prior authorization and utilization management
principles, which broadly align with ASCO's recommendations.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ American Society of Clinical Oncology. American Society of
Clinical Oncology policy statement on the impact of utilization
management policies for cancer drug therapies. J Oncol Pract 13:758-
762, 2017.
\13\ American Medical Association. 2016. Prior Authorization and
Utilization Management Reform Principles, https://www.ama-assn.org/
sites/default/files/media-browser/principles-with-signatory-page-for-
slsc.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Restricted Networks and Distribution
ASCO has previously stated its concerns about payer policies that
require oncologists to administer chemotherapy agents that have been
prepared outside the physician's office by an entity under contract
with the payer (so called ``brown bagging'' and ``white bagging'').\14\
``Brown bagging'' refers to arrangements in which the drug is purchased
through a specialty pharmacy and shipped directly to the patient; the
patient then takes the drug to the physician's office for
administration. ``White bagging'' refers to arrangements in which the
drug is purchased through a specialty pharmacy and shipped to the
provider's office for administration. ``Brown bagging'' is especially
concerning, as there is little control over how hazardous or unstable
medications are stored and handled prior to administration in the
physician's office. Concerns about ``white bagging'' and ``brown
bagging'' carry the same concerns about medication access and quality
whether they are used by payers or PBMs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ American Society of Clinical Oncology. ``Brown Bagging'' and
``White Bagging'' of Chemotherapy Drugs. 2016, https://www.asco.org/
sites/new-www.asco.org/files/content-files/advocacy-and-policy/
documents/2016-ASCO-Brown-Bagging-White-Bagging-Brief.pdf.
As well, PBMs increasingly are shifting drug dispensing away from
physicians and toward pharmacies they own or with which they are
affiliated, which can negatively impact patient care and access.\15\
PBMs actively incentivize--and in some cases require--patients to use
mail order or specialty pharmacies in lieu of a dispensing physician.
Such actions are problematic, as it means PBMs are both competing and
determining reimbursement rates for pharmacists.\16\ Certain states do
not allow in-
office dispensing or provider-led pharmacies, and such arrangements may
not be appropriate in every practice setting. However, some studies
have suggested that practices with medically integrated services may
improve patient adherence to treatment regimens.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Pharmacy Benefit Managers' Attack on Physician Dispensing and
Impact on Patient Care: Case Study of CVS Caremark's Efforts to
Restrict Access to Cancer Care Prepared by Frier Levitt, LLC
Commissioned by the Community Oncology Alliance. August 2016, https://
www.communityoncology.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/
PBMs_Physician_Dispensing-White
Paper_COA FL.pdf.
\16\ National Community Pharmacists Association. Letter to Senate
Judiciary Committee. April 4, 2018, https://www.ncpanet.org/newsroom/
news-releases/2018/04/09/pharmacy-associations-urge-senate-judiciary-
committee-to-hold-hearing-on-pbms.
\17\ Egerton, Nancy. In-Office Dispensing of Oral Oncolytics: A
Continuity of Care and Cost Mitigation Model for Cancer Patients.
American Journal of Managed Care, 22, 4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rebates and Discounts
The lack of transparency in which PBMs operate has caught the attention
of many stakeholders in the healthcare community, including plan
sponsors who are employers. The National Pharmaceutical Council (NPC)
has affirmed that employers are increasingly concerned with pharmacy
benefit transparency, complexity, and rebates. A recent NPC survey
revealed that a large percentage of employers agree PBMs lack
transparency and are overly complicated. Skepticism about the role of
rebates in achieving an ``aligned and effective health care supply
chain'' has also been expressed. More than 69% of large employer's
surveyed report their organizations would welcome an alternative to
rebate-driven approaches to managing pharmacy benefit costs.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ National Pharmaceutical Council. Toward Better Value: Employer
perspectives on what's wrong with the management of prescription drug
benefits and how to fix it. 2017, http://www.npcnow.org/system/files/
research/download/npc-employer-pbm-survey-final.pdf.
Numerous states have passed bills requiring greater transparency from
PBMs, including Maximum Allowable Cost (MAC) list mandates and more.
Scarce information is available about the size and frequency of rebates
PBMs receive from manufacturers, nor is it understood the extent to
which patients experience actual benefits of these rebates and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
discounts.
At the federal level, several legislative proposals call for greater
transparency.\19\, \20\ The 2018 HHS Blueprint for American
Patients First also addresses PBM transparency.\21\ The Blueprint
requests comments on different approaches to learning more about the
complex financial dealings of the pharmaceutical industry-at-large. In
addition to elimination of gag clauses, it also suggests modification
of the Anti-Kickback Statute (AKS) Safe Harbor that allows for rebates.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Senate Bill 413/H.R. 1038, Improving Transparency and Accuracy
in Medicare Part D Spending Act, https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-
congress/senate-bill/413.
\20\ House Resolution 1316, Prescription Drug Price Transparency
Act, https://www.
congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/1316.
\21\ U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2018. American
Patients First Blueprint, https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2018/05/11/
trump-administration-releases-blueprint-lower-drug-prices-and-reduce-
out-pocket-costs.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gag Clauses
According to the National Conference of State Legislatures, at least 26
states have passed legislation that would prohibit a practice known as
a ``gag clause'' on pharmacists.\22\ Gag clauses, increasingly used by
PBMs, are contractual requirements that bar a pharmacist from informing
patients about lower-cost drug options. These options could include
simply purchasing the drug for cash, rather than using insurance. In
these circumstances, patients could pay cash at the pharmacy, rather
than go through their insurance coverage, thereby avoiding costs that
may be solely due to the PBM payment structure. CMS recently issued a
letter to Part D plan administrators, reminding them that such clauses
are considered ``unacceptable.'' \23\ Patients with insurance coverage
are still challenged by high copays for prescriptions and out-of-pocket
deductibles. Pharmacies should not be prevented from sharing with
patients their most cost-effective option for purchasing needed
medications (i.e., gag clauses).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ National Conference of State Legislatures. Prohibiting PBM
``Gag Clauses'' that Restrict Pharmacists from Disclosing Price
Options: Recent State Legislation 2016-2018, http://www.ncsl.org/
Portals/1/Documents/Health/Pharmacist_Gag_clauses-2018-14523.pdf
\23\ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. CMS Sends Clear
Message to Plans: Stop Hiding Information from Patients. May 17, 2018,
https://www.cms.gov/Newsroom/MediaRelease
Database/Press-releases/2018-Press-releases-items/2018-05-17.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Direct and Indirect Remuneration Fees
As a means of setting drug reimbursement at the lowest price, CMS
implemented direct and indirect remuneration (DIR) fees, which are
intended to determine actual net cost of drugs covered under Part D.
DIR fees were initially authorized as part of the Medicare
Modernization Act of 2003. CMS defines DIR as additional compensation
received after the point-of-sale that serves to change the final cost
of the drug for the payer, or the price paid to the pharmacy for the
drug.\24\ Through DIR fees, plan sponsors and PBMs are required to
report all ``direct'' and ``indirect'' remuneration received from
third-parties, including drug manufacturers.\25\ Because manufacturer
rebates paid to PBMs are not known until a prescription has been
dispensed to the patient and a claim processed at the point-of-sale,
such remuneration is calculated and reconciled after Medicare pays the
PBM. In this way, CMS ensures that taxpayers are only paying PBMs what
the drugs ultimately cost. However, it can also mean that dispensing
pharmacies discover--after reconciliation--they owe additional money to
the PBM.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Medicare Modernization Act of 2003. 42 CFR 423.308.
\25\ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Medicare Part D--
Direct and Indirect Remuneration (DIR). 2017, https://www.cms.gov/
newsroom/mediareleasedatabase/fact-sheets/2017-fact-sheet-items/2017-
01-19-2.html.
A 2017 CMS report found that DIR fees used by PBMs do not decrease
point-of-sale cost for patients and can, in fact, increase patient out-
of-pocket costs. Patients incur cost-sharing based on the price at
their pharmacy, rather than the final, post-DIR reconciled price paid
by CMS to the PBM. This can push a patient more rapidly into the
``donut hole'' where they have higher out-of-pocket costs. At the same
time, DIR fees can reduce patient premiums and some government costs by
shifting costs to the catastrophic phase of the benefit.\26\ CMS has
proposed several ways to improve the administration of DIR fees in the
Medicare program, but has yet to implement significant changes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Medicare Part D--
Direct and Indirect Remuneration (DIR). 2017, https://www.cms.gov/
Newsroom/MediaReleaseDatabase/Fact-sheets/2017-Fact-Sheet-items/2017-
01-19-2.html.
Recently, PBMs have created a separate--and additional--DIR fee
structure, known among pharmacists and physicians with in-office
dispensing and pharmacies as ``claw backs.'' This involves retroactive
collection of fees by PBMs, the amounts of which are based on
physicians' and pharmacists' performance according to certain metrics.
PBMs justify imposition of these performance-based DIR fees by
referencing CMS' Star Rating System. The Star Rating System is used by
CMS in Medicare Advantage and Medicare Part D to measure performance on
plans covering drug services. The Star Rating System measures relate
largely to medication adherence for conditions such as diabetes,
hypertension, and cholesterol; and was designed to apply to Part D plan
sponsors, not pharmacies. No such measures exist for medication
management in oncology.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 2018 Part C and D
Star Ratings Measures, https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prescription-Drug-
Coverage/PrescriptionDrugCovGenin/Down
loads/2018MeasureList.pdf.
Despite lacking oncology measures and its misapplication on pharmacies
instead of plan sponsors, these fees are nevertheless charged directly
to oncology pharmacy providers, who assert this is done in a way that
that lacks transparency and is highly profitable for PBMs. These
performance-based fees are not required by HHS or CMS regulations, and
appear to have no basis in statute.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ PBM DIR Fees Costing Medicare and Beneficiaries: Investigative
White Paper on Background, Cost Impact, and Legal Issues. Prepared by
Frier Levitt, LLC. Commissioned by the Community Oncology Alliance.
January 2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Addressing Key Concerns: Transparency, Drug Waste, and Benefit Design
Key concerns that impact ASCO members and their patients with cancer
fall primarily into four categories:

Quality and access to care.

Transparency of PBM operations and pricing.

Impact on drug waste and/or cost.

Benefit design.
Quality and Access to Care
ASCO members have expressed several concerns about PBMs and their
impact on care. These include mistakes in filling prescriptions,
altering treatment dosages for patients without consulting their
oncology care provider, incomplete dispensing resulting in duplicate
patient copays, and delays in treatment related to prior authorization
demands and other problems.
Many of the practices employed by PBMs are utilization management
strategies. ASCO has previously asserted its position against policies
that attempt to incentivize, force, or coerce patients to accept anti-
cancer therapy alternatives that are not recommended by their
oncologist. Such practices can threaten both the outcomes for patients
and the well-being of their families or care takers. Utilization
management processes--whether directed by a health plan or PBM--should
result in timely and clear determinations that are consistent with the
health insurer's coverage and other policies; decisions should reflect
evidence-based practice; and payers should implement utilization
management policies in a way that minimizes administrative burdens on
both providers and patients.\29\ Public and private payers should take
immediate steps to assure that changes to prescribed therapy for
patients with cancer are made only in the context of prior consultation
and approval by their physician.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ American Society of Clinical Oncology. American Society of
Clinical Oncology policy statement on the impact of utilization
management policies for cancer drug therapies. J Oncol Pract 13:758-
762, 2017.
Timely access to therapies may be harmed by PBM-imposed network
restrictions. Some PBMs require that patients use only their
proprietary specialty pharmacy for certain drugs, despite the
possibility that the patient could access the drug more cheaply and
quickly from a different pharmacy. It is not uncommon that PBMs allow
the first fill of an oral oncology drug to be carried out at the local
or practice pharmacy. Thereafter, all other prescription refills are
often required to go through the PBM-associated specialty pharmacy.
Because the largest administrative burden and staff time commitment are
attached to the first prescription--which includes preauthorization,
peer-to-peer review, patient education, enrollment into copay
assistance, and seeking foundation support to fill the financial gap--
this puts the PBM-associated specialty pharmacy at an unfair advantage.
ASCO is opposed to requirements that limit patients to exclusive use of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PBM-owned or affiliated pharmacies.
Additionally, PBM accreditation standards required for participating
pharmacies are costly and do not have relevance for oncology care. They
often are applied in a manner that inappropriately limits the
dispensing of specialty drugs. CMS has stated that it has received
complaints from pharmacies that Part D plan sponsors have begun to
require accreditation of pharmacies, including accreditation by
multiple organizations or additional Part D plan-/PBM-specific
credentialing criteria for network participation. In a final rule, CMS
clearly stated that it does not support the use of a PBM-specific
credentialing criteria that inappropriately limits dispensing of
specialty drugs to certain pharmacies.\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Contract Year 2019
Policy and Technical Changes to the Medicare Advantage, Medicare Cost
Plan, Medicare Fee-for-Service, the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit
Programs, and the PACE Program.
Some oncology practices that provide in-office dispensing have been
excluded from PBM networks entirely, despite Medicare's Any Willing
Provider (AWP) requirements. CMS has received many complaints from
pharmacies expressing concern with the process PBMs have adopted for
complying with the AWP requirements. To address these concerns, CMS
issued a final rule clarifying that Part D plan sponsors must contract
with any pharmacy that meets the Part D plan sponsor's standard terms
and conditions for network participation. They also may not exclude
pharmacies with unique or innovative business or care delivery models
from participating in their contracted pharmacy network solely because
they do not fit in a Part D plan sponsor's particular pharmacy type
classification.\31\ CMS should enforce its ``Any Willing Provider''
provision in Medicare Part D, preventing PBMs from excluding qualified
in-office dispensing or provider led pharmacies from its networks. This
enforcement would also prevent PBMs from enacting disproportionate
incentives for patients to only access PBM-operated specialty
pharmacies, thus preserving patients' ability to choose the most
appropriate pharmacy that meets their needs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. CMS Finalizes
Policy Changes and Updates for Medicare Advantage and the Prescription
Drug Benefit Program for Contract Year 2019 (CMS-4182-F), https://
www.cms.gov/Newsroom/MediaReleaseDatabase/Fact-sheets/2018-Fact-sheets-
items/2018-04-02.html.
Additionally, CMS should instruct contractors and PBMs to discontinue
application of current Star performance ratings and related DIR claw
backs on oncology dispensing physicians and practice-based pharmacies,
instead relying on measures and standards that are more appropriate to
the specialty. Star performance ratings were not intended for this
purpose and, as currently structured, are not appropriate for oncology
practice. Both flat and percentage-based fees unfairly disadvantage
cancer care providers without demonstrably improving quality or patient
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
outcomes.
ASCO remains committed to ensuring that patients are able to obtain
timely, high-quality treatment and services at the lowest cost
possible. Fragmentation of medication management, which occurs when
cancer drug dispensing and distribution are operated by third parties
such as PBMs, has the potential to place cancer patients at higher risk
for errors and life-threatening toxicities unless additional steps are
taken to ensure patient safety and quality standards are met. When
managed at the clinic site, the pharmacy has direct access to the
patient's electronic records. Forty-seven states offer some degree of
in-office dispensing of drugs or provider-led closed pharmacies. In
general, specialty pharmacy certifications are readily achievable and
can be used to assure appropriate patient safety standards in this
setting. ASCO is opposed to increasingly narrow networks that limit
patient choice by excluding pharmacy options such as in-office or
provider-led closed pharmacies that are convenient, cost effective, and
safe for patient care.
Transparency of PBM Operations and Pricing
In contrast to expanding efforts by the federal government to make
healthcare prices more public, little is known about PBM financial
arrangements.\32\ Scarce information is available about the size and
frequency of rebates PBMs receive from manufacturers, nor is it
understood the extent to which patients experience actual benefits of
these rebates and discounts. The ever-changing mix of rebates,
discounts and performance-based DIR fees make it nearly impossible for
cancer care professionals to anticipate how much prescribed treatments
will cost their patients. New and different terms are introduced by
PBMs to refer to the same financial arrangements, which adds to the
confusion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 2016, https://
www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-
Reports/Medicare-Provider-Charge-Data/Physician-and-Other-
Supplier.html.
Numerous states have passed bills requiring greater transparency from
PBMs, including Maximum Allowable Cost (MAC) list mandates and more. As
mentioned earlier, 26 states have passed bills to prevent gag clauses,
to encourage pharmacists and dispensing physicians to feel empowered to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
talk to patients about the best possible price for their drugs.
CMS, specifically the Medicare program, should build on these efforts
by leveraging its regulatory authority. For example, CMS should make
clear the prohibition on gag clauses and should require a more
stringent and detailed accounting of DIR fees. Collecting and
ultimately publishing such data would help plan sponsors, employers and
providers understand the financial arrangements for which they are
being asked to contract, ultimately helping to ensure patients are able
to be fully informed about price differences and ways to obtain their
drugs at the lowest cost.
Impact on Drug Waste and/or Cost
A 2016 article by researchers at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
found that nearly $3 billion was being lost annually in waste of cancer
drugs.\33\ Cancer care providers and patients have common interest in
reducing the amount of waste in the healthcare system. Providers seek
to restrain costs and growth in expenditures in their practice, through
quality improvement and efficient scheduling practices that help reduce
waste.\34\ Patients have a natural interest in reducing their out of
pocket costs. There is growing concern that PBMs may be contributing to
the costly waste in cancer care. ASCO members have described situations
in which a PBM sent the wrong dosage or type of medication or sent
medication directly to a patient's home, only to have it expire before
they are able to get to their physician's office. Each mistake and
wasted vial of cancer medication represents an important expense for a
cancer patient and a lost opportunity for appropriate treatment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Bach, Peter et al. (2016). Overspending driven by oversized
single dose vials of cancer drugs. BMJ 2016; 352 doi: https://doi.org/
10.1136/bmj.i788.
\34\ Leung, Caitlyn, Cheung, MC, Charbonneau, LF, Price, A, Ng, P,
Chan, KKW. (2017). Financial impact of cancer drug wastage and
potential cost savings from mitigation strategies. Journal of Oncology
Practice, 13, 7, https://doi.org/10.1200/JOP.2017.022905.
Since January 2017, CMS has been requiring attachment of a ``JW
modifier'' to Part B drug billing when an office is submitting a claim
for waste.\35\ Such claims are limited to times where a physician is
required to discard an unused portion of a single dose vial or
container, and do not include a patient who does not show up for an
appointment. While these instances do not cover the full scope of waste
that affects patients in the Medicare program, this is an area worth
exploring to better identify cost and sources of waste. ASCO supports
increased use of the JW modifier, along with similar mechanisms in
commercial plans, to document waste in Part D and private plans. Making
these data publicly available would highlight opportunities to reduce
waste, lower costs, and enhance care. CMS should consider extending use
of the JW modifier to better identify sources and cost of waste related
to chemotherapy drugs in both Part B and Part D. Such data should be
made public. Private payers should consider similar strategies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 2016, https://
www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/
HospitalOutpatientPPS/Downloads/JW-Modifier-FAQs.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Benefit Design
ASCO members have noted a variety of ways in which PBMs use of the
benefit design process--including network size and formulary design--
can increase cost for providers and patients. Increased costs have also
resulted in oncology practice staff spending more time to locate copay
assistance for patients. A recent Kaiser Family Foundation survey
highlights the increasing role of separate prescription deductibles
within employer plans. Fifteen percent of workers with employer-
sponsored coverage now face separate prescription drug deductibles,
which shift 100% of the prescription cost to the patient until the
deductible is met.\36\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ Kaiser Family Foundation. 2017. Employer Health Benefits
Survey, https://www.kff.org/health-costs/report/2017-employer-health-
benefits-survey/.
There are also growing concerns about novel strategies imposed by PBMs
on benefit design plans, including a relatively new element known as
``copay accumulator programs.'' These programs target specialty drugs
for which manufacturers typically provide copay assistance. With a
copay accumulator program in place, a manufacturer's assistance no
longer applies to a patient's copay or out-of-pocket maximum.
Therefore, while they are described as a benefit for patients, these
programs in effect prevent patients from reaching their deductibles
sooner. Copay accumulator programs generate large savings for employers
and PBMs while increasing cost-sharing for patients. There is no
standardized naming for these programs, and formal names created by
payers can be ambiguous and confusing.\37\ PBMs are using copay
accumulator programs to shift more healthcare costs away from plan
sponsors and employers, and onto patients.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ Drug Channels. Copay Accumulators: Costly Consequence of a New
Cost-Shifting Pharmacy Benefit. January 3, 2018, http://
www.drugchannels.net/2018/01/copay-accumulators-costly-
conseguences.html.
At the heart of PBM administration of drug plans is formulary design, a
process that is normally managed by Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T)
Committees. Used by a range of organizations including PBMs, health
plans, hospitals and other health systems, P&Ts develop and manage
policies related to formulary management, including prior
authorizations, step therapies, quantity limitations, generic
substitutions, and other drug utilization management activities
affecting access.\38\ P&Ts are composed of physicians and pharmacists
from a variety of different specialties, but may also include different
healthcare practitioners as well as individuals with legal, contract,
administrative, and ethics expertise. P&Ts review the strength of
scientific evidence when making formulary management decisions. Plans
are often designed with several tiers; the highest tier (with the
highest copays) often include specialty drugs. The American Cancer
Society has found that PBMs regularly place cancer drugs on the highest
tier of their formularies, requiring the largest amount of cost-sharing
from patients.\39\ While CMS has public policy regarding the creation
of Part D drug formularies, this same guidance is not necessarily
followed in the private sector by all plan sponsors.\40\ A lack of
oncology specific specialization on a P&T committee can lead to
mistakes and omissions for cutting-edge and complex cancer medications,
leading to inferior care for cancer patients. Pharmacy and Therapeutics
committees should include full and meaningful participation by oncology
specialists.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes. Drug
Information Used in the Managed Care Pharmacy P&T Decision Making
Process: Current Practice and Insights. Retrieved from: https://
www.ispor.org/meetings/baltimore0511/presentations/ISPOR-AMCP-
presentation-FINAL-5-10-11.pdf.
\39\ American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network. ACS CAN
Examination of Cancer Drug Coverage and Transparency in the Health
Insurance Marketplaces. February 22, 2017, https://www.acscan.org/
sites/default/files/National%20Documents/QHP%20Formularies%20Analysis%
20-%202017%20FINAL.pdf.
\40\ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Medicare
Prescription Drug Manual. Chapter 6--Part D Drugs and Formulary
Requirements (v.01.19.16), https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prescription-
Drug-Coverage/PrescriptionDrugCovContra/PartDManuals.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion
Promoting delivery of high value care to every patient with cancer is
central to ASCO's mission. ASCO understands and shares concerns about
escalating costs and their impact on patients--and we have been
actively engaged in addressing that issue. However, strategies for
controlling cost must not compromise oncologists' ability to provide
the right care, at the right time, for all their cancer patients.
ASCO remains committed to principles and recommendations previously
conveyed in policy statements addressing utilization management. The
opaque nature of PBM practices and policies--and their uncertain impact
on cost and quality of cancer care--warrant special attention. ASCO has
established a focused effort to obtain greater insight on specific PBM
practices, their impact on patients and on cost, and appropriate
remedies. A dedicated group of ASCO volunteers will pursue an in-depth
analysis of PBM impact on cost and waste, their role and impact on
quality of care, and the impact of benefit design on patients' ability
to access the care they need.
In the meantime, ASCO is deeply concerned that the practices
highlighted within this statement have the near-term potential to erode
quality and access to care and should be addressed immediately.
______
American Society of Health-System Pharmacists
4500 East West Highway, Suite 900
Bethesda, MD 20814
Email: [emailprotected]
Phone: 301-664-8692
ASHP (American Society of Health-System Pharmacists) respectfully
submits the following statement for the record to the Senate Committee
on Finance hearing on ``Drug Pricing in America: A Prescription for
Change, Part III.''
ASHP represents pharmacists who serve as patient care providers in
acute and ambulatory settings. The organization's nearly 50,000 members
include pharmacists, student pharmacists, and pharmacy technicians. For
more than 75 years, ASHP has been at the forefront of efforts to
improve medication use and enhance patient safety.
ASHP's vision is that medication use will be optimal, safe, and
effective for all people all of the time. A primary tenet of that
vision includes access to affordable medications needed to save or
sustain lives. Addressing the issue of skyrocketing drug prices,
including excessive price increases on commonly used generic
medications, is one of ASHP's highest and longstanding public policy
priorities.
Poor access to medications can lead to increased morbidity and
mortality, and can cause healthcare costs to increase. According to a
recent Kaiser Health Tracking Poll, 29% of adults report that they are
not taking their medications as prescribed due to increased cost with
8% of those individuals reporting that their condition has worsened as
a result of poor medication adherence.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Kirzinger, A., Lopes, L., Wu, B., and Brodie, M. (2019, March
15). KFF Health Tracking Poll--February 2019: Prescription Drugs.
Retrieved March 8, 2019, from https://www.kff.org/health-costs/pol1-
finding/kff-health-tracking-poll-february-2019-prescription-drugs/.
ASHP has been proactively addressing challenges related to the rapid
increase of prescription drug pricing on several fronts, including
working with like-minded stakeholders and educating members of Congress
about the unsustainable burdens faced by patients, healthcare
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
providers, and the entire healthcare system.
ASHP is a lead member of the Steering Committee of the Campaign for
Sustainable Rx Pricing (CSRxP), a coalition of prominent national
organizations representing physicians, consumers, payers, hospitals
health systems, and patient advocacy groups. CSRxP has developed a
policy platform promoting market based solutions supported by three
pillars: competition, value, and transparency.
The goal of the campaign is to identify policy options that have
bipartisan support and, therefore, a greater likelihood of passage. To
that end, CSRxP focuses on policies to incentivize a more competitive
marketplace to help stimulate lower drug prices. The campaign has also
expressed support for efforts to loosen restrictions that prevent
generic drug companies from obtaining the samples necessary to
manufacture a competing product.
ASHP does not collect, store, or report drug pricing information.
However, we continually hear from pharmacy leaders in hospitals and
health systems that sudden, inexplicable, and unpredictable price
increases in connection with some of the most commonly used,
longstanding generic medications are becoming more prevalent--and are
occurring on a nationwide basis.
In January, ASHP, along with the American Hospital Association (AHA)
and the Federation of American Hospitals (FAH), released a report on
the impact that the cost of and access to prescription drugs are having
on hospital budgets and operations.
Specifically, the report showed that:

Average total drug spending per hospital admission increased by
18.5% between fiscal year (FY) 2015 and FY 2017.

Outpatient drug spending per admission increased by 28.7%, while
inpatient drug spending per admission increased by 9.6% between FY 2015
and FY 2017.

Hospitals experienced price increases of over 80% across
different classes of drugs, including those for anesthetics, parenteral
solutions, and chemotherapy.

Over 90% of surveyed hospitals reported having to identify
alternative therapies to manage spending.

One in 4 hospitals had to cut staff to mitigate budget
pressures.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ NORC at the University of Chicago. Recent Trends in Hospital
Drug Spending and Manufacturer Shortages (2019), https://www.aha.org/
system/files/2019-01/aha-drug-pricing-study-report-01152019.pdf.
Accessed February 25, 2019.
ASHP is committed to continuing to advance policy and other solutions
that will improve transparency in drug pricing and promote competition
in the market place.
NEED FOR TRANSPARENCY
Addressing the problem of high drug prices is complicated by a lack of
transparency in the system, from drug manufacturer price-setting to
pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) rebate s. ASHP respects the need to
protect trade secrets, but we also believe the system can benefit from
transparency related to costs. Thus, we encourage the Committee to
explore options for increasing transparency within the pharmacy benefit
managers (PBMs) rebates system. Specifically, rebates on drugs should
be disclosed to participants in the system, including plan sponsors.
Direct and Indirect Remuneration Fees (DIR Fees), which are negotiated
by PBMs, also make it difficult to determine the actual cost of a drug.
DIR fees are a growing nationwide concern among pharmacies that
dispense medications in a community pharmacy or outpatient clinic
setting. Created under the Medicare Part D Program, DIR fees were
originally intended as a way for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) to account for the true cost of the drug dispensed,
including any manufacturer rebates.
Often DIR fees are unknown until the drug is dispensed and the claim
adjudicated. Moreover, the fees themselves, which are often arbitrary
in nature, have mushroomed over the past decade, to the point that
pharmacies regularly see annual DIR totals in the tens of thousands to
hundreds of thousands of dollars.
In addition, PBMs are now inappropriately applying their own plan
performance measures as a way to assess fees on pharmacies. This is
problematic for the following reasons:

It is an arbitrary and unintended application of quality
measures meant for total plan performance as opposed to pharmacy-level
metrics.

The quality measures applied tend to be based on maintenance
medications such as blood pressure medications or medications used to
treat diabetes. These measures were never intended to be applied to
specialty medications or to other specialized disease states such as
oncology, yet PBMs assess DIR fees against the gross reimbursement for
all prescriptions received by pharmacy providers, not just maintenance
medications.

Pharmacy providers are essentially being penalized with backdoor
fees without any requirement that PBMs define, justify, or explain
these charges to providers and to CM S.
Due to the fee structure, DIR fees assessed on pharmacies providing
specialty medications have been especially problematic. Fees range from
a flat rate of per dollar per claim or a percentage (typically 3-9%) of
the total reimbursement per claim. Additionally, these fees are
assessed retroactively, sometimes months after the claim has been
adjudicated, providing no recourse for the pharmacy impacted by the
assessment.
The result of imposing DIR fees has led to higher cost-sharing
responsibilities for Medicare beneficiaries. This has, in turn, caused
more of these beneficiaries to enter the Part D donut hole where the
patient is solely responsible for the cost of the drug. Along with the
higher costs absorbed by patients, adherence rates tend to be lower
among Medicare beneficiaries who are in the donut hole and may not have
the financial resources to pay for their medications. This stands in
stark contrast to passing on savings to patients--the very reason DIR
fees targeting manufacturer rebates were created.
Pharmacies are not alone in their concern. In January 2017, CMS
published a fact sheet expressing concern over DIR fees and cited those
fees as contributing to increased drug costs, which, in turn, increased
patients' out-of-pocket spending and Medicare spending overall.\3\
Additionally, questions remain as to whether Part D plan sponsors have
the authority to assess these fees on pharmacies. There are no
references to DIR fees collected on pharmacies in either the Part D
statute or corresponding CMS regulations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Fact sheet. Medicare Part D--Direct and Indirect Remuneration
(DIR). Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, January 19, 2017,
https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/fact-sheets/medicare-part-d-direct-and-
indirect-remuneration-dir. Accessed February 10, 2019
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONCLUSION
ASHP thanks the Committee on Finance for holding this important
hearing. ASHP remains committed to working with Congress and industry
stakeholders to ensure that patients have affordable access to
lifesaving and life-sustaining medications.
______
Campaign for Sustainable Rx Pricing
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the Senate
Committee on Finance, the Campaign for Sustainable Rx Pricing (CSRxP)
thanks you for the opportunity to submit testimony for the record on
the critically important issue of the unsustainable and out-of-control
growth in prescription drug prices and the essential role that pharmacy
benefit managers (PBMs) play in lowering drug costs for U.S. consumers
and taxpayers.
CSRxP is a nonpartisan coalition of organizations committed to
fostering an informed discussion on sustainable drug pricing and to
developing bipartisan, market-based solutions that promote competition,
transparency, and value to improve affordability while maintaining
patient access to innovative prescription drugs that can improve health
outcomes and save lives. Our members represent organizations including
consumers, hospitals, physicians, nurses, pharmacists, employers,
pharmacy benefit managers and insurance providers.
Prescription drug prices are out of control and continue to grow at
unsustainable rates. Twenty-three cents of every health care dollar
goes toward prescription drugs.\1\ One in four Americans cannot afford
their medications. Excessively high prices unfairly threaten the
financial security, health and well-being of U.S. patients and their
families every day, as well as strain Federal and state health budgets
and the taxpayers who fund them. Too often patients are faced with the
unfortunate and unfair choice of purchasing the medications they need
to get well and stay healthy and paying their bills. Patients simply
should never be presented with such a choice and deserve affordable
access to prescription drugs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ AHIP. ``Where Does Your Healthcare Dollar Go?'' May 22, 2018.
Given the critical drug pricing crisis facing U.S. consumers and
taxpayers today, CSRxP ardently believes it is imperative to rein in
the out-of-control drug prices that put patient access to affordable
life-saving drugs at risk. We share and applaud the Committee's
commitment to lowering drug prices and very much appreciate your
leadership in tackling this serious issue that affects U.S. patients
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
and taxpayers every day.
That said, however, as policies are considered to reduce drug costs,
CSRxP strongly objects to the notion that PBMs are merely ``middlemen''
in the drug supply chain not working hard on behalf of patients to make
prescription drugs more affordable, as the pharmaceutical industry and
Administration suggest. Rather, just the opposite is true: PBMs
function as the only real check on the pharmaceutical industry's
unilateral ability to set high drug prices and raise them at
excessively high rates. Without PBMs negotiating on behalf of patients,
drug costs would be significantly higher and even more unaffordable for
patients and taxpayers, In this vein, CSRxP wishes to underscore the
following as the Committee considers how best to address this critical
drug pricing problem:
I.
Brand drug companies--and brand drug companies alone--set and
increase drug prices at unsustainably high rates.
II.
PBMs effectively deploy commercial tools in negotiations with
drug companies on behalf of patients to lower drug costs--saving
patients and payers an average of $941 per person per year and 40 to 50
percent annually on their prescription drug and medical costs.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Visante. ``The Return on Investment (ROI) on PBM Services.''
Prepared for PCMA. November 2016.
III.
Purported changes to the current rebate system under
consideration by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
will serve only to raise, not lower, drug costs while at the same time
perversely increase the profitability of the brand drug industry--the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
very industry entirely responsible for the drug pricing problem.
CSRxP firmly believes that without major actions by this Committee and
others, the pharmaceutical industry will continue to excessively profit
from the anti-competitive and unsustainable pricing practices that make
prescription drugs unaffordable and jeopardize access for the patients
who need them. We look forward to continuing our work with the
Committee to implement bipartisan, market-based solutions that
effectively leverage private sector negotiating power to curb unfair
price gouging practices by drug companies and blunt the unsustainable
growth in prescription drug costs.
I. Brand Drug Companies Are Responsible for Setting Needlessly High
Drug Prices
Despite efforts from the brand drug industry to suggest otherwise, the
drug industry is the driver of the high prescription drug prices that
American consumers and taxpayers face today. Brand manufacturers set
high launch prices for their products and typically increase those
prices at rates that far exceed inflation. As healthcare expert Avik
Roy recently said: ``[I]n the absence of competition, manufacturers
frequently charge the highest prices they believe they can justify in
the court of public opinion.'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Roy Avik. ``Drug Companies, `Not Middlemen,' Are Responsible
for High Drug Prices.'' The Apothecary. October 22, 2018.
Demonstrating this point, one recent analysis concluded that the
increasing costs of prescription drugs were due largely to price
increases imposed by manufacturers of drugs already on the market. From
2008 to 2016, the analysis found costs of oral and injectable drugs
increased by 9.2 percent and 15.1 percent, respectively, on an annual
basis with existing drugs contributing to much of the
growth.\4\, \5\ Costs increased for specialty oral and
injectable drugs by 20.6 percent and 12.5 percent, respectively, with
71.1 percent and 52.4 percent of these increases attributable to new
drugs.\6\ A separate recent study from AARP found that retail prices
for 87 percent of the most widely used brand name drugs by older
Americans increased from 2016 to 2017, with 30 percent having price
increases of 10 percent or higher.\7\ Overall, prices for prescription
drugs in the AARP study increased by an average of 8.4 percent from
2016 to 2017--or four times the 2.1 percent rate of general inflation
for the period.\8\ These 2017 price increases followed average double-
digit annual price increases every year from 2012 to 2016.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Hernandez et al. ``The Contribution of New Product Entry Versus
Existing Product Inflation in the Rising Cost of Drugs.'' Health
Affairs. Vol. 38, No. 1. January 2019.
\5\ Kodjak, Alison. ``Prescription Drug Costs Driven By
Manufacturer Price Hikes, Not Innovation.'' National Public Radio.
January 7, 2019.
\6\ Hernandez et al. ``The Contribution of New Product Entry Versus
Existing Product Inflation in the Rising Cost of Drugs.'' Health
Affairs. Vol. 38, No. 1. January 2019.
\7\ AARP Public Policy Institute. ``Trends in Retail Prices of
Brand Name Prescription Drugs Widely Used by Older Americans: 2017
Year-End Update,'' page 8. September 2018.
\8\ Ibid., page 5.
\9\ Ibid., page 6.
High-cost specialty medications in particular are driving much of this
unsustainable growth in prescription drug prices and spending. Pharmacy
benefit manager Express Scripts reported, for example, that even with
strategies in place to lower costs for consumers on specialty
medications, growth in commercial spending on high-cost specialty
products far outpaced growth in overall prescription drug spending in
2017: 11.3 percent versus 1.5 percent.\10\ Similarly, a separate AARP
analysis found that retail prices for 101 widely used specialty drugs
increased by 9.6 percent in 2015, continuing the increasing trend of
specialty product price increases seen since 2006.\11\ In 2015, the
average annual cost of a single specialty medication used on a chronic
basis exceeded $52,000, with the annual cost of these therapies growing
by almost $35,000 from 2006 to 2015.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Express Scripts. ``2017 Drug Trend Report,'' page 4.
\11\ AARP. ``Trends in Retail Prices of Specialty Prescription
Drugs Widely Used by Older Americans, 2006 to 2015,'' page 1. September
2017.
\12\ Ibid.
Simply put, data clearly demonstrate pharmaceutical companies
unilaterally set high drug prices and impose high price increases that
needlessly increase costs for consumers and taxpayers. The unfair
pricing practices of the drug industry make prescription drugs
unaffordable for patients, putting them at risk for not being able to
obtain the medications they need to get well and stay healthy.
II. PBMs Lower Drug Costs for Patients and Taxpayers
Rather than merely serving as ``middlemen'' in the drug supply chain as
the Administration and brand drug industry claim, PBMs play a critical
role in lowering the prices that brand drug makers impose on patients.
The rebates, price concessions, and other discounts negotiated by PBMs
on behalf of more than 266 Americans significantly reduce prescription
drugs costs for consumers and taxpayers--between 31 and 36 percent in
savings through rebates and discounts and an additional 11 to 15
percent in savings through encouraging increased utilization generics
and preferred brands.\13\ Such reductions have translated into
substantial overall cost savings, lowering costs for patients and
payers by an average of $941 per person per year and 40 to SO percent
annually on drug and medical costs.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Visante. ``The Return on Investment (ROI) on PBM Services.''
Prepared for PCMA. November 2016.
\14\ Visante. ``The Return on Investment (ROI) on PBM Services.''
Prepared for PCMA. November 2016.
Importantly, Medicare Part D, its enrollees, and the taxpayers who fund
it have benefitted significantly from PBM negotiations with drug
manufacturers, as well. PBMs have produced nearly $90 billion in
savings since the inception of Part D in 2006 to 2016 and are projected
to generate $300 billion in savings from 2017 to 2026, according to one
recent analysis.\15\ The Medicare Trustees generally confirmed this
analysis in their most recent report, estimating significantly slower
growth in Part D spending in part due to higher manufacturer rebates
negotiated by PBMs.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Milliman. ``Value of Direct and Indirect Remuneration: Impact
on Part D Prescription Drug Plan (PDP) Stakeholders.'' July 2017.
\16\ The Board of Trustees, Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal
Supplementary Insurance Trust Funds. ``2018 Annual Report of the Board
of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Supplementary
Insurance Trust Funds,'' page 112.
Indeed, HHS Secretary Azar and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) Administrator Verma both have touted the essential role
PBMs play in lowering prescription drug costs for consumers and
taxpayers. Secretary Azar told Congress: ``The President has generally
spoken about the desire to ensure that Medicare is negotiating and
getting the best deal possible for drugs. Part D actually has
negotiation through the 3 or 4 biggest pharmacy benefit managers that
negotiate and actually secure the best net pricing of any players in
the commercial system. I sat on the other side of that. I can assure
you of this.''\17\ Likewise, Administrator Verma said to Congress: ``I
think that we need to do everything that we can to make drugs more
affordable for seniors. . . . I'm thankful that we have the PBMs in the
Part D program that are performing that negotiation on behalf of
seniors.''\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Azar, Alex. U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor,
and Pensions. Hearing. November 29, 2017.
\18\ Verma, Seema. U.S. Senate Committee on Finance. Hearing.
February 16, 2017.
In fact, even drug companies themselves acting as large employers
contract with PBMs to negotiate lower drug prices for their own
employees.\19\ Eli Lilly Chief Executive Officer (CEO) Dave Ricks
explained: ``We hire a PBM by the way for our employee benefits. I
provide insurance for 70,000 Americans who work for [Eli] Lilly or
their beneficiaries and retirees to negotiate lower drug prices. . . .
That's how the system work; it's a marketplace and we're for
that.''\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Herman, Bob. Axios. ``Phama Companies Hire Drug Pricing
Middlemen, Too.'' March 7, 2019.
\20\ CBS. May 8, 2017.
In other words, those claiming that PBMs merely function as
``middlemen'' in the drug supply chain have stated just the opposite:
Secretary Azar, CMS Administrator Verma and a CEO of a major
pharmaceutical company all have touted the value of PBMs bring in
reducing prescription drug costs for consumers and taxpayers. CSRxP
therefore strongly objects to the notion that PBMs are just
``middlemen'' and instead urges the pursuit of bipartisan, market-based
policies that strongly support and foster the ability of PBMs to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
negotiate lower prescription drug costs on behalf of patients.
III. HHS's Rebate Rule Substantially Increases Costs for Consumers and
Taxpayers While Perversely Raises the Profitability of the
Pharmaceutical Industry
CSRxP agrees that the current rebate system can be significantly
improved as, in many cases, the system has not adequately addressed the
high prices set and controlled entirely by the brand pharmaceutical
industry. That said, however, we strongly oppose the HHS Office of
Inspector General's proposed rule (OIG-0936-P) that the Administration
purports would reform the system. Rather than reform the system, the
proposed rule will lead to the drug industry's imposition of higher--
not lower--prices on patients and, perversely, will result in raising
the profitability of the brand drug industry--the very industry that is
solely responsible for this dire drug pricing problem.\21\ In
particular, CSRxP wishes to emphasize the following highly problematic
issues with HHS's rebate rule:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ 84 FR 2356.

Drug companies increase prices regardless of rebate levels and
the rebate rule does nothing to stop drug companies from continuing to
unilaterally set high drug prices. The Administration contends that
rebate reform is necessary to encourage drug makers to lower their list
prices; without the pressure to provide substantial rebates,
manufacturers will not set list prices so high, the argument goes.
Research, however, definitively demonstrates that rebate levels are not
tied to price. Specifically, one recent analysis concluded that there
is no correlation between the prices drug companies set and the rebates
they negotiate with PBMs and, importantly, that drug companies increase
prices regardless of rebate levels.\22\ The study found prominent cases
of higher-than-average price increases in drug categories where
manufacturers negotiated relatively low rebates and, conversely,
prominent cases of lower-than-average price increases in drug
categories where manufacturers negotiate relatively high rebates.\23\
In other words, rebates negotiated by PBMs do not correlate with or
necessarily lead to higher list prices--rather drug makers entirely set
and control high list prices imposed on consumers and taxpayers. For
further evidence that the rebate rule will not result in lower list
prices, seven pharmaceutical executives testified to the Senate Finance
Committee and said that their respective companies will not reduce list
prices unless rebates are no longer used in the commercial market.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Visante. ``No Correlation between Increasing Drug Prices and
Manufacturer Rebates in Major Drug Categories.'' April 2017.
\23\ Ibid.
\24\ Rowland, Christopher. ``Drug executives grilled in Senate over
high prices.'' The Washington Post. February 26, 2019, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/drug-executives-grilled-in-
senate-over-high-prices/2019/02/25/abc89c04-393f-11e9-aaae-
69364b2ed137_story.htm
l?utm_term=.e57d10e05667.

The rebate rule does not combat the drug industry's abusive
price gouging practices for high priced drugs without competition.
Everyone agrees that prescription drugs without competition--often
high-cost specialty biologic products--pose especially significant cost
challenges for federal health programs and the U.S. healthcare system
as a whole. The HHS Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation
(ASPE) found, for example, that Medicare Part B spending on
prescription drugs increased at a rapid average annual rate of 7.7
percent from 2005 to 2014; during that period, specialty biologic
medicines (often without significant competition) grew at a
particularly fast rate, climbing from 39 percent to 62 percent of total
spending, with a substantial share of the growth due to price increases
rather than number of patients using the medications.\25\ Separately, a
large PBM recently found that its clients' spending on specialty
medications increased 9.4 percent while spending on traditional, non-
specialty medications decreased 5.8 percent in 2017.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ HHS Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation.
``Medicare Part B Drugs: Pricing and Incentives,'' page 6. March 8,
2016.
\26\ Express Scripts. ``2018 Drug Trend Report.''
Humira, the best-selling pharmaceutical product in the world today
with nearly $20 billion in sales in 2018, illustrates the critical
problem posed by high-priced medications without competition. Humira
has over 100 patents that potentially could extend its market
protection as far as 2034 in the U.S., but likely at least through
2022.\27\, \28\, \29\, \30\ As a
result of the anti-competitive and unfair patent ``thicket'' and ``pay-
for-delay'' deals reached between the manufacturers of Humira and its
biosimilars, U.S. patients taking Humira will continue paying a high
price for this drug for at least the next three years and likely will
face significant price increases throughout this time.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Gonzalez, Richard. ``Abbvie Long-Term Strategy.'' October 30,
2015. Slides 14-16.
\28\ Pollack, Andrew. ``Makers of Humira and Enbrel Using New Drug
Patents to Delay Generic Versions.'' The New York Times. July 15, 2016.
\29\ Slide presentation by Michael Carrier at FTC November 8, 2017
workshop. Slide 48.
\30\ AbbVie. ``AbbVie Reports Full-Year and Fourth-Quarter 2018
Financial Results.'' January 25, 2019.
It is of critical concern, therefore, that pricing reforms tackle
drugs with limited or no competition. Unfortunately, the changes to the
system in HHS's rebate rule do nothing to address this serious problem.
Rather, under the proposed rule, manufacturers retain complete control
in price setting and have increased leverage over PBMs that no longer
can use commercial negotiating tools to lower costs for patients and
taxpayers. Instead of weakening the bargaining power of PBMs on behalf
of patients, CSRxP urges the Committee to discourage HHS from adopting
this rule and instead take steps to enhance the ability of PBMs to
employ even stronger bargaining tools with drug makers so that drug
makers actually feel more pressure to lower prescription drug prices
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
for patients.

Medicare Part D premiums will increase for all enrollees if HHS
adopts the rebate rule--making prescription drug coverage more costly
for all Part D beneficiaries. CSRxP lauds the Department's overarching
goal to reduce prescription drug costs for patients. Hence, we do not
understand why HHS seeks to implement policies in the rebate rule that
will raise--not lower--Part D premiums for patients. Indeed, all
Medicare Part D enrollees will face substantial premium increases of
roughly 19 percent per month in 2020 and 25 percent overall as a result
of this proposed rule, according to the Department's Office of the
Actuary.\31\ Clearly, significantly raising premiums for all Part D
beneficiaries will not make prescription drug coverage more affordable
and will be particularly problematic for the many Medicare
beneficiaries who live on fixed incomes and simply cannot afford
unnecessary increases to their monthly Part D premiums.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ 84 FR 2358.
In fact, since the inception of the Part D program, rebates and
other discounts negotiated by PBMs and health insurers have saved Part
D beneficiaries an estimated 21.5 percent on their premiums--or more
than $12 billion savings.\32\ Assuming HHS does not implement this
proposed rule, health insurer and PBM bargaining tools are projected to
save beneficiaries 33.2 percent on premiums--or nearly $50 billion--
from 2017 through 2026.\33\ CSRxP firmly believes that patients should
continue to benefit from the significant premium savings that PBMs and
health insurers have negotiated on their behalf. Clearly raising Part D
premiums through implementation of the rebate rule would not advance
this very important goal and we strongly urge the Committee to
discourage HHS from adopting the rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Milliman. ``Value of Direct and Indirect Remuneration: Impact
on Part D Prescription Drug Plan (PDP) Stakeholders.'' July 2017.
\33\ Ibid.

The profitability of the brand drug industry--the industry
solely responsible for this critical drug pricing problem--will
increase if HHS implements the rebate rule, all unfairly at the expense
of taxpayers, Medicare beneficiaries, and Medicare. CSRxP is extremely
concerned that brand drug makers' profitability will significantly
improve at the substantial expense of taxpayers and federal health
programs if HHS adopts the rebate rule. One estimate projects brand
drug makers will pay out nearly $40 billion less in price discounts in
the Part D coverage gap over 2020-2029 as a result of the proposed
rule.\34\ In other words, brand drug makers that alone caused this dire
drug pricing problem will profit from the very changes the
Administration purports will solve it. At the same time, the HHS Office
of the Actuary projects that Medicare Part D spending will increase by
$196 billion over 10 years if this rule is implemented.\35\ This
enormous increase in Medicare Part D spending hurts beneficiaries and
taxpayers, making the program substantially less financially stable for
its enrollees and the taxpayers who fund it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ 84 FR 2362.
\35\ 84 FR 2359.
Put another way, taxpayers and Medicare beneficiaries perversely
will pay out nearly $200 billion to subsidize the profitability of the
brand drug industry--the very industry solely and entirely responsible
for the drug pricing problem--if HHS implements this rule. To be very
clear, implementation of this proposed rule wrongly and inappropriately
will: (1) put Medicare on less sound financial footing for current and
future beneficiaries, which is particularly problematic for those
seniors on limited, fixed incomes who depend on the program to provide
them health security as they age; and (2) require taxpayers and
Medicare beneficiaries to pad the bottom lines of the brand
pharmaceutical industry--a perverse and adverse outcome that will
financially benefit the very industry that has caused the drug pricing
problem that this proposed rule ostensibly seeks to address. CSRxP
therefore urges on behalf of Medicare beneficiaries and taxpayers that
the Committee dissuade HHS from adopting this proposed rule and instead
consider bipartisan, market-based alternatives that will increase
competition and lower prescription drug prices for consumers.
IV. Conclusion
In conclusion, CSRxP again wishes to express appreciation for your
leadership and the Committee's clear commitment to lowering
prescription drug prices for all Americans. We wish to underscore that
PBMs play a critically important role in lowering drug costs for
patients and taxpayers by serving as the only true check on drug
companies' unilateral ability to set high prices and raise them at
unsustainably high rates. The Administration's reforms to the current
rebate system will not stop drug makers from engaging in these unfair
pricing practices. Rather than improving prescription drug
affordability, these proposed changes will take away the very important
tools that PBMs leverage in negotiations with drug makers to lower
costs for patients. As a result, this rule will further jeopardize
patient access to affordable prescription drugs--all at the expense of
taxpayers who perversely would have to fund higher profits for the drug
industry. Most importantly, these ostensible reforms do nothing to
address the root cause of the problem: brand drug companies--and brand
drug companies alone--set list prices way too high and raise those
prices at unsustainably high rates.
CSRxP firmly believes that without major actions by this Committee and
others, the brand pharmaceutical industry will continue to excessively
profit from their unfair and unsustainable pricing practices that
increase drugs costs and risk access for the patients who need them.
CSRxP looks forward to continue working with the Committee to develop
alternative bipartisan, market-based policies that promote
transparency, foster competition, and incentivize value to improve
affordability for consumers while at the same time maintaining access
to the treatments that can improve health outcomes and save lives.
______
Coalition for Affordable Prescription Drugs
www.affordableprescriptiondrugs.org
Top Reasons Employers Partner With PBMs
Healthy employees are critical to American businesses. More than half
of all Americans get health insurance through their job, putting
employers on the frontlines of managing health care costs. That is why
the majority of employers across the country partner with PBMs to help
their employees get the medications they need at a price they can
afford.
(1) Help manage overall health care costs
PBMs design personalized drug benefit programs to help each employer
provide coverage that is suited for their employees' needs. PBMs drive
savings to lower premiums and out-of-pocket costs, so employees can get
the prescriptions they need to get and stay healthy.
(2) Help make the complicated simple
With over 4 billion prescriptions filled each year, PBMs help employers
ensure their employees get the medicines they need at a price they can
afford.
(3) Negotiate lower prices from drug companies
PBMs leverage the combined purchasing power of all the employers they
work with to negotiate deep discounts from drug makers to drive savings
for employers and consumers. PBMs are expected to save employer-
sponsored plans $349.6 billion over the next decade.
(4) Save patients money at the pharmacy counter by reducing out-of-
pocket costs
PBMs offer discounts available to patients at the pharmacy counter,
saving up to $130 per eligible medication.
(5) Provide patients and their doctors with real-time Rx information
PBMs provide physicians with coverage information at the point of
prescribing and provide consumers with convenient access to drug prices
so they are aware of their out-of-pocket costs. Using these tools,
consumers save $80 on average per prescription fill.
(6) Help make it easier for patients to access and adhere to their
prescriptions
PBMs build national networks of pharmacies and offer prescriptions by
mail to ensure that employees have easy, convenient access to the
medications they need no matter where they live.
(7) Use generic drugs to help lower costs
PBMs identify when there is a lower-cost clinically-equivalent drug.
PBM tools to encourage generic utilization can help reduce drug
spending by up to 19%.
(8) Improve patient safety
PBMs help prevent 100 million medication errors each year by checking
for potentially dangerous drug interactions and sharing this
information with doctors, pharmacists and patients.
(9) Help patients manage chronic conditions
Chronic and mental health conditions drive 90% of health care spending
in the U.S. PBMs have developed disease-specific programs to help
manage and treat chronic conditions, helping doctors and pharmacists
deliver a more seamless patient care experience and improve outcomes.
For example, research has shown that PBMs improve adherence in diabetes
patients, helping to prevent some 480,000 heart failures and 230,000
incidents of kidney disease each year.
______
Statement Submitted by Christine Kasisky, RPh
Eaglescripts Apothecary
Thank you, Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and Finance
Committee members, for having this hearing. My husband and I are
pharmacists and own a small independent pharmacy in Pennsylvania. Being
practicing pharmacists for over 25 years, we have seen many changes in
healthcare. Sadly, it's not for the best. We fully agree with ALL of
Chairman Grassley's opening remarks. We have filled out paperwork
online a long time ago to the Federal Trade Commission on insurances
and agencies working for insurances becoming providers. This is clearly
a conflict of interest for the patient. As you can see, how can Derica
Rice be the Executive Vice President of CVS Health and President of CVS
Caremark? Our personal example: Why is it when CVS Caremark billing is
not working for our independent pharmacy, the CVS helpline says to send
our patients to a CVS pharmacy; CVS is able to process prescriptions.
We also agree with ALL the comments by Ranking Member Wyden. In our
case, we can no longer afford health insurance for us and our 3
children. We are healthy individuals whose monthly premium went up to
$1,700.00 per month with a $7,000.00 deductible on each of us so our
family no longer has health insurance coverage. Rebates did not lower
insurance premiums and do not help patients. I will give some examples
of PBM practices in this letter based on personal experiences with PBMs
and evidence used in articles to state facts. If there are any further
questions, please do not hesitate to call me.
These issues are not new; they have gotten worse. Many bills have
been proposed, but due to payouts and threats nothing is done. See
Forbes, April 9, 2019, ``These Senators Received the Biggest Checks
from CVS, Humana and Other Drug Middlemen Testifying Tuesday,'' by
Michela Tindera. Also, PBMs have groups such as Drug Benefit Solutions
to stop new laws. Jonah Houts, the head of government affairs at
Express Scripts said, ``We were designed to create tension. We're
successful at what we do, and that's why we want to make sure the
lawmakers who are considering legislation that affects us understand
that.'' Another article: ``Was the HHS Drug Pricing Czar Daniel Best's
Death Ruled a Suicide Despite Evidence of Foul Play?'' by David Emery.
Was the 49-year-old PBM insider a victim of foul play? Recently, my
husband and I have been very vocal about PBM practices and January 29,
2019 he received a phoned death threat at closing time in our pharmacy
stating, if he doesn't shut his mouth, they were going to kill him. Who
do you report the wrongful PBM practices to? They need transparency,
regulation and oversight.
Pharmacies have tried taking PBMs to court for their many unfair
practices, but we cannot provide enough information of proof.
``Pharmacy Loses a Patient Poaching Lawsuit to ESI,'' by Natalia
Mazina, March 19, 2019, lists these practices but with unreasonable
contracts and lack of transparency, there is nothing we can do. ``The
Court dismissed the claim holding that pharmacies failed to plead
enough facts to establish this claim.'' We need fair contracts and laws
to support fair business practices.
We keep hearing how PBMs are a BENEFIT manager. There are a huge
amount of social media sites showing examples of the opposite. I just
got off the phone with Robin Agar a CVS patient who I was able to
listen to her calls and frustration with CVS Caremark. Calls and story
can be heard at Tarbell.org, April 8, 2019, ``Sorry, Wrong Number:
Patient Fights Back After CVS Caremark Denies Her the Drug She Needs
and Records Her Calls,'' by Michael Corcoran. It tells a sad story of
how Robin was dispensed the wrong frequency of a drug, and she couldn't
talk to anyone except the help desk who was not a pharmacist or
healthcare professional. It is the same with our independent pharmacy
when we have questions about a prescription. We can only talk to a
``help desk'' who is not a healthcare professional--how is this being a
good middleman? In another instance, she was denied a medication
because CVS Caremark wanted her on a newer more expensive drug. She
went through multiple appeals. In the second appeal, CVS stated her
doctor was unreachable but if you dialed the number they called, it was
for Playtex Corporation. They had called the wrong number despite
having the correct number on her prescription and denied the claim.
Couldn't CVS Caremark realize it was not a doctor's office? This is a
BENEFIT manager? According to Pennsylvania Law, a generic must be
substituted for a brand name unless the doctor or patient wants the
brand. Why is it the PBMs insist on CERTAIN brands? The much cheaper
generic drug is denied; the brand is on formulary, but the pharmacies
get reimbursed for the generic drug price. Who wins in this scenario?
Only the PBM.
At the hearing, every PBM wanted more competition. This is so
untrue. For example, I know of a patient complaining that CVS Pharmacy
wouldn't get a different manufacturer of a generic drug in for them.
The patient had an allergy to the red dye in the generic drug CVS
Pharmacy had in stock so the patient went to a chain competitor. Then,
the patient receives a ``nasty-gram'' from CVS Caremark to use CVS
Pharmacy. The patient had to waste their time and call to explain their
allergy to the stocked CVS medication and how CVS wouldn't order in
another manufacturer that was safe. This is a BENEFIT to the patient?
I recently spoke to Richard Stevens of West Virginia Pharmacists
Association who has many great articles including ``Update on PBMs,''
December 26, 2017. He states, ``It is a fact based on the following
evidence in this summary that PBMs drive up the cost of prescription
benefits which in turn drive up healthcare costs.'' ``PBMs are for-
profit middlemen working to increase their profits at the expense of
payers.'' He writes, ``mandate PBM transparency will give payers across
the public and private spectrum access to more information such as, the
PBM actual reimbursement paid to their pharmacy network. . . .'' ``PBMs
generate profits by hiding spreads on generic and branded drugs by
using different reimbursement methodologies for `reimbursing'
pharmacies versus what they `bill' payers, and multiple contracts allow
PBMs to protect information they consider proprietary.'' Do you
realize, as an independent pharmacy, we don't negotiate any drug
prices? Another middle man called a PSAO (Pharmacy Services
Administration Organization) negotiates our reimbursement rates. When
we asked our PSAO why we are getting below cost on our medicines we
dispense they replied, the PBMs only deal with a few PSAOs so if they
want to remain in business, they just accept the contract from the PBM.
It's a take it or leave it contract. PBMs do not reimburse us correctly
even though we submit our cost for the drug. Where is our proprietary
information? Please have laws for transparency. The article explains
``tricks'' by PBMs. ``Pay the pharmacy according to the PBMs MAC list
yet bill payer according to an AWP Reference Price which allows for
hidden `spreads' on generic drugs which mean profit for the PBM.''
``PBMs exploit a loophole in the federal law to inflate the AWP value
by 25% or more (false AWP.) PBMs use `false' AWPs when they bill
payers.'' ``Numerous court cases have revealed that as a rule PBMs
retain some rebate revenues by re-naming them as `administrative fees.'
For example, the New York State Attorney General's lawsuit against
Express Scripts on behalf of the state employees' Empire Plan.'' West
Virginia looked into their state program and decided to save taxpayer
money and have better patient care by eliminating PBMs in their state
programs. See ``West Virginia Medicaid saves $54.4 million with
prescription drug carve-out,'' by NCPA, March 13, 2019. Despite West
Virginia paying the pharmacies at CORRECT COST of the drug AND a $10.49
dispensing fee, the state saved $54,400,000.00 in one year! In PA we
don't even get reimbursed correctly due to spread pricing and claw
backs. How much are PBMs taking in? Ohio is following West Virginia and
I'm reading other states are investigating PBMs: Arkansas, Kentucky,
Louisiana etc. Please help out all states and create laws of
transparency and oversite. It is estimated a pharmacy needs between $10
and $11 for liabilities, utilities, staffing, rent supplies etc. in
addition to the cost of the drug. If West Virginia can do this and
still save why can't a PBM? We don't even get enough reimbursement for
the drug we dispense and if there is a fee its well below the $10 to
$11 needed. Sometimes there is no dispensing fee or its pennies.
Our Pennsylvania Pharmacist Association in December of 2018 showed
how ``CVS Caremark uses federal tax money to pay itself and others more
than independent pharmacies.'' See ``PPA Capsule Why haven't the chains
been joining us in complaining to the world about reimbursement
pricing?'' A thirty-day supply of the same drug was billed across the
state of PA. CVS Caremark reimbursed CVS Pharmacy the highest $63.05.
Independent pharmacies all over the state got reimbursed $14.24. How is
this fair? Should an insurance or PBM be a provider? How is this fair
to all the other pharmacies? CVS Caremark lies and keeps saying they
reimburse independents more than CVS pharmacies. This isn't even
counting the claw backs. Help! They lied to U.S. Senators under oath!
Our PA Auditor General had hearings about PBMs in which we
testified. I am hoping our state follows Ohio. Their auditor general
became attorney general, Dave Yost. He stated, ``Our review of PBM
practices throughout state government is still ongoing. These are the
first raindrops, but there's a storm coming.'' You can read the full
article ``Ohio Attorney General Takes Pharmacy Benefit Manager to
Court,'' by Catherine Candisky, March 18, 2019. Do you realize in one
year the Ohio Department of Medicaid found OptumRx and CVS Caremark
charged the state $224,000,000.00 more a YEAR for drugs than they were
reimbursing pharmacies? They are a BENEFIT manager who BENEFITED
themselves--not the patient, not the pharmacy, not the taxpayer!
Patients need their correct medicine based on their doctor. We need
paid fairly as pharmacies and need to worry about counseling our
patients not how much we lose on filling a prescription. Healthcare is
getting worse, but let's start now and make it better. Patients deserve
better healthcare than what is in place now. I think we all agree on
that!
______
Morning Consult
Retired Teachers on the Front Lines of the Drug Pricing Debate
By Jane Gilbert
More than two-thirds of Americans report that they are very concerned
about the high cost of prescription drugs. So, as eyes turn to this
week's State of the Union and the 116th Congress focuses on its work in
Washington, drug pricing undoubtedly will be a top priority for
lawmakers who are looking to create meaningful change for patients.
As steward of retiree health care for the Teachers' Retirement System
of the State of Kentucky, I help ensure the integrity of the retirement
benefits for more than 48,000 of our state's former teachers. Our
voice--and that of other purchasers who provide health care and drug
benefits to millions of other Americans--sometimes is lost in the noise
around the drug pricing debate in Washington.
The teachers I work on behalf of paid into this retirement system
throughout their careers, and it's my job to do everything possible to
see that these benefits are there for them in their retirement years.
This includes their access to affordable, quality health care,
including their prescription drugs.
However, my job has become increasingly difficult as drug prices
continue to rise with no end in sight. Recent studies show that over
the last five years, the price of the 20 most prescribed drugs to
seniors increased by an average of 12 percent each year--outpacing the
average annual rate of inflation by 10 times. These rising drug prices
have dire effects not just for retired teachers in Kentucky, but for
retired Medicare beneficiaries across the country with fixed incomes.
To help manage retirees' costs in the face of ever-rising drug prices,
TRS relies on pharmacy benefit managers to negotiate with drug
manufacturers and drive down the prices of prescription drugs through
both discounts and rebates. The PBM that TRS partners with helps TRS
keep prescription drug costs in check by ensuring our retirees have
access to lower-cost generic alternatives and by providing patient-
focused programs and tools, such as medication management tools for
chronic conditions of diabetes and heart disease. Eliminating rebates
in Medicare Part D is a distraction from the real problem. The real
problem is the drug list price that is not established by PBMs.
These programs and tools are critical to keeping TRS' health care costs
from increasing at an unsustainable rate while also improving health
outcomes and avoiding unnecessary, significant medical costs such as
hospital admissions due to adverse drug events. TRS' PBM works hard to
keep health care and drug costs affordable for Kentucky's retired
teachers. In fact, PBMs are expected to save Kentucky patients and
health care purchasers $9.4 billion over the next 10 years.
As policy makers in Washington look for ways to ease the burden of high
drug prices on patients and their families, solutions should be found
that expand and enhance the tools PBMs use on behalf of purchasers and
patients and increase timely competition to improve access. Congress
should focus on public/private partnerships, other market-based or
federal solutions that will put downward pressure on the rising
prescription drug prices set by drug companies and preserve affordable
options for patients.
Retired Kentucky teachers, who dedicated their lives to educating
future generations, shouldn't have to choose between paying for the
prescription drugs they need to get to stay healthy and putting food on
their tables. The stakes are too high to get this wrong.
Jane Gilbert is the director for retiree health care for the Teachers'
Retirement System of the State of Kentucky, which represents more than
120,000 active and retired teachers in the State of Kentucky.
______
National Association of Chain Drug Stores
1776 Wilson Blvd., Suite 200
Arlington, VA 22209
703-549-3001
www.nacds.org
(1) Introduction
The National Association of Chain Drug Stores (NACDS) thanks Chairman
Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and the Members of the United States
Committee on Finance for the opportunity to submit a statement on
``Drug Pricing in America: A Prescription for Change, Part III.''
NACDS and the chain pharmacy industry are committed to partnering with
Congress, HHS, patients, and other healthcare providers to find
solutions to lower the cost of prescription drugs and improve access to
quality, affordable healthcare services. NACDS represents traditional
drug stores, supermarkets and mass merchants with pharmacies. Chains
operate over 40,000 pharmacies, and NACDS' over 80 chain member
companies include regional chains, with a minimum of four stores, and
national companies. Chains employ nearly 3 million individuals,
including 157,000 pharmacists. They fill over 3 billion prescriptions
yearly, and help patients use medicines correctly and safely, while
offering innovative services that improve patient health and healthcare
affordability. NACDS members also include more than 900 supplier
partners and over 70 international members representing 21 countries.
Please visit nacds.org.
As this Committee examines the rising costs of prescription drugs, we
offer the following for your consideration.
(2) Lowering Costs Through Pharmacy DIR Reform
(a)
CMS Proposed Rule
On November 30, 2018, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) issued a proposed rule, ``Modernizing Part D and Medicare
Advantage to Lower Prices and Reduce Out-of-Pocket Expenses'' that
included policy reforms that would increase competition in the Medicare
Part D program and lower beneficiary out-of-pocket costs by reforming
pharmacy direct and indirect remuneration (DIR) fees.\1\ Specifically,
these reforms would lower beneficiary costs by:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 83 Fed. Reg. 62152, 62190-92 (November 30, 2018).

Redefining the ``negotiated price'' to include all pharmacy
price concessions. Including all pharmacy price concessions in the
negotiated price would reduce its amount and result in lower
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
beneficiary cost sharing;

Developing a broad definition of ``price concession'' to include
all forms of discounts, direct or indirect subsidies, or rebates that
serve to reduce costs incurred by Part D sponsors. Again, this would
help ensure the lowest negotiated price and thus) lower beneficiary
cost-sharing; and

Developing standardized pharmacy performance metrics for 2020.
NACDS believes such metrics would be a good first step toward the
development of Medicare Part D pharmacy quality incentive program. HHS
needs to develop a pharmacy quality incentive program to align
incentives between plans, pharmacies and beneficiaries. Pharmacy
incentive payments would support higher quality health outcomes.
Examples are medication optimization and improved medication adherence,
which would improve patient outcomes and reduce healthcare costs.
CMS has recognized the harms caused by pharmacy DIR fees for years.\2\
The use of pharmacy DIR fees grew an 45,000 percent between 2010 and
2017.\3\ Because of this, Medicare beneficiaries are paying more in
out-of-pocket costs, the federal government is not fully understanding
what it is paying for prescription drugs, and retail pharmacies are
conducting business in an environment where they are unsure whether a
payment will be clawed back at some later date as ``DIR.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See, e.g., 82 Fed. Reg. 56336, 56420-21 (November 28, 2017)
(explaining how pharmacy DIR fees increase beneficiary costs and
decrease drug price transparency necessary for competition among
plans); CMS, Medicare Part D--Direct and Indirect Remuneration (DIR)
(January 19, 2017) (noting the negative impact of pharmacy DIR fees on
beneficiary drug costs, taxpayer subsidies and plan cost-avoidance);
CMS, ``Fact Sheet--Medicare Part D--Direct and Indirect Remuneration
(DIR)'' (January 19, 2017), available at https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/
fact-sheets/medicare-part-d-direct-and-indirect-remuneration-dir.
\3\ Id. at 62l47.
CMS also recognizes that pharmacy DIR fees harm pharmacies by reducing
transparency and predictability of reimbursement.\4\ More broadly,
pharmacy DIR fees undermine drug price transparency, which is necessary
for efficient market competition that would reduce prescription drug
costs.\5\ Pharmacy DIR fees undermine the transparency needed to allow
all stakeholders, notably patients and providers, to make informed
decisions about how to best meet healthcare needs. As CMS also points
out, ``consumers cannot efficiently minimize both their costs and costs
to the taxpayers by seeking and finding the lowest-cost drug or a plan
that offers them the lowest-cost drug and pharmacy combinations.''\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Id. at 62191.
\5\ Id. at 62176.
\6\ Id. at 62176.
Beneficiaries are likely unaware that the increasing use of pharmacy
DIR fees has led to inflated drug costs, and thus higher cost-sharing.
The impact of higher cost-sharing for beneficiaries also negatively
impacts medication adherence, leading to increased total cost of care
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
and poorer health outcomes.
Moreover, finalizing pharmacy DIR reform needs to be coupled with the
development of standardized pharmacy quality metrics and a pharmacy
quality incentive program. Without a standard set of metrics,
beneficiaries, pharmacies and plans are unable to make comparisons of
pharmacy quality. As a result, there is not an effective means for
consumers to compare plans and pharmacies within the Part D program,
undercutting market competition, which can contribute to higher costs.
(b)
Better Medication Adherence and Medication Optimization Reduce
Healthcare Costs
Pharmacy DIR fee reform and the development of a standardized pharmacy
quality incentive program will save taxpayers billions of dollars by
aligning incentives for the entire Medicare program, which will
encourage a more systematic investment in pharmacy quality programs
designed to facilitate care coordination, reduce medical errors,
advance population health, and empower and motivate beneficiaries to
achieve better health outcomes through medication optimization services
and improved medication adherence.
Medication optimization services encompass patient-centered activities
that improve health outcomes by addressing medication appropriateness,
effectiveness, safety, adherence, and access. Medication optimization
services delivered by community pharmacies are central to the care of
beneficiaries. Nearly all Americans (91.7 percent) live within 5 miles
of a community retail pharmacy and in 2017 nearly 73 percent of
prescriptions dispensed in the U.S. were filled at retail pharmacies.
Face-to-face interactions with beneficiaries at the point-of-dispensing
allow the pharmacist to counsel and educate the patient and are
critical to achieving national-scale improvements in health outcomes
and lowered costs.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Patients who participated in brief face-to-face counseling
sessions with a community pharmacist at the beginning of statin therapy
demonstrated greater medication adherence and persistency than a
comparison group who did not receive face-to-face counseling. The
intervention group had statistically greater Medication Possession
Ratio (MPR) than the control group every month measured. Taitel M,
Jiang J, Rudkin K, Ewing S, Duncan I; ``The impact of pharmacist face-
to-face counseling to improve medication adherence among patients
initiating statin therapy;'' Patient Prefer Adherence; 2012;6:323-9,
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3340117/. Likewise, a
systematic review was conducted using 51 studies determining the
optimal modes of delivery for interventions to improve adherence to
cardiovascular medications. Among person-dependent interventions
(nonautomated phone calls, in-person interventions), phone calls showed
low success rates (38%). In-person pharmacist interventions were
effective when held in a pharmacy (83% successful) but were less
effective in clinics (38%). Cutrona SL, Chaudhry NK, et al.; ``Modes of
Delivery for Interventions to Improve Cardiovascular Medication
Adherence;'' AJMC; December 2010, https://www.ajmc.com/journais/issue/
2010/2010-12-vol16-n12/ajmc_10dec_cutrona929to942?p=l
The better use of medicines will also reduce medication non-adherence--
that is, patients not taking their medications as prescribed by their
healthcare provider. Medication non-adherence contributes to $100-290
billion in unnecessary healthcare expenditures every year as a result
of increased hospitalizations and other avoidable, expensive medical
services.\8\, \9\, \10\ Numerous studies have
shown that reducing patient drug costs increases medication adherence,
which, in turn, reduces overall healthcare costs. For example, a recent
study found that medication nonadherence for diabetes, heart failure,
hyperlipidemia, and hypertension resulted in billions of dollars in
Medicare fee-for-service expenditures, millions of hospital days, and
thousands of emergency department visits that could have been
avoided.\11\ Specifically, the study estimated that avoidable costs
from medication nonadherence of four chronic conditions is $28.9
billion, representing 8 percent of the total expenditures. A 2017 white
paper found that the direct medical costs and consequences related to
not taking medication as prescribed is estimated to be 7 to 13 percent
of national health spending annually--approximately $250 billion to
$460 billion in 2017, translated to a potential cost to taxpayers of $6
trillion over 10 years.\12\ And a 2016 cost-benefit analysis concluded
that between one and two thirds of medicine related hospitalizations
are caused by poor adherence. Improving adherence could result in
annual per-person savings ranging from $1,000 to $7,000, depending on
the disease state.\13\ Multiple, credible sources have drawn the same
conclusion: medication non-adherence is a costly, preventable problem
that dramatically affects total cost of care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Rosenbaum L, Shrank WH; ``Taking Our Medicine--Improving
Adherence in the Accountability Era;'' New England Journal of Medicine;
August 22, 2013.
\9\ Network for Excellence in Health Innovation; ``Bend the Curve:
A Health Care Leader's Guide to High Value Health Care;'' 2011.
\10\ The NCPIE Coalition; ``Enhancing Prescription Medicine
Adherence: A National Action Plan;'' 2007.
\11\ Lloyd, Jennifer T, Maresh, Sha, Powers, Christopher, Shrank,
WH, Alley, Dawn E; ``How Much Does Medication Nonadherence Cost the
Medicare Fee-for-Service Program?''; Medical Care, January 2019.
\12\ ``A Treatable Problem: Addressing Medication Nonadherence by
Reforming Government Barriers to Care Coordination;'' Prescriptions for
a Healthy America; October 2017.
\13\ Patterson JA, et al.; ``Cost-Benefit of Appointment-based
Medication Synchronization in Community Pharmacies;'' American Journal
of Managed Care; 2016.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(c)
Committee Support
As detailed above, pharmacy DIR reform as proposed by CMS would lead to
lower prescription drug costs for both Medicare Part D beneficiaries
and federal taxpayers. In addition, pharmacy DIR reform would lead to
better medication adherence among Part D beneficiaries, which would
lead to further healthcare cost savings. With these cost saving
benefits in mind, we urge the Committee to communicate support to CMS
in favor of finalizing pharmacy DIR reform, including the development
of standardized pharmacy quality metrics that would lead to a pharmacy
quality incentive program.
(3)
Reform to Manufacturer Rebates
(a)
NACDS Supports Goals of Proposed Rule but Changes and
Clarifications are Needed
The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and the Office of
Inspector General (OIG) recently released a proposed rule with the goal
of lowering the cost of prescription drugs by requiring that
manufacturer reductions in prescription drug prices to health plans/
PBMs be passed on to the patient at the pharmacy counter. We support
the goals of the proposed rule and believe the changes could lead to
reduced patient out-of-pocket costs and could lower government program
costs by improving medication adherence. However, we believe HHS and
OIG must include specific revisions to the final version, as well as
issue other regulatory or sub regulatory guidance to maximize the
impacts of passing manufacturer reductions in price to patients at the
point-of-sale, reduce costs for all stakeholders, and increase
efficiencies by utilizing and leveraging current capabilities and
technologies. Below we summarize the changes and clarifications that
are needed in the final rule or in concurrent guidance:

Timeliness of payments--Payment of discounts to pharmacies under
the HHS/OIG proposal must follow current prompt payment requirements.
Without prompt pay requirements applying to all elements of pharmacy
claims, pharmacies would face devastating cash flow challenges
resulting from having to wait months after dispensing medications
before receiving payment of manufacturer reductions in price.

Transparency--The total reimbursement due to the pharmacy,
including the amount of any payment related to manufacturer reductions
in price, must be known by the pharmacy at the point-of-sale at the
time of dispensing. Failure to account for the manufacturer reductions
in price at the point-of-sale claim adjudication would make it nearly
impossible for pharmacies to track the collection of open receivables
and could put pharmacies at substantial financial risk.

Protection from Unnecessary Fees--Pharmacies should not be
responsible for fees or other costs associated with administering
manufacturer reductions in price. Specifically, pharmacies should not
pay additional transaction, administrative, or other fees either
directly, or indirectly through reduced reimbursements. The total and
final reimbursement to the pharmacy must consist of the full contracted
reimbursement from the plan/PBM, the reduction in price negotiated
between the manufacturer and the plan/PBM, and the cost-sharing payment
from the beneficiary and shall not be affected by the reduction in
price negotiated between the PBM and the manufacturer.

Maximize Efficiency and Minimize Additional Costs--The final
rule should maximize the use of existing technology, standards,
systems, and business relationships. A new system potentially requiring
the development of new capacities and technologies for data sharing,
processing and auditing of payments to pharmacies, as well as new
financial relationships, will only add unnecessary cost and complexity
into the healthcare system.
(b)
HHS Must Address Pharmacy DIR First
HHS must finalize reforms in the use of pharmacy DIR fees in the
Medicare Part D program (as discussed in detail above) before moving
forward with finalizing changes to the treatment of manufacturer
rebates. Moving forward with reforms to manufacturer rebates without
reforming the use of pharmacy DIR fees could incentivize even more
aggressive use of pharmacy DIR fees, which would increase beneficiary
and taxpayer costs, and lead to poorer medication adherence and
worsening overall beneficiary health. We ask the Committee to
communicate with HHS the importance of finalizing the proposed CMS rule
that reforms pharmacy DIR before finalizing manufacturer rebate reform.
(4)
Electronic Prescribing and the Part D Prescription Drug Plan
NACDS supports the efforts of HHS and CMS in integrating a patient-
specific real-time benefit tool (RTBT) into the Part D benefit to drive
lower prescription drug spending and minimize beneficiary out-of-pocket
costs. Beneficiaries often arrive at the pharmacy counter with little
or no insight as to what a medication will cost them, which can lead to
overuse of unnecessarily expensive medications and the underuse of
essential medications. We strongly agree with CMS that ``reducing
medication cost also yields benefits in patients' medication
adherence'' and that ``increasing patient cost-share for a medication
[is] associated with a significant decrease in medication
adherence.''\14\ The integration of a RTBT into the Part D benefit will
give providers and beneficiaries the information needed to make better
informed choices on their healthcare treatment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ 83 Fed. Reg. 62152, 62165 (November 30, 2018).
NACDS cautions that policies utilizing RTBTs must be designed in a
manner that allows the prescriber to make a determination about whether
a prescribed drug is covered by the beneficiary's insurance plan
without fear of ``steering'' a beneficiary to certain pharmacies or to
mail order. This could be accomplished by requiring the beneficiary to
select his or her pharmacy of choice prior to the prescriber utilizing
the RTBT to access the enrollee cost-sharing information. Moreover, we
believe that the RTBT must provide sufficient information to the
prescriber and pharmacy to facilitate clinical decision making and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
assist in determining optimal patient medication regimens.
RTBTs must also be able to take into consideration pharmacy-level cost-
containment programs, such as $4.00 generic programs, or patient
assistance programs. Moreover, absent system safeguards, RTBTs can
inadvertently drive physician prescribing of expensive, therapeutically
alternatives that are subject to high rebate arrangements between PBMs
and manufacturers. Such results would negate the goal of using a RTBT
and needlessly drive up overall spending in the Part D program.
Policies utilizing RTBTs must:
1.
Preserve patient's right to pharmacy selection at the
outset;
2.
Ensure accurate and complete patient's out-of-pocket costs
at formulary and pharmacy levels;
3.
Avoid unintended economic costs to taxpayers and
beneficiaries associated with steering patients to therapeutic
alternatives that are subject to ``spread pricing'' due to
excessive list prices and rebates;
4.
No commercial messaging within RTBT transmissions; and
5.
Ensure information integrity, fairness and accuracy.
We ask members of the Committee to communicate to HHS the need for
RTBTs to be implemented in a way that serves its goals of providing
timely information that would lower prescription drug costs.
(5)
Prohibition Against Gag Clauses in Pharmacy Contracts
NACDS applauds Congress for passing the ``Know the Lowest Price Act of
2018'' (Pub. L. 115-262) that prohibits plans from restricting their
network pharmacies from informing their plan enrollees of the
availability of prescription drugs at a cash price that is below what
that the enrollee would be charged (either the cost sharing amount or
the negotiated price when it is less than the enrollee's cost sharing
amount) for the same drug under the enrollee's plan. We are encouraged
that CMS states that the measure will become effective with the plan
year starting January 1, 2020. The prohibition of gag clauses in
contracts among plans, Medicare Advantage plans, PBMs, and pharmacies
will enhance patient access to medications, enable pharmacists to have
improved relationships with patients, and keep prescription drug costs
for patients to a minimum.
(6)
Conclusion
NACDS thanks the Committee for your consideration of our comments. We
urge members of the Committee to ask HHS to use their authority to
include pharmacy DIR fee reform, the development of standardized
pharmacy quality metrics, and movement toward the implementation of a
pharmacy quality incentive program in the Final Part D Rule for FY2020.
We also urge the Committee to communicate to HHS support for moving
forward with requiring manufacturer reduction in prices be passed on to
patients at the pharmacy counter in a manner that does not
unnecessarily burden the prescription drug supply chain or jeopardize
patient access to their medications, and that doing so should occur
following efforts to finalize pharmacy DIR reform. Finally, we ask
members of the Committee to communicate to HHS the benefit of
incorporating a RTBT into the Medicare Part D program in a manner that
will drive lower spending on prescription drugs while protecting
patient choice.
______
National Association of Specialty Pharmacy
300 New Jersey Ave., Suite 900
Washington, DC 20001
www.naspnet.org
The National Association of Specialty Pharmacy (NASP) thanks Chairman
Grassley, Ran king Member Wyden, and the members of the United States
Committee on Finance for the opportunity to submit a statement for the
hearing record for ``Drug Pricing in America: A Prescription for
Change, Part III.'' NASP strongly shares the Committee's goals of
lowering out of-pocket costs for Medicare beneficiaries, improving
price transparency, and ensuring patients have continued and affordable
access to needed medications. We thank the Committee for its ongoing
focus and dialogue on these and other key issues that affect specialty
patients and the specialty pharmacies that work to address their
complex health care needs.
NASP and its members are committed to the practice of specialty
pharmacy with a focus on the patients served to ensure better clinical
outcomes while reducing overall healthcare costs. NASP defines a
specialty pharmacy as a state licensed and registered pharmacy that is
accredited by, or in the process of specialty pharmacy accreditation by
an independent, third-party accreditor and solely or largely provides
medications and patient medication management services to patients with
serious health conditions requiring treatment with complex medication
therapies. NASP represents the entire spectrum of the specialty
pharmacy industry from the nation's leading independent specialty
pharmacies and practicing pharmacists to small and mid-size pharmacy
benefit managers (PBMs), pharmaceutical and biotechnology manufacturers
of specialty drugs; group purchasing organizations; wholesalers and
distributors; integrated delivery systems and health plans; and
technology and data management companies. With over 100 corporate
members and 1,500 individual members, NASP is the unified voice of
specialty pharmacy in the United States.
As this Committee seeks to consider changes to the ways patients access
prescription medications in the United States, we offer the following
comments for your consideration, with a specific focus on the need to
reduce patient costs by ensuring a competitive market of specialty
pharmacies and allowing patients with complex medical conditions to
have transparent and affordable access to specialty medications.
Lowering Medicare Part D Beneficiary Out-of-Pocket Costs--DIR Reform
Amending the Definition of Negotiated Price and Providing Pharmacy
Price Concessions at the Point-of-Sale
Specialty pharmacies have seen dramatic growth in the collection of
non-transparent pharmacy direct and indirect remuneration fees (DIR
fees) by Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs) since 2012. The Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) has determined that DIR fees
issued as pharmacy price concessions grew more than 45,000 percent
between 2010 and 2017,\1\ with much of that growth occurring after Part
D plan sponsors or their PBMs stood up so-called ``performance-based''
pharmacy payment arrangements that served to institute sizeable
reductions in pharmacy reimbursement and zero savings for
beneficiaries. In fact, plan sponsors sometimes opt for higher
negotiated drug prices in exchange for higher DIR and, in some cases,
even prefer a higher net cost drug over a cheaper alternative because
any DIR received on the back end that exceeds the projections factored
into the plan's bid contributes primarily to plan profits--not lower
premiums for beneficiaries.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 83 Fed. Reg. 62174.
\2\ 82 Fed. Reg. 56420.
In its review of this concern, CMS has also highlighted the growing
disparity between gross Part D drug costs calculated based on costs of
drugs at the point-of-sale, and net Part D drug costs that account for
all DIR.\3\ This disparity is in large part due to the post sale
adjudication of so called ``performance-related'' DIR fees that many
PBMs collect from pharmacies months after claims are submitted and
reimbursed. As pharmacy price concessions increase on gross drug costs
and are applied after the point-of-sale, specialty patients are paying
higher and higher cost-sharing (copays and coinsurance). As a result,
specialty beneficiaries are forced into the catastrophic phase of Part
D much sooner than if pharmacy price concessions were accounted for at
the point-of-sale. Specialty pharmacies know first-hand how this higher
cost-sharing impedes beneficiary access to medications. For specialty
patients, missing doses or stopping therapy altogether often results in
serious setbacks in treatment, and may increase visits to emergency
departments or necessitate more costly therapeutic interventions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ 82 Fed. Reg. 56419-56428.
NASP agrees with the administration's position that DIR fees ultimately
increase costs across the Part D program shifting financial liability
away from the Part D Plan sponsor to the beneficiary, to the Medicare
program and ultimately, to taxpayers. In late 2018, CMS issue d a
proposed regulation, ``Modernizing Part D and Medicare Advantage to
Lower Drug Prices and Reduce Out-of-Pocket Expenses,''\4\ which
included a proposal to amend the definition of negotiated price and
move all pharmacy price concessions, including direct and indirect
remuneration (DIR) fees to the point-of-sale as soon as calendar year
2020. NASP strongly supports the administration's proposal and has
valued the opportunity to work with the Department of Health as well as
the broad pharmacy stakeholder community to encourage these efforts and
offer recommendations on how to successfully implement pharmacy
reimbursement reforms in a way that is most beneficial to the specialty
patients served by the Part D program. Addressing this needed reform
can be done via regulation or by passing legislation. NASP has endorsed
bipartisan and companion legislation, S. 640 and H.R. 1034, the PHAIR
Pricing Act of 2019 that would seek to eliminate DIR fees and implement
a system of fairly assessing pharmacy quality. NASP specifically
recommends the following legislative or regulatory actions be taken:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ 83 Fed. Reg. No. 231, November 30, 2018; CMS-4180-P; RIN 0938-
AT92.

Redefine ``negotiated price'' at 42 CFR Sec. 423.100 to include
all pharmacy price concessions and to reflect the ``lowest possible
price'' at the point-of-sale. Making this change will reduce
beneficiary cost sharing and eliminate retroactive pharmacy price
concessions, providing increased price transparency for patients and
pharmacies.

Develop a broad definition of ``price concession'' to include
all forms of discounts, direct or indirect subsidies, or rebates that
serve to reduce costs incurred by Part D sponsors. NASP believes
codifying a definition is necessary to support consistent accounting of
amounts that are pharmacy price concessions by Part D sponsors.

Ensure reasonable reimbursement to pharmacies participating in
the Medicare Part D program so that the payment received is not less
than a pharmacy's cost to dispense. Reimbursement below cost can force
pharmacies out of networks and even out of business, limiting
beneficiary access to the pharmacy of their choice and needed for their
specialty conditions.
Establishing Standardized Pharmacy Quality Metrics and Defining
Specialty Pharmacy
Specialty medications are more clinically complex than most other
prescription medications and are used to treat patients with serious
and often life threatening conditions including cancer, hepatitis C,
rheumatoid arthritis, HIV/AIDS, multiple sclerosis, cystic fibrosis,
organ transplantation, human growth hormone deficiencies, and
hemophilia. Current statute and regulations do not define specialty
drugs, but regulations instead classify specialty drugs as those
exceeding a threshold of $670. The cost of a drug should NOT be the
basis on which a medication therapy is classified as ``specialty.'' In
fact, there are many low-cost medications that are considered by
clinicians to be specialty medications because of the complexity of the
patient and diseases the medications are used to treat and the unique
and labor-intensive services required to assure proper utilization and
maximize a patient's clinical outcome.
A specialty pharmacy is needed to support the dispensing of specialty
drugs, particularly for drugs that are not routinely available, as well
as the extensive patient engagement needed to support clinical
management of a patient on specialty therapies. Current statute and
regulations do not define specialty pharmacy, which contributes to
problems in ensuring network adequacy for patients to access specialty
drugs and the specialty pharmacy of their clinician's and personal
choice. It also creates unnecessary but fixable challenges in the
effort to establish a quality-based payment system for specialty
pharmacies. Specialty pharmacies provide:

High-touch patient education. Specialty pharmacies serve as an
extension of a physician's office, educating the patient on both the
disease and the prescribed therapy. Many specialty pharmacists have
specialized areas of clinical expertise, which the prescribing
physician relies upon to help manage the patient and their disease.

Patient-centric medication management. Many specialty therapies
require in-depth patient/caregiver therapy education, assistance with
medication administration, counseling regarding side effects, and
continuous monitoring.

Navigating coverage and payment issues. Plan sponsors and PBMs
typically utilize significant formulary management tools to ensure
medically necessary utilization of specialty drugs, including prior
authorization, step therapy, quantity limits and therapeutic switching.
In response, specialty pharmacies work with prescribing physicians and
payers to facilitate the coverage process, and as needed, determine
options for patients to afford their medications.
Specialty pharmacies are severely impacted by ``performance based'' DIR
fees as these fees are assessed using wholly inapplicable performance
or quality metrics for drugs that are NOT dispensed by specialty
pharmacies and disease states not being managed by specialty
pharmacies. Often times, such broader pharmacy measures created by plan
sponsors and PBMs are not even appropriate for specialty pharmacy
evaluation, as the specialty pharmacy cannot influence the measure
(e.g., generic pricing performance). When a specialty pharmacy receives
retroactive financial penalties for not meeting PBM-applied DIR
performance metrics that are unrelated to the drugs the pharmacy
dispenses and the disease states these pharmacies are helping to
manage, the pharmacy faces significant financial uncertainty, as their
actual reimbursement rate cannot be determined until well after they
have dispensed the medication. Oftentimes when the reimbursement is
reconciled, it is far less than the actual cost of the drug, which is
further complicated by the cost of the requisite services provided by
specialty pharmacies to support the patient's journey on the drug. This
situation threatens the ability for specialty pharmacies--particularly
independent specialty pharmacies that simply do not have the ability to
offset lost revenues or costs with other portions of their businesses--
to remain network providers, risking access and satisfaction for
beneficiaries.
NASP specifically recommends the following regulatory or legislative
actions be taken to address concerns with the current DIR performance
metrics:

Have the Department of Health and Human Services work with
stakeholders to establish and have HHS oversee the creation of
standardized pharmacy performance metrics that are calculated and
reimbursed separate and apart from the negotiated drug price at the
point of sale to ensure any incentive payments tied to metrics: (1) do
not increase costs for beneficiaries; and (2) appropriately assess the
actual quality performance of a pharmacy in a manner that is specific
to the pharmacy type, drugs dispensed, and disease states being
managed.

Establish a definition of specialty pharmacy to ensure that
performance metrics are appropriate by pharmacy type--with specialty
pharmacy defined as a type, similar to how retail is defined in
regulation.
These recommendations are both included in the pending Proposed
Medicare Part D regulation and included in the bipartisan companion
bills S. 640 and H.R. 1034, the Phair Pricing Act of 2019.
Protecting Access to Specialty Drugs and Services and Market
Competition
The Medicare Part D Program requires plan sponsors to offer any willing
pharmacy (AWP) an in network pharmacy contract with standard terms and
conditions that are reasonable and relevant.\5\ Congress created the
AWP requirements to ensure a competitive marketplace in order to lower
costs and improve beneficiary access to all types of pharmacies. NASP
has serious concerns that Part D plans and their PBMs that own their
own specialty pharmacies continue to find opportunities to circumvent
statute and exclude other specialty pharmacies from network
participation. They look at regulatory definition of ``pharmacy type''
referenced by the AWP statute and see that specialty pharmacy is not
defined in statute or regulation, and they use that to circumvent AWP
requirements in place today. Efforts to exclude network access for
specialty pharmacies include: offering contracts to specialty
pharmacies with unreasonably low and non-negotiable reimbursement rates
and requiring PBM accreditation (w/fees) for already accredited
specialty pharmacies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Social Security Act (SSA) Sec. 1860D-4(b)(1)(A).
By excluding other specialty pharmacies from its network, the PBM
therefore drives more distribution revenue to its own subsidiary
specialty pharmacy such that PBM is using its status as a
``gatekeeper'' in one line of business to drive business to another
line of business that it owns, which is a specialty pharmacy. The PBM
that owns its own specialty pharmacy is therefore incentivized to
exclude other competitor specialty pharmacies. In doing so, the PBM
that owns a specialty pharmacy achieves two important financial goals.
First, to drive greater revenue and profit to its own specialty
pharmacy given that the PBM-owned specialty pharmacy is obviously in
network with its parent corporate entity. Second, to create greater
leverage in its purchasing power against manufacturers and wholesalers
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
as a result of its greater influence in the network.
NASP urges protections to ensure that plan sponsors and PBMs that own
their own specialty pharmacy business cannot provide more advantageous
pricing to their own entities in an effort to limit a pharmacy network
and gain greater market share. The exclusion of qualified specialty
pharmacies from payer networks has negative effects on specialty
pharmacy care for patients. Due to a smaller number of choices,
patients with complex and rare disorders may lack access to beneficial
clinical programs specific to their disease state. Networks that
include a limited number of pharmacies create confusion for
beneficiaries and medical providers and routinely result in significant
delays in treatment, may worsen health conditions and increase
hospitalizations and patient health care costs.
As the administration and Congress contemplate regulatory and statutory
changes that would require that rebates between manufacturers and PBMs
be moved to the point of sale, NASP urges careful consideration over
loopholes that could serve to the advantage of PBMs. for example, some
large specialty pharmacies are under common ownership and control by
PBMs and/or plan sponsors. NASP is concerned that a PBM/plan sponsor
could potentially offer a manufacturer favorable formularies or other
coverage support for its products in exchange for a purchase discount,
instead of a rebate. There must be protections to ensure that
arrangements for manufacturer price concessions are not more favorable
for PBM/plan affiliated specialty pharmacies than they would be when
the same drug is dispensed by a network specialty pharmacy. Reforms to
the system must not result in a deliberate pricing disadvantage for
network specialty pharmacies that are unable to influence formulary
placement, allowing PBM/plan-owned specialty pharmacies to gain a
market advantage. Providing statutory or regulatory protections against
such practices is all the more important when addressing pricing for
drugs where there are limited drug alternatives for patients, such as
those with rare and other specialized conditions. Specialty pharmacies
provide medication and services that are tailored to managing these
unique populations. Network adequacy and ensuring that the contracting
negotiations and practices that result from reforms to the system do
not violate any willing pharmacy requirements is essential to ensuring
access to these medications for patients.
NASP specifically recommends the following regulatory or legislative
act ions be taken to protect market competition for specialty
pharmacies:

Establish a definition of specialty pharmacy to eliminate
loopholes in current AWP statutory requirements and ensure that plan
sponsors do not limit network opportunities for non-PBM owned specialty
pharmacies.

Require regulatory protections against anticompetitive market
efforts to ensure that plan sponsors and PBMs that own their own
specialty pharmacy business cannot provide more advantageous pricing to
their own entities in an effort to limit a pharmacy network and gain
greater market share.

Require regulatory protections by codifying provisions in
existing CMS guidance and manuals to protect pharmacies against
reimbursement that is below a pharmacy's drug acquisition cost.

Establish a pharmacy appeal process during the plan sponsor bid
process that allow pharmacies to appeal when reimbursement is below a
pharmacy's drug acquisition cost.
Conclusion
NASP thanks the Committee for consideration of our comments. The
recommendations provided can help meet the Committee's goals of
decreasing out-of-pocket beneficiary costs for prescribed medications,
improving transparency in the drug pricing channel, and ensuring a
competitive specialty pharmacy marketplace. NASP looks forward to
working with the Committee as it continues to address drug pricing
policy reforms.
______
Pharmacists United for Truth and Transparency
326 S. Main Street
Winston-Salem, NC 27101
https://www.truthrx.org/
April 19, 2019
U.S. Senate
Committee on Finance
Dirksen Senate Office Bldg.
Washington, DC 20510-6200
Honorable Members of the Senate Finance Committee,
On Tuesday April 9th and Wednesday April 10th the Senate Finance
Committee and House Energy and Commerce Committee respectively convened
hearings to question pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) about their role
in the high cost of prescription drugs. Despite attempts by both the
Senate and House to obtain straight answers to straightforward
questions, the PBMs responses were limited to a handful of tired
talking points about ``saving clients' money'' and ``passing 100% of
rebates through to their clients.''
While neither hearing resulted in transparency or even a clear
definition of ``client,'' we applaud Rep. Buddy Carter for calling
attention to the relationship between PBM-negotiated rebates and
insurance companies--notably the ones that own PBMs and those that are
PBM-owned. That is to say, PBMs with financial ties to insurance
companies are very often negotiating and keeping rebates and fees
extracted from those rebates for their parent company. This is another
way for them to use the rebate to benefit their own bottom line and
continue to cut the public out of these ``savings.''
America's prescription drug system is irreparably broken and the
``fixes'' that have been proposed and implemented so far have only made
the situation worse. These fixes include turning state- and federally-
funded Medicaid and Medicare programs over to private contractors in
the name of saving beneficiaries (patients) money. But thanks to recent
state investigations, we now know PBMs can game the system to drive
small pharmacies out of business while bilking taxpayers out of
hundreds of millions of dollars.
Only full regulatory oversight of PBMs and complete transparency among
members of the prescription drug supply chain will enable us to fix our
broken system. Independent pharmacists know this includes but is not
limited to:

Ending the practice of manufacturer rebates to PBMs, which
increases drug list price and ultimately drives prices up for the
patient.

Eliminating the practice of spread pricing.

Eliminating Direct and Indirect Remuneration (DIR) fees that are
charged back to pharmacies months after the patient's initial
transaction and which increased an average per store in the U.S. from
$74,711 in 2017 to $129,614 per store in 2018. There is no evidence
these DIR fees have lowered costs or premiums for Medicare Part D
beneficiaries.

Eliminating the use of multiple reimbursement reference points
for the same drug including maximum allowable cost (MAC) lists, generic
effective rate (GER) and brand effective rate (BER), which vary by
pharmacy and financial affiliation to the PBM. It ultimately prevents
pharmacies from being able to recoup the costs to purchase the drug.
Pharmacies losing money will close, thereby threatening patients'
access to their medications especially in the rural and underserved
communities.

Standardizing drug acquisition costs for pharmacies via Centers
for Medicaid and Medicare National Average Drug Acquisition Cost
(NADAC) database plus a professional dispensing fee indexed to state
Medicaid and/or NACDS/NCPA survey for state and federally-funded plans.
This would allow for price predictability for patients and their
pharmacies and end the stressful and embarrassing ``how much does this
cost'' guessing game.

Eliminating per-prescription commissions and other per-
prescription, per-month fees paid to insurance plan brokers who shuttle
the largest PBMs to the largest plan sponsors ensuring competition at
the top is limited to a few multi-billion dollar players. Per-
prescription per-month broker commissions add hundreds of millions of
extra costs to patient and end-payer premiums.

Prohibiting PBMs from owning pharmacies and steering patients to
those pharmacies through fear tactics, misleading propaganda and/or
financial incentives not also available to other pharmacies in the PBM
network.

Eliminating the practice of ``self-dealing'' to PBM-owned
pharmacies in order to pay those pharmacies a higher reimbursement than
non-PBM owned pharmacies.

Eliminating restrictive practices that result in a
``distribution monopoly'' that includes, but is not limited to,
mandatory mail order, specialty drugs, biosimilars and restricting the
right of other pharmacies to provide patients with a 90-day supply.
These practices create conditions for rampant price gouging as well as
limit patient accessibility and choice and are blatantly anti-
competitive.

Further eliminating monopolization by protecting pharmacies from
excessive PBM-imposed credentialing requirements to hamper their
ability to mail medications or dispense certain drugs.

Eliminating transactions fees charged to pharmacies for everyday
business tasks including submitting patient claims for reimbursement,
which can amount to as much as $1,500 per month in service of patients.
PBMs are fighting VERY hard to protect their privacy, defaulting to
tired claims of ``proprietary information'' and ``trade secrets'' when
asked the most basic questions about their pricing practices. They use
a tired scare tactic by making ominous and nonsensical threats about
``drug prices going up'' if transparency is mandated.
America's high drug price crisis can be fixed, and Americans should be
the ones to fix it. We call on our country's legislators, healthcare
providers and healthcare business leaders to work together to resolve
the problem together to make American prescription drugs affordable
again.
Respectfully,
M. Scott Newman, PharmD
President, Pharmacists United for Truth and Transparency
Independent Pharmacy Owner
[emailprotected]
______
Pharmacists United for Truth and Transparency--Illinois
April 19, 2019
U.S. Senate
Committee on Finance
Dirksen Senate Office Bldg.
Washington, DC 20510-6200
Honorable Members of the Senate Finance Committee,
I am writing to you on behalf of the community and independent
pharmacies in Illinois to express our collective frustration and
concern at the lack of accountability in the answers the pharmacy
benefit manager (PBMs) representatives provided during the April 9th
hearing.
It is disconcerting to hear the spokespersons of these Fortune 100
corporations, who themselves represent an industry grossing more than
$300 billion annually, make claims of transparency, fair payment
practices, and passing on rebates to their clients. We know from
direct, everyday experience that many of the statements they made were
misleading at best.
Between the various hearings, Congress has spoken to patients, drug
manufacturers, pharmacy benefit managers and insurers. To the best of
our knowledge, Congress has never asked a pharmacist to share their
view--how we handle situations in which patients discover they can't
afford their medication; or what we must deal with when PBMs refuse to
reimburse the acquisition cost of a medication but justifying charging
us exorbitant Direct and Indirect Remuneration (DIR) fees. In Illinois,
community pharmacies were charged an average of $61,300 per store in
2017. In 2018, community pharmacies were charged an average of $104,658
per store at the same time reimbursements back to pharmacies for
dispensed prescriptions were cut.
In the words of a pharmacy owner in southeastern Illinois, whose
pharmacy also serves a town with a population of less than 650:
``We have been open for 25 years and very established. We
average 200-225 rxs/day. I also own a telepharmacy. . . . My
reimbursements are so poor that the cost of the vial, label,
drug, electricity, tech time, and registered pharmacist's time
puts me in the negative for most generic drugs. Our local state
senator told some other local independents that we should find
other sources to buy cheaper. But when we get paid cents on the
dollar . . . that doesn't even cover basic expenses. My relief
pharmacist (who only works 1 day per week average) made more
than I took home last year. . . . I have been cutting back on
extra expenses. . . . I just wish the Execs from PBMs would
answer as to why they are taking premiums from the patients,
rebates from the manufacturers and DIR fees from the pharmacy.
And how they can sleep at night knowing they are killing small
independent pharmacies like myself. This is just not right!
They say they are for transparency . . . explain why they have
to have DIR fees. I would also like to be paid the same as any
chain is, that way the patient not the PBM can decide which
pharmacy they go to.''
For non-PBM owned pharmacies, DIR fees, transaction fees, network
certification fees--even fees for calling the PBM help desk--are the
reality. Excessive fees result in an unsustainable system that
ultimately limits choice and access to medications for patients by
forcing the closure of small business pharmacies. Last year, 90
pharmacies were forced to close their doors in Illinois.
PBMs, on the other hand, are a growing business. Their ``volume power''
is enormous, never more so since acquiring or being acquired by larger
insurers (CVS/Aetna; Cigna/Express Scripts). PBMs are money makers--
there's no other reason an insurer would seek to acquire a PBM other
than to gain more of an already almost closed market. Some 80% of all
prescriptions processed in the United States go through CVS Caremark,
Express Scripts or OptumRx.
In the words of a pharmacy owner in central Illinois:
The PBM execs kept focusing on specialty meds, which of course
are the highest priced items. They probably do help to some
extent to keep those prices in check (while most of the time
shutting out the independents from filling these
prescriptions). However, if I had had an opportunity to ask
them one question, it would have been: ``Do you think
reimbursing a pharmacy under a dollar (total reimbursement) for
a 30 day supply of ANY medication is considered egregious and
predatory pricing?'' We have examples day in and day out of
these predatory claims (priced by our main competitor, CVS
Caremark). Here are a few: #30 Lisinopril 10mg Tab--$0.57; #30
Amlodipine 5mg Tab--$0.42; #30 Lisinopril 40mg Tab--$1.07; #60
Lorazepam 0.5mg Tab--$1.25; #30 Citalopram 40mg Tab--$0.57; #30
Amlodipine 10mg Tab--$0.33. My concern, along with all of the
independents, is with this type of predatory pricing, patients
will lose access to care once the independents are gone. I am
unaware of any other retail business ill which the business'
main competitor is allowed to set their competitor's retail
price. The highest percent of the drug spend is brand and
specialty, but the highest percent of prescriptions filled is
in generic drugs, for which their pricing is predatory.
The PBM system is rigged in favor of the real client--the insurance
company that owns the PBM. These are the ``clients'' who benefit from
receipt of manufacturer rebates. The constant comment that drug prices
will go up if rebates disappear is just another way of saying, ``We
will raise our prices to account for the loss of the rebate revenue
stream.''
This letter addresses only a few anti-competitive practices PBMs use in
their daily interface with pharmacies. There are many more you don't
hear about, and wouldn't because pharmacies are subject to
confidentiality agreements beyond the ability to disclose cheaper-
priced drug options to patients. Some of these other practices involve
the use of multiple Maximum Allowable Cost (MAC) lists, which allows
the PBM to reimburse a pharmacy for the same drug at a variety of
different reimbursement levels; audit abuses, in which PBMs can
withhold reimbursement and penalize a pharmacy literally hundreds or
thousands of dollars for simple mistakes such as a typo on a submission
claim; and avoiding responsibility for paying local sales or other tax,
forcing pharmacies to pick up those charges instead.
It would be difficult to know these practices are taking place if you
didn't know what questions to ask. A former pharmacy owner from
Illinois asked that we include his list of questions and commentary, in
hopes these questions might be helpful in the future. The questions are
attached for your reference.
Pharmacists who speak up about PBM abuse are often called ``self-
serving'' and ``greedy'' by PBMs. Nothing could be further from the
truth. An attack on pharmacy is an attack on the patient. Patients
depend on their pharmacies for access to their medication but also look
to their pharmacists for help and guidance in medication therapy. The
relationship between pharmacists and patients is truly a sacred trust,
especially in communities where there are few available options for
filling a prescription.
Senators, no one goes into pharmacy because it's a good business idea
or to get rich--it's too complex, too tipped in favor of giant
corporations to be a typical small business startup. Pharmacies are
here because pharmacists are called to be here, because they are
carrying on generations of family tradition taking care of neighbors
and doing right by the people in their community.
America's community pharmacies are the ``canary in the coalmine'' of
the prescription drug system. Pharmacies and patients have a special
relationship built on trust and communication. They may be the only
part of the health care team that stays with the patient for
generations, not just years, so they have a very good perspective on
issues facing patients today.
We ask you to protect patients and their pharmacies by implementing
legislation that mandates full regulatory oversight of PBMs, similar to
how insurance companies are regulated.
We applaud the work you're doing to investigate the high drug pricing
crisis and protect patients, because to us, they aren't just customers,
they are our reason for being here.
Respectfully,
Monique M. Whitney
Executive Director
Pharmacists United for Truth and Transparency
[emailprotected]
[all]