- COMMUNITY SUPPORT: ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT AND BEYOND
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
COMMUNITY SUPPORT: ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT AND BEYOND
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS, OVERSIGHT, AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
APRIL 12, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Small Business Committee Document Number 115-066
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-529
WASHINGTON : 2018
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
JOHN CURTIS, Utah
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT
Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Hon. Trent Kelly.................................................
1
Hon. Alma Adams..................................................
2
WITNESSES
Mr. Ara Bagdasarian, CEO, Omnilert, Leesburg, VA, testifying on
behalf of America's SBDC.......................................
5
Mr. Derrick Braziel, Founding Partner & Managing Director, MORTAR
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, testifying on behalf of SCORE......
7
Ms. Stephanie Carter, President, SCB Management Consulting, Upper
Marlboro, MD, testifying on behalf of the Association of
Women's Business Centers.......................................
9
Ms. Tamara Bryant, Director, Veterans Business Outreach Center at
Fayetteville State University, Fayetteville, NC................
11
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Mr. Ara Bagdasarian, CEO, Omnilert, Leesburg, VA, testifying
on behalf of America's SBDC................................
21
Mr. Derrick Braziel, Founding Partner & Managing Director,
MORTAR Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, testifying on behalf of
SCORE......................................................
26
Ms. Stephanie Carter, President, SCB Management Consulting,
Upper Marlboro, MD, testifying on behalf of the Association
of Women's Business Centers................................
30
Ms. Tamara Bryant, Director, Veterans Business Outreach
Center at Fayetteville State University, Fayetteville, NC..
36
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.
COMMUNITY SUPPORT: ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT AND BEYOND
----------
THURSDAY, APRIL 12, 2018
House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Investigations, Oversight, and
Regulations
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Trent Kelly
[chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Kelly, Chabot, Marshall, Norman,
and Adams.
Chairman KELLY. Good morning. I call today's Subcommittee
on Investigations, Oversight, and Regulations hearing to order.
I would like to thank everyone for joining us. The
importance of small businesses in supporting the United States
economy cannot be overstated. With 29.6 million small business
employing 47.8 percent of the workforce, small business success
is essential to the economic well-being of both individual
communities throughout the country, as well as our Nation
overall.
While there are many factors that contribute to the success
of a small business, one factor that is often overlooked is the
community-small business relationship. This relationship is
complex and reciprocal, requiring effort and support from both
the community and the small businesses to achieve mutual
success. Today's hearing will focus on understanding the
community-small business relationship, the resources currently
available to foster this important relationship, and areas for
resource expansion in the future. When we are talking about the
community-small business relationship, all sources of community
are important. Some of the most business centric communities
are found within the Small Business Administration, or SBA's,
Entrepreneurial Development programs. My home state of
Mississippi is fortunate to have a Women's Business Center, a
Veterans Business Outreach Center, or VBOC, multiple SCORE
chapters, and Small Business Development Centers. These
entrepreneurial development communities, along with many
others, have been integral to the success of Mississippi's
252,000 small businesses.
Why are these and other communities so important?
Statistically, a small business owner who is involved in a
community and has the support of the community, is
significantly more likely to receive patronage, promotion,
assistance, and advice from that community. Many small business
owners rely on communities, such the SBA's Entrepreneurial
Development programs, to offer them the knowledge and resources
they need to be successful. Conversely, many communities rely
on the success of small business to survive and thrive. A
successful small business provides 3.7 times more direct local
economic benefit than a large non-local business. Clearly,
understanding and fostering this relationship is vital to not
only the small businesses and communities involved, but to the
economic well-being of our Nation.
Our witnesses today will speak to their experiences
regarding the community-small business relationship, both in
terms of the communities found in the SBA's Entrepreneurial
Development programs, as well as those found elsewhere. I look
forward to hearing their stories and their advice on what
Congress can do better to provide small businesses and
communities with the resources they need to succeed. I now
yield to Ranking Member, Ms. Adams, for her opening statement.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all of
the witnesses for being here today. Mr. Chairman, thank you for
holding this important hearing regarding the SBA resources
available in our communities.
The SBA administers a portfolio of Entrepreneurial
Development programs, including Small Business Development
Centers, Women's Business Centers, the Service Corps of Retired
Executives, or SCORE, and Veterans Business Outreach Programs.
These initiatives provide aspiring entrepreneurs and existing
businesses with invaluable counseling, training, technical
assistance, and mentorship. This hearing gives us the
opportunity to celebrate the role of SBA resources partners in
the diverse ways they serve our country and learn more about
how they tailor their offerings to their unique communities.
Whether it is help creating a business plan, navigating the
procurement process, marketing a new product, or identifying
international trade opportunities, the SBA's Entrepreneurial
Development Programs provide an array of services to help small
firms navigate regulatory obstacles, grow, and thrive.
Entrepreneurs, therefore, significantly benefit from having
tools to identify, fiscally plan for, and maintain critical
business improvements.
Small business owners located throughout the country,
including in underserved rural and inner city communities, also
benefit from accessible, affordable technical assistance. This
reduces their isolation from buyers and other businesses.
In addition to outreach, hands-on counseling is critical
for businesses to obtain information pertinent to their local
market and capacities. This is why the SBA Entrepreneurial
Development programs are so critical to our local communities.
As an example, the Agency's network of Small Business
Development Centers is one such program. They operate in nearly
1000 locations across the country, located at colleges,
universities, Chambers of Commerce, and local economic
development corporations, allowing them to harness local
community resources. In a single year, this initiative has
helped more than 17,000 entrepreneurs launch new businesses,
advised nearly 200,000 clients, provided training sessions for
over 260,000 attendees, and helped clients obtain over $5
billion in financing. Clearly, this program is vital, it is a
vital part of our Nation's entrepreneurial ecosystem.
The SBA has also undertaken efforts to connect younger
entrepreneurs with more experienced businessmen and women
through the SCORE program, an expansive network of
entrepreneurs, business leaders, and executives who volunteer
as mentors to small firms, both in-person and online. SCORE has
become one of the federal government's largest volunteer
business advisor and mentoring programs with over 11,000
business professionals at over 320 chapters nationwide. By
offering advice from real world professionals, SCORE is helping
many business owners within all categories of the
entrepreneurial community.
Small businesses are as diverse as our Nation and the SBA
has entrepreneurial development initiatives targeted at
specific demographic groups.
Women's Business Centers, or WBCs, are a critical
initiative for female entrepreneurs. WBCs provide in-depth
counseling, training, and mentoring to small firms, resulting
in substantial economic impact as measured by successful
business startups, job creation and retention, and increased
company revenues. Women business owners have used this program
to develop business plans, obtain financing, and expand their
operations. As more women turn to entrepreneurship as a career
path, it is critical this initiative remain in place to close
those gaps.
And, finally, there are a range of SBA programs targeted at
our veterans, most notably the Veterans Business Outreach
Centers, which serve over 60,000 clients each year. The VBOC
program, along with Boots to Business and other veteran-
oriented initiatives, ensure that our service members have the
tools they need to go into business for themselves. There are
currently 20 VBOCs responsible for ensuring veterans' access to
capital through marketing and outreach efforts. Most
importantly, they promote veterans for federal procurement
opportunities to ensure three percent of federal prime
contracts and subcontracts go to service-disabled veteran-owned
small businesses.
The SBA programs are key to helping business owners remain
competitive in a global market. It is critical that we consider
ways to legislatively strengthen SBA Entrepreneurial
Development Programs; we do so with our local communities in
mind.
Today's hearing will focus on the efforts within each of
the SBA programs regarding community outreach. It also gives
Members the chance to hear about the challenges they face in
developing their networks and assisting local small businesses
adapt to a rapidly changing economy.
I look forward to the witnesses' insight, and I want to
thank you all for being here today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman KELLY. I thank the gentlelady. I also want to
recognize our full Committee Chair. Chairman Chabot is here and
at the hearing. And also I just want to thank our Ranking
Member, Ms. Adams. She is such a joy and this is such a great
Committee to be on. She is a joy to work with, both in
Committee and outside of Committee on legislation that we work
together on. And I just think that it is quite an honor to be
on a Committee where there we still like each other in some of
these jobs. So I just want to thank our Ranking Member.
And to the panel today, if Committee members have an
opening statement prepared, I ask that they submitted for the
record. I would like to take a moment to explain the timing
lights for you. You each have 5 minutes to deliver your
testimony. The light will start out green. When you have 1
minute remaining, it will go to yellow, and when it turns red
your time is up. Now, I will give you a little bit of time, by
you all have got remember I have got a little military in me,
so I may tap you out. So try to adhere to the time limit as
much as you can, but if you go a little bit over we will be
understanding.
And, with that, our first witness is Mr. Ara Bagdasarian.
Mr. Bagdasarian is a CEO and Co-Founder of Omnilert, an
emergency alert and notification systems company. In 2011 he
authored the book, The Lemonade Stand a why-to book for
entrepreneurs that later led to his founding of the Lemonhead
Council. The Lemonhead Council serves as an advisory board of
entrepreneurs, helping entrepreneurs. Mr. Bagdasarian is an
active member of his community, serving on the board of a
number of organizations, including the George Mason University
Enterprise Center and the United Way of the National Capital
Area. He is testifying on behalf of America's SBDC, the
association that represents America's nationwide network of
Small Business Development Centers.
Thank you for joining us today, Mr. Bagdasarian.
I now yield to Chairman Steve Chabot, Chairman of the full
Committee to introduce our next witness.
Mr. CHABOT. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I am
very pleased to introduce Derrick Braziel, who is the co-
founder and managing director of MORTAR Cincinnati business
accelerator in my district, in Cincinnati. The mission of
MORTAR is to ``enable underserved entrepreneurs and businesses
to succeed, creating opportunities to build communities through
entrepreneurship''. And they really do provide and fight for
that mission on a daily basis. Mr. Braziel and his many
talented colleagues have created an outstanding organization,
which continues to assist in bringing economic growth and
opportunity to many of Cincinnati's neighborhoods.
Prior to his time at MORTAR, Mr. Braziel worked as the
director of civil projects at Lewis & Clark Co. and the project
manager at Strive Together. He also co-founded Dreamapolis, and
entrepreneurial development nonprofit located in Indianapolis,
Indiana.
He is testifying on behalf of SCORE, the Nation's largest
network of volunteer expert business mentors, with more than
10,000 volunteers in 300 chapters across the country.
We thank you very much, Mr. Braziel, for being here today
and look forward to visiting you all in the past, both there
and here in Washington. And we are looking forward to your
testimony.
Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman KELLY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our next witness
is Ms. Stephanie Carter. Ms. Carter is the president of SCB
Management Consulting, Inc., a public and private sector
financial and operation strategy and implementation
consultation practice. SCB Management Consulting is also
certified as both a women's business enterprise and a women-
owned small business.
Ms. Carter brings 25 years of experience to her current
role, having previously worked at companies such as
Pricewaterhouse Cooper, CIGNA, and Resources Global
Professionals. She is testifying on behalf of the Association
of Women's Business Centers, which works to secure
entrepreneurial opportunities for women by supporting and
sustaining a national network of over 100 Women's Business
Centers.
Thank you for being here, Ms. Carter.
I now yield to Ms. Adams to introduce the final witness.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my pleasure to
introduce Ms. Tamara Bryant, the director for Veterans Business
Outreach Center at Fayetteville State University, in my home
State.
Ms. Bryant previously owned and operated a trucking company
while also holding a position as director of the Small Business
Center at Fayetteville Community College. Under her leadership,
FTCC's Small Business Center was recognized with the Small
Business Center Excellence Award for innovation in programs and
services in 2013 and in 2015. During those years she also
received Direct of the Year Award. And in 2017, under Ms.
Bryant's leadership, FTCC received a national award from the
National Association for Community College Entrepreneurship for
College of Excellence.
Ms. Bryant earned her degree from Fayetteville State
University--she is a Bronco--and her master's degree from
Central Michigan University.
Welcome, Ms. Bryant; thank you for being here.
Chairman KELLY. Thank you again to our Ranking Member, Ms.
Adams.
And, with that, Mr. Bagdasarian, you are recognized for 5
minutes to deliver your statement. You may begin.
STATEMENTS OF ARA BAGDASARIAN, CEO, OMNILERT; DERRICK BRAZIEL,
FOUNDING PARTNER & MANAGING DIRECTOR, MORTAR CINCINNATI;
STEPHANIE CARTER, PRESIDENT, SCB MANAGEMENT CONSULTING; TAMARA
BRYANT, DIRECTOR, VETERANS BUSINESS OUTREACH CENTER
STATEMENT OF ARA BAGDASARIAN
Mr. BAGDASARIAN. Thank you. I would like to begin by
thanking the Congressional Small Business Committee for
inviting me to testify today, on behalf of America's Small
Business Development Centers, to share a few of my thoughts on
the impact of community support for entrepreneurial
development.
As a serial entrepreneur, who founded his first enterprise
before the age of ten, I believe that the opportunities for
small businesses to innovate on a local, national, even global
scale, have never been better than they are today. I say this
not just because I am an unyielding optimist, but because I
cannot think of a time in the whole of human history when such
a wealth of resources and technologies were so readily
available to anyone with a will and that most precious resource
of all: an idea.
I am the co-founder and Chief Executive Officer of
Omnilert, the world's first emergency notification system for
colleges and university campuses; though our customer base has
since expanded to include private enterprise, government, and
nonprofits from all across the country. As a company founder, I
have developed a keen appreciation for the obstacles and
challenges one must endure when embarking upon such a venture.
In fact, a few years back, I took it to task to distill my
experiences into a book, titled The Lemonade Stand, which I co-
authored. The Lemonade Stand is, simply put, the why-to book on
entrepreneurship; a memoir based my own, real-world experience,
revelations, successes, and, of course, ?failures.
I have also served as a chairman for the Town of Leesburg,
Virginia's Economic Development Commission, a post that I held
for seven years, and am on numerous local and regional advisory
boards, whose purpose are to advocate for entrepreneurship. It
is from this vantage point that I have seen the positive
returns that result when a community invests in and supports
entrepreneurial development.
That is why I was stumped when, ten years ago, I was asked
for a Town of Leesburg marketing campaign why the town would be
a good destination for entrepreneurs. I am embarrassed to admit
that I could not think of a single reason other than the fact
that our town was a ``quaint, idyllic community''. We had all
the standard small business resources, a Small Business
Development Center, SCORE, and a Chamber of Commerce, however,
we did not have a community that was systematically supportive
of local entrepreneurship. This realization led to a concerted
effort on my part, and that of many others, to start building
the infrastructure for an entrepreneurship ecosystem: a shared
effort between community partners, both private and public,
that was assembled program by program. The fruits of this
effort, I believe, have yielded a model that can be replicated
in large and small communities across America.
It is through this model, and others like it, that
communities suffering from high unemployment or the uprooting
of key industry can plant the seeds of entrepreneurship and
cultivate the growth of new businesses, through proper
education and a supportive, local infrastructure. Much like
civic infrastructure, such as highways or the power grid,
communities can build and develop infrastructure to harness
great ideas that solve problems to power the economy. We have
taken significant steps in Loudoun County Virginia to build
this ecosystem. And the three core aspects of this
infrastructure are: entrepreneurship education. This means
learning how to view problems as opportunities, knowing how to
develop an idea to something real and tangible, and learning
how to fail and how to learn from failure to build a world view
that embraces challenges. Secondly, resources. A network of
systems and programs that support the planning, creation,
launch, and operations of a new venture. And, thirdly,
community, which is developed by proactively creating
opportunities to connect and discover synergies with one
another through events, engagements, and other programs
designed exclusively for founders and supporters.
My written testimony outlines some of these key programs
that we have implemented for each of these components.
I believe that building the infrastructure to support the
development of entrepreneurship is well within the means of
every community in America, be it large or small. But the
decision to go boldly forward is too often hindered by a fear
of change, or a desire to hang on to the industries and ways of
the past. Ironically, it was by embracing change that the great
American industries of the past and present even came to exist.
But in a world that the only constant is change itself, I
believe that congress has a purview and responsibility to
provide the incentives and support that will help the American
entrepreneurs continue to lead the world in innovation and
industry. That's why I believe it should advocate for the
building for infrastructure for entrepreneurship through
championing entrepreneurship education, support programs, and
community engagement.
Once this framework is built, an entrepreneurial ecosystem
will develop and flourish incrementally. But this must be a
deliberate effort requiring deliberate undertaking, requiring
the participation of current entrepreneurs, businesses,
communities and education leaders; as well as public sector
cooperation, advocacy, and resources.
Of course, what works in Leesburg may not work in Oxford,
Mississippi or Charlotte, North Carolina. Every community has
its own unique strengths and assets, but the ideas I have been
grateful to present through my testimony amount to a framework
of sorts for communities to empower its most resourceful and
motivated to be a catalyst for positive economic and community
change. There are thousands of communities around the world
filled with smart, passionate individuals with brilliant ideas.
We can all advocate for an initiative to develop
entrepreneurship in America, and it all starts with the local
community level.
I thank the Chairman and Subcommittee members for the
opportunity to testify this morning. Thank you.
Chairman KELLY. Thank you, Mr. Bagdasarian. And I now
recognize Mr. Braziel for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF ARA BRAZIEL
Mr. BRAZIEL. Chairman Chabot, Subcommittee Chairman Kelly,
Ranking Member Adams, members of the Subcommittee and members
of the full Committee, thank you for inviting me today and for
the opportunity to offer testimony on the work of MORTAR, and
more specifically, the value of our partnership with SCORE.
Today I would like to share why I believe that MORTAR and
our partnership with SCORE, a national nonprofit that mentors
aspiring and existing entrepreneurs, represents our best chance
for everyone, regardless of background, to achieve full
participation in the American dream.
Founded in 2014, MORTAR works to create diverse communities
by enabling historically marginalized entrepreneurs to access
the resources needed to start and run successful businesses.
Utilizing nontraditional methods, we take risks on an
entrepreneur's abilities to start and grow businesses where
others may not, providing an unparalleled connection to
technical assistance, pop-up retail spaces to test ideas, and
flexible ``friends and family''-styled micro-loans to grow
businesses. Our business academy, for example, which works with
mostly low-income, African American entrepreneurs, has a 96
percent graduation rate and is considered a model program
across the country.
We exist because we believe that there are minority men and
women all across our country, especially in our inner cities,
with an undeniable amount of world-changing talent. People like
my father, Dennis, who through athletic potential was adopted
by his white high school football coach, giving him the
opportunity to become the first person in his family to
graduate from college, to become a published author, and father
three amazing kids; one of them, my twin brother named Desmond
Braziel, is serving our country as a Captain in the United
States Army.
Another example is MORTAR graduate Means Cameron. Last
Friday, I met with Means, the owner of one of America's hottest
clothing brands, Black Owned, and his SCORE counselor, Jim
Stahly. And if you are nice to me, I promise to bring you all a
t-shirt. They were meeting with me because Means, despite being
college educated and the founder of a successful, hip street
wear company, needed access to capital to grow his business. To
see Jim, a white seasoned business executive, working with
Means, an African American millennial entrepreneur from the
inner city, seamlessly working through a sophisticated business
plan, brought tears to my eyes. Jim's experience, coupled with
Means' resourcefulness and MORTAR's resources, will help Means
continue to succeed.
The reality is that many people like Means will never have
an opportunity for their dreams to be realized without support
from organizations like MORTAR and SCORE. Our partnership with
SCORE has helped MORTAR graduates to exceed national business
averages.
For example, we know that of the 170 graduates of MORTAR's
program, 132 are still in business, with 71 percent engaged in
our alumni support network. We estimate that in the past year
alone our entrepreneurs have added $1 million to our regional
economy. One graduate, Brian Jackson, is on pace to open
Cincinnati's first black-owned brewery.
The work of MORTAR is just getting started. We recognize
that by partnering with organizations like SCORE, great things
can happen. In four short years, we have worked together to
offer 13 of our accelerated courses in 5 Cincinnati
communities, and every graduate has received a mentor from
SCORE. We have opened three additional pop-up spaces and SCORE
continues to help us evaluate the feasibility of future
expansion opportunities. In addition, we are applying our
framework in Milwaukee, testing our approach to community and
economic development for the first time outside of Cincinnati.
We recognize the power in bringing together people of different
backgrounds around a common shared passion for
entrepreneurship. As a result, we have forged lifetime bonds
between people who may have never met otherwise.
Moving forward, our plan is to continue partnering with
SCORE, working to teach entrepreneurship in communities where
the next Steve Jobs, Kanye West, or Walt Disney may live. We
see a country where with a MORTAR on every inner city corner,
where the crazy dreamers who see the world differently will be
encouraged, inspired and trained to change the world.
Thank you for again for your time and for allowing me to
testify. I am happy to answer any questions.
Chairman KELLY. Thank you, Mr. Braziel. And thank your twin
brother for his service to this great Nation. I am always
impressed with those who choose to do that.
Ms. Carter, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF STEPHANIE CARTER
Ms. CARTER. Thank you, Chairman Kelly, Ranking Member
Adams, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee, for the
opportunity to share this testimony with you.
My name is Stephanie Carter, and I am founder and president
of SCB Management Consulting, whose core services are program
and project management, risk management, strategic planning and
business process improvement as a subcontractor for the federal
government and private sector organizations.
I am testifying today on behalf of the Association of
Women's Business Centers, which supports the national network
of 107 WBCs throughout the United States.
As you know, the WBC program is a public-private
partnership with 30 years of success in providing training,
counseling, mentoring, and access to capital to women
entrepreneurs across the country. Women in businesses, like me
and SCB.
Today's hearing is a needed discussion. Too often we do not
fully recognize the factors at the periphery of traditional
business creation, despite their importance. I believe that the
community fostered by the WBCs is playing a key role in my
success, and its replication can only mean good things for
women entrepreneurs nationwide.
Business success is predicated on a host of factors,
ranging from the expertise of the business owner, to wisdom of
the business plan, to the ability to access capital, to picking
the right location or marketing, to hiring the right staff.
What is undeniable, however, is that those businesses that have
a network of support behind them fare better than those
without. In my view, here are a few reasons why.
First, a network allows you to problem solve the early
crises of launching and growing a business. Along the way,
whether its incorporation or tax questions, to the logistics of
office space or your first hire, there are myriad challenges in
every business. When you have a network of fellow entrepreneurs
you can collectively solve, and even anticipate, many of these
issues. Second, a strong community helps identify new
opportunities. Every business, whether 5 minutes or 5
generations old, is seeking new opportunities. A community that
understands your business and its offerings is incredibly
helpful in spotlighting business development. Similarly, it
also allows for teaming of entrepreneurs who may collectively
offer an innovative solution to the market than individually is
not available. Finally, and perhaps the hardest to define but
also the most important, a community and network gives you the
confidence to become an entrepreneur and the persistence to
thrive after that business is created.
All three of these were true for my business. I launched my
business after nearly 20 years in corporate consulting and
internal leadership roles. While I had the business, finance,
and operations foundation of my Duke MBA and corporate roles,
there were many aspects of entrepreneurship that I felt I
needed including legal, tax, sales and marketing. I initially
enrolled in entrepreneur and business planning courses with the
Women's Business Development Center in Center City Philadelphia
in early 2016.
Once I was in the Washington DC area, and with the public
sector being one of the greatest opportunities for consulting,
I embarked on learning as much as I could. I took my first
seminar with the WBC in July 2017. During that session, I
learned about other WBC courses including the procurement
series offered by Prince Georges County and Montgomery County.
I started that six-part series in August 2017 because it
offered a host of information about accessing the public sector
market. The series culminated with a matchmaking session with
procurement specialists in November.
I enrolled in the procurement series for the business
development information, however, I gained so many
relationships that ultimately formed a community of support for
my business. The WBC counselor who facilitated the series has
become a great ongoing resource for business development
opportunities, as well as other information. I forged a
partnership with one of the speakers who noticed during my
``elevator pitch'', that we may have some synergies, and
currently pursuing business development opportunities together.
I included one of the procurement series participants, who is
just starting her consulting business, in a recent bid of mine.
Public sector panelists have been very accessible and helpful
in gaining a greater understanding of their respective
organizations.
It also is not just the network at the WBCs alone that has
provided benefit. I learned of other networks at the WBC that I
should engage and have expanded my ability to grow my business
through them. I learned through the WBC courses that an
effective market penetrator for new entrepreneurs such as
myself are Woman and Minority certifications. As a newly
certified WBE and MBE, I regularly attend informational and
matchmaking sessions offered by the certifying agencies. I also
attend a variety of forums, including those by the State of
Maryland, ``Ready, Set, Grow'' monthly informational sessions
offered by the Governor's Office that also offer the
opportunity to meet industry leaders. As a result, I have begun
to forge new relationships in the public sector.
One of the first questions I often receive in these
networks is ``where do you live?'' People are consistently
shocked that I have traveled from Calvert County, which is in
southern Maryland, to Baltimore, Columbia, Northern Virginia,
et cetera, to attend an event. However, opportunities for the
information and access that I need generally are not offered in
Southern Maryland.
My example is not unique. Companies hover around these
networks and we must do a better job of creating communities of
support in areas that need business growth the most.
Similarly, we must continue to enhance the WBC program at
SBA. With jurisdiction over the program, this Committee has the
opportunity to make the benefits I have experienced more
widespread. The limitations of an outdated authorization are
evident in the day-to-day experiences of these centers.
I encourage policymakers to consider legislation that would
allow for more flexibility for WBCs, particularly eliminating
the many burdens they face and choose not to operate in certain
areas.
The role of AWBC, who I am representing here today, should
also be leveraged. Through statute, we should build on the best
practices of other resource partners and allow for
accreditation. Part of this process would ensure that every WBC
has the skilled resources to develop communities of support for
women business owners.
Finally, Congress should increase the visibility of the WBC
program. I encourage this Committee to use its extensive media
abilities to talk about WBCs. The more we do that, the larger
the community of support becomes.
With the help of Congress, the SBA, and the WBC, I believe
we can continue to build a community of support that will allow
women entrepreneurs and small business owners around the
country to realize their full entrepreneurial potential and
contribute significant economic growth and job creation.
Thank you again for this opportunity to testify.
Chairman KELLY. Thank you, Ms. Carter. And I now recognize
Ms. Bryant for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF TAMARA BRYANT
Ms. BRYANT. Good morning. I would like to thank Ranking
Member Alma Adams and Chairman Trent Kelly for the invitation
to share with you the Veterans Business Outreach
Center programs and services.
Again, my name is Tamara Bryant. I am the director of the
Veterans Business Outreach Center at Fayetteville State
University, serving the States of North Carolina, South
Carolina, and Kentucky. The Veterans Business Outreach Center,
also called VBOC, is one the Small Business Administration's
program that provides business training, counseling and SBA
resource partner referrals to active duty service members,
National Guard and Reserve personnel, veterans, and military
spouses interested in starting or growing a small business.
VBOC entrepreneurial program development programs is
collaborations of resources and partnerships are critical
success factors for VBOC's mission and to help increase the
success rate of Veteran-owned businesses.
VBOC is hosted by at Fayetteville State University College
of Business and Economics, a historically black college
university, and it is known for its support of military-
affiliated students through serving large numbers of active
duty soldiers, their spouses and families, as well as veterans.
This collaboration with FSU is a natural fit for VBOC's target
customers. It has allowed VBOC the opportunity to collaborate
and partner in the College of Business and Economics
Entrepreneurship Programs, such as small business consulting
teams. The small business consulting teams are undergraduate
and graduate students, and many of the students are military
affiliated, minorities and women, that work closely with our
clients to solve business needs in areas of marketing research,
feasibility studies, to name a few.
These student engagement opportunities provide the students
with real world educational experience, focused on helping
small businesses and our clients receive valuable assistance at
no charge.
FSU-VBOC is extremely fortunate to have great partnerships
with highly valued resource partners. We understand our clients
come with a unique technical skill set, impeccable leadership
skills, core values, and a mission focused mindset. But often
times they may lack business acumen skills or the ability to
transfer their military skills into an entrepreneurial career
pathway.
FSU-VBOC client base is very diverse, serving over 400
clients this past fiscal year, 47 percent minority and 21
percent women with various needs.
I would like to highlight one successful client for whom
VBOC leveraged other resources that yielded the clients' great
results. Marcella Eubanks, Army Veteran, 82nd Airborne, owner
of Bravery Kids Gym, came to VBOC with her idea of owning an
all-inclusive children's gym with a focus on children with
special needs. She received assistance with developing her
business plan and startup assistance and referral to a local
community bank to obtain and SBA loan. She came back to the
Center for other services because she viewed the staff at VBOC
as a trusted advisor and was willing to work with other
agencies. She has been referred to the SBTDC for specialized
training in QuickBooks and utilized College of Business and
Economics student internships. These referrals have helped her
hire six part-time employees and win pitch competitions,
improve the business operations and marketing systems.
This is one of many success stories demonstrating FSU-
VBOC's collaboration with resource partners and local
organizations to deliver desirable outcomes for our clients.
Veteran-owned businesses are the pillars to the American
economy. Nearly one in ten businesses are veteran-owned Veteran
women-owned business steadily increase each year. Fifteen
percent of business are owned by veteran women. The past fiscal
year for VBOC network was marked by very significant levels of
outreach, training, and services for veteran-owned and military
spouses small businesses. Over 1700 training events were held,
178 businesses created, and 1006 jobs created and retained, 243
prime and subcontracts awarded, and $8.5 million in SBA loans
approved.
Most of the VBOC centers cover multiple states and attend
Boots to Business course, all with a budget of $6 million.
The 22 Veterans Business Outreach Center through its
cooperative agreement is committed to ensuring that every
service member and military spouse has the resources they need
in their communities to start and operate small businesses,
achieve post-secondary career success, and strengthen the
Nation's economy.
My ask to you is to continue to support VBOC's services to
increase the success rate of this highly skilled workforce.
Again, thank you for this opportunity to share and
represent the VBOC program, a program that helps our service
men and women and veterans who fought, protect, and serve this
great Nation.
Thank you.
Chairman KELLY. Thank you, Ms. Bryant. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes of questions.
First of all, Ms. Bryant, I just want to comment. I am a
huge supporter of the VBOC. We have one at Mississippi State
University and they do such a great job with both our veterans
and communities and making sure that we have those small
businesses that are veteran-owned. Because we know what is in
their heart, we have just got to make sure they have the right
tools, and I really appreciate our VBOCs for doing that.
And, Ms. Carter, your testimony mentions a great deal about
networking opportunities within a Women's Business Center, WBC.
What role does community networking play in encouraging small
business creation?
Ms. CARTER. Well, it has provided a tremendous opportunity.
So the example I gave where a speaker actually did outreach,
but they also encouraged us while we were in those sessions to
think about teaming with each other, right. So we are not
competitors, we might have many synergies. And so that is
exactly what I did. So I was able to do that recently on a bid.
I met a woman who had similar experience to me and we might be
competitors one day, but right now we are partnering together.
Chairman KELLY. You know, I am an old business guy. I have
been out so long I don't even remember what it is, but I know
you never have one store in a mall, you have four anchor stores
because even though you are competitors you also share a lot
and you generate. So I really appreciate your comments on that.
And I am proud of what you have been able to accomplish.
Mr. Braziel, you discussed the success of the partnership
between SCORE and MORTAR in your testimony. How does this
partnership harness the existing knowledge within the community
to enable small business success?
Mr. BRAZIEL. I would say that the folks that SCORE are able
to offer for our entrepreneurs are invaluable because they
bring with them many a times decades of business experience
that our entrepreneurs would never have access to without
having that relationship with SCORE. I would say that the value
of a successful business person is the network that they have.
And SCORE brings not just a network of other coaches, but their
own personal networks. Our SCORE coaches have provided so many
connections just from that initial interaction. So, for us,
there is a value in resource exchange that SCORE offers, but it
is also the networks that SCORE is able to offer for the
entrepreneurs that we are working with.
Chairman KELLY. And once again, I mean it is so important
to know where the resources and the things that you need to do
that, but it is also important for people to believe in you.
Mr. BRAZIEL. Right.
Chairman KELLY. And to know. As my daddy used to tell me
when I was a kid, he said, you know, we are often scared to do
things because we are scared of being told no or failing. And
my daddy always said you start at no and if you don't do
anything you stay there.
So I think all of these organizations do that. I think they
help people get off no and to do things and to have at least
chance possible of failing, but they encourage them to reach
out and chase their ideas.
Mr. Bagdasarian, your testimony refers to the need for
strong community to support small business growth and creation.
What role do small businesses play in creating strong
communities?
Mr. BAGDASARIAN. It plays a very important role, because I
believes it takes entrepreneurs to create more entrepreneurs,
to encourage, as you mentioned, to provide the resources,
connecting the experiences of experienced entrepreneurs, some
of the challenges they face. The reality is most startups, most
new businesses will fail. It will fail many times. I know in my
personal experience, prior to starting Omnilert I had three or
four businesses that never took off. And so knowing that,
having the confidence to go back and the resilience to go back
and try again, try again, because something will fit if you are
solving a problem that is not being met in the community. There
is an opportunity there.
And it is important also I think there is a cultural
factor, building a culture that you can do it, it can be done,
versus simply find a good job. But you can do this. And that is
probably the biggest obstacle to taking that the first step to
starting a business.
Chairman KELLY. Thank you. Ms. Bryant, given the limited
number of VBOCs, how do you work with other entrepreneurial
development resource partners to ensure that returning veterans
find a supportive community?
Ms. BRYANT. Because everybody gave into the FSU, the
support that we have in North Carolina has been tremendous and
critical. We have been fortunate to have Entrepreneurial
Development programs such as SCORE, such as the Women's
Business Center, and SBTDC, in that area. We are also fortunate
in North Carolina to have another State government program
called the Small Business Centers of North Carolina. And so
collaboratively together we are able to assist veterans,
military spouses in starting and growing small businesses by
working together with different developmental programs and
getting access to loans and procurement opportunities.
Chairman KELLY. Thank you. And I yield back the balance of
my time. And I now recognize our Ranking Member, Ms. Adams, for
5 minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
your testimony.
Beyond SBA's business assistance services there are a
number of training opportunities and resources available to
veteran-owned small businesses, such as partnerships between
VBOCs and college campuses. Ms. Bryant, can you explain how
effective educational classes can be for entrepreneurs and
whether they are an efficient way to supplement other training
programs?
Ms. BRYANT. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question.
Yes, another example I would say is one course that is offered
like at Fayetteville State University is called our small
business management course. With this course it teaches
business concepts and strategies and principles on how to
operate a successful small business. A lot of times you have
minorities and women that are in those classes. Those classes
also are required that they work with a local entrepreneur to
assist them with that business need that they have. This allows
that student to be exposed to real world examples and be able
to apply the knowledge that they learn in the classroom to a
real world example of helping that small business.
So that is an example that we give in terms of how class
and real world can come together to help small businesses, as
well as the student, gain that particular skill set to be able
to get the job.
Ms. ADAMS. Great. Thank you very much. I am a strong
advocate of HBCU, started the first bipartisan HBCU caucus
here, which I co-chair with Congressman Bradley Byrne from
Alabama, graduate twice of North Carolina A&T State University,
40 years on the campus of Bennett College.
But, given your position on an HBCU campus, how important
is it to coordinate the coordination between government,
private industry, educational institutions, and nonprofits in
advancing the position of entrepreneurs? And where can Congress
better support your efforts?
Ms. BRYANT. I will say to continue to provide access to
affordable and accessible education for these students. A lot
of time these are minorities and women, and first generational
children that are looking to obtain a degree. Having these
programs in place will allow them and expose them to
opportunities that they would not have before. So having that
access to affordable education will assist not only those
students, but it will also assist the small businesses where
they have a high skill set to be able to continue to grow and
sustain their business.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you. Mr. Braziel, could you please
describe the efforts made to recruit volunteers from different
backgrounds and how that has impacted the business ownership in
your community?
Mr. BRAZIEL. Yes. I would say first and foremost, SCORE has
stepped to the plate and provided the lion's share of the
volunteering for the entrepreneurs who are going through our
program. And that has been an amazing partnership for our
organization. I would also say that from that experience many
other people who may have maybe been nervous our anxious about
working with our entrepreneurs have stepped forward to
sometimes even double up to volunteer and provide business
support for MORTAR graduates.
I would say, in a lot of ways the MORTAR program and our
partnership with SCORE has become an example to our community
on how race relations can continue to improve. We have mostly
again low income African Americans, and SCORE sometimes can be
a little seasoned in white. But our folks are coming together
around a shared common objective and the partnership is
amazing. We do these surveys at the end of every class and five
is a perfect score from a satisfaction perspective, and no
survey has gone under 4.6 out of 5. So that initial
relationship with SCORE around business coaching has been
amazing and acted as a multiplier effect, that now we are
seeing someone from our board, who is an African American male,
he is now joined SCORE's corps of volunteers and he is now
providing business support for other not just graduates of
MORTAR's program, but other participants who go through SCORE.
So I would say that MORTAR has provided this great example
of what is possible and we are seeing a lot of growth from our
volunteers.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you very much. I have got 38 seconds. Mr.
Bagdasarian, some of the obstacles unique to startup, if you
can maybe give me one?
Mr. BAGDASARIAN. Fear. Fear is probably the greatest
obstacle, not knowing what needs to be done. I have worked with
hundreds of entrepreneurs or would-be entrepreneurs over the
years and the greatest obstacle is the expectation that I need
to write a 500 page business plan and then go out and raise $15
million of seed capital, and then go get a big office. Just
knowing how to take that first step. Like I mentioned, there
has never been a better time to start a business than now
because there are so many resources that are available today
that did not exist 20 years ago.
Ms. ADAMS. Great. Right on time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Chairman KELLY. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Dr. Marshall from Kansas for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. MARSHALL. Good morning, everybody. First question would
be, to kind of continue, what are the biggest barriers to
market, to enter the market? And then what are the biggest
reasons for lack of long-term success? So barriers to entering
the market to start a small business, and then barriers to keep
you from being successful?
And maybe just spend 15 or 20 seconds with each one of you,
2 or 3, right off the top. Maybe start with Ms. Bryant on the
far end and then we will come back.
Ms. BRYANT. Some of the barriers that I see a lot of small
businesses face is access to capital. A lot of times not
knowing what that financial literacy is and what it takes to
obtain that capital. Another barrier is not understanding some
of the small business skill sets that it takes, especially in
our veteran population. They understand and know what it is
like being in the military, but translating that military skill
set onto an entrepreneurial pathway and understanding those
business skills of marketing and sales, and having that
technical assistance to be able to help them navigate that
system.
Mr. MARSHALL. Ms. Carter, anything to add?
Ms. CARTER. Yes. As I mentioned during my testimony, there
are probably many barriers. The ones that come to mind
particularly are some skills that you currently don't have. And
what is most important is building your business is sales and
marketing. So the technical skills that I have been able to
gain through the WBC, as well as I have taken sessions with
SCORE and SBDC, have been extremely helpful.
The other is access to capital. So one of the things that I
continually fall into is, you know, when I bid on something do
I have the staff. Well, I can't hire the staff until I have the
contracts. So it is this cycle until someone, you know, kind of
gives me the opportunity and I am able to do that.
Mr. MARSHALL. Okay.
Mr. BRAZIEL. I would briefly add unconscious bias. I think
a lot of times we expect for successful entrepreneurs to look a
certain way, to speak a certain way, to behave a certain way.
But a lot of time there are entrepreneurs who are out there who
may not understand social norms. So maybe they use slang, or
maybe they have misspellings in their business plans. And
despite all of those things they still have a viable idea, and
if given an opportunity and some access to capital, they could
be successful. But until we are able to dismantle some of the
biases we have around successful entrepreneurship, those folks
will continue to be left behind.
Mr. MARSHALL. Okay.
Mr. BAGDASARIAN. The only thing I would have to add is
knowing, understanding the product market fit and understanding
that the first idea, the first business that you may take to
market, the initial market may not be the market that you
ultimately pursue that has the greatest growth. But having the
right mentors, having the right advice resource, having that
community that provides that support, may provide you with that
insight on which direction to take. And that happens all too
often.
Mr. MARSHALL. Okay. I am surprised nobody said the cost of
healthcare. I think the cost of healthcare would be one of the
biggest barriers for someone to leave a job and start a new
business.
Talk about the Tax Cuts and Jobs bill. Has the Tax Cuts and
Jobs bill, is it impacting any of your businesses? Do you see
it going forward impacting it?
Maybe we will start here and go back that way.
Mr. BAGDASARIAN. It has not directly impacted my business.
If we were required to distribute funds towards headcount, for
example, that maybe more of an incentive to hire people,
reinvest those funds back into the business. But it has not
made a direct impact into my specific business.
Mr. MARSHALL. Are you a C Corp an LLC or an S Corp?
Mr. BAGDASARIAN. We are an LLC.
Mr. MARSHALL. And you don't think lowering the LLC tax is
going to help you any?
Mr. BAGDASARIAN. Well, it certainly helps, but as far as
driving new job growth, I don't think it is directly tied to
creating new jobs. I think that it certainly helps from a
business owner perspective.
Mr. MARSHALL. Okay.
Mr. BAGDASARIAN. I could go into more depth later.
Mr. BRAZIEL. I would briefly add that I think our folks are
so far behind that it hasn't directly affected them yet.
Mr. MARSHALL. So decreasing their taxes, giving the $2000
more, the average salary, in their own pocket, is not impacting
them in any way?
Mr. BRAZIEL. In the conversations that I have had with our
graduates, they have not communicated that that has been a
benefit for them. So it is possible, but I have not had those
direct conversations yet.
Mr. MARSHALL. Okay. Ms. Carter?
Ms. CARTER. Because I am so small, I think it may make an
incremental business, but not significant at this point, stage
in my business.
Mr. MARSHALL. Okay. Ms. Bryant?
Ms. BRYANT. We have had some businesses that have said that
the bill have helped and some that said it has not. In regard
to have helped, it does help them in regards to being able to
put more funds to their business. If that be via being able to
purchase additional equipment or hire a new personnel.
Mr. MARSHALL. Yes. I have talked to tens, maybe hundreds of
companies that are making capital purchases because they can
write it all off. I talked to an accountant where 96 out of 100
of his clients in a small rural Kansas community are seeing
significant tax benefits in their own pocket as well. And this
American consumer is what drives this economy.
Thank you.
Chairman KELLY. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Mr. Norman from South Carolina for 5 minutes.
Mr. NORMAN. Thank you, each one of you for taking your time
out today. Regulations. I know I am a small business owner.
What regulation would you cut if you had the opportunity? And
address the workforce. I am having trouble with as you
mentioned, Mr. Braziel, people coming to work; they have either
never worked before or they don't have the basic skill set to
interact with people. How do we address that?
Mr. BAGDASARIAN. Well, typically, the regulations that my
business encounters are really industry specific, specifically
with telecommunications, because we work with cellular
providers, and they are really specific to that. So in the
context of this discussion I really don't have any specifics to
share with you.
Mr. BRAZIEL. I would say the Jobs Act has been a great
start to open the flow of capital for entrepreneurs. But I
would say that, again, what we are looking for from the
threshold to have people even able to access those initial
resources can be very challenging for people that are coming
from a different culture.
I would also argue that even though somebody may not speak
or behave based upon traditional social norms, they still, in
my opinion, could run successful businesses.
I like to often give this example of when I go to my local
Kroger down the street I get asked all the time if I want a
ride. And in my opinion that same idea could have been
translated into an Uber, it is ride sharing. However, there is
other access to technology or capital, or whatever it might be,
to start that kind of a business. So I would say that if we can
do more to unlock the flow of capital for those kinds of
entrepreneurs, the better.
Mr. NORMAN. Let me follow up with this, now how would you
do that? I mean when you go for a loan at a bank you have got
to have--they have shareholders too. How would you say to do
that?
Mr. BRAZIEL. Sure. Let us say you are my uncle, which would
be an honor, and it was Thanksgiving, and I said could you loan
me $500. I doubt that you would ask me for my credit score, for
collateral, for some of these other things, because you know me
and you know my track record. You would hopefully give me a
loan. I think the same thing could apply to how we offer access
to capital for disadvantaged entrepreneurs, just to give them a
leg up. Maybe it is lower amounts of capital, but we can lower
collateral, interest rates, et cetera, to still give them an
opportunity to at least test their business ideas.
Ms. CARTER. With respect to the workforce, I think as a
small business owner we have tremendous opportunities when we
can. So I actually just recently formed a nonprofit
organization, called the Vendor Community Partnership, to try
to address the crime in downtown Baltimore. There is a
tremendous problem with joblessness. I believe it starts with
education and opportunities. So the nonprofit has formed a
partnership with the Downtown Partnership of Baltimore and
those large business--we created a preferred vendor list of
small businesses. Those small businesses get on the list if
they hire at least one person from these underserved
communities. We are partnering with some nonprofits who will
help with the job training, preparing, you know, many people
who want to work but just haven't had the opportunity. So they
will be prepared to work, they will show up every day, and they
will be productive citizens. And we believe that that is also
going to, you know, have a positive impact on the crime and
overall allow people to contribute to their families.
Ms. BRYANT. In regards to the lack of the workforce as
well, I agree. I think we need to continue to work with the
local high schools, the community colleges, the universities,
and collaborate with the business industries, and to find out
what are those skill sets that they are looking for, continue
to implement more programs in the high schools and community
colleges with the 21st century skills that are lacking from
interpersonal skills, those things that are lacking the
workforce. To be able to assist them and help those small
businesses obtain and retain those students. I think education
and exposure is the key to be able to try and recruit and train
highly skilled employees.
Mr. NORMAN. Yes. And I think you all in your role, when you
go into these schools, high schools particularly, we ought to
stress we have customers to please now. There is a sense of not
understanding that you have got a boss, you have got customers
you have to sell your product to. And there is a certain
responsibility that comes with that.
Thank you all. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman KELLY. Thank you. And I just want to thank all
four panel members. You know, one thing you didn't mention, Mr.
Braziel, you kind of hit on it, is role models are so
important, to see successful people. And I look at the panel
that I have got sitting in front of me, and I know, as Chairman
Chabot likes to say, all 30 people watching C-SPAN right now
can--but, you know, it is important, each of you represent role
models that people can look up to and they believe they can do
it right. And I go back to believing you can succeed is the
very first step and all those other things before they can even
fall into place.
And I would like to thank everyone for joining us today.
The community-small business relationship is a vital factor in
not only the success of the individual community and small
businesses, but also in the growth of the United States economy
overall.
I would particularly like to thank our witnesses.
I do want to mention, Congressman Velazquez, the Ranking
Member, is coming. I am already in the middle of closing and I
am going to close. But I hope you all will stay around and talk
to her. She is quite a phenomenal team player on this
Committee. And I have got to get to another Committee and I
know Ms. Adams does too, but I do ask that you stay around and
please take the opportunity to talk to her because she is a
phenomenal member of this Committee.
I would particularly like to thank our witnesses for their
testimony. I appreciate each of your insights into this
relationship and what Congress can do to further foster this
relationship going forward.
Now, I ask unanimous consent that members have five
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record. Without objection, so ordered.
We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:04 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
Testimony of Mr. Ara Bagdasarian
Co-Founder & CEO Omnilert, LLC
Co-Author ``The Lemonade Stand'' Book
``Community Support: Entrepreneurial Development and Beyond.''
Before The Committee on Small Business
Subcommittee on Investigations, Oversight, and Regulations
I would like to begin by thanking the Congressional Small
Business Committee for inviting me to testify today, on behalf
of America's Small Business Development Centers, to share a few
of my thoughts on the impact of community support for
entrepreneurial development on local communities and economies.
As a serial entrepreneur who founded his first enterprise
before the age of 10, a neighborhood lawn and gardening service
called ``KidCo,'' I believe that the opportunities for small
businesses to innovate on a local, national--even global
scale--to be sure, there are challenges to be faced and
overcome--but because I cannot think of a time in the whole of
human history when such a wealth of resources and technologies
were so readily available to anyone with a will and that most
precious resource of all: an idea.
I am the co-founder and Chief Executive Officer of
Omnilert, LLC, the world's first emergency notification system
for college and university campuses; though our customer base
has since expanded to include private enterprise, government,
and nonprofits from all across the country. As a company
founder, I have developed a keen appreciation for the obstacles
and challenges one must endure when embarking upon such a
venture.
In fact, a few years back, I took it to task to distill my
experiences into a book, titled ``The Lemonade Stand,'' which I
co-authored. ``The Lemonade Stand'' is, simply put, the why-to-
book on entrepreneurship; A memoir. Based my own, real-world
experience, revelations, successes, and, of course, failures.
I have also served as the Chairman for the Town of
Leesburg, Virginia's, Economic Development Commission; a post
that I held for 7 years. And I am on numerous local and
regional advisory boards, whose purpose are to advocate for
entrepreneurship. It is from this vantage point that I have
seen the positive returns that result when a community invests
in and supports entrepreneurial development.
That's why I was stumped when, 10 years ago, I was asked,
for a Town of Leesburg marketing campaign, why the town would
be a good destination for entrepreneurs. I'm embarrassed to
admit that I could not think of a single reason other than the
fact that our town was a ``quaint, idyllic community''. We had
all the standard small business resources--SBDC, SCORE, and a
Chamber of Commerce--,however, we did not have a community that
was systematically supportive of local entrepreneurism.
This realization led to a concerted effort on my part, and
that of many others, to start building the infrastructure for
an entrepreneurship ecosystem: A shared effort between
community partners--both private and public--that was assembled
program by program. The fruits of this effort, I believe, have
yielded a model that can be replicated in large and small
communities across America.
It is through this model--and others like it--that
communities suffering from high unemployment or the uprooting
of key industry can plant the seeds of entrepreneurship and
cultivate the growth of new businesses--through proper
education and a supportive, local infrastructure.
Much like civic infrastructure--such as highways or the
power grid--communities can build and develop infrastructure to
harness great ideas that solve problems to power the economy.
We have taken significant steps in Loudoun County Virginia to
build this ecosystem. The three pillars of this infrastructure
are: entrepreneurship education, resources, and community. Here
are some of the key programs developed as part of our plan--
though it is, by no means, a comprehensive list:
I. Entrepreneurship Education
The foundation for developing a community support system
for entrepreneurship is education. The objective is to develop
the entrepreneur mindset or perspective. This means viewing
problems as opportunities, knowing how to develop an idea into
something tangible, learning how to fail and how to learn from
failure to build a world view that embraces challenges. A few
of the programs implemented in Loudoun County to support
Entrepreneurship Education include:
School Curricula (Lemon Lessons,
IncubatorEdu) - In 2011 we introduced one of the
country's first Entrepreneurship Education curricula to
several high school business programs. The Lemon
Lessons curriculum, based on the why-to-book on
entrepreneurship that I co-authored (``The Lemonade
Stand'') supplemented the overall business and
marketing curricula. Today, there are a number of
Entrepreneurship Education curricula designed for high
schools and higher education is offering major studies
in entrepreneurship. They encompass hands-on skill
development including speaking, listening, and writing
while developing critical thinking skills and analysis.
I recently had the privilege of teaching an
entrepreneurship course at Shenandoah University which
also has a Loudoun campus.
Step Up Loudoun/Loudoun Youth - As
entrepreneurship is based on problems in need of a
solution, this program started in 2013 by Loudoun Youth
Inc., challenges high school students to identify an
issue and create a plan to address the issue, and most
importantly, implementing the plan. Students learn the
lifecycle of developing ideas into real products or
programs and are supported by business leaders during
the process. Link to Program
Young Entrepreneurs Academy - A program
initiated through the Loudoun Chamber of Commerce and
Small Business Development Center was in 2016 to
provide a 7-month extracurricular program that teaches
middle and high school students the fundamentals of
entrepreneurship. In addition to learning the core
principles, students work on their own startup business
or program. Students are then paired with an
experienced entrepreneur to mentor for several months
to develop their new venture and prepare for a pich
event. Link to Program
Academies of Loudoun - To further fortify
the educational foundation for entrepreneurship, in
fall 2018 a new magnet high school which focuses on
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math with a
pathway in Entrepreneurship is opening. Again, the key
is to teach the entrepreneur mindset and creating
tangible solutions from challenges. Opportunities to
innovate surface when entrepreneurship is overlaid with
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math. Link to
Program
II. Support Programs
A network of systems and programs to support the planning,
creation, launch, and operations of a new venture. In Loudoun
we have a number of programs that help entrepreneurs take new
businesses to market:
Small Business Development Center - The
Loudoun SBDC has been the primary source of support for
small business since 1988. The SBDC provides counseling
on the mechanics of starting and launching a business.
Frequent seminars provide an additional educational
resource for individuals interested in learning what is
required to start a business, fundamentals of small
business marketing, sales, accounting, and operations.
The SBDC manages a network of experienced entrepreneurs
and professionals who advise clients at no cost. One-
on-one advising has proven to be an invaluable tool for
countless entrepreneurs I have encountered. Over the
years, I have utilized the counseling services to help
vet new ideas, structure partnerships, and various
other operational assistance. Link to Program
George Mason University Enterprise Center
(MEC) - In 2011, this small business incubator was
established through a partnership between the Town of
Leesburg, Loudoun County, and George Mason University.
The facility and programs are operated by George Mason
University acts as a ``one stop shop'' for many of the
county's entrepreneurship programs. In addition to
providing shared office space to 46 startup members,
meeting rooms, and training space, the MEC is the home
of the Loudoun Small Business Development Center,
SCORE, and Town of Leesburg Department of Economic
Development. This unique destination frequently
inspires collaboration with it's entrepreneur members,
and I have frequently jumped into a whiteboard session
to brainstorm ideas with other incubator members. Link
to Program
Loudoun Lemonhead Council - In 2012 a group
of seasoned entrepreneurs formed an organization to
share their experiences by acting as a sounding board
for emerging entrepreneurs. At meetings, presenting
entrepreneurs pitch their new venture, share their
challenges, and discuss opportunities. Connections are
frequently made into professional networks, plus
ongoing support and mentorship continues following the
session. Also, ``Lemonhead'' entrepreneurs are invited
to share their story as guest speakers in high school
classes. As an member, I frequently meet and advise a
number of entrepreneurs who have presented at Council
meetings. Link to Program
SCORE - In 2013, this program which provides
experienced mentors to advise entrepreneurs opened a
Loudoun Chapter to serve our growing community. This
group of vetted advisors share their experience with
specific domains. I utilized SCORE to help with the
legal structure of an early venture, and continue to
use SCORE advisors for various perspectives. Link to
Program
1 Million Cups (1MC) - A program started by
the Kauffman Foundation where entrepreneurs pitch their
idea to an open group of entrepreneurs was introduced
to our community in 2013. This facilitates open
discussion, insight, and feedback to help develop new
business ventures. IMC meets weekly at the George Mason
Enterprise Center. This brings the entrepreneurship
community together to foster a dynamic of collaboration
and collective support. In many cases, startups present
to the Lemonhead Council for a deeper dive after they
present at 1MC. Link to Program
Economic Development (County and Local) - As
a testament to our community's support of
entrepreneurial development. In April 2015 Loudoun
County's Department of Economic Development hired a
dedicated Small Business and Entrepreneurship Manager.
This Manager serves as a central point of contract for
entrepreneurs, connects them with resources, and
creates synergies between entrepreneurial partners.
Both Loudoun County and Town of Leesburg advocate for
and are key partners in building community support for
entrepreneurial development. Link to Program
III. Community
Finally, fostering a collaborative community of
entrepreneurs, investors, mentors, educators, and community
leaders to live and thrive within this ecosystem must be a very
deliberate effort. Community is developed by proactively
creating opportunities to connect; and discovering synergies
with one another through events, engagements, and other
programs designed exclusively for founders and supporters.
In Loudoun, we started 5 years ago with a monthly founders-
only networking event, and now have a number of MeetUp groups,
guest speakers, happy hours, and pitch events. This helps
cross-pollinate relationships be4tween complimentary startups
and entrepreneurs. Unlike typical business networking events,
`entrepreneur networking events' do not encourage the
participation of those soliciting professional services. They
tend to be more collaborative and supportive in nature. Often
new innovations emerge though collaborations and partnerships.
After 7 years of development, we have a growing
entrepreneurial community functioning within an ecosystem
supported by a solid infrastructure.
Conclusion
I believe that building the infrastructure to support the
development of entrepreneurship is well within the means of
every community in America--be it large or small. But the
decision to go boldly forward is too often hindered by a fear
of change; or a desire to hang on to the industries and ways of
the past.
Ironically, it was by embracing change that the great
American industries of the past--and present--even came to
exist. But in a world where the only constant is change itself,
I believe that Congress has the purview and responsibility to
provide the incentives and support that will help American
entrepreneurs continue to lead the world in innovation and
industry. That is why I believe it should advocate for the
building of infrastructure for entrepreneurship through
championing entrepreneurship education, support programs, and
community engagement.
Once this framework is built, an entrepreneurial ecosystem
will develop and flourish incrementally. But this must be a
deliberate undertaking, requiring the participation of current
entrepreneurs, businesses, communities and education leaders;
as well as public sector cooperation, advocacy, and resources.
Of course, what works in Leesburg may not work in Oxford,
Mississippi or Charlotte, NC. Every community has its own
unique strengths and assets. But the ideas I've been grateful
to present to you here today amount to a blueprint, of sorts,
for communities to empower its most resourceful and motivated
to be a catalyst for positive economic and community change.
There are thousands of communities around the country filled
with smart, passionate individuals with brilliant ideas. All
that is needed is the blueprint.
Derrick Braziel
Managing Director
MORTAR
Statement to the Committee on Small Business
United States House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Investigations, Oversight, and Regulations
``Community Support: Entrepreneurial Development and Beyond''
April 12, 2018
Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, Subcommittee
Chairman Kelly, Ranking Member Adams, members of the
subcommittee and members of the full committee: Thank you for
inviting me today and for the opportunity to offer testimony on
the work of MORTAR and more specifically, the value of our
partnership with SCORE.
When I was in college, I was introduced to a quote by
Author Stephen Gould. Mr. Gould said that he was, ``less
interested in the weight and convolutions of Einstein's brain
than in the near certainty that people of equal talent have
lived and died in cotton fields and sweatshops.''
Founded in 2014, MORTAR works to create diverse communities
by enabling historically marginalized entrepreneurs to access
the resources needed to start and run successful businesses. We
exist because we believe that there are minority men and women
all across our country--especially in our inner cities--with an
undeniable amount of world-changing talent. People like my
father, who through athletic potential was adopted by his white
high school football coach, giving him the opportunity to
become the first person in his family to graduate from college,
become a published author and father three amazing kids, one of
which, my twin brother named Desmond Braziel, who serves our
country as a Captain in the United States Army.
For the past four years, MORTAR has worked in Cincinnati to
uncover latent entrepreneurial talent operating under the
surface over our urban neighborhoods. We believe that any
entrepreneur can thrive--when equipped with the right resources
and hustle.
Our strategy is a practical solution to a common problem
for minorities across the country--it's very difficult to
access the resources needed to start and grow businesses.
Further, with the rapid gentrification of neighborhoods, many
indigenous entrepreneurs are not connected to opportunities to
prevent displacement while increasing engagement.
Utilizing non-traditional methods, we take risks on an
entrepreneur's abilities to start and grow businesses where
others may not, providing an unparalleled connection to
technical assistance, pop-up retail spaces to test ideas, and
flexible, ``friends and family''-styled micro-loans to grow
businesses. Our business academy, for example, which works with
mostly low-income, African-American entrepreneurs, has a 96%
graduation rate and is considered a model program across the
country.
Our innovative work provides a critical piece of our
Cincinnati's startup ecosystem, showing what's possible when
people work together towards a common goal, elevating
Cincinnati into a national conversation around diversity and
inclusion. Every day, MORTAR shows Cincinnatians and other
communities what's possible when you invest in previously
underestimated entrepreneurs.
Unfortunately, Cincinnati suffers from chronic economic
inequality, as over 75% of African-American families live in
poverty and 17.1% of African-Americans are looking for work.
The Kauffman index ranked Cincinnati 32 out of 40 in terms of
entrepreneurial opportunity. Forbes ranked Cincinnati 50th out
of 52 cities in terms of economic opportunity for minorities,
and the Urban League listed Cincinnati at 73rd out of 77 cities
in terms of economic mobility for African-Americans.
Within these sobering statistics are minority entrepreneurs
with talent who could make a tangible impact in our region if
given the opportunity.
Take Means Cameron, for example. Last Friday, I met with
Means, the owner of one of America's hottest clothing brands,
Black Owned, and his SCORE mentor, Jim Stahly. They were
meeting with me because Means, despite being college educated
and the founder of a successful, hip streetwear company, needed
access to capital.
To see Jim, a seasoned business executive, working with
Means, an early-thirties entrepreneur from the inner city,
seamlessly work together through a sophisticated business plan
brought tears to my eyes. Jim's experience, coupled with Means'
resourcefulness and MORTAR's resources, will help Means
continue to succeed.
The reality is that many people like Means will never have
an opportunity for their dreams to be realized.
Luckily, I have the opportunity to make a positive impact
on entrepreneurs like Means every day.
Central to our work is our partnership with SCORE. Any
person, whether you intend to be an artist, plumber,
entrepreneur or politician, needs to have a support system in
place if you want to succeed. According to the U.S. Small
Business Administration, small business owners who receive
three or more hours of mentoring report higher revenues and
increased growth.
SCORE is the nation's largest network of volunteer, expert
business mentors, with 10,000 volunteer mentors nationwide
providing free small business mentoring sessions, workshops and
educational services to clients. Since 1964, SCORE has helped
more than 10 million aspiring entrepreneurs to start or grow a
business. In 2017, SCORE mentors volunteered 3.6+ million hours
to help create 54,506 small businesses and 61,534 non-owner
jobs.
SCORE has filled a critical gap for MORTAR entrepreneurs,
offering their time and expertise to support and cultivate the
dreams of our high-potential, under-resourced entrepreneurs.
Since day one, SCORE has provided a mentor for every single one
of MORTAR's 170 graduates. In the beginning, I was nervous--how
would this organization of seasoned, mostly white professionals
interact with our graduates? Well, I can say with certainty
that our partnership with SCORE, and the resources they
provide, has made our entrepreneurial community one of the
strongest in the country.
SCORE has also stepped in to support MORTAR, helping us
evaluate our own business model along with opportunities to
expand our footprint in Cincinnati and beyond.
Our partnership with SCORE has been instrumental to our
growth--we've recently expanded to five communities in
Cincinnati, and opened three additional pop-up spaces there. We
plan to pilot our new curriculum with partners in Milwaukee,
and we recognize that working with SCORE is an indispensable
component of our success. We recognize the power in bringing
together people of different backgrounds around a common,
shared passion for entrepreneurship. As a result, we've forged
lifetime bonds between people who may have never met otherwise.
The experience of MORTAR entrepreneurs connecting with
SCORE mirrors that of my father, who, through the generosity of
my grandfather, forever changed his trajectory and that of my
family.
At the end of the day, our hope is that our approach--in
close partnership with SCORE--will catalyze the creation of
local ecosystems where entrepreneurs of all backgrounds and
colors can not only participate, but also transfer economic
opportunity and ownership to future generations.
Our partnership with SCORE has helped MORTAR graduates to
exceed the national business averages. For example, we know
that of the 170 graduates of MORTAR's program, 132 are still in
business, with 71% engaged in our alumni support network. We
estimate that in the past year alone, our entrepreneurs have
added $1 million to our regional economy. One graduate, Brian
Jackson, is on pace to open Cincinnati's first black-owned
brewery.
It's been proven that MORTAR graduates--despite coming from
disadvantaged backgrounds--are staying in business longer,
creating more jobs and real economic change for individuals and
communities in our region. The impact of our work has been
featured in publications such as Forbes, NBC Nightly News, the
Stanford Social Innovation Review, Politico Magazine and
others.
The work of MORTAR is just getting started. We recognize
that by partnering with organizations like SCORE, great things
can happen. Our plan is to continue working to teach
entrepreneurship in communities where the next Steve Jobs,
Kanye West or Walt Disney may live. We see a world where with a
MORTAR on every inner city corner, where the crazy dreamers who
see the world differently will be encouraged, inspired and
trained to change the world.
Thank you for again for your support and for allowing me to
testify. I am happy to answer any questions.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Testimony of Stephanie Carter: Community Support:
Entrepreneurial Development and Beyond
Thank you, Chairman Kelly, Ranking Member Adams and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, for the opportunity
to share this testimony with you. My name is Stephanie Carter,
and I am founder and President of SCB Management Consulting.
SCB resolves complex business challenges and develops tailored
solutions for corporate executives, public sector
organizations, and business owners. SCB's core services are
program and project management, risk management, strategic
planning and business process improvement.
I am testifying today on behalf of the Association of
Women's Business Centers (AWBC), which supports the national
network of Women's Business Centers (WBCs) by providing
training, mentoring, programming, and advocacy with the goal of
improving services to women entrepreneurs. The AWBC's
membership includes all of the 107 WBCs throughout the United
States.
As you know, the Women's Business Center program is a
public-private partnership with 30 years of success in
providing training, counseling, mentoring, and access to
capital to women entrepreneurs across the country. Women and
business like me and SCB.
Before I begin, let me thank the subcommittee for holding
this hearing today. Understanding the challenges of launching
and growing a business is difficult, and too often we do not
fully recognize the factors at the periphery of traditional
business creation--despite their importance. I fully believe
that the community fostered by the WBC played a key role in my
success, and its replication can only mean good things for
women entrepreneurs nationwide.
Strength in Numbers
Business success is predicated on a host of factors,
ranging from the expertise of the business owner, to wisdom of
the business plan, to the ability to access capital, to picking
the right location or marketing, to hiring the right staff.
When a business succeeds or fails, there are so many variables
to point to as a driver of where an entrepreneur made or did
not make it.
What is undeniable, however, is that those businesses that
have a network of support behind them fare better than those
without. In my view, here are a few reasons why this is.
First, a network allows you to problem solve the early
crises of launching and growing a business. Along the way,
whether its incorporation or tax questions, to the logistics of
office space or your first hire, they are myriad challenges in
every business. When you have a network of fellow entrepreneurs
you can collectively solve--and even anticipate--many of these
issues.
Second, a strong community helps identify new
opportunities. Every business, whether five minutes or 5
generations old, is seeking new opportunities. A community that
understand your business and its offerings is incredibly
helpful in spotlighting business development. Similarly, it
also allows for teaming of entrepreneurs who may collectively
offer an innovative solution to the market than individually is
not available.
Finally, and perhaps the hardest to define but also the
most important, a community and network gives you the
confidence to become an entrepreneur and the persistence to
thrive after your business is created.
For these reasons, developing communities of support around
women entrepreneurs should be considered critical. The
potential of the nation's 11 million women business owners
thrives only when the challenges of business can be addressed
through sufficient access to counsel.
The Role of Women's Business Centers in Fostering Community
The network of 150 women's business centers service
locations across the country spend each day unlocking this
potential--and addressing those challenges. The WBC program
plays a different role to each of the two million women who
have walked through our doors, but in so doing, has created a
community of two million women entrepreneurs.
A study of WBC clients done by the Center for Women's
Business Research found that, aside from general business
management information, gaining financial management skills,
and learning about the legal aspects of organizing a business,
what the clients valued highly from their experience in the
center was finding a community of other women with whom to
build relationships. Unlike a ``transactional'' short-term
course--after which a prospective business owner is on their
own--women's business centers provide a venue for ongoing
learning and relationship-building.
Simply put, the WBC's role is the glue of the women's
entrepreneurial ecosystem. In communities that have WBCs,
entrepreneurs of all kinds are developing the skills and
confidence to launch or grow their business.
How WBCs and Community Support Helped SCB
I launched my business after nearly twenty years in
corporate consulting and internal leadership roles. While I had
the business, finance and operations foundation of my MBA and
corporate roles, there were many aspects of entrepreneurship
that I felt I needed including legal, tax, sales and marketing.
I began enrolling in Entrepreneur and Business Planning
Courses with the Women's Business Development Center in Center
City Philadelphia and the SBDC in Baltimore in early 2016.
Once I was in the Washington DC area, and with the public
sector being one of the greatest opportunities for consulting,
I embarked on learning as much as I could to help me directly
penetrate the market and begin to grow my business. I took my
first seminar with the WBC in July 2017 ``Orientation to Small
Business Resources-Montgomery County.'' During that session I
learned about other WBC courses including the Procurement
Series offered by Prince Georges County and Montgomery County.
I started that six-part series in August 2017 because it
offered a host of information about accessing the public sector
market. The series culminated with a matchmaking session with
procurement specialists in November.
I enrolled in the Procurement Series for the business
development information, however, gained several relationships
that ultimately formed a community of support for my business:
The WBC counselor who facilitated the series
has become a great ongoing resources for business
development opportunities as well as other information
I may need including securing office space.
I forged a partnership with one of the
speakers who noticed during my `elevator pitch' that we
may have some synergies, and currently pursuing
business development opportunities together.
I included one of the Procurement Series
participants who is just starting her consulting
business, in a recent bid.
Public sector panelists have been very
accessible and helpful in gaining a greater
understanding of their respective organizations.
It also is not just the network at the WBCs alone that has
provided benefit. I learned of other networks at the WBC that I
should engage and have expanded my ability to grow my business
through them. There is an exponential impact of the initial
network supplied by the WBC.
I learned through the WBC courses that an effective market
penetrator for new entrepreneurs such as myself are Woman
Business Enterprise (WBE) and Minority Business Enterprise
(MBE) certifications. I began the process in 2017 and now
certified in all qualifying categories. As a newly certified
WBE and MBE, I regularly attend informational and matchmaking
sessions offered by the certifying agencies.
I also attend a variety of forums such as Pre-Bid
Conferences, Economic Forums, and State of Maryland ``Ready,
Set, Grow'' monthly informational sessions offered by the
Governor's Office that also offer the opportunity to meet
industry leaders. As a result, I have begun to forge new
relationships in the public sector. Some of these relationships
are leading to immediate collaborations while others are laying
the foundation for long-term mutual relationships.
I am also a member of the DC Chapters of the Financial
Executives International (FEI) and the Risk and Insurance
Management Society (RIMS). I was previously with other business
organizations, however, have generally found daytime chapter
meetings are not conducive to my subcontracting engagements.
Furhtering Community Support
One of the first questions I often review in these networks
is ``where do you live?'' People are consistently shocked that
I have traveled from Calvert County to Baltimore, Columbia,
Northern Virginia, etc. to attend an event. However,
opportunities for the information and access that I need
generally are not offered in Southern Maryland.
My example is not unique. Companies hover around these
networks and we must do a better job of creating communities of
support in areas that need business growth the most.
Similarly, we must continue to enhance the WBC program at
SBA. With jurisdiction over the program, this Committee has the
opportunity to make the benefits I have experienced more
widespread. The limitations of an outdated authorization are
evident in the day-to-day experiences of these centers.
I encourage policymakers to consider legislation that would
allow for more flexibility for WBCs--particularly eliminating
the many burdens they face and choose not to operate in certain
areas.
The role of AWBC, who I am representing here today, should
also be leveraged. Through statute, we should build on the best
practices of other resource partners and allow for
accreditation. Part of this process would ensure that every WBC
has the skilled resources to develop communities of support for
women business owners.
Finally, Congress should increase the visibility of the WBC
program. I encourage this Committee to use its' extensive media
abilities to talk about WBCs. The more we do that, the larger
the community of support becomes.
The commitment of this Committee to the WBC program
deserves recognition as Congress is working to enhance WBC's
role in fostering a positive environment for women
entrepreneurs. We are grateful to Committee Chairman Chabot,
Ranking Member Velazquez and Representatives Knight and Lawson
for introducing leg8islation to re-authorize the program.
Representative Stephanie Murphy, too, championed the program
and restored to the FY2018 WBC funding the additional $1
million in appropriations included in FY2017.
These actions make the WBC's role in the broader women's
business community profound. I am excited that they will
continue their work and continue to support the growth of
women's entrepreneurship and the community of support created
by this important program.
Conclusion
In closing, I appreciate the opportunity to celebrate the
unstoppable community of women-owned businesses and the impact
they are having on our nation's economy and to update this
subcommittee on the role that community played in my success.
Many challenges remain for women-owned businesses, but we have
only begun to tap the potential of this economic powerhouse.
With the help of the Congress, the SBA, and the WBC
Program, I believe we can continue to build a community of
support that will allow women entrepreneurs and small business
owners around the country to realize their full entrepreneurial
potential and contribute significantly to economic growth and
job creation.
Thank you again for this opportunity to testify.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Community Support: Entrepreneurial Development and Beyond,
a VBOC Perspective
Good morning, I am Tamara Bryant. I am the director of the
Veterans Business Outreach Center at Fayetteville State
University serving the states of North Carolina, South
Carolina, and Kentucky. The Veterans Business Outreach Center
or VBOC is the Small Business Administration's program that
provides business training, counseling, and SBA resource
partner referrals to active duty service members, National
Guard & Reserve personnel, veterans, and military spouses
interested in starting or growing a small business. The SBA has
20 organizations participating in this cooperative agreement
and serving as Veterans Business Outreach Centers (VBOC) across
the mainland US and one in Hawaii. I would like to thank
Ranking Member Alma Adams and Chairman Trent Kelly
Representative for the invitation today to share with you
VBOC's entrepreneurial development programs, a collaboration of
resources and partnerships to help build stronger
entrepreneurial communities and to increase the success rate of
Veteran-owned businesses.
VBOC's core competencies are entrepreneurial development
training designed to deliver interactive and experiential
workshops that give the attendee the opportunity to walk away
with tangible outcomes and takeaways they can immediately
employ in their business. One major point of entry to VBOC
services is during the active duty service member's transition
out process in a training called Boots to Business. This is a
two-day training workshop conducted at military branches that
introduces our target audience to the idea of entrepreneurship.
The training is taught by VBOC and other SBA resource partners
including Small Business Development Centers, SCORE and Women's
Business Centers. Last fiscal year, Fayetteville State
University's VBOC conducted 68 training sessions. The 20-VBOC's
as a whole conducted 607 training sessions across the country.
Our second core competency is business counseling that assists
clients with evaluating the feasibility of a business concept
and turns it into an actionable plan, start-up assistance/
expansion, business planning, loan package assistance, and
more. Third, is our resource referral program, VBOC works
closely with other SBA resources partners across the U.S. when
a specific area of expertise or greater assistance is needed.
For instance, if a client needs to get a Veterans
Administration (VA) certification as a VOSB or SDVOSB we will
refer the client to the Procurement Technical Assistance Center
who are certified to do VA certifications. The entrepreneurial
development training, collaboration of resources and community
support are critical success factors for VBOC's mission which I
will elaborate on.
Fayetteville State University Veterans Business Outreach
Center (FSU-VBOC), since its inception in 2010, is committed to
assisting veterans, transitioning soldiers, active duty, guard,
reservist, and spouses to start, purchase or grow a small
business. FSU VBOC is located in North Carolina with a total
population of 790,000 Veterans who reside in each of the 100
counties across the state. Close proximity to the largest Army
Installation, Fort Bragg-home of the 82nd Airborne. VBOC is
hosted at Fayetteville State University's (FSU), College of
Business and Economics, a Historically Black College University
(HBCU). FSU is a constituent member of the University of the
North Carolina System, and it is known for its support of
military-affiliated students through serving large numbers of
active duty soldiers, their spouses and families, as well as
veterans. The college has over 6,200 students with almost 25
percent of that population being the military community. This
collaboration with FSU is a natural fit for VBOC's target
customers and mission. It has allowed VBOC the opportunity to
collaborate/participate in the College of Business and
Economics entrepreneurship programs such as small business
consultant teams. The small business consultant teams are
undergraduate or graduate students (many of the students are
military affiliated, minorities and women) that work closely
with our clients to solve business needs in areas of marketing
research, feasibility studies, and financial analysis, and to
help them pursue new opportunities. These student engagement
opportunities provide the students with real-world practicum
educational experience focused on helping small businesses and
our clients receive valuable assistance at no charge. In
addition to collaborating with CBE, we conduct government and
corporate procurement training to better position the target
audience to compete for all levels of contracting, and judge
entrepreneurial pitch competitions, to name a few undertakings.
This collaboration allows VBOC to promote and market our
services to military students and alumni', provide our clients
access to student internships, provide government procurement
technical training/plans rooms, workshops/seminars taught by
awarded winning entrepreneurial professors, as well as, access
to state-of-the-art classrooms and technologies.
FSU-VBOC is extremely fortunate to have great partnerships
with highly valued resource partners to help service our
clients in an exemplary manner. VBOC's network offers
invaluable services and programs for our veterans and military
community, however, we do have our challenges for example, not
having centers in each state, which leaves several VBOC's to
cover multiple states. Therefore, it is critical for the VBOC's
to leverage other resource partners to assist their client's
needs. We understand our clients come with a unique technical
skill set, impeccable leadership skills, core values, and a
mission-focused mindset but often they may lack the business
acumen skills or the ability to transfer their military skills
into an entrepreneurial career pathway. VBOC's entrepreneurial
development training, business counseling and referral services
address those needs with the assistance of SBA Resource
Partners, local/state agencies and community support which
becomes an added-value to their clients. It is imperative that
we know and understand the population of our target customers
and the available resources to meet the client needs and manage
and exceed their expectations. FSU-VBOC client base is very
diverse serving over 1,400 clients this past fiscal year, 47%
minority and 21% women with various needs in access to capital,
securing government contracts/certifications, business plan
development and access to human capital. Having a clear
understanding of who we serve and what their needs are allows
VBOC to leverage the right resources and provide in-depth
counseling that results in impactful outcomes. I will be
highlighting two successful clients for whom VBOC leveraged
other resources that yielded the clients' great results.
Marcella Eubanks, Army Veteran owner of Bravery Kids Gym,
came to VBOC with her idea of owning an all-inclusive
children's gym with a focus on children with special needs. She
received assistance with developing her business plan/start-up
assistance and referral to a local community bank to obtain
funding. She came back to the center for other services because
she viewed the staff at VBOC as a trusted advisor and was
willing to work with other agencies. She's been referred to the
Syracuse University V-WISE pitch competitions, SBTDC for
specialized training in QuickBooks and utilized CBE student
internships. These referrals have helped her win pitch
competitions, hire 6 part-time employees and improve the
business' operational and marketing systems.
Robert Fletcher, Army Veteran owner of Bob's Smokin'
Southern BBQ Sauce, attended VBOC's annual Entrepreneurial
Bootcamp for Service Disabled Veterans. The week-long training
provides a learning and development opportunity for veterans
and spouses who are interested in starting a business. Robert's
idea of his famous barbecue sauce concept started in the boot
camp. He later worked closely with the VBOC staff to form the
business. Robert was also introduced to one of VBOC's core
strategic partners the North Carolina Veterans Business
Association (NC Vet Biz). Its mission is to support, educate
and connect all veterans in commerce in North Carolina with
resources to become successful in business. The association
assisted Robert with additional distribution channels to get
his sauce to the market. The training, counseling and
partnership assisted Mr. Fletcher in operating nationally with
sauces now in over 200 stores, as well as being offered
expansion internationally to Australia, Germany, and Okinawa.
He will soon be a part of a Netflix documentary scheduled to
begin production in late 2018. These are two of man success
stories demonstrating FSU-VBOC collaborations with resource
partners, and local organizations to deliver desirable outcomes
for their clients. FSU-VBOC's impact on the US economy's during
the past fiscal year includes: contributing to 41 businesses
started, 537 jobs created and retained, 2.2 million loans
acquired, and 1.3 million contracts awarded with the assistance
of great partnerships and community support.
Veteran-Owned businesses are the pillars of the American
economy. Nearly 1 in 10 businesses are veteran-owned,
generating approximately 1.1 billion of the nation's total
sales per year. These businesses hire 5.03 million people per
year, and have an annual payroll of $195 Billion (data
collected by the Office of Veterans Business Development).
Veteran-owned businesses are found across diverse industries
with the above average representation in finance/insurance,
transportation/warehouse, construction, and agriculture/
forestry/fishing. The State of North Carolina sees growth in
these industry sectors as well. FSU-VBOC partnered with NC
Department of Agriculture, USDA and NC Department of Veterans
and Military Affairs to host annual Veterans in Agriculture
summit to promote, support and expose more Veterans to the
agriculture industry. Veteran women-owned businesses steadily
increase each year, (15.2% of businesses are owned by veteran
women). To continue the steady increase, VBOC co-hosted ``A New
Mission: Military Women as Entrepreneurs Conference'' with the
Women's Business Center of N.C. across the state. VBOC's
recognized the challenges these veterans faced as business
owners in obtaining access to capital and government/corporate
procurement. To assist our clients with these critical needs
FSU-VBOC partnered with the North Carolina Veterans Business
Association to provide veterans and the military community with
access to more procurement opportunities, removing barriers to
entry and networking opportunities. The past fiscal year for
the VBOC network was marked by very significant levels of
outreach, training, and services for veteran-owned and military
spouses' small businesses. Over 1,700 training events held, 178
businesses created, and 1,006 jobs created and retained, 243
prime and subcontractors awarded, and 8.5 million dollars in
SBA loans approved. Starting May 1st, the award expands the
existing VBOC network from 20 to 22 centers across the nation,
ensuring 100 percent geographic coverage. Each of the 22
awardees displays proven commitment and continued excellence in
providing comprehensive entrepreneurial services to the veteran
and military community. Most of the VBOC centers cover multiple
states and attend every Boots to Business course, all with a
budget of $6,000,000. The 22 Veterans Business Outreach Center
through its cooperative agreement is committed to ensuring that
every service member and military spouse has the resources they
need in their local communities to start and operate small
businesses, achieve post-service career success, and strengthen
the Nation's economy. My ask is for your continued support of
VBOC services to increase the success rate of business
ownership with this highly skilled workforce. Again, thank you
for this opportunity to share and represent the VBOC network-a
program that helps our service men and women, and Veterans who
fought, protected and served this GREAT NATION!
Submitted, 10 April 2018
Tamara Bryant, Director
[emailprotected]
Fayetteville State University-Veterans Business
Outreach Center
www.FSUVBOC.com
1200 Murchison Rd
Fayetteville, NC 28301
(910) 672-1107