- SENSIBLY REFORMING THE CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM. STANDARDS PROGRAM
[Senate Hearing 116-79]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-79
SENSIBLY REFORMING THE CHEMICAL FACILITY
ANTI-TERRORISM STANDARDS PROGRAM
=======================================================================
ROUNDTABLE
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
JUNE 4, 2019
__________
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-699 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin, Chairman
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
RICK SCOTT, Florida
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Gabrielle D'Adamo Singer, Staff Director
Michelle D. Woods, Senior Policy Advisor
Satya P. Thallam, Chief Economist
Colleen E. Berny, Professional Staff Member
William G. Rhodes III, Fellow
David M. Weinberg, Minority Staff Director
Julie G. Klein, Minority National Security Advisor
Christopher J. Mulkins, Minority Government Accountability Office
Detailee
Jeffrey D. Rothblum, Minority Fellow
Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
Thomas J. Spino, Hearing Clerk
C O N T E N T S
------
Opening statements:
Page
Senator Johnson..............................................
1
Senator Peters...............................................
2
Senator Hawley...............................................
12
Senator Carper...............................................
20
Prepared statements:
Senator Johnson..............................................
35
Senator Peters...............................................
36
WITNESSES
Tuesday, June 4, 2019
Brian Harrell, Assistant Director for Infrastructure Security,
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, U.S.
Department of Homeland Security................................
3
Nathan Anderson, Acting Director, Homeland Security and Justice
Team, U.S. Government Accountability Office....................
4
Matthew Fridley, Corporate Manager, Safety, Health, and Security,
Brenntag North America, on behalf of the National Association
of Chemical Distributors.......................................
5
Tim O'Brien, President, Detotec North America....................
6
William Erny, Senior Director, American Chemistry Council........
7
Andrew Wright, Vice President, Legislative Affairs, International
Liquid Terminals Association...................................
8
John S. Morawetz, Health and Safety Representative, International
Chemical Workers Union Council, United Food and Commercial
Workers International Union....................................
9
Alphabetical List of Witnesses
Anderson, Nathan:
Testimony....................................................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
44
Erny, William:
Testimony....................................................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
70
Fridley, Matthew:
Testimony....................................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
52
Harrell, Brian:
Testimony....................................................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
38
Morawetz, John S.:
Testimony....................................................
9
Prepared statement...........................................
76
O'Brien, Tim:
Testimony....................................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
60
Wright, Andrew:
Testimony....................................................
8
Prepared statement...........................................
73
APPENDIX
Statements submitted for the Record:
American Fuel and Petrochemical Manufacturers................
82
DOW..........................................................
86
Environmental Technology Council.............................
88
Responses to post-hearing questions for the Record:
Mr. Harrell..................................................
91
Mr. Anderson.................................................
96
SENSIBLY REFORMING THE CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM.
STANDARDS PROGRAM
----------
TUESDAY, JUNE 4, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:30 p.m., in
room SD-106, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Ron Johnson,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Johnson, Scott, Hawley, Peters, Carper,
and Hassan.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JOHNSON
Chairman Johnson. Good afternoon. This roundtable is called
to order.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for your thoughtful
testimony and your time here today appearing before us
answering our questions.
I would ask consent that my written statement\1\ be entered
into the record. Without objection.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Johnson appear in the
Appendix on page 35.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Just real quick, I do want to remind everybody what
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards stands for (CFATS).
It is not the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). It is not
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). It is not
Department of Defense (DOD). It is not Department of
Transportation (DOT). This was a piece of legislation enacted
to prevent the diversion basically for terrorist purposes of
chemicals, and from my standpoint it should be focused on that.
Last Congress, we had actually a larger roundtable, more
participants. I learned a lot from that and found there was
duplication with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives (ATF). We tried to address that in our bill that
passed by voice vote. We tried to reward good behavior. If you
are up to snuff and you have enacted a great plan here, we give
you some rewards in terms of less of a regulatory burden. You
have it covered. You do not need the nanny State coming in here
and telling you exactly how to run your operation.
I would hope that that will be--the goal of our ongoing
efforts here is to reauthorize this, and I do realize those in
industry would like a long-term authorization. It is all part
of the Stockholm Syndrome. They are kidnapped and they are just
asking for a glass of water. They want some certainty, and I am
happy to give them that level of certainty.
I do not think they want greater regulation. I do not think
they want CFATS to become an adjunct or an addition to OSHA and
EPA and DOT and DOD. I am sure there is more of an alphabet
soup here of different agencies that control your lives. Again,
I want to keep this thing focused. I appreciate everybody's
involvement in here, but, hopefully that statement from the
Chairman of this Committee will provide some guidance in what
we are trying to do to reauthorize this program. We should
reauthorize it for a longer period of time to provide that
certainty. But I think we should reform it without mission
creep.
With that, I will turn it over to Senator Peters.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PETERS
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will give a few
opening remarks, too, but I would ask unanimous consent that my
prepared statement----\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Peters appears in the
Appendix on page 36.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Johnson. I am not so sure about that. [Laughter.]
Without objection.
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would agree with the Chairman. At the most basic level,
CFATS is about ensuring that certain chemicals never fall into
the hands of terrorists. That is its fundamental task. But by
most accounts that I have heard, at least, the program is well
regarded. I have heard that from stakeholders, including
industry owners and operators, labor unions, and the Department
of Homeland Security (DHS). And it has been my experience that
everybody is seeking the certainty that a long-term extension
of the program would bring, and I agree with that aspect, and I
am happy to hear the Chairman also agrees that that is
something that we need to seek out.
We need to keep the aspects of the program that are working
well and improve aspects of the program that are not to ensure
that CFATS is a mature and reliable security program on par
with other established and enduring compliance frameworks.
Improving CFATS' focus on cybersecurity, employee engagement,
whistleblower protections, and outreach and coordination with
first responders on-site, I think, are areas that there is some
real room for progress.
Senator Johnson put forward a number of priorities in the
last Congress, and I look forward to working with the Chair and
our House colleagues to find some common ground and to strike a
bipartisan agreement that enhances security, reduces the risk
of terrorist attacks, and protects workers and our communities.
And I am confident, Mr. Chairman, that we can get that job
done, and I look forward to working with you in a very frank
and productive discussion with the experts we have here today.
Chairman Johnson. I appreciate that, Senator Peters.
We will just go down the list. Everybody has been given a
generous 2 minutes. [Laughter.]
We read your testimony, and it was very thoughtful, and
that will obviously be entered in the record. But if you can
just summarize your main points in 2 minutes, and then we will
open it up for general discussion. And we do this a little bit
different than a hearing where we each get 7 minutes. It is
really more of an open discussion so that we stay on the same
point with different Senators going down that same vein or the
same line of questioning as opposed to hopping all over the
place with more formalized rounds.
We will start with Brian Harrell. Mr. Harrell currently
serves as the Assistant Secretary for Infrastructure Security
of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA),
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Mr. Harrell.
TESTIMONY OF BRIAN HARRELL,\1\ ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR
INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY, CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
SECURITY AGENCY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Mr. Harrell. Alright. Thank you, Chairman Johnson, Ranking
Member Peters, and Members of the Committee, for having me here
today to discuss this important chemical security program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Harrell appears in the Appendix
on page 38.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chemicals are vital to our daily lives and economy. We use
them to develop medicines, refine fuels for our vehicles, and
build microchips for smartphones. Despite these benefits,
chemicals do not come without risk.
We live in a dynamic threat environment. Terrorists have
shown the desire to seek out and use chemicals in devastating
attacks, and our adversaries around the globe continue to
target facilities that store or produce chemicals.
The threat environment is changing. While an attacker would
have to physically drive a vehicle bomb up to a building 20
years ago, today the attacker might target a chemical
facility's operating system or employ unmanned aircraft or a
drone to carry out an attack from the comfort of their remote
location.
Ensuring that does not happen is one of my chief reasons
that I sit before you today. CFATS, as a non-prescriptive,
flexible anti-terrorism program is well suited to reduce the
risks of a chemical terrorist attack. Since its creation, CFATS
has identified chemical facilities that present the highest
risk in case of attack or exploitation, and we have worked to
ensure these facilities have security measures in place to
reduce the risks of these hazardous chemicals. As a result, the
level of security across the industry has significantly
increased, not only making a successful chemical attack more
difficult but also serving as a significant deterrent to our
adversaries.
Chemical security is a shared commitment, and the gains
made by CFATS are the result of a strong working relationship
with our industry stakeholders, our government partners, and
first responders.
However, the Department recognizes that as the threat
environment is constantly evolving, so, too, must CFATS. We are
engaging our workforce and industry stakeholders on ways in
which the regulation can continue to meet today's complex risk
landscape. We cannot be satisfied with our past progress, but
we must look for opportunities for improvement and adjust
within the changing physical and cybersecurity landscape. This
is a sign of a mature program.
Last, recognizing that CFATS focuses its efforts on only a
fraction of chemical facilities, the Department is considering
other opportunities to assist the chemical facility population
at large through voluntary initiatives. Chemical security must
remain a high priority for the Nation. We cannot allow
terrorists to access dangerous chemicals. If we can imagine a
scenario, a motivated terrorist can imagine a more devastating
one.
DHS looks forward to working with Congress toward a long-
term solution that includes both regulatory and voluntary
efforts so that we can continue to defend today and secure
tomorrow.
Thank you, and I look forward to the conversation.
Chairman Johnson. Our next witness is Nathan Anderson. Mr.
Anderson currently serves as the Acting Director of the
Homeland Security and Justice Team at the U.S. Government
Accountability Office (GAO). Mr. Anderson.
TESTIMONY OF NATHAN ANDERSON,\1\ ACTING DIRECTOR, HOMELAND
SECURITY AND JUSTICE TEAM, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE
Mr. Anderson. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Peters,
Members of this Committee, good afternoon. We at GAO have
issued a number of reports on CFATS over the last 7 years, and
DHS has made substantial progress in a number of areas where we
found deficiencies such as identifying high-risk facilities,
prioritizing them, and reviewing security plans. But there is
room for improvement, particularly in measuring the CFATS
program's performance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Anderson appears in the Appendix
on page 44.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sometimes when people use terms like ``performance
measures,'' it is difficult to understand the implications of
shortcomings in this area, so let me be clear. When we identify
deficiencies in the program's performance measures, we are
stating that improvements are needed so that decisionmakers
have the information necessary to gauge whether or in what form
the program should exist.
In our report from late last year, we found that DHS
performance measures for the CFATS program speak to program
accomplishments, such as the number of facilities inspected,
and these are important outputs. However, they do not measure
program outcomes. One way to do this is to measure reductions
in vulnerability at facilities that have resulted from
implementing required security measures.
Think of this in terms of cost-benefit. We know the cost of
the CFATS program in terms of annual appropriations, and we
have information on the cost that industry has incurred through
compliance. But we do not have clear information on the
benefits, specifically the amount that risk is reduced through
compliance with the CFATS program. Such information is needed
to assess the program's return on investment, and such measures
exist in some other DHS component programs.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Peters, and Members of the
Committee, this concludes my statement, and I look forward to
the discussion.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Anderson and Mr. Harrell.
Our next witness is Matthew Fridley. Mr. Fridley is the
Safety, Regulatory, and Security Manager at Brenntag North
America. He is also the current chair of the Chemical Sector
Coordinating Council (CSCC). Mr. Fridley.
TESTIMONY OF MATTHEW FRIDLEY,\1\ CORPORATE MANAGER, SAFETY,
HEALTH, AND SECURITY, BRENNTAG NORTH AMERICA, ON BEHALF OF THE
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CHEMICAL DISTRIBUTORS
Mr. Fridley. Good afternoon, Chairman Johnson, Ranking
Member Peters, and distinguished Members of the Committee.
Again, my name is Matthew Fridley, and I am the safety, health,
and security manager for Brenntag North America, a chemical
distribution company headquartered in Reading, Pennsylvania.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Fridley appears in the Appendix
on page 52.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to my role at Brenntag, I am the chair of the
Chemical Sector Coordinating Council. I am also the vice chair
of the Regulatory Affairs and Security Committee for the
National Association of Chemical Distributors (NACD) on whose
behalf I am testifying today.
I thank you for allowing me to participate in this
important roundtable. Brenntag is currently the largest
chemical distributor globally and the second largest chemical
distributor in the United States.
I believe the CFATS program has made the chemical industry
and our Nation much more secure with industry investing
significant capital and training resources toward enhanced
security measures.
DHS has generally taken a non-adversarial and balanced
approach in implementing the CFATS program. DHS has excelled in
outreach to industry in a number of ways. They include
understanding the diversity of the chemical industry and
working with companies on security measures that meet the CFATS
risk-based performance standards (RBPS); interacting with
chemical owners and operators; and always making inspectors and
headquarters personnel available to walk through and talk
through issues or questions.
One priority I can recommend to the Committee is to require
that any changes to Appendix A: Chemicals of Interest (COI)
list remain subject to rulemaking and notice and comment.
Changes to the COI list will have a major impact on my business
operation and security investments.
I also support the creation of the program under which DHS
would recognize companies that meet certain criteria such as
participation in an initiative such as Responsible
Distribution. By acknowledging the value of these industry
initiatives, DHS will be able to prioritize resources in
noncompliant outliers that pose a greater risk to security.
In 2014, the reauthorization further enhanced the security
efforts by providing regulatory certainty to both industry and
DHS, thereby increasing efficiencies in the program. It is my
hope Congress can pass a long-term reauthorization of the CFATS
program.
On behalf of both NACD and Brenntag, I appreciate the
opportunity to present our views on this important issue.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Fridley.
Our next witness is Timothy O'Brien. Mr. O'Brien is
President of Detotec North America, an explosive manufacturing
company headquartered in Sterling, Connecticut. Mr. O'Brien.
TESTIMONY OF TIM O'BRIEN,\1\ PRESIDENT, DETOTEC NORTH AMERICA
Mr. O'Brien. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Peters, and
Members of the Committee, as president of Detotec North America
and past chairman of the Institute of Makers of Explosives, I
thank you for the opportunity to discuss the CFATS program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. O'Brien appears in the Appendix
on page 60.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The commercial explosives industry has been regulated for
security since 1971 by ATF. Following the tragic events of
September 11, 2001 (9/11), Congress passed the Homeland
Security Act of 2002, which strengthened ATF's mission to
protect the public from the diversion of explosives for illicit
use, including acts of terrorism.
Reports from the U.S. Bomb Data Center show a consistent
decline in thefts of explosives over the past 30 years. CFATS
has had no perceptible impact on security for commercial
explosives. This may have been the reason why DHS stated before
this Committee last year that they would ``lose no sleep over
explosives leaving the program.''
Since Detotec opened 30 years ago, we have been compliant
with ATF's comprehensive security regulations. In all that
time, we have never experienced a theft or diversion of our
products. In 2008, Detotec submitted our first CFATS Top-
Screens and received conditional authorization in 2013.
In 2016, we submitted new Top-Screens based on a new
tiering methodology. Between the authorizations and the new
Top-Screens, we were inspected 10 times by ATF, DOD, and the
Defense Contract Management Agency (DCMA). No security concerns
were raised, and we were found to be in full compliance.
Despite our record, DHS required additional security
measures from us. DHS made suggestions for compliance, and our
cost estimates for those ranged from $400,000 to over $1
million. That would have shut us down.
By the time we found a viable plan, we were 10 days late,
resulting in a fine of $100,000. Detotec was able to reduce the
amount paid through a small business process; however, an
employee had to be let go.
Let me reiterate: I had to lay off an employee to pay a
fine for failing to submit to DHS my plan for what we would
implement in 6 months, not for failure to implement those
measures.
I do not appear before you to ask for deregulation of
commercial explosives, but to make the case for removing ATF-
regulated materials from CFATS, which will cut costs for
taxpayers and reduce duplicative regulation without having a
negative effect on national security.
Thank you. I look forward to any questions that you may
have.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. O'Brien.
Our next witness is William Erny. Mr. Erny is a Senior
Director at the American Chemistry Council (ACC), which
represents over 170 businesses involved in the chemistry
industry. Mr. Erny.
TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM ERNY,\1\ SENIOR DIRECTOR, AMERICAN
CHEMISTRY COUNCIL
Mr. Erny. Yes, good afternoon. As you all know, the
business of chemistry is a major economic driver here in the
United States. We are a $526 billion enterprise, and we are
growing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Erny appears in the Appendix on
page 70.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is because of this critical role in the economy that
chemical security continues to be a major priority for ACC and
its members, and to demonstrate this commitment, this year
marks the 31st anniversary of ACC's Responsible Care program.
Responsible Care is the leading chemical industry stewardship
program. Under Responsible Care, our members have invested more
than $17 billion to enhance security at all of our sites.
The CFATS program also plays a very critical role in
protecting chemicals. CFATS provides a baseline to set for the
industry that covers all facilities that they must adhere to.
As such, ACC supports long-term authorization.
It is true that DHS has made a lot of progress over the
last 4\1/2\ years. However, we would like to make some
additional recommendations we believe would further enhance the
program.
One, DHS should maintain its focus on chemical security.
CFATS should retain its core mission of chemical security, not
wander into other areas such as safety and environmental
requirements that we believe would serve to sort of water down
their current focus and resources on their core mission.
Two, personal surety, terrorist screening for Tiers 3 and
4, lower-risk tiers, should be optional. DHS has recently
announced they plan on expanding terrorist screening to more
than 3,000 additional lower-risk facilities, including tens of
thousands of additional workers and contractors. In a nutshell,
we believe this is just too far, it is too much, and it is not
necessary.
And then item number three, establish a CFATS recognition
program. DHS should leverage chemical industry stewardship
programs such as Responsible Care by providing regulatory
recognition for responsible operators. Such a program would
enhance the current stewardship programs that are available and
incentivize the creation of new programs.
It is a fact that companies who participate in industry
stewardship programs outperform their peers and the industry as
a whole. Creating a CFATS recognition program would enhance
chemical security across the sector and beyond the universe of
the regulated community.
In closing, I would just like to say that CFATS has helped
make our industry and our communities more secure. We encourage
this Committee to consider these proposed changes and to
provide long-term authorization for CFATS.
Thank you, and I look forward to our discussion.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Erny.
Our next witness is Andrew Wright. Mr. Wright is the Vice
President of Legislative Affairs of the International Liquid
Terminals Association (ILTA), representing both terminal and
supply members that transport liquid products. Mr. Wright.
TESTIMONY OF ANDREW WRIGHT,\1\ VICE PRESIDENT, LEGISLATIVE
AFFAIRS, INTERNATIONAL LIQUID TERMINALS ASSOCIATION
Mr. Wright. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Peters, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
participate in today's roundtable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Wright appears in the Appendix on
page 73.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The International Liquid Terminals Association represents
the tank and terminals industry in all 50 States. ILTA members
provide storage and transportation logistics and value-added
services for a wide range of liquid commodities, including
crude oil, gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, and chemicals.
ILTA appreciates the critical role that DHS and the CFATS
program play in maintaining our Nation's security and supports
the CFATS coalition priorities.
However, I want to focus on an ILTA recommendation to
correct the treatment of gasoline, diesel, and other fuel
mixtures. All flammable materials identified as chemicals of
interest have a National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
rating of Class 4, which is extremely flammable, with the
notable and problematic exception of gasoline Class 3 along
with diesel, kerosene, and jet fuel, all of which are Class 2.
Faced with the best science and the most authoritative
standard in use today for the characterization of flammable
materials, DHS no longer requires those facilities to perform
top-screen evaluations based solely on the presence of these
mixtures. In fact, for nearly a decade, gasoline, diesel,
kerosene, and jet fuel have effectively not been regulated
under CFATS because of a DHS regulatory hold. Therefore, in
practice, DHS recognizes the lower risk associated with
gasoline and other fuel blends. We believe that it is time to
bring the regulation in line with current DHS practice and
remove the unjustified exception that would incorrectly treat
these products as if they were chemicals of interest.
ILTA and its member companies have worked unsuccessfully
through regulatory channels for more than 10 years to correct
the mistaken treatment of gasoline and fuel blends that are
still written into the regulations. Only Congress can focus
CFATS on plausible security risk and ensure that gasoline and
fuel mixtures are removed from CFATS during this and future
Administrations.
I look forward to your questions.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Wright.
Our final witness, last but not least, is John Morawetz.
Mr. Morawetz is a Health and Safety Representative for the
International Chemical Workers Union Council and the United
Food and Commercial Workers (UFCW) International Union. Mr.
Morawetz.
TESTIMONY OF JOHN S. MORAWETZ,\1\ HEALTH AND SAFETY
REPRESENTATIVE, INTERNATIONAL CHEMICAL WORKERS UNION COUNCIL,
UNITED FOOD AND COMMERCIAL WORKERS INTERNATIONAL UNION
Mr. Morawetz. Thank you, Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member
Peters, and Committee Members for the honor of appearing before
you on chemical facilities security and safety. I represent, as
you said, the Chemical Workers and UFCW. We represent 20,000
members in 32 States and strongly support a multiyear
reauthorization with four improvements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Morawetz appears in the Appendix
on page 76.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One, our members work with many CFATS Appendix A extremely
hazardous substance and have a vested interest in a facility
operation for everyone's well-being. Thankfully, there has not
been a terrorist attack on a chemical plant, but we can learn
from unintentional releases at our facilities, including a
massive release in Houston that killed four people and a
complete rupture of a full chlorine tanker car in West
Virginia.
Most tragically, in 1971, a Georgia facility that
manufactured magnesium trip flares had some fires and blew up.
Horribly, the evacuation distance was not sufficient, and 27
workers were killed.
Our recommendations:
First, workers and labor representatives need to be
involved in protecting our chemical infrastructure. Workers'
daily expertise must be utilized and documented in the
drafting, implementation, and evaluation of plant security
plans. I would love to talk about CFATS inspections, but our
locals and members are often not included while other Federal
agencies have established joint management-labor inspection
models.
Second, everyone, including CFATS inspectors, must be
trained on specific hazards, responses, their roles and drills.
Third, whistleblowers must not face retaliation. DHS must
have procedures on whistleblower retaliation, including at
least 90 days to file a complaint, a private right of action,
and for representatives to file complaints.
Last, DHS knows how facilities use best practices to reduce
their risk, including safer substances, reductions in storage,
and just-in-time use, and that information should be released
annually.
Thank you, and I would be glad for the continuing
discussion.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Morawetz.
Let me just start. I come from a manufacturing background,
and it was my experience that the whole safety issue started
with local police and fire public safety organizations. We
would get frequent visits by the fire department. Do you have
any hazardous chemicals? Where are they located? What the
quantities were, what is your evacuation plan, those types of
things. So, kind of like the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), a layered approach, local, State, and then
Federal.
What we have here with CFATS after 9/11 is a whole new
program specifically designed to keep dangerous chemicals that
could be used in a terrorist attack out of the hands of
terrorists. I do not believe the intent of Congress--and had I
been here, I would have fought that intent--was to have an all-
encompassing regulatory agency governing worker safety, fire
hazards, chemical discharge, potential pollution issues.
I want to start questioning with industry: What agencies
regulate your businesses already in addition to DHS? We will
start with Mr. Fridley because you look like you are ready to
go here.
Mr. Fridley. Yes, pretty much the alphabet soup, as you
stated earlier, Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. So give us the most significant ones, if
you can.
Mr. Fridley. Obviously, EPA, OSHA, DOT, DEA, we have ATF,
we have the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the U.S. Coast
Guard (USCG) as well because we have the Maritime
Transportation Security Act of 2002 (MTSA) facilities, are the
primary, along with DHS.
Chairman Johnson. And you are heavily regulated by most of
those.
Mr. Fridley. Yes, sir.
Chairman Johnson. It is not like you do not get visited. It
is not like they are ignoring those issues that they are
concerned about.
Mr. Fridley. That is correct.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. O'Brien.
Mr. O'Brien. ATF would be our primary agency that oversees
us, and they in the past have clearly stated that they
effectively regulate the security of commercial explosives,
emphasizing that the only value DHS adds relative to explosives
is the regulation of the precursor chemicals. We are visited
routinely by them. We have very prescriptive regulations by
them, that they tell us exactly what we have to do.
Chairman Johnson. Describe ``routinely.'' How often do you
get site visits from ATF?
Mr. O'Brien. So at a minimum, you are inspected every 3
years because a license lasts 3 years. My particular company
has three separate licenses, so they happen to fall one a year.
So we were getting visits one every year by ATF. And when they
come in, they will come in and examine exactly how much
explosives we have, down to the gram. They will count all of
the detonators we have. They will count everything. There is no
threshold at which, OK, this program only applies if you are
over a certain level. If we have a gram or higher, we are
regulated by ATF.
They also have a vetting program because after the Safe
Explosives Act of 2002, all of our downstream customers had to
get a license. So they have all gone through the ATF vetting
process as well. They will verify that we are only receiving
and giving out explosives to companies that----
Chairman Johnson. I do not want to get too far in the
weeds.
Mr. Erny. By the way, this is my first and only kind of
structured question. Then we are going to throw it open. If you
want to say something on an issue, put your name tag up so we
can call on you, OK. Mr. Erny, quickly.
Mr. Erny. Sure. To add on to the ones that I think I caught
mentioned so far, some of the additional ones, in addition to
OSHA and EPA and the regular ones, would be DOT, for instance.
They have security regulations in place that handle en route
security of chemicals, which include the sale point and the end
point as well. So there is a lot of crossover and duplication
in that.
The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and its
rail security regulation, very involved in sort of the
transportation via rail of chemical products.
Customs and Border Protection (CBP) and Customs-Trade
Partnership Against Terrorism (CTPAT) program, not a
regulation, voluntary, but the nature of it and the importance
of it to import chemicals across the border makes it
essentially a must-do.
And then FDA with food-grade chemicals and things of that
nature.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Wright.
Mr. Wright. Yes, Senator----
Chairman Johnson. Can you add anything to that?
Mr. Wright. Well, the Coast Guard. A lot of our facilities
are maritime, so we have the Coast Guard, EPA, OSHA, DHS, DOT.
I would add we have a lot of State and local regulation on our
facilities. We probably have as much from the States as we do--
obviously, it varies State to State, but we probably have as
much from the States as we do from the Feds.
Chairman Johnson. Again, we got more site visits by the
local fire department. So a show of hands, does anybody feel
you are underregulated?
[No hands raised.]
OK. Senator Peters, do you have something?
Senator Peters. I will do a couple.
Mr. Morawetz, in your opening remarks, you discussed the
need to improve employee engagement in the development and
implementation of these assessments. I think as you mentioned
in your opening comments, chemical workers are routinely not
consulted. Is that correct?
Mr. Morawetz. That is correct.
Senator Peters. Can you discuss the security benefits of
engaging more broadly with these chemical workers on the site
plans? Why do we need to try to facilitate that in your mind?
Mr. Morawetz. I would say it is no different than any other
party at this table or any stakeholder involved in this
process, that if you leave anybody out, you lose some vital
information. In particular, the people who actually operate the
machinery, the reactor vessels, the storage vessels, the
piping, everything, if they are not involved, then I think we
lose potentially some information, and basically from a
terrorist attack--and that is what we are concentrated on; I
agree with that--we are at greater risk if we do not include
people.
Senator Peters. So you are saying they are not included for
all the benefits to potentially be there, but they are not
included now in this current program? Could you discuss your
experience with inspectors in other compliance programs that
may be a good model for us to look at?
Mr. Morawetz. I have experience, direct experience with
three: the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH)--I worked at NIOSH for 2 years; OSHA--OSHA
inspected some of these facilities; and the Chemical Safety
Board. The facility that I mentioned where four people got
killed, it was a massive release of methyl mercaptan. It was
the subject of OSHA regulations. It was the subject of a
Chemical Safety Board investigation. It is actually still
pending. It was basically a seamless, easy process. The
inspectors come in. There is a union there or the union knows.
They sit down. They meet together. The vast majority of the
time you sit down and you meet and you discuss the problem and
try to resolve it.
A rare situation where one side or the other says, ``No, I
want to meet separately.'' Then there are separate meetings
with both parties. I think there is a lot to be gained for
inspectors in doing that and, in particular, it puts me at a
disadvantage of answering a lot of questions about CFATS, how
it applies with the other gentlemen know more, because we only
have found one facility where our members know and have been
involved with the CFATS program.
Senator Peters. The current CFATS program also does not
have real whistleblower retaliation protections in place. Would
you talk a little bit about why that may be problematic?
Mr. Morawetz. I do not have direct experience with the
chemical workers. However, in the news, our whistleblowers may
be biased, but I tend to think where a union is in place, a
whistleblower situation is less inclined to get to an extreme
position and things resolve easier. We work with a couple of
Department of Energy (DOE) facilities, and in those facilities,
for the last, I think, about 5 or 6 years, there has been a
whole move toward a culture of safety based upon a DOE worker
who complained. It was a whistleblower complaint. His job was
taken away from him. He had his pay, but he was put into a
different office basically doing nothing. That is one. There
are other articles today about American Federation of
Government Employees (AFGE) in Kansas City, I believe, that
there is a whistleblower complaint. So it can happen.
Senator Peters. Yes. I have other questions, but I will
defer so Senator Hawley can ask his questions, if that is
alright, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Hawley.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HAWLEY
Senator Hawley. Thank you very much. I just want to note
that Missouri companies often tell us what while they support
the intent of regulations like CFATS, these regulations are
often redundant, contradictory, poorly defined, as many of you
have testified today, and it makes it harder and costlier for
them to meet the requirements, and that is especially true in
the case of small businesses.
I want to just ask about the commercial security
initiatives. Mr. Fridley, I think it was in your written
testimony, you wrote that verified industry standard programs
and insurance carriers often require companies to maintain
contingency plans that are ``as comprehensive as the
contingency plans required by government agencies and often
have much more applicability and effectiveness in real-world
situations.'' That is from your testimony. Do you want to say
something more about that?
Mr. Fridley. Yes, Senator Hawley. Thank you for the
question. There are obviously municipalities, there are
insurance requirements. I have five facilities, over 100 people
employed in the State of Missouri, so we see this----
Senator Hawley. We are so glad you do.
Mr. Fridley. But, yes, everybody has different aspects that
they want as part of that contingency plan. How we are doing
some of these things is we are leveraging the different
agencies and different ones on how we can do one plan that
satisfies multiple agency requirements, insurance requirements
and such.
We are doing that same thing with our security models. We
are looking at the various requirements by the different
agencies, and we are putting in one security system, that will
be able to be managed and be applied by all. So we are not
necessarily seeing the duplicative portion of it, at least not
in my experience.
Senator Hawley. Let me just ask Mr. Harrell on that point,
can you speak to how CFATS is leveraging or considering
leverages commercial security initiatives to advance the goal
of protecting chemical facilities and then, wherever possible,
to reduce any duplicative or unnecessary regulatory burdens on
business?
Mr. Harrell. Absolutely. I just got to the Department back
in December, so I have often said in this forum that I have
been a regulator, I have been regulated, and now I am seeing
things through kind of that Federal lens. I am very sensitive
to that duplicative nature of compliance and regulatory
standards. I think it is very important to reduce where we can.
I think that is where the Department of Homeland Security has
done a good job of engaging with the other Federal regulators
out there. We have routine meetings with them to ensure that
while we may show up on a Monday, that somebody else is not
showing up on a Tuesday, which would be completely disruptive
to private industry. Coming from private industry, I am very
sensitive to that.
I think we have done a good job of ensuring that there is
coordinating and the ability to share information back and
forth, which I think prevents some of the issues that you are
describing.
Senator Hawley. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Morawetz, let me ask you, you said in
OSHA you have the ability, labor has the ability to input into
OSHA's process, into their inspections?
Mr. Morawetz. Yes.
Chairman Johnson. What other Federal agencies does labor
have the input right?
Mr. Morawetz. In an OSHA inspection?
Chairman Johnson. Well, what about EPA? What about the
Department of Transportation?
Mr. Morawetz. I do not have direct experience with EPA. So
my experience is NIOSH, OSHA, and Chemical Safety Board, and
basically there are joint meetings. There are separate
conversations. We have access to information, letters, etc.,
and we discuss the questions and see what--in particular, not
so much me, but I would say the rank-and-file members who know
more information about processes and dangers, they get involved
in it.
Chairman Johnson. Most union contracts lay out a process
for workers to come forward and lodge certain safety concerns
or other types of problems, correct? Most formal labor
agreements? That would be a true statement?
Mr. Morawetz. I do not have really direct experience
exactly what particular contracts say about bringing health and
safety concerns. I know contracts often have a health and
safety committee, so there is a process set up.
Chairman Johnson. I know what I have experienced coming
from the private sector to the public sector. Whistleblower
retaliation is far more prevalent--I do not know how many
orders of magnitude more prevalent--within government than it
ever was in the private sector, because in the private sector
you can get sued out of existence if you use and abuse your
employees that way. Do you have a different experience?
Mr. Morawetz. I could not compare private and public. Most
of our main job is not involved with retaliation, so, really,
it is hard for me to----
Chairman Johnson. My understanding is that workers have a
great deal of protection when it comes to whistleblowing on
their employers, whether it is a labor issue, whether it is a
safety issue. Just go right down the line. Just get an
attorney, and you will find out how many rights you have in the
private sector as a whistleblower against an employer.
Again, I am not seeing a great need to offer additional
whistleblower protection within something like CFATS, which
should be a narrowly focused piece of legislation about keeping
dangerous chemicals out of the hands of terrorists.
Mr. Morawetz. Generally from my experience, talking to
representatives, the vice president of the union, they really
feel that because it is not so much public sector but because
they have a union contract in that structure, that it is more
likely that there will not be that kind of situation. In non-
union facilities, we feel that that intimidation is much real
and can happen more readily. And my personal experience and
different ways that I have heard from people, I think the fear
on the job is a very real factor.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Wright, real quick, because I am not
following the Class 2, 3, and 4, really describe what you are
talking about here. Are all the liquids exempted from CFATS
except for gasoline and diesel fuel? Or are they all under it
except for--describe what you are talking about.
Mr. Wright. Yes, Senator. I am sorry. That is sort of
complicated. Only 4's are included as COIs. However--and that
was the specific rule that DHS put into the regulation. But
then away from Appendix A, they put a couple of little
paragraphs in that brought gasoline in, diesel fuel, kerosene,
even though it was not a 4, but a 3 or a 2.
Chairman Johnson. This is as clear as mud right now. I am
sorry. What liquids were included to be covered under CFATS in
the original law?
Mr. Wright. Well, things like--I mean, we are talking about
flammables. I mean, it would be----
Chairman Johnson. OK, flammable liquids.
Mr. Wright. Yes.
Chairman Johnson. That is what you are dealing--again,
talking about your industry. So which ones were included under
the law?
Mr. Wright. It would be chemicals like propane, for
example, that need to be kept under pressure, that are
genuinely highly flammable, that might explode. Basically the
thing that we are trying to prevent here is for terrorists to
be able to use something as a weapon that, in the case of
flammables, that might explode and cause damage outside the
fence. With gasoline, it will burn but it will not explode. I
call it the ``A Team effect.'' You watch these television
shows, and they bump up against a car and the car explodes.
Chairman Johnson. So liquids that were not only flammable
but explodable were included in the law?
Mr. Wright. That is correct.
Chairman Johnson. And then by regulation----
Mr. Wright. Well, it was included in the regulation.
Chairman Johnson. So included in the regulation.
Mr. Wright. Under Title A--or under Appendix A. But then
they just added gasoline in and kerosene and the other
flammables.
Chairman Johnson. So they added liquids that are flammable
but not explosive.
Mr. Wright. Correct.
Chairman Johnson. Are they regulating them now?
Mr. Wright. They are not regulating them now under a
regulatory hold.
Chairman Johnson. And you are asking to put something in
this piece of legislation to prevent them from adding that at a
later date, to make the distinction between a liquid that is
flammable and non-explosive versus a liquid that is flammable
and explosive?
Mr. Wright. That is basically the case.
Chairman Johnson. Is that the----
Mr. Wright. But right now, Senator, they are not
regulating, but the regulation still exists. It is just on a
regulatory hold.
Chairman Johnson. I am trying to get clarity.
Mr. Harrell, tell me, is that an accurate description of
what we are talking about here with flammable liquids? You are
including under CFATS and regulating under CFATS flammable and
explosive liquids but not strictly flammable, although you are
reserving the option to do so?
Mr. Harrell. Yes, absolutely. So what he is describing is,
in fact, accurate. There are a number of chemicals that are
originally part of Appendix A that we have since essentially
minimized. And so now as we move forward, we are willing and
open to have this conversation of removing these chemicals from
Appendix A. But that will require rulemaking.
Chairman Johnson. Or law.
Mr. Harrell. Correct.
Chairman Johnson. We could do that as part of this
reauthorization, make it very explicit so it is not necessarily
up to one regulator after the next going, ``OK. No, we changed
our mind.''
Mr. Harrell. And I think that is----
Chairman Johnson. Wouldn't it be better to kind of lay out
exactly what CFATS is all about? Why are we doing this? What is
the purpose of CFATS? Anti-terrorism. And what chemicals are we
trying to protect from what?
Mr. Harrell. I think we agree with that.
Chairman Johnson. Is there a generalized statement you can
make in terms of what CFATS is supposed to be dealing with in
terms of chemicals, an overall mission statement?
Mr. Harrell. So, the overall mission statement would be the
Department's role in risk reduction, right? So removing or
mitigating the risk of high-risk chemicals for chemical
facilities across the country.
Chairman Johnson. Now define high-risk chemicals. Wouldn't
that be the next step? So now define a high-risk chemical.
Mr. Harrell. Right. So that potentially could do
significant harm, cause a number of deaths, and have giant
explosions throughout the country, that we would otherwise feel
uncomfortable with as a country, as a Nation; that and the
stealing of those chemicals that could be used potentially
against soft targets or otherwise.
Chairman Johnson. Do you have that definition anywhere
within regulation, whatever a high-risk chemical is?
Mr. Harrell. We do, and I have not committed it to memory,
but I am sure we have it.
Chairman Johnson. OK, great. I would like to see what that
definition is.
Any of you folks aware of what that definition is of a
high-risk chemical?
[Witnesses shaking heads.]
You have obviously looked at this. Do you understand what
the mission is of the CFATS regulation? Are they following that
mission?
Mr. Anderson. Yes, sir, absolutely. When we speak of high-
risk chemicals, we are talking about chemicals in X quantity
past a certain threshold could inflict mass danger based on a
geographic distance of concern. And what we have looked at
recently is how the methodology has changed, how CFATS has
become more mature and has a better understanding for where
there might be higher consequences or lower consequences. And
there was a peer-reviewed study by Sandia National Labs where
they got into that and made some changes to how they define
risk.
Chairman Johnson. Again, Appendix A was developed under the
regulatory regime, and the industry had the opportunity to
comment on that? Did DHS do a pretty good job of responding to
comments and lay out that list where it made sense? Go ahead,
Mr. O'Brien. By the way, I am not here to litigate your
particular case.
Mr. O'Brien. No, nor am I saying--but from our experience,
we know that ATF was only engaged very late in the process. So
I was just going to offer that perspective.
Chairman Johnson. Duplicative regulation is different than
what I am talking about right now. Right now I am trying to
talk about how CFATS defined its mission, how it came up with
Appendix A, what the definition of those risky chemicals are,
and whether that Appendix A makes sense, and does it need
further refinement? Or does the definition need further
refinement?
Mr. Wright, you had----
Mr. Wright. Yes, thank you, Senator. I just wanted to point
out that when we were included, we went back to DHS in 2009
with white papers, evidence, and said, look, this is not a
chemical of mass effect. We can have a fire but we are not
going to have an explosion. And they basically as a result of
that quit regulating us, but they would never change the
underlying regulation. And that is why we are asking the Senate
to exercise some oversight and say, OK, 10 years is long
enough, let us make the regulation meet the reality--I mean the
policy meet the reality.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Harrell, real quick, do you kind of
agree--you are just in the position now. Do you agree with that
distinction between something that is flammable, but then you
have a ton of it could cause real damage, versus something that
is flammable and explosive in terms of a risky chemical.
Mr. Harrell. Indeed, yes, so there is a difference between
the two. I think DHS is absolutely committed to having the
conversation back and forth with this Committee to do what
makes sense and to remove or add things if we had to, to
Appendix A through rulemaking.
Chairman Johnson. And to me, again, the whole purpose of
reauthorization is to provide certainty, and if we can kind of
do that--gasoline has been around a while. It is not like this
is a new issue. I think we should bring certainty to this. If
you are going to regulate it, regulate it. If not, you are not.
I would tend to agree, kind of the explosive definition.
Mr. Fridley, you had a comment?
Mr. Fridley. Yes, the only thing I would want to make sure
is we are very careful with what we are going to change as far
as Appendix A, whether we are going to take away from or add
to, percentages, poundage, it could be anything, because any
minor change could have significant consequences to my
industry.
Chairman Johnson. OK. By the way, I agree. This is all
about bringing certainty.
Mr. Fridley. Yes, absolutely.
Chairman Johnson. If we have an Appendix A that can be
changeable depending on Administration or the administrator or
regulator, I would say it does not bring a great deal of
certainty.
Now, if we develop new chemicals, we learn something new
about something, but we know what gasoline does. If it is not
going to be regulated, it should not be on the list. We
probably ought to take that out, I would think, legislatively.
Again, you guys hop in here. Otherwise, I will just keep
going.
Senator Peters. Let me----
Chairman Johnson. Just hop in. I want this free-flowing.
Senator Peters. I should have hopped in on some of the
whistleblower information. I want to get back to you, Mr.
Morawetz. The Chairman was asking you about union protections
for folks who are whistleblowers. It is true if you are in a
union, you usually have a lot of additional protections, but I
understand a lot of the companies in this industry are not
unionized. Is that correct?
Mr. Morawetz. That is correct.
Senator Peters. So they would not have those kinds of
protections----
Mr. Morawetz. That is correct.
Senator Peters [continuing]. That you have in a union, so
that is why we are looking at this broadly as protections to
make sure we are creating a work environment where when people
see things that are not right, they know they will not----
Chairman Johnson. But there are plenty of protections
within law.
Senator Peters. Well, yes, but you must have a process that
makes it a lot easier than saying, well, you are going to get
fired, you must hire a lawyer, you are going to be out of work
for a few years. You are going to have to litigate the case. I
mean, that is not really reasonable for folks. That is still
going to create an environment that is not conducive to folks
who are seeing things, particularly workers who are on the
front lines and are actually engaged in this activity.
Chairman Johnson. Not to interrupt, but I am going to
interrupt. You have the exact same thing with the law in CFATS.
Again, what I am saying is there is already whistleblower
protection in law. Do we need another layer of whistleblower
protection in law within a specific program? I am happy to look
at that.
Senator Peters. We will talk about it. We have an actual
process where the person continues to stay in the job,
continues to work, does not have to----
Chairman Johnson. And that exists in law. We will figure
out where that is and work that out.
Senator Peters. Yes, we had a GAO report titled,
``Improvements Needed for DHS Chemical Facility Whistleblower
Report Process.'' There is a long title. And included in the
DHS response, which was dated back in 2016, the DHS, Mr.
Harrell, was going to move forward with some of that. Were such
whistleblower retaliation rules ever issued as a result of that
GAO report, to your knowledge?
Mr. Harrell. So DHS has developed a documented process and
procedure to address and investigate whistleblower retaliation
reports, and we can share this process with this Committee.
However, DHS will need to complete rulemaking to fully
implement the whistleblower retaliation provision.
We value whistleblower provisions and any program that
investigates any retaliation claims. However--and this is
really to Senator Johnson's point. CFATS is focused on anti-
terrorism, facility security, and risk reduction, so this is
outside of our subject matter expertise.
So we would like to work with Congress to develop a program
that meets the needs of industry, facility employees, and, of
course, the Department.
Senator Peters. Mr. Harrell, the President's Fiscal Year
(FY) 2020 budget includes about $18 million in cuts to CFATS.
If the cut were implemented, how would that impact your
program?
Mr. Harrell. So any budget cut, whether you are in the
private sector or you are in the Federal Government, will
certainly impact operations. So my job is really to minimize
those impacts and assure that we do not diminish national
security or allow foreseeable risks to materialize. So CISA
will continue to approve facility security plans and conduct
inspections, although probably at a somewhat reduced rate.
The good news is, though, we have streamlined many of our
processes and inspections over the years, and we have matured.
We have improved training and implemented measures to ensure
the consistency across the country.
So, ultimately, at the end of the day, though, we would
need to curtail some of our inspector training, some of our
travel, and some of our outreach as some of the low-hanging
fruit there of how we would curtail.
Senator Peters. So $18 million is low-hanging fruit?
Mr. Harrell. No. We will continue the mission. We will
continue to execute. It will just be somewhat of a slower
process and a bit reduced other than normal operations.
Senator Peters. Has the Department's focus on the Southern
Border impacted any of the CFATS program in any way?
Mr. Harrell. It has had zero impact.
Senator Peters. Zero impact. A few weeks ago, a notice went
out to all CISA employees soliciting volunteers to go to the
Southern Border. Did any of your personnel volunteer to be
deployed down to the Southern Border?
Mr. Harrell. They did, yes. So the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency had a number of employees
volunteer, some of which came from the Infrastructure Security
Division, my division, and so there are some down there now.
Senator Peters. How many in total?
Mr. Harrell. I do not have the total number offhand, but we
have a few down there. But in terms of impact, in terms of that
operational impact, not doing inspections or slowing the
process down of approving site security plans, there has been
none of that.
Senator Peters. OK. During the February 27 House hearing on
CFATS, Director David Wulf mentioned that thousands of
facilities have lowered their tier or have tiered out and are
no longer considered high risk. I think we should all consider
that probably a good thing that that happened. It seems to me
that there are fewer facilities that are high risk.
So my question for you, Mr. Harrell, is: Has DHS done
anything to inform facilities still covered by CFATS of lessons
that were learned from those facilities that now have a lower
tier or tiered out of the program?
Mr. Harrell. So we pride ourselves on doing a lot of
outreach. We are very transparent with some of the things that
we have done well over the years. And so in terms of going
around the country and engaging with facilities and engaging
with trade associations, we are talking about these industry
best practices and some of these physical security mitigation
measures that industry has implement over the years.
So do I have a document to point to? No, not necessarily.
But there are conversations that are happening on almost a
daily basis about what good security looks like, and I think we
have been able to convey that to the industry at large.
Senator Peters. So you are having informal conversations,
but it does not sound like there is any systemic way of
actually compiling data to look at facilities that are at
reduced risk and then provide some of that data to other
facilities?
Mr. Harrell. In terms of data, I think this is probably an
opportunity for improvement for us.
Senator Peters. Is that something you will consider going
forward? Is that something we need to be engaged in here?
Mr. Harrell. No, indeed. As a matter of fact, it is ongoing
as we speak now. As we move forward, I think it is incumbent
upon us as a mature program to push out these industry best
practices to what reduces risk for not only the regulated
community but also the non-regulated community as well. The
30,000 facilities that are out there that we do not necessarily
touch now, they may not be high risk, but they are not no risk.
And so there is an opportunity to engage them as to what good
security looks like and provide that road map.
Senator Peters. A good security format is that we want to
reduce the security risk, so it is good to get folks into lower
tiers. So that should be a focus of your efforts. You would
agree with that?
Mr. Harrell. Indeed.
Senator Peters. That is a good thing.
Mr. Harrell. Yes.
Senator Peters. We need to step up those efforts.
Mr. Harrell. Yes.
Senator Peters. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Harrell. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Carper.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CARPER
Senator Carper. Thanks. Sorry to arrive late, and I know
some other of our colleagues will arrive eventually.
Senator Tom Coburn and I, I think we were Chair and Ranking
Member of this Committee when we worked on CFATS
reauthorization. Actually, it might have been authorization. I
think it was earlier. It was not actually authorized, but I
think it was maybe included in an appropriations bill. But we
worked on it, and we did a pretty good model of bipartisan
cooperation, which we always like to do, but my recollection is
that we made a number of changes and improvements to the law in
order to address, on the one hand, the backlog of inspections
of the facilities across the country, and also ensure that DHS
and also the industry being regulated had the kind of certainty
that they needed in order to make investments in securing
chemical facilities.
I would just ask, Mr. Anderson, you are representing GAO.
Is that correct?
Mr. Anderson. Yes, sir.
Senator Carper. And, Mr. Harrell, I understand you are here
representing DHS. Is that correct?
Mr. Harrell. Yes, sir.
Senator Carper. I am going to ask both of you sort of the
same question. Nobody back 5 years ago thought the law was
perfect, and the idea is to find out what works, do more of
that. And if it is not perfect, make it better. So we knew it
was not perfect, so the idea is to make it better, and my hope
is that this conversation today will help us to do that.
In the spirit of if it is not perfect make it better, I
understand that GAO has issued a number of recommendations to
DHS regarding improvements to the program. Mr. Anderson, if you
could just talk a little bit about maybe some of those
recommendations, and then I am going to ask you, Mr. Harrell,
if either you or maybe both of you could talk about how DHS has
responded to those recommendations. And, finally, is there more
work to be done? And my guess is the answer is probably yes.
Mr. Anderson, do you want to lead us off?
Mr. Anderson. Happy to lead off. We have issued 12
recommendations over the last 7 years. Ten have been
implemented, and they speak to identifying high-risk
facilities, better prioritizing them, and then reviewing and
approving facility site security plans.
The two areas that we believe are outstanding and do demand
attention, first is performance measurement. And as I said in
my opening remarks, this sounds bureaucratic, but it really
speaks to how the program should exist, how in that risk
equation of threat, vulnerability, and consequence do we know
that these security measures that the CFATS program puts in
place are actually reducing vulnerability? A lot of the big
facilities, they have a security posture in place where they
might be high consequence and, therefore, get a real high risk
rating. But they have already got those security measures in
place, so it is not the CFATS program that is reducing that
threat of a terrorist attack. It is some of the smaller ones in
many cases that maybe, would not have a perimeter fence or
would not have video surveillance but for the requirements of
the program.
In that situation, then perhaps if it is the CFATS program
coming in and recommending or requiring that security posture,
there has been a reduction in vulnerability. We feel at GAO
that that is where the program needs to improve. It is called
an ``outcome measure.'' What is the outcome of that investment
in the CFATS program?
The second area is with information sharing for first
responders, and that was from our most recent report as well,
that in many cases the Local Emergency Planning Committees
(LEPCs), did not have the information or did not have access to
the information to know what kind of chemicals were present in
an area when they were responding to an event.
Senator Carper. Mr. Harrell.
Mr. Harrell. Thank you, Senator, for the question.
Senator Carper. Do you agree with anything he said?
Mr. Harrell. We are very focused on metrics and
accountability, and we have spent a lot of----
Senator Carper. I am sorry. Very focused on metrics, did
you say?
Mr. Harrell. Metrics, yes. This program has over the last
number of years really driven, I think, a lot of the physical
security protective measures within industry. And these
measures are contributing to risk reduction. Well, now the
question, the logical question, is: Prove it. Do not tell me
about it, but show me. Right?
And so in going forward in coordination with the GAO
report, we are trying to move our metrics and our
responsibility toward proving the fact that we have done risk
reduction. And so we think that comes through engaging with the
facility and talking about from the moment in which you started
CFATS and you had just kind of a regular security program, to
now implementing the measures within CFATS, how has risk been
reduced? What measures have you put in place that have
quantitatively reduced risk?
And so we are trying to take that data, compile it, and
measure with it, and I think that is one of the new things that
really should be back to this Committee, is, again, expressing
the fact that we have done risk reduction.
Right now we have measured that over the last number of
years we have had a number of facilities increase their
security measures by 55 percent, and we are certainly willing
to kind of walk through that number with this Committee as to
how we have gotten to that. But we think it is important,
moving forward, that we measure this, and I think it is a sign
of a mature program. That is what I am committed to doing.
Senator Carper. Anybody else want to comment on this
exchange and what was said or not said? Speak now or forever
hold your peace.
Mr. Erny. Maybe I will just say just a few things.
Information availability, this is an issue that sort of spans
across multiple statutory authorities and regulatory agencies,
and with involuntary programs, etc. In fact, DHS, Brian, I do
not think you mentioned anything about your Internet Protocol
(IP) Gateway. A great tool that is available today where,
folks, members of the LEPCs and others can gain access to
critical information about sites, CFATS sites, and chemicals in
their community.
But the thing that I want to stress with this is you have
to balance the need for information and transparency and
security, and I think it is always kind of that tough line that
we are trying to reach as to what is the right balance here. So
I would just caution everybody when we talk about making more
information available to more people, the whole issue around
need to know is really important?
Senator Carper. OK. Yes, Mister--is it Fridley?
Mr. Fridley. Yes, sir.
Senator Carper. Hi, Mr. Fridley.
Mr. Fridley. Just a little piggyback on Bill's comment. The
outreach, I think we do as good a job as we can, and obviously
it has been getting better with the CFATS DHS inspectors' help.
They do a lot of the coordination for us. They know who are the
players. We do really big live exercises with different
agencies. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), we involve
the Joint Terrorism Task Forces (JTTF). We involve, you know,
ATF. We involved Transportation Security Administration
officers. We do not publicize this nor do they, but we offer up
our facilities on a regular basis for them to come in to do
their drills as well as our drills.
So there is a lot of coordination, I think, that goes out
that does not necessarily get communicated out. So we are
dealing with the right people. It is just not publicized.
Senator Carper. OK. Good. Anyone else?
Mr. Wright. Yes, thank you, Senator. I want to reiterate
what Bill is saying. I think it is a balance, and there are
lots of other statutes and agencies that deal with sharing of
this type of information. As Senator Johnson said in his
opening, we need to keep CFATS focused on the terrorism issue.
There are lots of other statutes, lots of other agencies that
can do this. I know that my industry, we work very hard--and
other industries----
Senator Carper. What is your industry?
Mr. Wright. I work with the terminals, sir, the storage
facilities that you see at ports particularly. But we work very
hard and it is in our interest to see that the local first
responders know what we have and know how to deal with it. So
we do that.
But in the CFATS context, the whole purpose of CFATS is to
keep information close to the people who are trained to deal
with it, the people who are committed to keeping it secret,
because we go through this exercise, and that information about
dangerous chemicals or vulnerabilities to facilities, we have
sort of turned the thing on its head. And so, it is very
critical that we keep--and I think we have done a good job of
this, and I think certainly DHS has done a good job with this,
is to keep the information to the number and kinds of people
with the right training who can deal with it.
And so if there is a problem, maybe it is another statute,
maybe it is another agency that ought to be dealing with it.
But I feel that industry is doing a very good job because it is
in the industry's interest.
Chairman Johnson. In other words, you want to keep your
security plans out of the hands of terrorists.
Mr. Wright. That is correct.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Harrell, you wanted to comment on
something?
Mr. Harrell. Yes. Thank you again for the question. So
information sharing I think is absolutely critical to not only
the facility but also first responders, and I say this as a
former law enforcement officer. We need to strike that nice
balance between getting the information to first responders and
then also not providing that blueprint for attack. I think that
is kind of what we all necessarily can agree on up here. But
CFATS requires facilities currently to make contact with first
responders during the facility's security planning. This is
found under Risk-based Performance Standard No. 9.
So we have made concerted efforts over the last year as a
response to the GAO audit to engage our Local Emergency
Planning Committees. As a matter of fact, in 2018 we engaged
570, which is a pretty significant number. Over the last 5
years, we have actually engaged every single LEPC that is
active in the United States. So I think we are doing a very
good job of engaging those local first responders and providing
them the things that they need to know so that when things go
bump in the night or something happens, they have and are armed
with the information to properly respond.
Chairman Johnson. I think it was Mr. Anderson's testimony
that said there was--you did take a look at use of the IP
Gateway.
Mr. Anderson. Yes.
Chairman Johnson. And the local responders had access to
that? I am highly concerned about having that information
available, but it is in a secured channel with a properly
secured gateway. Local responders should be looking at that.
What is the disconnect here?
Mr. Anderson. Two data points that may be relevant to the
discussion here. Thirteen of 15 LEPCs that we spoke with did
not have access to IP Gateway, so they did not know how to
navigate it. Put that on one side. Seven of 11 other LEPCs we
spoke with did not realize they had CFATS-covered facilities in
their jurisdiction. So part of this is communication, and part
of this is education. But we did see some pretty big gaps in
terms of information sharing with first responders as of August
2018.
Chairman Johnson. I would think that would be pretty easy
to take care of. You have how many total CFATS-regulated
companies? How many thousand?
Mr. Anderson. High risk, 3,500. Total, 30,000.
Chairman Johnson. Those 3,500 that DHS just says you have
to contact your local fire department and make them aware that
you are there and that here is your secure password into this
IP Gateway. I would think that would be pretty simple. Again, a
little lowly plastics manufacturer, our fire department knew
everything about our operation. So what is happening with local
law enforcement?
Mr. O'Brien. Senator Johnson, just to add our perspective
from the explosives industry, by ATF law we have to engage the
local fire and first responders. So every facility covered by
CFATS that is an ATF-regulated facility already has to engage
local law enforcement and first responders.
Chairman Johnson. I will kick it over to you, Mr. Harrell.
Do you have an answer to why law enforcement did not even know
about the CFATS facilities or why not a one that were surveyed
had access to the IP Gateway.
Mr. Harrell. I think we are still very intent on engaging
local law enforcement, LEPCs. This is an iterative process.
This is us going and pinging them, constantly talking about our
tools. Some of them are overtaxed. Some of them are running
from call to call and do not necessarily have the resources and
do not necessarily have the full situational awareness that we
offer these things. I think it is incumbent upon us to engage
early and often to remind them that we have these tools, and,
oh, by the way, they are free. And so we are committed to that.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Again, my experience with, fire
departments, they are waiting in between fire calls, and this
is what they do in between that, is they visit different sites
so they are prepared.
Mr. Harrell, you talked about operating systems. I am a
little concerned about hearing you talk about operating
systems. Can you tell me what you are talking about, CFATS
program looking at operating systems?
Mr. Harrell. Sure. The Risk-based Performance Standard No.
8, which is cybersecurity, if you read the language today it is
a little bit antiquated. I think there is an opportunity for
improvement here to revisit that language, refresh it, and
really focus on today's cybersecurity threats when it comes to
not only corporate systems but also industrial control systems.
And so I think we really need to understand the threat, and we
have seen this threat in terms of industrial control systems
and, nation-state adversaries trying to exploit this overseas,
and we do not want that to happen here.
Chairman Johnson. Cybersecurity is an incredibly complex
and an unbelievably large issue here. The President's budget
calls for a reduction and basically calls for it because your
right-sizing the industry for today's threat. First of all, do
you agree with that statement of the President's budget?
Mr. Harrell. Well, so CFATS resides in the Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency----
Chairman Johnson. I understand, so should cybersecurity and
looking at operational controls of chemical facilities, do you
really think that should be within the purview or within the
jurisdiction of the CFATS program?
Mr. Harrell. As it currently is written, and I would
continue this today, that is, there are certain industry best
practices, things that we should be doing to safeguard our
systems, having a phishing plan, understanding insider threats,
doing the basic cyber hygiene that every company should be
doing. And so, yes, the answer is yes. I think from a risk-
based performance standard we should continue to at a high
level look at cybersecurity.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Anybody in industry want to comment
on that?
Mr. Fridley. We actually utilize a lot of the resources
that DHS provides us for our information technology (IT). I am
not an IT person, but I have put them in contact with our IT.
Chairman Johnson. That is DHS, that is CISA's
responsibility, not necessarily CFATS.
Mr. Fridley. But I am using the CFATS portal to be able to
make the right contacts. I just do not have the infinite
knowledge of who is all who, so they definitely play a role in
that. But we actually work with a lot of things as far as
looking at pulling certain things off our business network that
are not core to our business and putting them on separate
networks, to kind of keep that delineation between the
different attacks that could happen.
Chairman Johnson. Using CFATS as your portal to get to the
experts at CISA in terms of plugging into National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) standards or whatever, that
does not bother me. Where I get a little concerned is if all of
a sudden CFATS is going to set up its own little cybersecurity
directorate to audit and consult with chemical facilities in
terms of your operating systems and how to prevent cyber
attacks. I am questioning that right now.
Mr. Fridley. We actually get inspected from our cyber
standpoint from, RBPS 8 that Brian was talking about, and we
actually had the inspectors come and get with our IT folks to
kind of go through and do that cleanse.
Chairman Johnson. Which inspectors?
Mr. Fridley. The CFATS inspectors.
Chairman Johnson. On cyber?
Mr. Fridley. Yes, sir.
Chairman Johnson. This is different from the roundtable we
had last year on cyber.
Mr. Fridley. We have a corporate approach for our cyber, so
they send their cyber experts to our facility, our
headquarters, and they did the whole inspection process with
our director of cybersecurity.
Chairman Johnson. OK.
Senator Peters. I will interject. I mean, it is clear, I
think, Mr. Harrell, you mentioned the attack on a plant now is
not going to be a truck driving through the gate. It is likely
to be a cyber attack in some way and that is why cybersecurity
is an important part of what you do. Is that correct?
Mr. Harrell. It is, yes, 100 percent.
Senator Peters. And would all of you agree that we are
thinking about with CFATS?
[Witnesses nodding heads.]
Great. Thank you.
Mr. Harrell. If you do not mind, sir, one of the things I
would just add to that is, I would really refrain from looking
at this through the silos of physical security, cybersecurity,
and industrial controls. Today we are seeing blended attacks.
We are seeing that hybrid threat. And so it is incredibly
important that we look at this from a convergence perspective
to understand that what happens on the physical side can
certainly have a cyber implication. And what happens on the
cyber side can have a physical implication.
IP-based cameras, access control systems, they are all
Internet-facing today, and we do not want that to be the enemy
avenue of approach on the physical security side to get into
some of the key cyber systems. So I think we need to have a
full understanding across the entire threat landscape.
Senator Peters. Everyone agree with that? Any other
opinions on that?
Mr. Erny. Maybe I will just add a couple of thoughts. I do
not disagree with that; for sure there needs to be a focus, a
cyber-related focus when it comes to the CFATS program.
However, it needs to be a focused approach to this, and I think
for the most part, my understanding listening to members, that
DHS has done that. But there is a continuing concern of this
thing expanding out. We are looking at things like ransomware
and some of these other cyber-related issues that we see today.
Some of this gets blended in with more of sort of what you
would consider to be sort of a traditional attack on a chemical
facility through a cyber means.
I think the one way to look at it and the way we try to
define it in our membership is: Can a cyber means be used to
institute a physical release or a physical theft of chemicals
of interest? And so I would just ask DHS that as long as you
maintain a focus on cyber as it applies to CFATS, I think that
is appropriate.
The one last thing I will say about this issue is we have
other agencies dipping their toes into cyber. We have the Coast
Guard getting ready to release some cyber guidance through
their Navigation and Vessel Inspection Circulars (NVIC)
process. Customs and Border Protection just added a lot of
cyber-related, and they are not all the same.
And so one of the issues here with the companies is just
getting overwhelmed by all these different agencies----
Chairman Johnson. That is my concern.
Mr. Erny [continuing]. Different approaches around
cybersecurity. That is a real concern.
Chairman Johnson. It is the concern I am expressing right
now. Listen, there is no doubt about it that cyber attacks,
that cybersecurity is a threat to every business particularly
in this sphere. What you do not want is you do not want every
one of your alphabet soup agencies with a whole new cyber
standard and their cyber inspection team and that type of
thing. I can certainly see every agency being a portal to a
unified approach how we go about doing this. Now, the unified
approach may be to an Industry Sector Advisory Committee (ISAC)
within a particular industry where you try and get like-minded,
similar types of industries working at the problems because
they have some similarities there, like the Financial Systemic
Analysis and Resilience Center (FSARC) or whatever. I have a
real concern when one program within a larger agency is taking
the whole cybersecurity issue on its own back and trying to
develop the processes and the expertise and that type of thing,
do full audits and, here is the program, this is what you have
to comply with; if you do not comply with it, here is your
fine. That is where I start having some real concern. Mr.
Harrell, if that makes sense to you.
Mr. Harrell. Actually, it does, and our commitment to you
is that, we will reduce those redundancies amongst regulation.
We do not want that same scenario that you just described. And
so as we go down that road, potentially, the onus is on us to
ensure that does not happen.
Chairman Johnson. And you may take that attitude. The
fellow or gal that follows you may not. Again, I think Congress
has done a pretty poor job of actually writing law that directs
these agencies. We write these little frameworks to have the
agencies go about and become their own little fiefdoms. So as
we reauthorize this thing, I am going to try and do as best as
possible to keep CFATS within its little box doing its thing
and hopefully doing it really well and doing it really
efficiently and, rewarding the good actors here.
Senator Peters. I will just say, Mr. Chairman, when you say
keep it in a box and silos, we have way too many silos right
now when it comes to this. And when you have cyber, we have to
be able to break down silos and make sure the communication is
there to really have a whole-of-society impact so that folks
from DHS or Coast Guard or wherever are also assisting private
industry to safeguard assets, too. We have to come together. I
do not think this is just strictly a regulatory regime. It is
also a way to incorporate how we use some of the assets that we
have at the Federal Government to assist you in protecting your
assets as well against the bad guys that are looking for the
weakest link to get in. And if we do not do this in a
comprehensive way, we are not going to be successful. So that
will put my 2 cents in.
Chairman Johnson. I am not looking at silos in terms of
information when we see a threat and, oh, we are just going to
keep that to ourselves. I am just talking about mission creep
and having 16 ways on Sunday in terms of this is--no, you have
to comply with cyber this way, no, you have to--again, you
mentioned all the alphabet soups, and they are all giving you
the business, right? Because we all recognize this is a threat,
we cannot let this, I do not think, cyber to proliferate in
terms of regulatory regimes. We have to try as best as possible
unify this.
OK. One thing, and I think this came across, and it is
actually pretty pleasing to hear it in the last roundtable,
there does appear to be a pretty cooperative--and I think Mr.
O'Brien may disagree with this, but, in general, there seems to
be a fair level of good cooperation between industry and DHS.
This seems to be one agency that, by and large, because Mr.
O'Brien said opportunity to assist voluntarily. Is that pretty
accurate?
Mr. Fridley. Yes, sir.
Chairman Johnson. I know you have your regulator sitting
right next to you, but----
Mr. Fridley. He is one down. [Laughter.]
Chairman Johnson. One down. We kept it arm's length.
Mr. Wright. Senator, we think so. We think particularly
after the 2014 changes that we have had a very cooperative
relationship with DHS. We have been very pleased. But as this
reauthorization process starts, we have the same concern that
you have.
Chairman Johnson. I know. You want clarity on that issue,
and we will----
Mr. Wright. Exactly. On our narrow issue I do, but on the
broader issue, we just do not want to see mission creep here.
We want this program to remain focused on terrorism.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Anybody else want to comment?
Confirm? Deny?
Mr. Fridley. Yes, I think that, obviously, at Brenntag we
have probably the most regulated facilities for the CFATS
program in the country. So, we have a lot of conversations. Any
questions we have get answered. Any concerns we have, we may
not like the answer, but we get the answers back. They listen.
It is a team effort. It is one of the few, obviously, from the
regulatory agencies that we have that relationship and actually
think we are being heard and valued.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Mr. O'Brien?
Mr. O'Brien. Thank you, Senator.
Chairman Johnson. Spill your guts. [Laughter.]
Mr. O'Brien. Actually, this may surprise you, but they have
been amazingly receptive. The deficiency has been no
recognition of ATF in their mission and what they do. So that
is the deficiency. But as an agency, I mean, I have to be fair
and I have to be honest. They have been approachable. They have
given answers. But there has been no justification for those
answers, and that is where we are really falling. Understand--
why are we regulated for safety and security against terrorism
twice? And we cannot get those answers. But the people who come
out have been nice, congenial.
Chairman Johnson. By the way, there is not a good answer
for it.
Mr. O'Brien. Might not be.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Harrell, do you want to comment?
Mr. Harrell. Yes, we would love to. The intent really is to
work with all entities that are subject to compliance. This is
not a ``gotcha'' regulation. We pride ourselves on the outreach
and the transparency and the willingness to help facilities
really across the board.
The program is designed to give facilities many chances to
come into compliance. Out of the 3,327 facilities that are
regulated by CFATS, DHS has only taken five enforcement actions
on four facilities. One facility was actually fined twice. But
this represents less than 1 percent of the regulated
population.
So, we are committed to--a rising tide lifts all boats. We
want to have the interaction back and forth. We are very
flexible, and we want to have the conversation to where, at the
end of the day, the facility becomes more secure. We are
committed to that.
Chairman Johnson. So one of the things I am a big believer
in--I was not always when running a small business, then I got
bought by a bigger business, and I had to create one, when I
really found out the real value of developing a mission
statement. I asked staff, do we have a mission statement? Is it
anywhere in law? And there really is not one for this. So I
would recommend as we reauthorize this stuff to develop a
mission statement. If we need to clearly define some of these
things, we should do it. Let us take the opportunity right now,
let us lay out that mission statement. Let us try and get--
because we have this cooperation and coordination. Let us get
agreement within the industry this is what--everybody wants
this reauthorized. Fine. Under what mission statement? And if
we do a good job writing it--I am not talking about multiple
paragraphs, multiple sentences. I am talking about something
pretty simple. The simpler, the better. Then if we need to look
at some of these definitions of what a risky chemical is, a
liquid that is flammable but explodable, and just try and get
some definition to bring everybody a little bit better clarity
of what CFATS is all about, the regulators combined with the
regulated, then I think we will have done a pretty good job as
we reauthorize this thing.
So let us bring clarity to this thing, let us bring
certainty to the business, while at the same time accomplishing
what I consider is the primary goal here. Let us make sure we
keep chemicals out of the hands of terrorists and do not let
them fall into the wrong hands to be used for terrorist-type
events.
Again, I think it ought to be pretty simple to do these
things, so let us work together on that.
I will give everybody an opportunity. We will start with
Mr. Morawetz, and if you have any comments that you cannot wait
to get out?
Mr. Morawetz. Besides my written statement, I would just
reiterate that we are a stakeholder like everybody else at this
table and this room. We think that we should be included in it.
Without that, I think you are losing a lot from it. In
particular, I agree about where the focus is, which is Appendix
A, Chemicals, and that they are extremely hazardous substances.
And we are only dealing with it in the realm of anti-terrorism,
but there is a lot that could be done on it.
Chairman Johnson. By the way, Mr. Morawetz. It is
interesting. When I was running a manufacturing plant, if I
wanted to get answers, I did not go to management. I went to
people on the plant floor. So you are absolutely right. They
are the ones that are actually implementing. Any smart
management, any smart regulator is going to get input from the
people that are actually doing the work on the shop floor. So
we are in complete agreement from that standpoint.
Mr. Morawetz. And my guess is most of the people at this
table involve their workforce.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Wright.
Mr. Wright. Senator, just thank you for this opportunity.
As I say, we have a very specific issue, and we want Congress
to exercise some oversight and to help give us some relief for
what we consider to be a rather narrow problem. But beyond
that, we are very supportive of CFATS and very supportive of
the program, and we look forward to working with you as we get
into the reauthorization language. And thank you very much for
your comments today.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Erny.
Mr. Erny. I would just say a few things. I like the focus
and the attention that you are bringing to this issue. We stand
ready to help and support the Committee as needed. I think one
of the more important things here is to make sure that we keep
CFATS focused on anti-terrorism and chemical security, and I
would be very concerned with any wandering away into some other
areas.
Anyway, I look forward to working with your Committee.
Chairman Johnson. As a homework assignment, I would not be
opposed to each of you writing up a no-more-than-two-sentence
mission statement. I would be really interested in seeing
something like that. If you have to go longer, I am just going
to ignore it. No, I am just kidding. I think these things are
best when they are really focused. I have seen mission
statements that run on three pages. That is really not being
succinct enough. Mr. O'Brien.
Mr. O'Brien. Thank you, Senator Johnson, for the
opportunity to be here. A side note. My kids were thrilled that
I actually was participating with a Senator. They had no idea
things like this happened in----
Chairman Johnson. Not that big a deal. [Laughter.]
Mr. O'Brien. I said, boy, when my kids think it is a big
deal, it must be a big deal. Daddy did something good.
I appreciate the opportunity. It still confuses us why a
group that is already regulated for safety and security against
terrorism is falling under the CFATS program. It is the most
obvious duplicative regulation we can see out there. When you
look around, we cannot find another one that is as obvious as
this. We still would love answers as to why we are continuing
to be in this, because we have done our metrics. We do not see
the benefit for security that DHS is claiming. We do not know
where they are getting those metrics from.
So the continued ask is please look at us as a regulated
community and look for that justification. If you are opening
up the thing as to what ought to change? We are easy, double-
regulation group.
Chairman Johnson. Well, as you are aware, I fixed that last
time, so you understand where I stand on that.
Mr. O'Brien. We appreciate your efforts, Senator.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Fridley.
Mr. Fridley. Yes. With over 100 CFATS-regulated facilities,
we are looking to invest quite a bit of capital, and we are
just looking for certainty on reauthorization. So we look
forward to working with you, Ranking Member Peters, and both
your staffs on this regulation and get the reauthorization.
Chairman Johnson. I actually have a question for Mr.
Anderson, because I think what you are asking for, a metric
reduction vulnerability, I just think it is unanswerable and
immeasurable. So how do you do that? Or let us put it this way:
very difficult to.
Mr. Anderson. There are other analogs in Federal space, and
I will point to the Coast Guard and to their MTSA and how they
regulate and measure the effects of--I should say measure the
effects of their efforts, for example, at port chemical
facilities. It is called the ``Maritime Security Risk Analysis
Model (MSRAM),'' and to unpack that a little bit, what they
will do is they will go in and, based on that initial security
vulnerability assessment, there will be a baseline of the
security posture. And then after additional measures are put in
place, even if it is somewhat back of the hand, say they have
gone from a five in terms of vulnerability to a terrorist
attack to a two, based on some perhaps subjective measure, but
there is usually alignment between some of those numerics and a
given security posture. Then you are getting a better
understanding for how much has vulnerability reduced as a
function of these requirements. Otherwise, you and other
decisionmakers who are in a position to evaluate this program
do not have the information necessary to determine whether the
benefit is worth the cost.
Chairman Johnson. OK. You have answered my question. I
understand what you are talking about. I think part of the
problem for DHS on that is if they have already brought people
up to a standard--the good metrics have already been achieved,
hopefully. Now what else are you going to measure? So, you are
here. Without further mission creep, without saying, ``well,
because we have to improve our metrics now, OK, you met this
standard.'' It is like in my business, it is OK, you have the
one part per billion. Hey, how about two parts per trillion?
Because now we can measure it. Which, by the way, is exactly
what is happening in industry as we get an ability to measure
with more precision. It has gone from parts per million to
parts per billion. Now I am reading things like parts per
billion in terms of purity. Again, I am a little concerned
about a metric like that at this level at this point in time
after people have already been certified. How would they
actually have an improved metric if you have already got people
at a certification level?
Mr. Harrell, are you providing any scores on that? Is there
any score right now in terms of facilities other than tier
level?
Mr. Harrell. There is. As a matter of fact, we are focused
on from when you enter the program and your current State of
security program to where you finally come into compliance and
you have added some of these physical security protective
measures in place. What is that score? What is that risk
reduction? And we have been able to measure that, and we are
happy to supply----
Chairman Johnson. Isn't it just for GAO's purposes, just a
matter of accumulating all that data on 3,500 companies?
Mr. Harrell. I believe it is.
Mr. Anderson. I would say there is a little bit of the
devil is in the details. The information that we have gotten
from DHS is on risk, writ large. We are talking about the
vulnerability variable between threat plus vulnerability plus
consequence. So you could reduce risk by, reducing consequence.
Or you could better measure risk or have a risk score based on
a high-consequence event. But it is really vulnerability that
we are after here. We are trying to reduce the vulnerability of
facilities to a terrorist attack. That needs to be measured.
There are analogs in Federal space. While it is difficult,
other mature programs have gotten there, and I would be happy
to unpack the MSRAM model for DHS.
Chairman Johnson. I would like to keep talking--let me
throw one out. How would you measure this one? After 9/11, I
think the most significant security measure we took is we
hardened the cockpits. How do you put a score on that? I think
it dramatically increased security in our airspace. But how
would you ever measure that? Other than we did it. This was
obvious. Just kind of like meeting the standards of what CFATS
certification is, you have done it. So we will have this--we do
need to have this conversation because I am just not quite
getting measurement. I do want these agencies to concentrate on
actually certifying and responding and cooperating with the
agencies to make things safe as opposed to spending a lot of
time measuring the unanswerable. So you have to do a little
more convincing, at least to me.
Mr. Anderson. I am happy to, and I do have more to say, but
I am thinking the conversation is pivoting away from this at
the moment.
Chairman Johnson. Well, we should probably do this in my
conference room or whatever with staff. Because, I am
intrigued. That is why I am asking the question. I am an
accountant. I love data. I like to measure things. But
sometimes, again----
Mr. Anderson. But it also underscores your point. It does
underscore that perhaps the program needs to change. If you
have gotten to this high baseline already for a given security
posture, then maybe you argue at that point that the hard work
has been done. Now the program needs to shift from one of
checking internal controls.
Chairman Johnson. Mr. Harrell, do you have anything just
burning----
Mr. Harrell. Just our commitment to evolving the program,
not only with you but this Committee. We recognize that the
program should be focused on risk reduction and active
intelligence. The threat has evolved, and so should we. And we
are committed to this body, the industry, and, we want to be a
partner in a long-term policy solution.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Well, let me underscore how important
it is that you maintain the attitude you have right now with
the people you are regulating that you have been cooperative. I
think that is pretty rare in the Federal Government, so I am
glad to be conducting the oversight over a program and agency
that has that type of seal of approval from your regulator,
those that you regulate. It is a real feather in the cap to all
your personnel, so thank them personally from me.
Mr. Harrell. Yes, sir, I will.
Chairman Johnson. Make sure you maintain it. That should be
a prime goal of the organization, is to maintain that level of
cooperation that is in reality that you really are cooperating.
One suggestion for doing that is listening. Where you have
duplication like ATF, support a reform that in a way does not
jeopardize national security, and helps reduce the regulatory
burden. Those businesses that have International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) certification or, other regulatory
agencies that are keeping you up to snuff, they have already
met your certification and potentially surpassed it, reward
them with less of a regulatory burden. I think that not only
would demonstrate that you have an attitude toward cooperation,
but in the end you will actually modify things based on the
reality and you will continue to cooperate with the industries
that you regulate.
Again, hats off to you and everybody within the CFATS
program for, first of all, creating that atmosphere where you
really do have people that appreciate the fact you have that
cooperation and just lay that in as just an ongoing culture
within your agency.
Mr. Harrell. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Anybody have any last thoughts based on
that?
[No response.]
Speak now, or you have to do it in the conference room
later. [Laughter.]
This hearing record will remain open for 15 days until June
19 at 5 p.m. for the submission of statements and questions for
the record. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]