- ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[Senate Hearing 115-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 18, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 2:36 p.m., in room SD-430, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Lamar Alexander (chairman)
presiding.
Present: Senators Alexander, Shelby, Murkowski, Graham,
Hoeven, Kennedy, Lankford, Feinstein, Tester, Udall, Shaheen,
and Merkley.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE--CIVIL
Department of the Army
Corps of Engineers--Civil
STATEMENT OF HON. R.D. JAMES, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
THE ARMY (CIVIL WORKS)
opening statement of senator lamar alexander
Senator Alexander. The subcommittee on Energy and Water
Development will please come to order.
We welcome the new Chairman of the Senate Appropriations
Committee. Senator Richard Shelby is here. We are delighted to
have him here.
We want him to know that Senator Feinstein and I, and the
rest of the members of this committee, work together. We have
traditionally come to an agreement early on important issues
that most Senators are very interested in. We like being at the
head of the line when it comes to allocation and when it comes
to moving to the floor.
Our hope is that we can present the full committee with a
bill that you can take up early, and give to Senator McConnell,
and we can follow your interest in the regular order, Mr.
Chairman.
If you have any remarks that you would like to make before
Senator Feinstein and I do, you are welcome to make them.
Senator Shelby. I will wait my turn. Thank you.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing will review the President's fiscal year
2019 budget request for the Army Corps of Engineers, and the
Bureau of Reclamation, which is part of the Department of the
Interior.
This is our subcommittee's second budget hearing. Our third
and final hearing will be next Wednesday to review the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission's fiscal year 2019 budget request.
Senator Feinstein and I will each have an opening
statement. I will then recognize Chairman Shelby, and any other
Senator who is here, for up to 5 minutes for an opening
statement, alternating between the minority and the majority
and the order in which they arrived.
We will then turn to our witnesses to present their
testimony on behalf of the Corps and the Bureau of Reclamation.
Each witness will have 5 minutes to offer your testimony. Then
we will recognize Senators for 5 minutes of questions each,
alternating between the majority and minority in the order in
which they arrived.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here today, and
also Senator Feinstein. I have expressed regularly my
appreciation for her steady, constructive, and experienced work
on the variety of issues we deal with.
Our witnesses today include R.D. James, Assistant Secretary
of the Army for Civil Works; Lieutenant General Todd Semonite,
Chief of Engineers for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Brenda
Burman, Commissioner for the Bureau of Reclamation at the
Department of Interior; and Timothy R. Petty, Ph.D., Assistant
Secretary for Water and Science at the Department of Interior.
Today, I will focus my questions on four main areas. One,
making our Nation's water infrastructure a priority; two,
properly funding our inland waterways system; three, adequately
funding our Nation's ports and harbors; and four, using a more
commonsense approach to making decisions about which projects
receive funding by looking at the, ``remaining benefit to cost
ratio'' of an ongoing project.
Today, because of the Office of Management and Budget
rules, the Corps has to pretend a project is not already under
construction when the Corps decides which projects will receive
funding each year. This does not make any sense, and makes it
harder to complete projects on time and on budget.
Now, on making water infrastructure a priority, this is
something that Senator Feinstein and I have worked hard on.
Based on the number of appropriations requests we receive each
year, the Corps of Engineers must be the Federal Government's
most popular agency.
I can recall after the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers
flooded in 2011, I was on the Senate Environment and Public
Works Committee, and the room filled up with United States
Senators who wanted some extra money to deal with flood
disasters, both the cleanup afterwards and the prevention of
the next flood.
My memory is there must have been 15 or 20 Senators there,
Senator Shelby, of both parties talking about the importance.
So there is a real interest in what the Corps does.
The Corps touches the lives of almost every American and
maintains our inland waterways, it deepens and keeps our ports
open, looks after many of our recreational waters and lands,
manages the river levels to prevent flooding, and its dams
provide emission-free, renewable hydroelectric energy.
In my opinion, we should spend more, not less, on our
Nation's water infrastructure. So in 2012, Senator Graham and I
gathered our staffs, including Senator Feinstein's, and we
said, ``Let us just rear back and ask, `What would a great
country, the United States, want from its ports, from its
locks, its dams, and from its waterways in order to fully
maximize them for our economic growth?' ''
We asked the staff to paint a picture of where we would
like to go, and not worry about how we would pay for it. We had
a lot of discussions among this group of Senators and the White
House.
We talked to the Appropriations committee chairman, Senator
Inouye. We talked with the Environment and Public Works
committee, and other interested Senators. From these
discussions, Congress took three important steps focused on
properly funding our inland waterways system.
First, we passed a law that reduced the amount of money
that comes from the Inland Waterways Trust Fund to replace
Olmsted Lock, a project in Illinois and Kentucky that was
soaking up almost all of the money that is available for inland
waterway projects.
Second, we worked with the commercial waterway industry to
establish a priority list for projects that needed to be
funded, on which Chickamauga Lock ranks near the top, in fourth
place.
And third, we enacted a user fee increase that commercial
barge owners asked to pay in order to provide additional funds
to replace locks and dams across the country.
These steps increased the amount of funding that was
available for inland waterways projects from about $85 million
in fiscal year 2014 to $104 million in fiscal year 2019. And
Congress has followed through by appropriating all of the user
fees that have been collected in the last 4 years.
The user fees that are paid into the Inland Waterways Trust
Fund by waterway users are matched with Federal dollars, which
allow the Corps of Engineers to make significant progress to
address the backlog of work on our inland waterways.
But despite knowing the Inland Waterways Trust Fund would
have $104 million available for fiscal year 2019, the year
coming up, the Administration's budget is only proposing to
spend $5 million, the lowest level of proposed spending from
the Inland Waterways Trust Fund in at least the last 20 years,
leaving 97 percent of these funds sitting unspent in a Treasury
account.
Now, here is what this means. It means we would be
collecting taxes from commercial barges to go through the locks
in order to improve the locks, and then we would be keeping the
money, putting it in the bank, and not spending it for the
purpose that we took it.
And despite not spending the entire $104 million in user
fees from commercial barges, the Administration's budget also
includes a new user fee for inland waterways that would raise
another $1.7 billion over a 10 year window.
Now, what sense does that make?
We need to spend the money that we are already collecting,
that is a good idea, before we ask the waterways industry to
pay more. It makes no sense to ask barge owners to pay more
fees when the Administration is not even proposing to spend all
the fees we are collecting today.
The budget request also only proposes to fund a single
project, Olmsted Lock, and eliminates funding for the other
three projects that are already under construction and received
funding last year: Lower Monongahela, Kentucky Lock, and
Chickamauga Lock.
Replacing Chickamauga Lock is important to all of
Tennessee. If Chickamauga Lock closes, it will throw 150,000
more trucks onto I-75. Construction has been going on for the
past 4 years thanks to the new plan and the steady funding that
has been coming from this committee. So it does not make sense
for the Administration to not include the project in the budget
request.
I have worked with General Semonite over the last 2 years.
I deeply appreciate that funding for construction on
Chickamauga Lock has been included in previous work plans. And
as General Semonite and I have discussed, starting and stopping
is not an efficient way to build inland waterway projects. This
year's budget proposal is a huge step backwards for our
Nation's inland waterways.
Now, our ports and harbors; this is an area that has great
interest to our Chairman, Senator Shelby, and our Vice
Chairman, Senator Feinstein, as well as to me.
Despite receiving a record level of funding in a regular
appropriations bill of $6.8 billion in fiscal year 2018, the
budget request this year fails to adequately fund our Nation's
harbors, such as Mobile Harbor in Alabama, Savannah Harbor in
Georgia, Long Beach Harbor in California, and many others
across the country.
Five years ago, Congress took a look, as I said, at the
need to provide more funding for ports and waterways. We
realized that the Government was spending only a fraction of
the taxes each year that are collected in the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund for our ports and harbors, resulting in
billions of dollars of unspent funds just sitting there. That
fund got bigger and bigger each year.
In fact, unlike the Inland Waterways Trust Fund, which has
virtually zero balance in the trust fund, the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund has an unspent balance of over $9
billion today.
To provide more funding for our ports and harbors, Congress
enacted spending targets for the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund
in the Water Resources Reform and Development Act of 2014 that
were meant to make us spend a little more each year on harbor
maintenance projects. We have set these targets and we have met
those targets for the last 4 years in the Energy and Water
appropriations bill.
The target for fiscal year 2019 is $1.442 billion. However,
the Administration's budget only proposes to spend $965
million, $435 million less than what Congress appropriated last
year and $477 million than the target that Congress
established.
So I will ask the witnesses how they plan to sufficiently
fund our ports and harbors without requesting adequate
resources to do it.
I would also like to recognize Brenda Burman, Commissioner
from the Bureau of Reclamation and Dr. Timothy Petty, Assistant
Secretary for Water and Science at the Department of Interior.
The Bureau of Reclamation delivers water to one of every
five farmers in the west, irrigating more than 10 million acres
of some of the most productive agricultural land in the
country.
Reclamation does not manage water resources in Tennessee,
but I know of its deep importance to Senator Feinstein and
other Senators of this subcommittee, and we look forward to
hearing your testimony.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Lamar Alexander
I want to thank our witnesses for being here today, and also
Senator Feinstein.
Our witnesses today include: R.D. James, Assistant Secretary of the
Army for Civil Works; Lieutenant General Todd Semonite, Chief of
Engineers for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Brenda Burman,
Commissioner for the Bureau of Reclamation at the Department of the
Interior; and Timothy R. Petty, Ph.D., Assistant Secretary for Water
and Science at the Department of the Interior.
Today I will focus my questions on four main areas: making our
Nation's water infrastructure a priority; properly funding our inland
waterways system; adequately funding our Nation's ports and harbors;
and using a more common-sense approach to making decisions about which
projects receive funding by looking at the ``remaining benefit to cost
ratio'' of an ongoing project. Today, because of Office of Management
and Budget rules, the Corps has to pretend a project is not already
under construction when the Corps decides which projects will receive
funding each year. This does not make any sense, and makes it harder to
complete projects on time and on budget.
Based on the number of appropriations requests we receive each
year, the Corps of Engineers is the Federal Government's most popular
agency.
I can recall when, after the Missouri and Mississippi rivers
flooded in 2011, eight senators showed up at a Senate Environment and
Public Works Committee hearing to ask what went wrong and what went
right with disaster relief efforts. So, there's a real interest in what
the Corps does.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers touches the lives of almost every
American. The Corps maintains our inland waterways, it deepens and
keeps our ports open, looks after many of our recreational waters and
land, manages the river levels to prevent flooding, and its dams
provide emission-free, renewable hydroelectric energy.
In my opinion, we should spend more, not less, on our Nation's
water infrastructure.
So, In 2012, Senator Graham and I gathered our staffs, including
Senator Feinstein's, and we said, ``Let's just rear back and ask what
would a great country, the United States, want from its ports, locks,
dams, and waterways in order to fully maximize them for our economic
growth.''
We asked the staff to paint a picture of where we'd like to go, and
not worry about how we would pay for it. We had a lot of discussions
among this group of senators and the White House. We talked to the
Appropriations committee chairman, Senator Inuoye. We talked with the
Environment and Public Works Committee, and other interested Senators.
From these discussions, Congress took three important steps, focusing
on properly funding our inland waterways system.
First, Congress passed a law that reduced the amount of money that
comes from the Inland Waterways Trust Fund to replace Olmsted Lock, a
project in Illinois and Kentucky that was soaking up almost all of the
money that is available for inland waterway projects.
Second, we worked with the commercial waterways industry to
establish a priority list for projects that needed to be funded, on
which Chickamauga ranks near the top, in fourth place.
And third, we enacted a user fee increase that commercial barge
owners asked to pay in order to provide additional funds to replace
locks and dams across the country, including Chickamauga Lock.
These steps increased the amount of funding that was available for
inland waterways projects from about $85 million in fiscal year 2014 to
$104 million in fiscal year 2019. And Congress has followed through by
appropriating all of the user fees that have been collected in the last
4 years.
The user fees that are paid into the Inland Waterways Trust Fund by
waterway users are matched with Federal dollars, which allow the Corps
of Engineers to make significant progress to address the backlog of
work on our inland waterways.
But despite knowing the Inland Waterways Trust Fund would have $104
million available for fiscal year 2019, the Administration's budget is
only proposing to spend $5 million--the lowest level of proposed
spending from the Inland Waterways Trust Fund in at least the last 20
years--and leaving 97 percent of these funds sitting unspent in a
Treasury account.
That means, in effect, we would be collecting taxes from commercial
barges to go through the locks in order to improve the locks, and then
we would be keeping the money, putting it in the bank, and not spending
it for the intended purpose.
And despite not spending the entire $104 million in user fees from
commercial barges, the administration's budget also includes a new user
fee for inland waterways that would raise another $1.7 billion over a
10-year window.
I do not think this is a responsible approach. We need to spend the
money that is already being collected before we ask the waterways
industry to pay more. It makes no sense to ask barge owners to pay more
in fees when the administration is not even proposing to spend all the
fees we are collecting today.
The budget request also only proposes to fund a single project,
Olmsted Lock, and eliminates funding for the other three projects that
are already under construction and received funding last year--Lower
Monongahela, Kentucky Lock, and Chickamauga Lock.
Replacing Chickamauga Lock is important to all of Tennessee and if
Chickamauga Lock closes, it will throw 150,000 more trucks onto I-75.
Construction has been ongoing for the past 4 years so it does not make
sense for the administration to not include the project in the budget
request.
I've worked with General Semonite over the last 2 years and I
deeply appreciate that funding for construction on Chickamauga Lock has
been included in previous work plans. And as General Semonite and I
have discussed, starting and stopping is not an efficient way to build
projects.
This year's budget proposal is a huge step backwards for our
Nation's inland waterways.
Despite receiving a record level of funding in a regular
appropriations bill of $6.8 billion in fiscal year 2018, the budget
request this year fails to adequately fund our Nation's harbors, such
as Mobile Harbor in Alabama; Savannah Harbor in Georgia; and Long Beach
Harbor in California, and many others across the country.
Five years ago, Congress took a look at the need to provide more
funding for our Nation's ports and harbors to ensure we can compete
with other harbors around the world.
We realized that the government was spending only a fraction of the
taxes each year that were collected in the Harbor Maintenance Trust
Fund for our ports and harbors, resulting in billions of dollars of
unspent funds just sitting in a bank account that got bigger and bigger
each year.
In fact, unlike the Inland Waterways Trust Fund--which has
virtually no balance in the trust fund--the Harbor Maintenance Trust
Fund has an unspent balance of over $9 billion today.
To provide more funding for our ports and harbors, Congress enacted
spending targets for the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund in the Water
Resources Reform and Development Act of 2014, that were meant to make
us spend a little more each year on harbor maintenance projects.
We have met these targets for the last 4 years in the Energy and
Water appropriations bill.
The target for fiscal year 2019 is about $1.442 billion. However,
the administration's budget only proposes to spend $965 million, $435
million less than what Congress appropriated last year and $477million
below the WRRDA target.
So I will ask the witnesses how they plan to sufficiently fund our
ports and harbors without requesting adequate resources to do it.
I'd also like to recognize Brenda Burman, Commissioner from the
Bureau of Reclamation and Dr. Timothy Petty, Assistant Secretary for
Water and Science at the Department of the Interior.
The Bureau of Reclamation delivers water to one of every five
farmers in the West, irrigating more than 10 million acres of some of
the most productive agricultural land in the country.
Although Reclamation doesn't manage water resources in Tennessee, I
know of its deep importance to Senator Feinstein and other Senators on
this subcommittee, and we look forward to hearing your testimony.
With that, I'll turn to Senator Feinstein for her opening
statement.
Senator Alexander. With that, I will turn to Senator
Feinstein for her opening statement, and then to Senator Shelby
and to other Senators.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR DIANNE FEINSTEIN
Senator Feinstein. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Shelby, thank you very much for attending this
hearing and members on both sides, the same.
The Army Corps and the Bureau of Reclamation handles some
of the most important issues facing our Nation today. What I
want you to know is how critical you are to California, both
the Army Corps and the Department of Reclamation, for a State,
now, of over 40 million people. We are bigger than 21 States
and the District of Columbia put together.
We have water. We have rivers. One thing we do not have is
enough drinking water, and ports that are old, and a number of
other problems.
But I would like to begin by addressing the Army Corps'
budget proposal. Compared to the recent fiscal year 2018
omnibus that we just passed, the Administration's budget
request represents a $2 billion or 30 percent cut. That is
devastating.
Moreover, despite the Administration's emphasis on
rebuilding our Nation's infrastructure, this year's budget
request is actually 4 percent less than what the Administration
requested last year.
We cannot construct new Army Corps infrastructure projects
if we do not fund new studies. The Army Corps of Engineers is
effectively California's main infrastructure project.
For construction, the budget requests just $910 million,
the lowest level of construction funding requested since 2001,
believe it or not. This represents a $1.2 billion or 56 percent
cut, Mr. Chairman, from the fiscal year 2018 omnibus. So we are
taking a 56 percent cut from the omnibus just passed.
This committee is constantly told that we should not start
new projects until we finish ongoing ones. Yet, you also cut
funding for ongoing projects. By delaying funds or providing
insufficient funds to an ongoing construction project, the
total cost of that project is going to go up. I do not see that
that is an efficient way to fund the Corps and can actually
lead to waste of taxpayer dollars.
So Mr. James, I would appreciate your thoughts on how the
Corps can sustain the investments we have made in fiscal year
2018 at a time when the needs are so great throughout the
country.
I would like, for a moment, to turn to the Bureau. I want
Ms. Burman to know that one of the outstanding relationships
that I have had with the Department has been with the Bureau of
Reclamation. So much in California depends on the work you do
and the cooperation between this branch and the executive
branch. I hope that cooperation will continue. It is really
important.
Given the operation of the Central Valley Project and water
delivery throughout the State, the two big projects,
Reclamation's request for water and related resources is $441
million, or 33 percent less than what we just appropriated in
the omnibus. Nearly half of this cut can be attributed to the
Administration not requesting the $196 million we included in
the omnibus for implementation of the drought-related
provisions of the 2016 WIIN Act.
This is a big problem for me, and it is symptomatic of how
I will look at this budget. I know I am just one vote, but I
worked for 3 years to get the water bill passed. We negotiated
that bill with Leader McCarthy. That is how we got it passed.
We hope to begin some new water infrastructure in
California with desalinization, by funding the effort to get to
that third membrane so that the energy coefficient is more
positive than it is today, with Water$mart, with groundwater
recharge, with a number of other programs. So that $400 million
that came with that bill is really extraordinarily important to
me and to the State.
The recent omnibus included the first year of specifically
recommended projects including three water recycling projects
and seven water storage projects. I would really like to work
with you, Ms. Burman, to see that this progress continues and
we begin to see desal projects recommended, in time, for the
fiscal year 2019 appropriations bill.
I look forward to hearing an update on Reclamation's plans
to stand up the desal program. I want to cooperate in every way
I can and how you will identify future water storage,
recycling, and desal projects that meet both the needs of the
West and also have broad support from the impacted communities.
For, I guess, the 19 States that are part of Reclamation,
you really are extraordinarily important to our wellbeing. I
want you to know that and offer my willingness to work with you
to achieve a better future for all of us.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I look forward to the
witnesses' testimony.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Senator Feinstein.
We will now invite our members to make any opening
statements they may wish before we go to the witnesses.
We will begin with Chairman Richard Shelby.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR RICHARD C. SHELBY
Senator Shelby. Mr. Chairman, I will try to be brief. First
of all, I want to thank you, as Chairman of the committee, and
Ranking Member Feinstein for bringing this hearing about. This
is very, very important.
The Energy and Water Development appropriation bill
supports several important Federal agencies, as you pointed
out, including our Nation's energy program, scientific
research, water development projects, several national security
interests.
I am looking forward, as a member of the committee, to
working with all of you on this subcommittee and drafting a
bill that prioritizes spending in a responsible manner and
meets our needs, which are many.
I believe this hearing regarding our Nation's water
infrastructures is of great importance to the country. The
ability to navigate America's ports and inland waterways is
critical to our commerce, to our continued economic growth, and
we must prioritize, and we must fund these investments to
remain competitive in the global workplace.
My home State of Alabama has many important water structure
needs, as most other States. The most important in my State, I
believe, is the deepening and widening of the Port of Mobile.
The Port of Mobile provides access to nearly 15,000 miles of
inland waterways serving the Great Lakes, Ohio, upper
Mississippi, and Tennessee Valley ports.
It is currently the 10th largest port in the United States
and has been identified as the fastest growing container
terminal in North America. Simply put, the Port serves as an
economic driver for the region, and of course, for my State of
Alabama.
The new Administration, this Administration, has made
economic growth a top priority and a lot of us have worked with
the President and the executive branch on this. The Corps, we
all know, plays an important part in this process.
I look forward to hearing from the panelists today. I know
they are professionals in this, but we must meet our needs, as
Senators Feinstein and Alexander pointed out. It is folly to do
otherwise.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Chairman Shelby.
Senator Tester, would you like to make a statement?
STATEMENT OF SENATOR JON TESTER
Senator Tester. Yes, I will be very quick, though.
Thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Feinstein for
holding this hearing.
When the Chairman of the Federal Reserve left his position,
I had a chance to visit with him and I asked him what was most
important in this country. I was assuming he was going to talk
about the debt, which is critically important.
But what he said was this, if we do not leave a 21st
century economy for our children, we are in big trouble. We
will never be able to do anything.
I am glad you are all here today because water
infrastructure is critically important when it comes to our
21st century economy.
We have long lived off of previous generations'
investments. And I know that as I ask you questions about how
money is going to be spent and if there is enough in there, you
do need to put it back on us to make sure that you have the
resources to be able to do what we demand.
I am going to tell you that as I look at some of our water
infrastructure in our towns, and our cities, and our rural
areas, it is worn out. If we do not make an investment, we are
really not doing what somebody in the financial industry
thought was most important. And that is leave a 21st century
economy to our children that is based on, in my book,
infrastructure, number one. Education is right alongside of it.
Thank you all for being here. I look forward to your
testimony.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Senator Tester.
Senator Kennedy.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR JOHN KENNEDY
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, General, Madam Commissioner, Mr. Secretary,
I appreciate you being here. I am not sure I would have your
jobs for love or money, but I am glad you do them.
I do not think I have ever met a public official or a
politician who was against jobs. We are all for jobs. It has
been my experience that you cannot be for jobs if you are
against business.
It has also been my experience that businesswomen and
businessmen need four things out of government. They need
reasonable taxes, reasonable regulations, a skilled workforce,
and decent infrastructure. Then government, frankly, needs to
get out of the way.
For most Americans, when you say ``infrastructure,'' they
think of roads, and clearly, we need work there. They think of
bridges. Maybe they think of airports. But in my State, they
also think of water, water infrastructure.
Five of the 12 largest ports in America are in Louisiana.
Our commercial fishing industry is the largest in the
continental United States. We need help. I am going to talk to
you today about some specific projects.
Dredging, which is always a problem. Flood control, we have
talked about the Comite River to the Mississippi River
diversion canal, which I will talk to you about a little bit
later. Work on our ports.
If anybody is wasting money in my State, I want to know
about it. I want you to pick up the phone and call me. I will
never ask you to spend taxpayer dollars if some of my people
are wasting it, and I mean that.
But at the same time we, like every other State, have some
critical needs and they deal with maritime commerce. I
appreciate the opportunity to visit with you about them today.
Thank you for being here.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Senator Kennedy.
Senator Shaheen.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR JEANNE SHAHEEN
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking
Member Feinstein for holding this hearing.
Thank you all for being here to testify today.
I share the views of my colleagues that we have to invest
in infrastructure and that we need to do more to properly fund
the needs that we have, with $96 billion worth of authorized
projects currently backlogged on the Army Corps' list. We
clearly have more to do.
I certainly share the view of Senators Alexander and Shelby
that we have to take a look at what we need with respect to our
ports and harbors. We are not keeping up with the backlog. In a
small State like New Hampshire, where we are very low on the
list, it is a particular problem.
So I look forward to a chance to ask you some questions
about that today.
Thank you.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Senator Shaheen.
I will now recognize our witnesses. Secretary James,
General Semonite, Commissioner Burman, Secretary Petty, why do
you not just proceed in that order for about 5 minutes each,
and then we will ask questions.
Mr. James.
SUMMARY STATEMENT OF HON. R.D. JAMES
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee for the opportunity to discuss the
President's budget for the Civil Works program of the Army
Corps of Engineers for fiscal year 2019.
This is my first opportunity as Assistant Secretary for
Civil Works to appear before this subcommittee. I look forward
to the opportunity to share my thoughts with you and emphasize
my commitment to results, rather than processes, to ensure that
the Corps is moving dirt and putting projects into the ground.
I am honored to be joined by Lieutenant General Todd
Semonite, our 54th Chief of Engineers.
The fiscal year 2019 budget reflects the Administration's
priorities and focuses on investments that will yield high
economic and environmental returns, or address the significant
risk to public safety.
The budget provides $4.8 billion in gross discretionary
funding for the Army Civil Works program. These investments
will enable communities to reduce their flood risk, facilitate
waterborne transportation, restore significant aquatic
ecosystems, and generate low cost, renewable hydropower.
The budget focuses on the highest performing work within
the three main missions of the Corps, which is commercial
navigation, flood control, and aquatic ecosystem restoration.
The budget also focuses on maintaining the vast water
resources infrastructure that the Corps owns and manages, and
on finding innovative ways to rehabilitate it or hand it over
to others.
It gives priority to coastal harbors and inland waterways
with the most commercial traffic, but also funds the
maintenance of channels at small ports that support significant
commercial fishing, subsistence or public transportation
benefits. Similarly, the budget invests in safety improvements
at Corps dams based on an assessment of risk.
The Civil Works program relies on a foundation of strong
relationships between the Corps and local communities. It
enables us to work together to help meet their water resource
needs.
The Corps program uses a diverse set of tools and
approaches to working with local communities, whether this
means funding projects where they pay their share of the cost,
or supply planning assistance and technical expertise to help
them make better informed decisions to the local entities.
The Flood Control and Coastal Storm Damage Reduction
program is a collaborative effort that integrates and
synchronizes flood control projects, programs, and authorities
of the Corps to help reduce the risk of loss of life and
property damage from riverine and coastal flooding. Also, it
increases the resilience of local communities through
structural and nonstructural measures.
Funding for the Aquatic Ecosystem Restoration program will
be used to restore several large ecosystems, including
restoring aquatic habitat and ecosystems, where ecosystem
structure and functional processes have been degraded in the
past, and work needed to comply with biological opinions.
The budget prioritizes funding to operate and maintain
water resource infrastructure and the funding allocations for
the maintenance of commercial navigation flood control, coastal
storm damage reduction, and hydropower projects are informed by
risk-based assessments.
Funding for the construction program uses objective
performance-based guidelines to fund the projects with the
highest net economic, environmental, or public safety return to
the Nation. For example, the budget funds the Olmstead Locks
and Dams project to completion.
The budget also funds the Dam Safety Program to enable the
Corps to evaluate and implement effective risk reduction
strategies at its dams where it is needed.
The budget funds six feasibility studies to completion and
includes funding for floodplain management services and for the
Planning Assistance to States program to assist local
communities with technical and planning assistance, and
specifically to help them develop and implement nonstructural
approaches that will enable them to reduce their flood risk.
Lastly, the budget makes important investments to promote
the sustainable management of lands around Corps facilities by
providing funds to update the plans that govern how we manage
those facilities and help combat invasive species.
I thank you for inviting me here today. I look forward to
your questions and interactions.
Thank you.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. R.D. James
Thank you Chairman Alexander and distinguished members of the
subcommittee for the opportunity to present the President's Budget for
the Civil Works program of the Army Corps of Engineers for fiscal year
2019. The Budget funds the development, management, restoration, and
protection of the Nation's water, wetlands, and related resources,
through studies, the construction, operation and maintenance of
projects, the Corps' regulatory program, the cleanup of certain sites
contaminated as a result of the Nation's early atomic weapons
development, and emergency response preparedness.
The fiscal year 2019 Army Civil Works Budget reflects the
Administration's priorities. It provides $4.785 billion for this
program, focusing on investments that will yield high economic and
environmental returns or address a significant risk to public safety.
These investments will enable communities to reduce their flood risk,
facilitate waterborne transportation, restore significant aquatic
ecosystems, and generate low-cost renewable hydropower. The Budget
focuses on the highest performing work within the three main missions
of the Corps: commercial navigation, flood and storm damage reduction,
and aquatic ecosystem restoration.
The Civil Works Program, which this Budget supports, relies on a
foundation of strong relationships between the Corps and local
communities, that enable us to work together to help meet their water
resources needs. The Budget supports a Corps program that uses a
diverse set of tools and approaches to working with local communities,
whether this means funding projects where they pay a share of the
costs, or providing planning assistance and technical expertise to help
them make better informed decisions. The Budget funds Corps
participation in national and international conversations on how to
best address our water resources challenges and helps us maintain and
improve our efforts on resiliency and sustainability--one of the
challenges associated with the ways that we have used our water
resources.
The Budget also focuses on maintaining the vast water resources
infrastructure that the Corps owns and manages, and on finding
innovative ways to rehabilitate it or hand it over to others. These
goals will be met, for example, by funding capital investment in the
inland waterways, and by establishing--as proposed in the Budget--an
annual fee to support this infrastructure investment and economic
growth. This proposal will help finance the users' share of future
capital investment, as well as 10 percent of the operation and
maintenance cost, associated with these waterways. The Budget also
proposes to divest the Washington Aqueduct, which is the wholesale
water supply system for Washington, D.C.; Arlington County, Virginia;
the City of Falls Church, Virginia; and parts of Fairfax County,
Virginia.
In addition, the Budget proposes needed revisions to the
appropriations language for the Construction, Operation and
Maintenance, and Mississippi River and Tributaries accounts and the
Harbor Maintenance and Inland Waterways Trust Funds to enable greater
transparency in how these funds are budgeted and spent.
The Budget provides $4.8 billion in discretionary funding for the
Civil Works program, including approximately $1.9 billion to support
commercial navigation; $1.5 billion for flood and storm damage
reduction; and $224 million for aquatic ecosystem restoration.
The Budget allocates these funds based on performance. For example,
it gives priority to coastal harbors and inland waterways with the most
commercial traffic, but also funds the maintenance of channels at small
ports that support significant commercial fishing, subsistence, or
public transportation benefits. Similarly, the Budget invests in safety
improvements at Corps dams based on an assessment of the risk,
considering the consequences of the most likely failure modes.
Under its navigation program, the Corps maintains approximately
12,000 miles of inland waterways with 218 locks at 176 sites;
approximately 300 deep-draft and 600 shallow-draft Great Lakes and
coastal ports extending 13,000 miles and include 23 locks at 19 sites;
and more than 900 coastal navigation structures.
The flood and coastal storm damage reduction program is a
collaborative effort that integrates and synchronizes the flood risk
management projects, programs, and authorities of USACE with those of
other Federal, State, regional and local agencies. It helps to reduce
the risk of loss of life and property damage from riverine and coastal
flooding, and increase the resilience of local communities through
structural and non- structural measures.
Funding for the aquatic ecosystem restoration program will be used
to restore several large ecosystems. Activities include restoring
aquatic habitat in ecosystems where ecosystem structure, function, and
processes have been degraded; work needed to comply with biological
opinions; and operation and maintenance of the Chicago Sanitary and
Ship Canal fish barrier.
The Budget prioritizes funding to operate and maintain water
resources infrastructure. It provides $3.1 billion for the operation
and maintenance program, consisting of approximately $2.1 billion in
the Operation and Maintenance account, $933 million in the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund account, and $135 million in the Mississippi
River and Tributaries account. The funding allocations for the
maintenance of commercial navigation, flood and storm damage reduction,
and hydropower projects are informed by risk-based assessments that
consider both project and project component conditions and the
consequences in the event of a failure. For example, funding levels
will enable continued reduction in the number of extended lock closures
per year due to preventable mechanical breakdowns and a reduced risk of
failure at our flood risk management projects.
The Budget provides $965 million to be derived from the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund to maintain coastal channels and related work--
the highest amount ever budgeted. The Budget also proposes to reduce
the Harbor Maintenance Tax rate to better align estimated annual
receipts with recent appropriations levels for eligible expenditures
from the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund.
The Budget provides $1 billion for the construction program,
consisting of $872 million in the Construction account, $109 million in
the Mississippi River and Tributaries account, $33 million in the
Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund account, and $5 million in the Inland
Waterways Trust Fund account. The Budget uses objective, performance-
based guidelines to fund the projects with the highest net economic,
environmental, or public safety return to the Nation. For example, the
Budget funds the Olmsted Locks and Dam project to completion.
The Budget also includes $452 million for dam safety, consisting of
$431 million for dam safety assurance, seepage control, and static
instability correction actions and related work in the Construction
account, $10 million for seven new dam safety modification studies in
the Investigations account, and $11 million for interim risk reduction
measures at Corps dams in the O&M account. When coupled with
anticipated unobligated carryover balances, this funding will enable
the Corps to evaluate and implement effective risk reduction strategies
at our dams where needed.
The Budget provides $82 million in the Investigations account and
$600 thousand in the Mississippi River and Tributaries account for
studies and related remaining items. The Budget funds six feasibility
studies to completion and also includes $15 million for Floodplain
Management Services and $5 million for the Planning Assistance to
States program to assist local communities with technical and planning
assistance, and specifically to help them develop and implement non-
structural approaches that will enable them to reduce their flood risk.
All ongoing feasibility studies funded in the Budget have signed
Feasibility Cost-Sharing Agreements, and have developed a plan that
outlines their scope, schedule, and cost, which has been agreed upon by
the District, Division, Corps Headquarters, and the local sponsor.
The fiscal year 2019 regulatory program is funded at $200 million
to protect the Nation's waters and wetlands and provide efficiency in
permit processing.
The Budget provides $33 million for the emergency management
program, a robust level of funding to help ensure that our people are
properly trained and equipped to help communities respond to all types
of disasters.
Lastly, the Budget also makes important investments to promote the
sustainable management of the lands around Corps facilities, by
providing funds to update the plans that govern how we manage our
facilities and helping to combat invasive species.
Thank you all for inviting me to attend today.
General Semonite will provide further remarks on the Army Civil
Works 2019 Budget.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Mr. James.
General Semonite.
STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL TODD T. SEMONITE,
COMMANDING GENERAL AND CHIEF OF ENGINEERS,
ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS
General Semonite. Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member
Feinstein, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
I am glad to be appearing here with Secretary James and
look forward to his leadership on the Civil Works team as we
work together to address water resource challenges across the
Nation.
I would also like to take a moment to welcome Major General
Scott Spellmon, who is joining us today, as the newest member
of the Corps Headquarters Leadership team. General Spellmon
will be assuming the role as my Deputy Commanding General for
Civil and Emergency Operations, filling in behind the recent
departure of Major General Ed Jackson.
Scott comes to us from the Northwest Division as he
transitions from his most recent role as Commanding General,
where he oversees a very challenging and dynamic annual program
of over $3 billion in civil works, environmental restoration,
and military construction in more than a dozen States,
primarily within the Columbia and Missouri River basins.
I have been in command of the Corps for close to 2 years. I
want to briefly update you on where we are going.
As I said last year, the Corps' credibility is measured by
our ability to deliver results that are on time, on budget, and
of exceptional quality.
Since Congress first authorized our Navigation Mission in
1824, the Corps has worked hard to develop and implement
solutions to the Nation's water resource challenges. We are
able to do this because we have a world class workforce of
talented and dedicated professionals who are passionate about
what we do. None of our work is done alone. It is with the full
participation and hard work of many others.
We appreciate, value, and depend upon the support of the
Administration, the Congress, and all of our partners to
succeed in this mission. I am very proud of the work that the
Corps accomplished, but I am equally aware that the
organization can and will improve. I have been, and remain,
committed to instituting changes in the Corps' delivery process
in order to become a more efficient and effective organization.
The Corps faces a multitude of challenges, some old and
some new. Much of our infrastructure is well beyond its design
life, yet the requirements have never been greater. The demands
on the Federal budget continue to grow and as our
infrastructure ages, we find more and more of our actual
appropriations going to operations and maintenance activities
at the expense of both investigations and construction
investments.
Today, we do have over $96 billion in construction
requirements representing the Federal share on a multitude of
projects. We have close to 100 ongoing feasibility studies
which, if authorized, will simply add to the Federal budget
requirement.
Our feasibility studies are formulated with the assumption
of efficient funding and most all are multiple year projects.
Yet, we budget on an annual basis with no assurances that
adequate funding will be available from year to year. This
creates uncertainty for our non-Federal sponsors, drives up
project costs, and delays the realization of benefits.
The Corps continues to work on policy and administrative
changes that can improve infrastructure delivery. Over the last
year, I have assembled my general officers, my SES's, and my
senior leaders to look internally at our organization, our
authorities, policies, regulations, and procedures in order to
identify opportunities for increased efficiency and
effectiveness. This includes developing over 74 initiatives, in
my hand right here, and legislative proposals that we have
developed on how the Corps can help deliver our program. I look
forward to sharing those initiatives and those innovative
changes with your staffs.
The Corps is fully engaged in support of administrative
efforts aimed at streamlining the regulatory process. The Corps
is addressing topics such as implementing the one Federal
decision that established discipline and accountability in the
environmental review and permitting process for infrastructure
projects.
We are reviewing the nationwide permit program to identify
modifications that will increase the efficiency of
decisionmaking, and we continue to work with the EPA in
reviewing the 2015 Waters of the United States rule. Our goal
is to simplify the process for gaining infrastructure permits
while protecting the environment in accordance with the law.
We are working to delegate more decisions to the lowest
appropriate level in encouraging our leadership to take more
prudent risks. To put this concept into practice, we have
implemented changes delegating Section 408 decisions at the
lowest possible level, eliminating redundancies, identifying
alternate processes and authorities, and clarifying when such
permissions are not even required.
We believe that risk informed professional judgment
decisions should be made and documented without being subject
to numerous time-consuming reviews.
The Corps wants to be part of the solution, not part of the
problem. We recognize the need to address internal policies,
regulations, processes, and cultural impediments in order to
remain relevant into the future. We want to be value added to
deliver our solutions, whatever role that may have in the
endeavor.
We cannot conduct all these reforms in isolation. We need
the help of OMB (Office of Management and Budget) and Congress
to unleash the power of the Corps by acting on our numerous
recommendations.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members of the subcommittee.
This concludes my testimony and I look forward to answering any
questions you might have.
Thank you.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lieutenant General Todd T. Semonite
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee:
I am honored to testify before your committee today, along with The
Honorable R.D. James, the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil
Works, on the President's Fiscal Year 2019 Budget for the United States
Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) Civil Works Program.
I have been in command of the Corps for close to 2 years, and I
want to briefly update you on where we are going. As I said last year,
the Corps' credibility is measured by our ability to deliver results
that are on time, on budget, and of exceptional quality.
The Corps continues to work on policy and administrative changes
that can improve infrastructure delivery. More specifically, we are
looking internally at our organization, authorities, policies,
regulations and procedures in order to identify opportunities for
increased efficiency and effectiveness. This will include efforts to
reduce redundancy and delegate authority for decisionmaking to the most
practical and appropriate level.
For example, section 1007 of WRRDA 2014 requires the Secretary to
establish a process for reviewing requests submitted under Section 14
of the Rivers and Harbors Appropriation Act of 1899, as amended, in a
timely and consistent manner. These requests (commonly referred to as
Section 408 requests because the provision from the 1899 Act is
codified at 33 USC 408) involve proposals for the permanent or
temporary alteration by others of any completed Civil Works project.
The Budget includes significant funding to support Section 408 reviews.
Beginning in 2017, the majority of all Section 408 decisions can be
rendered at the district level. Further efforts to eliminate
duplication of public interest and environmental reviews and establish
timelines for decisions are ongoing. The Corps has also clarified when
Section 408 permission is required, or not required, and when the
requirements of Section 408 may be met by another Corps process and/or
authority, thus resulting in the elimination of redundancies.
Similarly, the Corps continues to make significant progress in the
Regulatory program. Section 1134 of the WIIN 2016 amended Section 2040
of the Water Resources Development Act of 2007 and directed the Corps
to research, develop, and implement an electronic system to allow for
the electronic preparation and submission of applications for permits
and requests for jurisdictional determinations. The Corps has accepted
electronic submission of permit applications or jurisdictional
determination requests via email for several years and the application
form is a fillable PDF available on Corps District websites. The
information received helps the Corps track the number and type of
applications, as well as status and completion of reviews. The Corps
will continue to explore additional automation advances to make the
process more efficient for the public and cost effective for the
government.
The Corps focuses on work that provides the highest economic,
environmental, and public safety returns to the Nation. The Corps also
operates and maintains water resources infrastructure that may no
longer meet its authorized purposes or for which the needs of the
Nation have changed. As such, the Corps is conducting studies--there
are currently seven ongoing studies--to ascertain the viability of
deauthorizing projects and removing them from the Corps inventory.
The Corps also continues our work across the globe with presence in
more than 110 countries supporting national security and our Combatant
Commanders with civil works, military missions, and water resources
research and development expertise. We are proud to serve this great
Nation and our fellow citizens and we are proud of the work the Corps
does to support America's foreign policy. Corps civilian employees
nationwide have volunteered--and continue to volunteer--to support our
Nation's missions and vital interests abroad, often in harm's way. Many
have served on multiple deployments.
summary of fiscal year 2019 budget
The fiscal year 2019 Civil Works Budget is a performance-based
budget, which will reduce flood risk in communities across the Nation,
facilitate commercial navigation, restore aquatic ecosystems, and
generate low-cost renewable hydropower. The Budget uses a targeted
approach to investment in our water resources, which will benefit the
Nation's economy, environment, and public safety--now and in the
future.
The Budget focuses on high-performing projects and programs within
the three main water resources missions of the Corps: commercial
navigation, flood and storm damage reduction, and aquatic ecosystem
restoration. The Budget includes $4.785 billion in gross discretionary
funding for Civil Works activities throughout the Nation.
The Budget also proposes the necessary level of funding for the
Regulatory program to protect and preserve water-related resources of
the Nation.
investigations program
The fiscal year 2019 Budget provides $82 million in the
Investigations account, and $600,000 in the Mississippi River and
Tributaries account to evaluate and design projects within the Corps
three main mission areas and for related work, including research and
development. The Budget also supports the Corps planning and technical
assistance programs, including using its expertise to help local
communities increase their resilience to, and preparedness for, flood
risks.
construction program
The Budget provides $1.019 billion for the construction program,
including $872 million in the Construction account, $109 million in the
Mississippi River and Tributaries account, $5.25 million in the Inland
Waterways Trust Fund account and $32.6 million in the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund account.
The goal of the construction program is to produce as much value as
possible for the Nation from the available funds. The Corps uses
objective performance measures to allocate this funding. Projects
funded primarily due to their economic return, require a benefit-to-
cost ratio of 2.5-to-1 or higher, calculated at a 7-percent discount
rate. Projects funded on the basis of their environmental return must
demonstrate that they will restore degraded ecosystem structure,
function and/or process to a more natural condition. Funding is also
prioritized for mitigation work at ongoing construction projects, and
work needed to comply with treaties or biological opinions. The
selection process also prioritizes investments, on a risk informed
basis, in dam safety assurance, seepage control, and static instability
correction work at dams that the Corps owns and operates, and work to
address significant risk to human safety, as well as construction of
dredged material disposal facilities for high and moderate use segments
of commercial deep-draft, shallow-draft, and inland waterways projects.
operation and maintenance (o&m) program
All structures age and can deteriorate over time, causing a
potential decline in reliability. As stewards of a large portfolio of
water resources infrastructure, we are working to ensure that its key
features continue to provide the benefits assumed with project
construction.
The Corps continues to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
its operation and maintenance program. The Budget focuses on
investments that address infrastructure maintenance needs on a risk
informed basis. It supports the Corps asset management program, by
investing in the highest priority needs among the infrastructure that
the Corps owns and operates, and in work that will reduce long-term O&M
costs in real terms.
The Budget for the operation and maintenance program provides
approximately $2.1 billion in the O&M account, $135 million in the
Mississippi River and Tributaries account, and approximately $932.5
million in the Harbor Maintenance account. The focus is on the
operation and maintenance of commercial navigation, flood risk
management, and hydropower projects and other facilities. For example,
the Budget gives priority to maintenance work at the coastal ports and
inland waterways with high levels of commercial traffic. However, the
Budget also funds small ports, with an emphasis on those that support
significant commercial fishing, subsistence, or public transportation
benefits. The allocation of funding for maintenance among projects
reflects a risk- informed assessment that considers both project and
project component conditions as well as the consequences in the event
of a failure.
The concerns that lead to dam modifications and/or interim risk
reduction measures so that they can continue to serve their authorized
purposes generally first become apparent through inspections and
monitoring that the O&M program funds. Additional measures are
considered and evaluated as new and existing issues are identified.
Generally, the O&M program supports completed works owned or operated
by the Corps, including administrative buildings and laboratories. Work
to be accomplished includes: operation of locks and dams along the
inland waterways; dredging of inland and coastal Federal channels;
operating multi-purpose dams and reservoirs for flood risk reduction,
hydropower, recreation, and related purposes; maintenance and repair of
facilities; monitoring of completed projects; and general management of
Corps facilities and the land associated with these purposes including
work to serve as a responsible steward of the resources on Corps lands.
The fiscal year 2019 Budget provides $213 million in the O&M
account for hydropower activities to maintain power components such as
generators, turbines, transformers and circuit breakers at Corps
hydropower facilities and keep them operating efficiently and
effectively. The Corps also receives approximately $275 million each
year derived from Department of Energy revenues related to power sales,
and from contributed funds. The Corps is the largest hydropower
producer in the U.S., operating 24 percent of the Nation's hydropower
capacity.
reimbursable program
Through the Interagency and International Services (IIS)
Reimbursable Program, the Corps assists other Federal agencies, State,
local, Tribal governments, and those of other countries with timely,
cost-effective solutions. These agencies can turn to the Corps, which
already has these capabilities, rather than develop their own internal
workforce and expertise to act as their design and construction agent.
Such intergovernmental cooperation is effective for agencies and the
taxpayer, and uses the skills and talents that we bring from our Civil
Works and Military Missions programs. The work is principally technical
oversight and management of engineering, environmental, and
construction projects. The work itself is typically performed by
private sector firms and is financed by the agencies we service. We
only accept agency requests that are consistent with our core technical
expertise, in the national interest, and that can be executed without
impacting our primary mission areas.
emergency management
The fiscal year 2019 Budget provides $27 million in funding for the
Flood Control and Coastal Emergencies account to enable the Corps to
prepare for emergency operations in response to natural disasters. The
Budget for the emergency management program also includes $5.5 million
for the National Emergency Preparedness Program.
approaches to flood risk management
The Investigations account also includes $25 million for Corps
efforts, in conjunction with State floodplain management authorities,
to provide technical and planning assistance to enable local
communities to reduce their flood risk, with emphasis on non-
structural approaches. The Budget continues to invest in the
development of interagency teams known as Silver Jackets to help
coordinate Federal assistance in enabling communities to understand
their flood risks and implement non-structural flood risk management
solutions.
The Silver Jackets program is an innovative program, which provides
a national forum to address State and local flood risk management
priorities. The Corps participates in these efforts, along with FEMA
and other Federal agencies. The Budget for the Civil Works program
funds the Corps staff work on these teams. Each team is developed at
the State level. The teams share lessons learned at the State level
with each other, and each team works to apply the available Federal and
State resources effectively to meet its State's flood risk management
priorities. Through these collaborative interagency partnerships, we
are able to target and allocate our Floodplain Management Services and
other technical assistance programs to support State and local
priorities with a focus on non-structural flood risk reduction
measures. These intergovernmental flood risk management teams are now
active in nearly every State.
conclusion
The fiscal year 2019 Budget represents a continuing, fiscally
prudent investment in the Nation's water resources infrastructure and
restoration of aquatic ecosystems. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is
committed to a performance-based Civil Works Program, based on
innovative, resilient, and sustainable risk-informed solutions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of Subcommittee. This concludes
my statement. I look forward to answering any questions you or other
Members of the Subcommittee may have.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, General Semonite.
Commissioner Burman, welcome.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
Bureau of Reclamation
STATEMENT OF HON. BRENDA BURMAN, COMMISSIONER
Ms. Burman. Thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member
Feinstein, and members of the subcommittee for the opportunity
for Assistant Secretary Petty and me to discuss with you the
President's budget for the Bureau of Reclamation.
Reclamation's fiscal year 2019 budget continues to address
water supply challenges in the West to ensure water
reliability, efficient generation of energy, celebration of
America's recreational opportunities, commitments to Tribal
Nations, and environmental responsibilities.
The 2019 budget prioritizes funding for Reclamation's
management responsibilities to provide water and generate power
in the West.
I wanted to make a quick note about hydrology because that
is the backdrop that Reclamation operates within. There is a
map up at your desk of the western United States, and you will
see this year, we have had a very interesting north to south
pattern.
So if you were in the northern States, you are generally
above average. The Missouri, the Big Horn, the Columbia are
above average right now.
But if you travel further south, the Colorado River system
is significantly below average continuing an 18 year plus long
drought. Arizona, New Mexico, the Arkansas are significantly
below average.
California had a very dry December, January, and February.
We were lucky to catch up a little bit in March, but California
is still below average and making it difficult for water users,
both families and farms.
In addressing that, our budget emphasizes the following
principles.
First, water reliability and increased storage capacity. We
cannot deliver reliable water supplies in the West without
strong and safe infrastructure, and additional storage will be
necessary to meet our current and future challenges.
Second, is efficient energy generation. As the Nation's
second largest producer of hydroelectric power, Reclamation's
projects and programs constitute an important driver of
economic growth. Maintaining and modernizing hydropower
infrastructure to improve generation efficiency and reliability
and improve cost-effectiveness is a high propriety.
Third, is providing multipurpose recreation access. Many
Reclamation projects provide multipurpose water resource
development benefits, including recreation.
Lastly, is our mission of conservation. Theodore Roosevelt,
sometimes referred to as the conservation president,
established a legacy through land and wildlife conservation.
Endorsing those principles, Reclamation strives to ensure
future water delivery and power generation through the
responsible use and conservation of its resources.
I believe we will continue to do great things if this
budget is funded. Let me take a moment to provide you an
understanding of some of the exciting projects we have
underway.
In the Great Plains region, home to Senators Hoeven and
Tester, we continue collaborating with our stakeholders to
manage, develop, and protect water resources throughout the
region. Reclamation is also coordinating with numerous local
entities to improve job resilience.
In the Upper Colorado region, home to Senator Udall, we
request funding for two Indian water rights settlement
projects: the Navajo-Gallup Water Supply Project and the Aamodt
Litigation settlement. These settlements provide permanent
water supplies by building and improving water systems for
sustainable municipal, industrial, and domestic water supplies
in those communities.
The Lower Colorado region encompasses the Lower Colorado
River Basin is home to Hoover Dam and includes parts of Senator
Feinstein's State of California. The priority focus here is
preparing for and protecting water users in Arizona, Nevada,
and California from the worst effects of drought that is 18
years and counting.
Over 75 percent of this region's budget is either paid for
directly by our partners or through the sale of hydropower
generation. The region is looking at additional ways to assist
California with their implementation of other important
irrigation and water conservation initiatives.
The Mid-Pacific region, home to the rest of Senator
Feinstein's State and to Senator Merkley's Oregon has suffered
from its own unique set of drought-related problems. Last
year's precipitation was the wettest year on record, but this
year, we have been dry, and we are once again reducing
allocations.
California needs more storage. Despite a recent storm, 2018
will likely be below average and many water users face
challenges this year.
Finally, there is the Pacific Northwest region, home to the
Grand Coulee Dam, one of the largest hydropower facilities in
the world. This region encompasses Senator Murray's Washington,
the rest of Senator Merkley's Oregon, and the State of Idaho.
Our focus here for the coming year will be on the Boise
River Feasibility study; that research is designed to increase
storage opportunities and Reclamation's Anderson Ranch and
Arrowrock Dams, and at the United States Corps of Engineer's
Lucky Peak Dam.
We will also continue with design and implementation
activities at the Lewiston Orchards Water Exchange and as part
of the larger Yakima Integrated Plan, there will be continued
construction at Cle Elum Dam Fish Passage.
Finally, we will implement multiple biological opinion
actions as part of the Columbia and Snake River Salmon Recovery
Program operating under the Federal Columbia River Power
System.
2019 promises to be an exciting year. I again thank the
committee and I am prepared to answer any questions you have of
the Bureau's fiscal year 2019 budget. Thanks.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Brenda Burman
Thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Feinstein, and
members of the Subcommittee for the opportunity to discuss with you the
President's fiscal year 2019 Budget for the Bureau of Reclamation. I am
Brenda Burman, Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation.
The Bureau of Reclamation's fiscal year 2019 Budget provides the
foundation for Reclamation's efforts to deliver water and generate
hydropower, consistent with applicable State and Federal law, in a
cost-effective and environmentally responsible manner in the interest
of the American public. It also supports the Administration's and
Department of the Interior's (Department) goals of ensuring the
efficient generation of energy to meet our economic needs; provision of
secure water supplies for irrigation, people, and the environment;
ensuring outdoor recreation opportunities; and fulfilling our
commitments to Tribal nations. To be successful in achieving these
results, Reclamation will continue to work with a wide range of
stakeholders, including water and power customers, Tribes, State and
local officials, conservation organizations, and others.
This budget focuses on meeting the Department's priorities,
including that of ensuring that the Nation's natural resources we
steward are used for multiple purposes. Working with States, Tribes,
customers, and local entities, Reclamation will maintain secure and
reliable water supplies and power generation and fulfill Indian water
rights obligations, while meeting our environmental responsibilities.
Reclamation plans to focus on opportunities to increase water
resources and supply reliability by expanding cost-effective water
storage opportunities, making investments in modernizing existing
infrastructure, focusing on local water conflicts, and providing
support for water infrastructure development benefiting Native
Americans in order to meet Reclamation's core mission goals.
The 2019 budget prioritizes funding where it most effectively
implements Reclamation's management responsibilities for providing
water and generating power in the West with a priority on water
reliability, efficient energy generation, recreation, and conservation.
As the Nation's largest producer of hydroelectric power, Reclamation's
projects and programs constitute an important driver of economic
growth. Modernizing hydropower infrastructure to improve generation
efficiency and reliability and improve cost effectiveness is a high
priority. Many Reclamation projects provide multi-purpose water
resource development benefits, including recreation. Reclamation's
recreation areas represent some of the most popular areas for water-
based outdoor recreation activities in the Nation. Theodore Roosevelt,
sometimes referred to as the ``conservationist president'', established
a legacy through land and wildlife conservation. By endorsing those
principles, Reclamation will strive to ensure future water delivery and
power generation through the responsible use and conservation of its
resources.
Reclamation is requesting a gross total of $1,049,025 in Federal
appropriations, which is anticipated to be augmented by over $800
million in other Federal and non-Federal funds for fiscal year 2019. Of
the total, $891,017,000 is for the Water and Related Resources account,
which is Reclamation's largest account, $61,000,000 is for the Policy
and Administration account, and $35,000,000 is for the California Bay
Delta account. A total of $62,008,000 is budgeted for the Central
Valley Project Restoration Fund, to be offset by expected discretionary
receipts in the same amount. We will continue to seek to optimize non-
Federal contributions to accomplish more with limited Federal dollars.
Reclamation's budget includes a substantial request for Indian
water rights settlements, continuing the high prioritization of this
program to meet trust and treaty obligations. The fiscal year 2019
Budget includes second year funding to support the Blackfeet Water
Rights Settlement, which was authorized by Water Infrastructure
Improvements for the Nation Act (Public Law 114-322) (WIIN) in December
2016. The WIIN Act requires full funding for the Blackfeet Settlement
by the enforcement date of January 21, 2025. The fiscal year 2019
Budget also continues funding to keep implementation of other water
settlements on track. These include the Navajo-Gallup Water Supply
Project as part of the Navajo-San Juan settlement and the Aamodt
Litigation, Crow, Ak-Chin, San Carlos Apache, Colorado Ute, and Nez
Perce settlements.
Reclamation's mission is to manage, develop, and protect water and
related resources in an economically and environmentally sound manner
in the interest of the American public. As a result, it has designed
the infrastructure it manages to account for significant variability in
hydrology and other weather conditions from year to year. The
robustness of the water system has been tested in recent years through
extreme droughts as well as floods. During the winter of 2017, above
average precipitation in much of the Western United States improved
water supplies after many years of drought. But the long-term impacts
from droughts, such as those in the Colorado River Basin, are not
recovered in a single wet year. Many portions of the West remain
abnormally dry or in moderate to extreme drought according to the most
recent U.S. Drought Monitor. Reclamation must ensure that its
infrastructure is sized and maintained appropriately to handle wet
periods and floods to cost-effectively capture water supplies for drier
times. The investments described in Reclamation's fiscal year 2019
budget will further these efforts so that Reclamation can continue to
provide reliable water and power to the American West.
Reclamation's dams and reservoirs, water conveyances systems, and
power generating facilities are integral components of the Nation's
infrastructure. Effectively managing the benefits provided by these
structures are among the many significant challenges that Reclamation
faces that extend over the next 5 years and beyond in its ability to
achieve progress on its mission objectives. Changing demographics and
competing demands are increasingly impacting already strained systems.
Reclamation's water and power projects and activities throughout the
western United States are not only foundational for essential and safe
water supplies for both agricultural, municipal and industrial
purposes, but also provide energy in the form of hydropower, and
maintain ecosystems that support fish and wildlife, hunting and
recreation, as well as rural economies.
This budget addresses priorities by allocating funds based on
objective and performance-based criteria to most effectively implement
Reclamation's programs and its management responsibilities for its
water and power infrastructure in the West. Water management, improving
and modernizing infrastructure, using sound science to support critical
decisionmaking, finding opportunities to expand capacity, reducing
conflict, and meeting environmental responsibilities were all addressed
in the formulation of the fiscal year 2019 budget. Reclamation
continues to use appropriated resources to address challenges faced in
water resources management and to improve the way it does business.
Additionally, to help address these needs, in fiscal year 2019 and
beyond, Reclamation will continue to explore alternative types of
financing, to include all forms of public-public and public-private
partnerships, and non-Federal cost-sharing.
As the largest supplier and manager of water in the Nation and the
second largest producer of hydroelectric power, Reclamation's projects
and programs are foundational to driving and maintaining economic
growth in hundreds of watershed basins throughout the United States.
Reclamation manages water for agricultural, municipal and industrial
use, and provides flood control and recreation for millions of people.
According to the fiscal year 2016 Department of the Interior Economic
Report fiscal year 2016, Reclamation's activities, including recreation
benefits, provide an economic contribution of $48.1 billion, and
support approximately 388,000 jobs.
Reclamation operates 53 hydroelectric power plants that account for
15 percent of the hydroelectric capacity and generation in the United
States. Annually, Reclamation generates on average 37 billion kilowatt
hours of electricity, enough to meet the annual needs of over 3.5
million households, and collects over $1.0 billion in gross power
revenues for the Federal Government.
Department Wide Reorganization Plan
The Department of the Interior is taking bold steps to better
position itself for the next 100 years. In response to President
Trump's Executive Order on a Comprehensive Plan for Reorganizing the
Executive Branch, Secretary Zinke laid out a vision for a reorganized
Department of the Interior which aligns regional boundaries within
Interior to provide better coordination across the Department to
improve mission delivery and focuses resources in the field. Across the
Department, the 2019 budget includes a total of $17.5 million to start
this effort. The Reclamation budget includes $3.4 million to support
the Department's migration to common regional boundaries to improve
service and efficiency and to ensure that Reclamation staff are in
positions where they can most effectively carryout Reclamation's
mission and serve the American public.
account level details
The fiscal year 2019 budget allocates funds to projects and
programs based on objective, performance-based criteria to most
effectively implement Reclamation's programs and its management
responsibilities for its water and power infrastructure in the West.
The fiscal year 2019 budget emphasizes the following principles:
--Shared Responsibility.--Securing non-Federal cost-share partners to
meet project or program funding needs, and leverage funding
through these collaborative partnerships.
--Merit-Based Funding.--Utilizing competitive processes for the
awarding of grants, contracts, or other government services
based on published criteria that reflect Departmental and
Administrative priorities. The selection of awards is, wherever
possible, guided by high quality evidenced based research and
performance measures.
--Core Mission in Framework of Department of the Interior
Priorities.--Performing the core management responsibilities of
providing water and power in alignment with Department
priorities and the goals in the Strategic Plan of 2018-2022.
The fiscal year 2019 budget for Reclamation totals $1.049 billion
in gross budget authority. The budget is partially offset by
discretionary receipts in the Central Valley Project Restoration Fund
($62 million) resulting in net discretionary budget authority of $987
million.
water and related resources--$891,071,000
The fiscal year 2019 Water and Related Resources budget provides
funding for five major program activities--Water and Energy Management
and Development ($252.9 million), Land Management and Development
($44.3 million), Fish and Wildlife Management and Development ($149.7
million), Facility Operations ($295.8 million), and Facility
Maintenance and Rehabilitation ($148.3 million). The funding proposed
in Reclamation's fiscal year 2019 Budget supports key programs
important to the Department and in line with Administration objectives.
By far, the greatest portion of Reclamation's Water and Related
Resources budget is dedicated to our core mission--managing water
resources. This is accomplished within over 300 Congressionally
authorized projects, each of which has its own authorization. Ensuring
a safe and sound infrastructure plays a critical role in this mission
delivery. In order to modernize our infrastructure, over $88 million is
requested for the Dam Safety program, an additional $45 million is
requested to address extraordinary maintenance items, and over $26
million is requested for site security to protect our infrastructure
investments.
Reclamation's efforts to support water supplies for Tribal nations
are long standing and include certain rural water projects and
implementation of water rights settlement actions. Funding to support
Tribal nations is included within a number of projects. For example,
the Ak Chin Water Rights Settlement Act Project budget of $16.2 million
facilitates delivery of Colorado River water through the Central
Arizona Project to 16,000 acres of irrigated lands on the Ak-Chin
Indian Reservation. The fiscal year 2019 budget continues the
implementation of the Blackfeet Indian Water Rights Settlement enacted
in December 2016, two settlements enacted in December 2010 (Crow and
the Aamodt Litigation) and the 2009 authorized Navajo-Gallup Water
Supply. Additionally, the Columbia/Snake River Salmon Recovery; Animas-
La Plata, San Carlos, Klamath, Trinity River Restoration Program within
the Central Valley Project, Yakima River Basin Water Enhancement
Project, and three of the five authorized rural water projects
(discussed below) benefit Tribal nations.
The Native American Affairs Program budget of $10.6 million
continues support for Reclamation activities with Indian Tribes. These
activities include providing technical support for Indian water rights
settlements, and to assist Tribal governments to develop, manage and
protect their water and related resources. The office also provides
policy guidance for Reclamation's work with Tribes throughout the
organization in such areas as the Indian trust responsibility,
government-to-government consultation, and Indian self-governance and
self-determination.
More generally, Reclamation's budget supports its role in
implementing Indian water rights settlements; this includes $6.3
million to improve coordination and application of expertise to analyze
Indian water settlements more effectively and expediently to strengthen
Department-wide capabilities in the Secretary's Indian Water Rights
Office, and achieve an integrated and systematic approach to Indian
water rights negotiations.
Reclamation has identified several key areas for investment where
coordination with other Department bureaus will leverage results to
more effectively achieve mission outcomes. Reclamation's fiscal year
2019 budget for research and development (R&D) programs include both
Science and Technology, and Desalination and Water Purification--both
of which focus on Reclamation's mission of water and power deliveries.
The Science and Technology program supports engineering innovation
that promotes economic growth, supports maintaining and improving our
water and power infrastructure, and spurs continued generation of
energy. Program outcomes also enable reliable water and power delivery
to our customers, improve safety, limit the impacts of invasive
species, and ensure that Reclamation can meet its environmental
compliance responsibilities. These activities support the
Administration's priorities for the fiscal year 2019 Budget, including
job creation by supporting technology transfer activities that may lead
to new business opportunities for private industry. The program also
supports Administration priorities related to maintaining and improving
our water and power infrastructure by partnering with the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers to foster research projects to develop technologies
that extend the operating life and reduce maintenance costs of
Reclamation's structures. The Administration priority related to energy
from all sources is supported by hydropower research that ensures that
Reclamation is maximizing reliability, reducing maintenance costs, and
exploring new energy development opportunities. Research on safety is
ensuring our workers can perform their jobs safely and securely.
The Desalination and Water Purification program priorities include
development of improved and innovative methods of desalination and
reducing costs to develop new water supplies. The research and testing
funded out of this program supports the Administration's priorities for
the fiscal year 2019 Budget--including job creation--by supporting
innovative new solutions that spur the creation of new businesses by
entrepreneurs and by advancing Reclamation's competitive edge in the
area of water treatment and desalination.
Reclamation's mission to ensure continued water delivery and power
generation cannot be accomplished without meeting our legal
environmental responsibilities. Reclamation meets these
responsibilities on its individual projects through a large number of
activities, including Reclamation's Endangered Species Act recovery
programs, and other programs that contribute towards these efforts,
such as the Columbia/Snake River Salmon Recovery Program, the Middle
Rio Grande Project Collaborative Program, the San Juan River Recovery
Implementation Program, the Upper Colorado Recovery Implementation
Program, and the Multi-Species Conservation Program within the Lower
Colorado River Operations Program, among many others.
Among other efforts, Reclamation helps address the West's water
challenges through the WaterSMART competitive grant program. This
program helps local water stakeholders address current and future water
shortages, including drought; degraded water quality; increased demands
for water and energy from growing populations; environmental water
requirements; and the potential for decreased water supply availability
due to drought, population growth, and increased water requirements for
environmental purposes.
central valley project restoration fund--$62,008,000
This fund was established by the Central Valley Project Improvement
Act, Title XXXIV of Public Law 102-575, October 30, 1992. The budget of
$62.0 million is expected to be offset fully by discretionary receipts
to the maximum extent possible based on what can be collected from
project beneficiaries under provisions of Section 3407(d) of the Act.
The discretionary receipts are adjusted on an annual basis to maintain
payments totaling $30.0 million (October 1992 price levels) on a 3-year
rolling average basis. The budget of $62.0 million for the CVPRF
(Central Valley Project Restoration Fund) was developed after
considering the effects of the San Joaquin River Restoration Settlement
Act (Public Law 111-11, March 30, 2009), which redirects certain fees,
estimated at $2.0 million in fiscal year 2019, collected from the
Friant Division water users to the San Joaquin Restoration Fund.
california bay-delta restoration fund--$35,000,000
The CALFED Bay-Delta Restoration Act (Public Law 108-361), as
amended, authorized multiple Federal agencies to participate in the
implementation of the CALFED Bay-Delta Program as outlined in the
August 28, 2000, Record of Decision (ROD) for the CALFED Bay-Delta
Program Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement and Environmental
Impact Report. The legislation directed the implementing agencies to
undertake a set of broadly described programmatic actions identified in
the ROD to the extent authorized under existing law. In addition, the
Act authorized $389.0 million in Federal appropriations for new and
expanded authorities. The Water Infrastructure Improvement for the
Nation Act (Public Law 114-322) dated December 16, 2016 reauthorized
the CALFED Bay Delta Authorization Act through fiscal year 2019.
The fiscal year 2019 Budget of $35.0 million implements priority
activities pursuant to Public Law 108-361. Six Federal agencies--the
Department of the Interior, Department of Commerce, Department of
Agriculture, Department of the Army, Environmental Protection Agency,
and the Council on Environmental Quality--work together to ensure that
the Federal actions and investments the Administration is undertaking
are coordinated in a fashion to help address California's current water
supply and ecological challenges.
policy and administration--$61,000,000
The $61.0 million budget will be used to: (1) develop, evaluate,
and directly implement Reclamation-wide policy, rules, and regulations,
including actions under the Government Performance and Results Act; and
(2) manage and perform functions that are not properly chargeable to
specific projects or program activities covered by separate funding
authority.
This completes my statement. I would be happy to answer any
questions.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Commissioner Burman.
Dr. Petty, welcome.
STATEMENT OF TIMOTHY R. PETTY, PH.D., ASSISTANT
SECRETARY FOR WATER AND SCIENCE
Dr. Petty. Thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member
Feinstein, and also the whole subcommittee that is here today.
I look forward to discussing with you the President's
budget for the Bureau of Reclamation, as well as the Central
Utah Project Completion Act, which is also responsible in the
Water and Science hallway. I appreciate your ongoing support of
our programs.
The overall Department of the Interior's 2019 budget
request is $11.7 billion, which emphasizes Interior's role in,
one, protecting the Nation's natural resources, advancing
America's natural energy, providing vital scientific
information for responsibly managing our resources, as well as
energy development, and lastly, honoring our trust
responsibilities to the Native Americans.
The Bureau of Reclamation's activities include, in a
broader area, not only Reclamation as the Commissioner talked
about, but contributes more than $48 billion in economic
resources and supports over 388,000 jobs each year, which was
also mentioned in opening.
Reclamation's 37 billion kilowatt hours of electricity
provides for more than $1 billion in gross power revenues for
the Federal Government.
The Bureau of Reclamation works with States, Tribes, local
governments, and nongovernment organizations to provide
reliable water, as well as power supply for the West.
The 2019 budget continues efforts to address the challenges
of water availability. Interior's $1 billion total budget
request for Reclamation is to invest in our water, as well as
power infrastructure, facilitating the delivery of water to 31
million people in the West. In addition, our program invests in
ecosystem protection and restoration, so that we can continue
to supply water and power reliability as we have done
historically.
This budget also continues to strengthen our Tribal Nations
by implementing Indian water rights settlements. We are
proposing that Reclamation invest $127.4 million in fiscal 2019
toward fulfilling those responsibilities.
Interior's budget furthers our commitment to developing
domestic energy resources in order to make America stronger, as
well as energy independent.
Hydropower, as mentioned, is a renewable and reliable
resource providing clean energy to the western United States.
It is the Nation's largest renewable energy resource, and the
Bureau of Reclamation is the second largest producer of
hydropower in the United States.
We support the President's efforts to create a leaner, more
efficient government, and the Bureau of Reclamation will be
actively involved in bringing forward the most promising ideas
to improve government effectiveness and efficiency, and to spur
economic growth.
For example, Reclamation has developed a proposal to
facilitate the transfer of title of certain Reclamation
projects when such transfers are beneficial to all parties.
This will allow irrigation districts and water managers to make
their own decisions to improve water management at the local
level.
Finally, Interior's budget request includes resources for
the Central Utah Project Completion Act, which falls under the
jurisdiction of the Assistant Secretary for Water and Science.
The 2019 budget for this Office is $8 million. Of this amount,
$3.4 million will be available for planning and construction
activities administered by the Central Utah Water Conservancy
District, continuing our important partnerships and the ongoing
construction of the Utah Lakes System Facility.
The budget also continues Interior's required program
oversight activity and Endangered Species Recovery Program
implementation through the Department's CUPCA (Central Utah
Project Completion Act) office.
The Central Utah Project annually provides 62,000 acre feet
of water for irrigation and over 100,000 acre feet for
municipal and industrial purposes supplying water to nearly
400,000 people; a big portion of the State of Utah.
In keeping my opening comments brief, I would like to
submit my whole testimony into the record.
Thank you again for your support of our programs.
I am happy to take any questions that you might have at
this time.
Thank you.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Timothy R. Petty, Ph.D.
Thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Feinstein, and
members of this Subcommittee for the opportunity to discuss with you
the President's fiscal year 2019 budget for the Department of the
Interior's Bureau of Reclamation and Central Utah Project Completion
Act office. I am Tim Petty, Interior's Assistant Secretary for Water
and Science, and I appreciate your ongoing support of our programs.
The 2019 budget request is $11.7 billion for Department of the
Interior's programs. This budget features targeted investments to
advance American energy dominance, enhance public access to public
lands, and strengthen the economy through infrastructure investment,
regulatory relief, and fiscal responsibility. The Department's 2019
budget reflects the Administration's commitment to strike the right
balance of development and conservation of America's resources to
advance important national objectives.
generating revenue and utilizing natural resources
The Department of the Interior 2019 budget emphasizes the crucial
contributions the Department's diverse missions make to the Nation's
economy. According to Interior's latest economic report, Interior
supports $254 billion in estimated economic benefit, while direct
grants and payments to States, Tribes, and local communities provide an
estimated $10 billion in economic benefit. The Bureau of Reclamation's
activities, including recreation, contribute over $48 billion in
economic activity and support over 388,000 jobs each year. The
availability of water is vitally important to communities and to
growing healthy economies across the West. To ensure that millions of
customers continue to receive essential water supplies and
hydroelectric power, the 2019 budget includes $1.0 billion for
Reclamation's water resource programs.
Interior's budget request for Reclamation invests in our water and
power infrastructure, facilitating the delivery of water to 31 million
people in the West. This budget also continues to strengthen our tribal
nations by implementing Indian water rights settlements and furthering
the construction of water delivery systems that support Tribes and
rural communities. Interior's request includes $127.4 million for
Reclamation in 2019 towards fulfillment of this responsibility.
Interior's budget furthers our commitment to developing domestic
energy resources in order to make America stronger and boost the
Nation's economy. Hydropower is the Nation's largest renewable energy
resource and the Bureau of Reclamation is the second largest producer
of hydropower in the United States.
Finally, Interior's budget request includes the Central Utah
Project Completion Act Office, which falls under the jurisdiction of
the Assistant Secretary for Water and Science. The Central Utah Project
annually provides 62,000 acre-feet of water for irrigation of over
30,000 acres and over 100,000 acre-feet for municipal and industrial
purposes, supplying water to nearly 400,000 people. This water will
help address the water demands of the growing population in the Wasatch
Front, one of the fastest growing areas in the Nation.
advancing energy dominance
The Department has a significant role to play in securing an energy
future for our Nation that achieves America's energy dominance. Through
increasing access to public lands and alleviating unnecessary
regulatory burdens while balancing conservation objectives, the
Department is working to ensure that the Nation's ``all-of-the-above''
energy development strategy includes not only conventional sources, but
also hydropower and other renewable sources.
Reclamation's 2019 request includes $1.1 million to support
hydropower development initiatives. These initiatives include
activities designed to achieve operational efficiencies at Reclamation
hydropower facilities and to promote the development of new, non-
Federal hydropower on existing, non-powered Reclamation infrastructure.
Funding will provide for technological and operational innovation, as
well as the policy execution and oversight of nonFederal hydropower
development at existing Reclamation facilities through Lease of Power
privilege or Federal Energy Regulatory Commission licensing.
The 2019 budget also supports innovation by using prize
competitions to target difficult scientific and technological problems
related to infrastructure, water availability and hydropower
generation.
conserving our land and water and expanding outdoor access
As the largest wholesaler of water in the country, Reclamation has
a leading role--in coordination with other Federal agencies, State
officials, local water users, and interested stakeholders--in
developing strategies to help ensure water supplies for future
generations. As managers of critical water resources, Reclamation
ensures millions of customers receive the water and power supplies that
support a healthy economy. To help address the many challenges faced by
water managers, Interior continues the implementation of the WaterSMART
Program. The funding proposed in Reclamation's 2019 WaterSMART budget
supports collaboration with the US Geological Survey and our non-
Federal partners in efforts to address emerging water demands and water
shortage issues in the West, to promote water conservation and improved
water management, and to support local innovation efforts to stretch
water supplies.
The WaterSMART funding request for Reclamation in 2019 is $19.9
million. This investment includes $10.0 million to continue WaterSMART
conservation grants and $3.0 million for Title XVI water recycling and
reuse research grants, and is highly leveraged through partner
costshare funding.
In addition, Interior's budget request includes $164.9 million for
US Geological Survey Water Resource programs. These programs collect
and deliver hydrologic data, model and analyze hydrologic systems, and
conduct research and development leading to new understanding of and
methods for gathering water data. The budget includes $69.7 million for
National Water Quality Program activities, and $64.9 million for the
Groundwater and Streamflow Information Program, which will maintain the
national streamgage networks to provide long-term data collection and
development of analysis tools. The budget also includes $30.4 million
to assess water availability and use in support of the National Water
Census.
Reclamation projects play a major role in meeting the increasing
public demand for water-based outdoor recreation opportunities.
Reclamation projects include approximately 6.5 million acres of land
and water and over 200 recreation areas available to the public. This
includes 12 designated National Recreation Areas that are managed by
the National Park Service or United States Forest Service. Through non-
Federal partnerships, Reclamation assists local communities in
attracting recreation-related investments and involves local citizens
in the decisionmaking process.
Invasive Mussels: With increased use of Reclamation reservoirs for
recreation comes the increased need for monitoring and early detection
of invasive quagga and zebra mussels, and for outreach and education to
prevent infestation. The 2019 Reclamation budget includes $7.6 million
for prevention, early detection and monitoring, containment and control
at existing facilities, outreach and education, and research focused on
these issues. This funding will support Reclamation's efforts to
proactively stop the spread of invasive mussels in the West, including
preventing the spread of zebra and quagga mussels into the Columbia
River Basin.
The US Geological Survey is also actively working to detect and
respond to invasive species, including invasive mussels. Interior's
budget provides $19.3 million across several USGS programs in support
of invasive species detection and response efforts and research.
modernizing our organization and infrastructure for the next 100 years
Reclamation's dams, water conveyances, and power generating
facilities are integral components of our Nation's infrastructure that
provide basic water and power services to millions of customers in
hundreds of basins throughout the Western United States. Effectively
managing the benefits that these structures provide is among the
significant challenges facing Reclamation over the coming years.
Reclamation manages 492 dams throughout the 17 Western States.
Reclamation's budget request includes funding for specific
Extraordinary Maintenance activities that are central to mission
objectives of operating and maintaining projects to ensure delivery of
water and power. Through constant monitoring and assessment,
Reclamation strives to most effectively use its limited resources to
ensure dam safety and to maintain the ability to store and divert water
and to generate hydropower. Reclamation's 2019 budget includes $45.0
million for extraordinary maintenance, repairs and replacements.
The Dam Safety Program continues to be one of Reclamation's highest
priorities, utilizing the latest information and technology to evaluate
and address the most pressing safety risks in order to ensure
reliability and protect the downstream public. The Dam Safety Program
has identified 363 high and significant hazard dams. Reclamation
evaluates dams and monitors performance to ensure that risks do not
exceed current Reclamation public protection guidelines. The 2019
budget request includes $88.1 million for Reclamation's Dam Safety
Program.
fulfilling our trust responsibilities
The Department of the Interior upholds the Federal Government's
unique trust responsibilities to federally recognized Tribes, American
Indians and Alaskan Natives. Interior's 2019 budget continues to
support Federal responsibilities and tribal needs related to education,
social services, infrastructure, and stewardship of land, water, and
other natural resources.
The 2019 budget includes $173.0 million across the Department to
honor Indian land and water Settlement commitments. This includes
$127.4 million in Reclamation and $45.6 million in BIA. The budget
continues to meet Federal responsibilities outlined in enacted land and
water rights claim settlements with Indian Tribes to ensure they have
access to land and water to meet domestic, economic, and cultural
needs. Also within the Reclamation request, $10.6 million will support
Reclamation's Native American Affairs program to work with and support
Tribes in the resolution of their water rights claims, which also
strengthens the Department's capabilities to achieve an integrated and
systematic approach to Indian water rights negotiations.
management and reforms
Interior is taking bold steps to better position itself for the
next 100 years. In response to the President's Executive Order on a
Comprehensive Plan for Reorganizing the Executive Branch, Interior is
working to reorganize its operating structure to establish unified
regional boundaries to provide better coordination across the
Department to improve mission delivery and focus resources in the
field. The Department's 2019 budget includes a total of $17.5 million
for this effort.
In addition, the Department is pursuing ideas to improve government
effectiveness and efficiency, and to spur economic growth. For example,
Reclamation has developed a proposal to facilitate the transfer of
title of certain Reclamation projects and facilities when such
transfers are beneficial. While Reclamation has engaged in efforts
related to title transfer in the past on a case by case basis, this
broader initiative will go further to facilitate greater local control
of water infrastructures to allow local water managers to make their
own decisions to improve water management at the local level, while
allowing Reclamation to focus management efforts on larger projects
with a greater Federal nexus.
central utah project
The Central Utah Project Completion Act (CUPCA), Titles II--VI of
Public Law 102-575, provides for completion of the Central Utah Project
(CUP) by the Central Utah Water Conservancy District (District). The
Act also authorized funding for fish, wildlife, and recreation
mitigation and conservation; established an account in the Treasury for
deposit of these funds and other contributions; established the Utah
Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation Commission to coordinate
mitigation and conservation activities; and provided for the Ute Indian
Rights Settlement.
The 2019 budget for the CUPCA program is $8.0 million. Of this
amount, $3.4 million will be available for planning and construction
activities administered by the Central Utah Water Conservancy District,
continuing our partnership in the ongoing construction of the Utah Lake
System facilities. In addition, $898,000 will be transferred to the
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation Account for use by the
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation Commission. The 2019
budget also continues Interior's required program oversight activities
and endangered species recovery program implementation through the
Department's CUPCA Office.
conclusion
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the
President's 2019 budget for the Department of the Interior's Bureau of
Reclamation and Central Utah Project Completion Act. I look forward to
working with the Committee to implement this budget. This concludes my
testimony and I am happy to answer questions.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Dr. Petty.
We will now begin a 5 minute round of questions. Mr. James,
let me begin with you. I have a few questions about the Inland
Waterways Trust Fund.
In 2014, my notes show that we raised taxes. We increased
the fee on a gallon of gasoline from $.20 to $.29 per gallon.
Is that correct?
Mr. James. Yes, sir.
Senator Alexander. And increasing the fee, increased the
amount of money deposited into the Trust Fund by about $20
million a year. And so, on the average, it has been about $107
million a year.
Is that correct?
Mr. James. Yes, sir. It is.
Senator Alexander. And the President's budget estimates
that the Trust Fund will collect about that same amount in the
upcoming year, $104 million.
Is that correct?
Mr. James. My understanding, sir, it is close to $108
million.
Senator Alexander. So maybe $108 million. We raise taxes on
the large barge owners who said, ``We will pay higher taxes if
you will fix the locks.'' And so, now we are collecting $104
million from them.
How much of that $104 million does the budget propose to
spend?
Mr. James. About $5.3 million.
Senator Alexander. About $5.3 million out of $104 million.
So if you are not proposing to spend what we are already
collecting, why would you propose raising taxes further on
waterway users?
Mr. James. My understanding, sir, is that the Corps
foresees a lot of work that is going to be done in the future.
And at the present rate of the taxing, the money would not be
there.
Senator Alexander. Well, Mr. James, that might be true, but
if you are not spending what you are already collecting, why
would you collect more?
Mr. James. I cannot argue with you, sir.
Senator Alexander. All right.
General Semonite, let me ask you this. Over the past 4
years, thanks to your good work and the Corps of Engineers, you
have restarted construction of the Chickamauga Lock.
I believe I remember that you visited with me in my office
and said that you were of the belief that efficient management
of lock construction meant that it was better not to start and
stop, but once you start to keep going.
Am I remembering right?
General Semonite. You definitely are, sir.
Senator Alexander. Under the budget, how much money could
you spend this next year on Chickamauga Lock?
General Semonite. Sir, we have done a lot of research on
all of those locks and we identify the high priority. You
talked about the big four. Right now, we estimate a capability
of $78 million in the 2018 timeframe. We have also gone out to
2019, 2020, and 2021.
Senator Alexander. In 2018 for Chickamauga Lock?
General Semonite. That would be a capability we could put
in if, in fact, the plan is approved. Yes, sir.
Senator Alexander. But what is 2019?
General Semonite. Sir, the 2019 number would be on the
order of $99.5 million.
Senator Alexander. That is how much you could spend.
General Semonite. We could, capability-wise.
Senator Alexander. You could spend.
General Semonite. A logical time to be able to get that
amount of construction in the ground. Yes, sir.
Senator Alexander. Yes, but would the amount of money that
is in this budget allow you to fund all four of those locks at
the level you could fund them at?
General Semonite. Not in the budget, sir, but of course,
what Congress has done is given us that extra plus-up.
Therefore, we have been charged to be able to figure out where
is the best place to use that. I have to submit to Mr. James
that logical plan and then he will continue to be able to
approve that.
Senator Alexander. But what we have done the last 4 years
is, in the Congress, we have not paid much attention to the
President's budget.
What we have done is try, over the last 4 years, on the
Inland Waterway Trust Fund and the Harbor Maintenance Fund, to
set targets that would allow you to continue on Inland Waterway
to fund all four of those within the capability that you have.
It would be my goal to try to do that this year again.
General Semonite. And that is our plan, sir.
Senator Alexander. Yes, if you have the money.
General Semonite. If we had the money.
Senator Alexander. If you have the money. Now, let us go,
Mr. James, to the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. In the Inland
Waterway Trust Fund, we at least do not have much of a balance
in there. We have spent about everything in it.
But in the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund, how much balance
do we have today?
Mr. James. About, I think it is----
Senator Alexander. I think it is about $9 billion and I
have about 40 seconds left.
Mr. James. Yes, sir. It is $9 or $10 billion.
Senator Alexander. I am going to go pretty fast.
How much are you proposing to collect in revenues for the
Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund in the upcoming year 2019?
Mr. James. A little over a billion and a half.
Senator Alexander. How much?
Mr. James. One-and-a-half.
Senator Alexander. Billion?
Mr. James. Billion.
Senator Alexander. So that would take it up over $10 or
$11.
How much are you proposing to spend from the Trust Fund in
the year 2019?
Mr. James. Around $950 million.
Senator Alexander. Is not the target for the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund established in the 2014 legislation
about $1.44 billion? Was that not the congressional target?
Mr. James. Yes, sir. It was.
Senator Alexander. So you would spend a lot less than that.
Mr. James. Yes, sir.
Senator Alexander. Well, I would say--and now my time is
up, and I want to set a good example--but I know that Chairman
Shelby and the Vice Chairman Senator Feinstein, and others of
us will want to try to at least have our target for next year,
and you are about one-half billion dollars short. So we need to
go to work on that.
Senator Feinstein.
Mr. James. Thank you, sir.
Senator Feinstein. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I have a question for both Mr. James and Ms. Burman.
I will never forget the Sunday afternoon just over a year
ago when we heard that the collapse of Oroville Dam's emergency
spillway was imminent. It would threaten 180,000 lives if it
collapsed.
We were very fortunate. The disaster was averted. But I
think it was really a wakeup call because the spillways were
not in good condition. An independent panel of experts just
issued a report in January that recommended specific
improvements in dam safety. This committee has asked and
directed each of you to report back to us on how you will
respond to the Oroville independent panel's report.
Do you have any news or views on this that you might tell
us this afternoon? Maybe we will just begin with you, Mr.
James.
Mr. James. Yes, ma'am. Thank you very much.
I will tell you that, of course, Oroville was not a Corps
dam, but we have been very active with the people there at that
dam site to see what did happen, why did it happen, and analyze
all of that. I think we have a meeting with you on May 7, if I
am not mistaken, to go over the details of what has been
discovered about that.
That also led us to take harder looks at the Corps' dams
around the country, and be more specific and serious about dam
safety. In my experience in this business, with dams, those
overflow structures, spillways are usually what do go out once
they overtop. Through age, and settling, and desiccation of the
concrete, that is what happens to them.
We are looking at that very closely.
Senator Feinstein. But you have no findings or suggestions
at this time?
Mr. James. I think probably the Corps does. There are none
that reached my desk, ma'am. So I will not tell you what I do
not have. But the General might speak more to that. I do not
know.
Senator Feinstein. General, can you comment?
General Semonite. Senator, you are aware, we have been out
there several times. We are working very, very closely with the
Oroville team to be able to make sure that we are learning. We
do have a lot of lessons learned from that. We have shared
those back, just like the Secretary said.
We have also seen the same thing in Puerto Rico. The dam
down there failed; the spillway. So we are trying to make sure
that not only do the Federal dams learn from those, but we go
back and build-in to our body of knowledge, what did we learn
from that, and continue to be able to build that into our dam
safety center.
Senator Feinstein. Well, what did you learn from Oroville?
General Semonite. I think on this specific one you have to
watch out for any kind of erosion underneath there. We can give
you a technical report. But it really goes back to the
inspections. You cannot just assume that because it looks good
on the top, that it is going to be strong enough to carry that
water load.
Senator Feinstein. Was the cement or concrete thick enough?
General Semonite. Ma'am, I am not prepared to be able to
specifically say here what went right or wrong with respect to
Oroville. I think that is something that the team continues to
be able to come up with their assessment on.
Senator Feinstein. I do not want to put you on the spot,
but I would appreciate any observations. The Corps has been
very silent. This is the first time it has happened in a
quarter of a century. It was very serious and it could have
been disastrous.
So it would be very helpful to me as we carry out this
budget and asks of the Department, that I know what the problem
was.
General Semonite. Ma'am, we met with you several times. We
will come and lay this out for you in your office at any time
you would like.
Senator Feinstein. I would appreciate that.
General Semonite. Sound good?
Senator Feinstein. Ms. Burman, I know you have extensive
experience with California water. I look forward to working
with you. I would like to discuss a little bit about desal with
climate change and population growth causing ever-growing
challenges.
It seems to me that we ought to be really putting some
emphasis, particularly, on co-states, on desal and particularly
helping get that final membrane, which changes the energy
coefficient from negative to positive.
So as you know, the recent omnibus directed Reclamation by
April 30 of this year to develop guidelines and criteria for
administering the new desal program, and to issue a funding
opportunity announcement.
Is the Bureau on schedule to comply with this?
Ms. Burman. Senator Feinstein, Reclamation plans to
implement the amendments to the Water Desalination Act of 1996
contained in Section 4009 of the WIIN Act through a new funding
opportunity announcement in the spring of 2018.
This funding opportunity announcement will be used to
allocate $18 million in funding. That is $6 million from fiscal
year 2017 and $12 million from fiscal year 2018. This money
goes towards construction and on the ground opportunities.
I would also just mention that at our Research and
Demonstration Program, we have a competitive funding
opportunity announcement out on the street right now that
closes May 1. And again, that is for more research and
demonstration processes. But we will this spring, and we are
working very hard on it, we will this spring be announcing the
opportunity.
Senator Feinstein. Well, thank you, and you anticipated the
question, which I appreciate too.
Quickly, you said California needs more storage, and that
is certainly true. We are waiting and we have waited for 15
years now for Reclamation to complete the feasibility studies
on sites Los Vaqueros and Temperance Flat.
Can you move that along, please?
Ms. Burman. That seems like a fair request, Senator
Feinstein.
We are working very hard to complete feasibility on the
Temperance Flat study by the end of August. We are working very
hard to finish sites reservoir feasibility study by the end of
August, and we are working on Los Vaqueros too. We are
projecting that that would be in November of 2018.
Senator Feinstein. Thank you very much. I appreciate your
knowledge. Thank you.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Senator Feinstein.
Chairman Shelby.
Senator Shelby. Thank you, Senator Alexander.
Secretary James, as I said earlier, the deepening and the
widening of the Port of Mobile is a top priority of mine----
Mr. James. Yes.
Senator Shelby [continuing]. As well as most of my
constituents.
Given your 30-plus years serving on the Mississippi River
Commission, I know you understand the importance of our
Nation's ports as we have discussed here, both inland and
coastal, and how they contribute to economic growth.
I am looking forward, hopefully, working with you to
achieve this goal, and I would like to invite you to meet with
me at the Port of Mobile. The General is very familiar with all
of this, but you might be. In the near future, maybe we can
work this out.
My question is, it is my understanding that the funds
Congress appropriated in the most recent supplemental
legislation have yet to be disbursed to the Corps.
Is that correct? And if so, has this caused delay in some
of the issues that you are working on in the Corps?
Mr. James. Yes, sir, it is.
We have completed the General Reevaluation Report. The
Water Resources Development Act of 2014, allows the Secretary
to proceed directly to the preconstruction engineering design
upon the approval of the Director's Report and subject to the
availability of funding. The construction funding would not
require a new start decision, but would require execution of a
project partnership agreement once construction is funded.
As far as where it is in our system, I cannot answer that
for you, sir, right now.
Senator Shelby. Would you do it for the record?
Mr. James. I will take it for the record and get it
directly to you. I think there are two different ways to do
that and there is somebody who warned me about that; take it
for the record or something else, but either way.
Senator Shelby. Get back in touch with me and the Chairman.
Mr. James. Thank you very much, sir. I will do that. I
promise. And I think I do have a trip scheduled to visit with
the people at the Mobile Harbor right away.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
Mr. James. Thank you.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
General, you are very familiar with the Port of Mobile. We
have talked about this in several hearings and so forth.
Where are we there? I know there is a study going on and it
seems to be promising. I know the Port of Mobile is growing by
leaps and bounds on container freight and so forth. The
deepening and the widening would probably move it way on up
from the 10th busiest port in the U.S. on up.
Where are we?
General Semonite. Senator, first of all, I think I have
hands-on experience doing about 20 different port deepenings.
We see great merit in the Mobile Harbor, to be able to deepen
that. You are very familiar.
We are looking to go 49 feet deep, about another 100 feet
wide for three miles.
Right now, the GRR (General Reevaluation Report), Mr. James
is----
Senator Shelby. Why 49 instead of 50? Why not go to 50 feet
and make it even?
General Semonite. Sir, we will come and lay that out, but
this is what the study does; is it gives us that
recommendation. So we will continue to take your advice.
Right now, I plan on signing that study in November 2019. I
would like to go to the left and try to get it done faster. As
soon as that is done, Mr. James has the authority to go ahead
and start PED. We need money for PED. So although that is going
to be in the next fiscal year, we would recommend that if, in
fact----
Senator Shelby. What if we got it this year?
General Semonite. If we got it this year, we could put it
in the 2018 work plan. We do not anticipate that, so right now
we are assuming that that will be in the 2019 work plan. That
is still something that would have to be approved, but that
would allow us to keep momentum right from the GRR right
through design.
Senator Shelby. Well, I am going to work with the chairman
and ranking member regarding that.
Let us go back into something Senator Feinstein raised and
Senator Alexander, and that is the Harbor Maintenance Fund. We
have, what, $9 billion in it right now, very little money in
the other fund. We have all these needs that deal with the
economy of this country and our ports.
It is up to Congress to decide whether to spend that money
or not. You want to spend or there is a recommendation to spend
$900 million, I think, is the question Senator Alexander asked.
And you have, maybe with this year's receipts, $10 billion.
There are great needs out there.
What is the problem? This is not borrowed money. Can you
answer that now or is this something beyond today's hearing?
Mr. James. Well, I can answer it from my own words, but I
do not think that is the answer you are looking for.
The Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund and the Inland Waterway
Trust Fund are slippery animals, very slippery animals. They
are not what I thought they were when I took this job. And
getting the money out of them, if you are a towboat operator
and you were charged a tax to put money into Inland, then you
ought to be able to get that tax right straight back out and
work on a dam, or dredging, or something.
From my understanding at this point, which is new to me,
with budgeting, and I apologize, but you are not able just to
reach in and get that back out. By the way, from what has been
explained to me, it goes against the $5 billion cap on the
budget process as well.
Senator Shelby. Well, I know Senator Alexander has worked
in this area a long time, but just listening to the
conversation and the questions. You have this money and you
have these needs, and it is up to Congress, maybe this
committee, to appropriate and meet these needs that we have.
And we have this money there.
We have to figure out, Mr. Chairman, how to do this and do
it right, rather than just sit on it and let our infrastructure
go.
Senator Alexander. Mr. Chairman, I think every member of
this committee would look forward to working with you to do
that on these various projects.
Senator Shelby. We all have needs from Oregon to Louisiana,
from New Hampshire to Alaska on here. If we have money that is
for that, and it is not borrowed money, and we are just sitting
on it--it might be slippery--but something is wrong, and we
need to figure it out here in this committee. Maybe we can, Mr.
Chairman.
Senator Alexander. We will hope for a generous allocation
that would give us a lot to work with.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Senator Shelby, for being
here.
Senator Tester.
Senator Tester. It makes me wish I had some ports in
Montana, Mr. Chairman.
Now, I think maybe the real question is if we cannot get it
out, where is it going? We ought to fix that.
These are for you, Ms. Burman.
First of all, thank you all for being here. I appreciate
it. I want to talk a little bit about the rural water projects,
a 71 percent cut down to $33.9 million funding nationwide for
rural water projects.
I mean, it is almost so small, it is nonexistent. I do not
want to put you on the spot, because my guess is you know that.
These water projects are not free. They cost money. It is like
any infrastructure.
The real question here is I happen to have two of them in
my State, North Central and Dry Prairie. I will tell you that
20 years ago, they were working on these projects. They were
$100 million apiece.
We are not going to get this projects built until after the
middle of this century at this rate, if at all. Water is life
and critical for economic development.
Can you tell me--and I have had this conversation with
other members in the Administration and the past administration
too, I will add--that if you do not advocate for adequate
dollars, how do you expect us to put it in? That is the
question.
Ms. Burman. Thank you, Senator. Rural water projects and
water economy is very important to this Administration.
When you look at the fiscal year 2019 request for rural
water projects, they are very difficult numbers. We had very
difficult budget numbers to meet this year.
We had to prioritize what is first, what are our existing
responsibilities. So $20 million is going towards Operation and
Maintenance of current projects and the remaining funds were
prioritized for Tribal projects.
Senator Tester. All right. So let me ask you, and I will
get to that in a second with Mr. Petty.
Did you guys send in different numbers and did OMB knock
them down?
Ms. Burman. We work with the Department and the
Administration on all of our budget numbers, sir.
Senator Tester. Okay. You do not have to really answer
that.
Did you put in a different set of numbers and have OMB
knock it down? It is okay if it did. I am not going to hold it
against you or Director Mulvaney.
Ms. Burman. We work with the Department and the
Administration. The Administration submits our requests and
that is our process.
Senator Tester. You are a good soldier.
So we have St. Mary Diversion Dam, a lot of economic
activity, drinking water for 18,000. It irrigates 120,000. I
can give you statistics on the Milk River.
We are requesting $1.9 million for this project. The design
work itself is going to be $2.5 million.
How do we even complete the design work to get it going?
And we need to get going on this. I do not know if you have
ever been there. Have you ever been out there?
Ms. Burman. Not yet.
Senator Tester. You are invited.
Ms. Burman. Thank you.
Senator Tester. It is an engineer piece of genius work and
it is over 100 years old. It has been worn out for 20 years, at
least. It is going to blow up. I am not talking about blow up,
but it is not going to service here pretty quick.
So the question is, once again, this is a line item that is
just absolutely underfunded, unequivocally. It is the same kind
of question. What are we supposed to do about that? Is it the
goal here just we are going to bump it up or you just expect
Congress to do that, right?
Ms. Burman. The St. Mary Diversion Dam faces a number of
issues. It is, as you said, it is a very old. It has reached
the end of its useful life. We are trying to work very hard
with the delegation, with the locals to also find ways for it
to be an affordable project for the folks who get water from
that place.
Senator Tester. Yes, you are exactly right. The irrigators
downstream, it has to be affordable, otherwise it does not do
any good. Then the Milk flows up into Canada. There is an issue
there. So it brings in the State Department. It is complicated,
but just to start off the design work, we just have to have
more than that.
Mr. Petty, I will say that in your presentation, and I was
not going to ask this question, but I have to now. You said you
have $127.4 million for Indian Water Settlements.
Dr. Petty. That is right.
Senator Tester. That sounds like a great sum of money.
Blackfeet alone is $400 million. You have Salish and Kootenai
right in front of you now and they are negotiating off of $1
billion. That is just two tribes in Montana.
So the question is that even though $127.4 million looks
good, it really is a drop in the bucket.
Dr. Petty. Yes, Senator. I could not agree with you more.
The complexity is this is how much we have. This is what we are
working with, but there are significant Tribes working many
years, actually, in Senator Risch's office as well with the
Tribes there.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Dr. Petty. So I look forward to actually working with you
and try to answer those questions.
Senator Tester. Yes, we will work. This is important stuff
and I did not even get to the mussels.
I will end where I started and that is if we do not put
some sort of focus on infrastructure in this country in water
infrastructure, along with other infrastructure, we are not
going to continue to be the leader of the free world.
Dr. Petty. I could not agree with you more, Senator.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Senator Tester.
Senator Kennedy.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, we have talked about this. Mr. Secretary, I want
to make sure you are aware of it.
Since we have been meeting since 3:30, we have lost a
football field and a quarter of land in Louisiana. We levied
the Mississippi River so it cannot overflow and deposit
sediment. I am not saying we should not have levied it, but we
did and that was one of the consequences.
The sediment that is there is sinking. It is compacting and
you can debate the cause, but you cannot debate the fact that
the water is rising.
Now, we are spending a lot of our own money to try to do
something about it. But the Federal permit process is killing
me. I am not asking you to break any rules. I would not do
that.
But on occasion, not every week maybe not every month, I
might call you and say, ``I need a little help navigating the
Federal bureaucracy.''
Would you help us through that?
General Semonite. I would definitely help you, sir.
Senator Kennedy. And you have been a big help, General.
Number two, I know, Mr. Secretary, you are familiar with
the Freshwater Bayou Lock. It is one of the top 10 in the
country in terms of commercial lockage. I forget which of my
colleagues asked you about how we are going to properly fund
our locks, but how are we going to properly fund our locks,
specifically, the Freshwater Bayou Lock?
Mr. James. That is probably the best question we will get
today.
Senator Kennedy. Yes, sir.
Mr. James. The toughest question we will get today is how
are we going to fund anything? As the lady said, we produce a
proposed budget, and it goes through the Administration, and
then the Congress gets it, and then you all have to react
however you can.
I am very concerned about our ability to repair and replace
most things in this country that has to do with infrastructure,
and particularly water infrastructure.
Senator Kennedy. I know you are, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. James. I realize the problems that Louisiana has down
there. All of us have some erosion problems and some bank
caving along rivers and what have you. But I am very familiar
with the coastal erosion and the sea level rise in Louisiana.
Senator Kennedy. Can I mention one other thing to you?
Forgive me for being abrupt, but I only have 5 minutes.
Mr. James. Yes, sir.
Senator Kennedy. And I like to try to stay within my time.
Dredging is hugely important in my State. We have to find
the money for it. I mean, for the Mississippi River up to Baton
Rouge, the Red River, the Houma Navigation, Calcasieu River,
Bayou Collette. I am leaving some out. We cannot maintain
maritime commerce if you cannot get the boats in.
Mr. James. I understand and you are also talking about
Morgan City.
Senator Kennedy. Morgan City, absolutely, thank you. You
bailed me out.
Mr. James. Head of Passes.
Senator Kennedy. Yes.
Mr. James. I understand because you are at the very end of
a system that drains 41 percent of the United States. Where the
waters hit the oceans and the larger bodies of water, they slow
down and the sediment and all settles out.
As far as we have to get the money, I agree with you 100
percent. It is a matter of priorities.
Senator Kennedy. Okay. I want to talk to you about that, if
I could. Excuse me for interrupting.
Mr. James. Yes, sir. I would be happy to talk to you about
it, but it is something that is hard to talk about.
Senator Kennedy. Let me talk to you about one other project
in the minute I have left, and I know you are aware of it, the
Comite River to the Mississippi River Diversion Canal.
Here is the Mississippi River. Nobody lives along the
Mississippi River. Here is the Comite River. A lot of people
live along the Comite River. Mississippi River has levees;
Comite River does not. It floods and it floods houses and
businesses. So we want to dig a canal from the Comite River to
the Mississippi River and take some of the pressure off.
Twenty-five years ago, the people of Louisiana taxed
themselves and they have been paying money, except they have no
canal.
Now, you have some extra money now to do that, and I hope
you will consider doing it.
Final point, I got 13 seconds. Can you tell me, like you
are talking to a 10th grader, in about 30 seconds, why you
cannot get that $9 billion out of the Harbor Maintenance Fund?
Mr. James. No, I cannot tell you.
Senator Kennedy. All right. Would you write me a letter,
and explain that to me, and tell me what Congress needs to do
to give you the authority to make that Fund a little less
slippery so you can go in there and get it?
Mr. James. I could do that, but I would rather come, sit
down, and visit with you on it.
Senator Kennedy. I will come see you.
Mr. James. I have already said it and the other one both
are slippery. They are not what they look like.
Senator Kennedy. Well, I am going to come see you. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Alexander. The reason he would rather do this is
because the letter would have to go through the Office of
Management and Budget.
[Laughter.]
Senator Kennedy. We like to talk. We do not like to put
things in writing.
Senator Alexander. That is it, Senator Kennedy. Thank you.
Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to sit down with you, too, because the last
letter I sent to you, Secretary James, also went to the Office
of Management and Budget, and I still do not have a response to
that letter.
But it was about the challenge that we have in New
Hampshire. We do not have as much coastline as the State of
Louisiana. We have the shortest coastline in the country, 18
miles, but we have some very important harbors there.
One of those is the Hampton Seabrook Harbor. It is our
State's largest commercial fishing port, and it has experienced
dramatic, and I mean dramatic, and unexpected shoaling since it
was last dredged in 2013. General Semonite knows what I am
talking about because the Army Corps released a shoaling report
recently that confirmed that some areas of the harbor are less
than 1 foot deep.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit this report for the
record, if I could.
[The information follows:]
Senator Shaheen. You cannot really see the depths here, but
the red shows the places where we have serious trouble where it
is below the ability to bring boats in and out.
There is a probability that if we do nothing, this Harbor
is going to become unusable in the very near future, maybe even
in the next year.
My question is not just about that $9 billion for the
maintenance fund, but it is also what can be done to address
the small harbors, like we have in New Hampshire, that we have
across this country that do not rank as high on the priority
list as some of the bigger harbors, but are absolutely
essential to the economies of our State?
How can we address those and what can we do in Congress to
make sure that we are able to address those needs that we have?
Clearly, just the funding is not enough if you have $9 billion
that you are still sitting on that we have not put out yet.
Mr. James. That is correct, ma'am. I have to meet the
benefit-cost ratio and low use harbors usually do not meet
that. Also, if they are for transport of goods, they have to
meet a tonnage minimum in order to be dredged and so forth.
What we do have right now available to us is the Low Use
Subsistence Harbors Fund. I think this might be able to get
funded through that mechanism. But other than that, it is tough
to reach into the budget to get the funding because of the
requirements in the budget. It could also be funded maybe
through the work plan. It may be worth looking at even in the
supplemental.
Senator Shaheen. General Semonite, do you have anything to
add to that?
General Semonite. Senator, the Secretary is right.
I am very, very aware that you have some significant
challenges. You had storms, even since November 2017.
Senator Shaheen. Right.
General Semonite. So you have a $4 million problem right
now in dredging it, a $3.5 million problem on the jetty that
needs to be fixed. Those have to be addressed.
Now, we have to design that. The only way to design it, we
have to do it this year. So we think that there is a potential
to nominate to the Secretary, design money in 2018, probably
$275,000. Get the design done and then we would have to come
back in to see if we could secure work plan funding, if nothing
else, in 2019. You did not get any money for this in 2019.
Senator Shaheen. Right.
General Semonite. So it would have to be built-in to the
2019 work plan. But that could be an option of how we can take
care of this critical issue.
Senator Shaheen. Well, I appreciate that. I hope that you
would be willing to work with me. Secretary James, I hope you
would also consider working with me on this. We do not need all
that extra plus-up for Senator Alexander's locks. We need to
look at some of the other places in the country where there are
problems. I am sure he would agree with that.
Mr. James. Ma'am, I will be most happy to work with you or
your staff can call us for more information, or more input, or
direction. Be happy to. Just let us know.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you. Another project that is also
critical, again, as General Semonite knows, is the Portsmouth
Harbor and Piscataqua River Navigation Project.
We have one of the fastest currents in the world in the
Piscataqua River, and the navigability of that channel is
challenging even under the best of circumstances. So when there
are issues around the widening of the turning basin, then it
means safety issues with respect to the boats coming in and
out, especially as we are looking at longer sized, larger and
longer boats coming in.
So again, I hope you will also be willing to work with us
on that Port as well.
Mr. James. Yes, ma'am, of course.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you. Thank you both.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Senator Shaheen.
Senator Lankford.
Senator Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, can I recommend to the committee that we have
a closed door meeting with the Corps of Engineers and with OMB
together? That we have a conversation about priorities, and the
inland waterways, and the Harbor Maintenance Fund, and try to
figure out how to un-slippery this slippery issue?
Senator Alexander. We will take that under advisement.
Thank you, Senator.
Senator Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, let me read a piece of legislation to you. This
piece of legislation starts with this. Section 6002 from WRRDA
(Water Resources Research Act), ``(A), Assessment and
Inventory. Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of
this Act, the Secretary shall conduct an assessment of all
properties under the control of the Corps of Engineers and
develop an inventory of the properties that are not needed for
the mission of the Corps of Engineers.'' Then it has a lot
after that.
Do you want to take a guess on what year that passed?
General Semonite. I believe that is 2016.
Senator Lankford. 2014, actually. The deadline to receive
that was 2015 and my clock says it is past that. That we still
have not received that.
We are trying to be able to work through helping the Corps
by figuring out the inventory of what you have, where are the
priorities, where is the inventory that is not a priority, and
allow this committee the ability to be able to look over your
shoulder and to say, ``Prioritize this. Do not prioritize or
sell that.''
But we cannot get through Step 1 because what we asked for
in 2014, we still have not received.
Help me understand when we are going to get this so we can
help you, because all we seem to talk about is how do we get
things done? And it is always, ``We have this big list,'' but
we have no ability to help you with that.
General Semonite. Senator, there are probably 50 or 60
different reports that we have been asked to do. They fall into
two different categories.
One is they come in, but they do not come with any funding.
And unfortunately, that means that some of those, as much as we
know it is a requirement, we just do not have the capability to
put money against it because there is nothing there.
The other one, some of these de-authorizations is another
great example. I have the report done, but sometimes it takes a
while to be able to get from us through channels back to you.
So this is why we want to work with you to figure out how
can we make sure that we can expedite some of these reports,
and if they can bypass some checks, then maybe that way, we can
inform you a little bit easier.
Senator Lankford. Yes. I mean, this is one designed to help
you.
General Semonite. Of course, yes, sir.
Senator Lankford. This is not one designed to hurt you.
General Semonite. You are exactly right.
Senator Lankford. I am trying to find some help, and we
cannot seem to get through to that. Okay.
We will try to follow up on that. I will have a chance to
have a meeting to be able to chat about that, and how we can
move on that, and to be able to get that done.
Let me go through a couple of other things here. In Tulsa,
Oklahoma there is a levee system that has been on the top of
lists of projects for the Corps for multiple years.
Do you know where that stands on the list right now?
General Semonite. Sir, we see this as a significant
challenge to the people there. This is an LSAC--a rating we
use--it is one of the worse levees, LSAC 1 and LSAC 2.
This is one that could certainly compete in the work plan,
but as most of you know, Congress did a great job of passing
the Disaster Supplemental. That Disaster Supplemental, about 3
weeks ago, provided to the Corps of Engineers $17.4 billion
with very specific guidelines of where we can use that.
We think that the potential for Tulsa levee could come
underneath the Disaster Supplemental. So while we could take it
out of the Civil Works budget, we are also looking right now at
options with the Secretary.
I have to give him two products. I have to give him the
work plan and the Disaster Supplemental. We think there is
merit either in the work plan or the supplemental for Tulsa
levee to be taken care of. But this is critical.
Senator Lankford. Yes, it is critical.
Secretary James, let me just tell you, if you come to
Tulsa, Oklahoma and see the levee, and the issues that are
there, the homes that are on the other side of it, the refinery
that is on the other side of it, you will understand exactly
what the risk is, and what we are facing.
And if we take you through there, I would like to be able
to show you how the system is set up to be able to operate.
Because if you go in there, to be able to go into one of the
houses that houses the mechanisms and everything for the levee,
you will find if you go to the bottom of that, a 50-year-old
whiskey bottle that is the float for the system.
Now, the whiskey bottle has worked. I get it. But I think
there is a better way to probably accomplish that. We could
multiply that all the way down that levee with the dangers and
the risks that are really there.
That is a big issue, of course. Obviously, the MKARNS is
another one. The MKARNS is listed as a high use now waterway
system, inland waterway system. It has $138 million of backlog
on it.
It has been rated now with a report that if any part of
that fails--which, as you know, it has a critical failure rate
all the way throughout the whole system--any part of it fails,
it has a $2.9 million impact per day.
Help me to understand structurally how we plan this as far
as to get ahead and how we chip away at that. This is something
I have discussed with the Corps for multiple years trying to
figure out, how do we even start on this process? We seem to be
maintaining, but not getting into the big parts or the critical
parts of the project.
General or Secretary, either one, I would love to be able
to get an answer.
Mr. James. Well, I have traveled on the MKARNS up to the
Port of Catoosa, a few years ago, with the Mississippi River
Commission. It is an awesome waterway. I have not seen a busier
inland port yet anywhere in this country.
The waterway, is it authorized? It is 12 foot?
Senator Lankford. It is. Currently, we are obviously
interested in dredging it much deeper than that, but it is, I
believe, authorized to 12 feet.
Mr. James. Yes, that is what I thought. I know when I was
there on the trip, they were talking about needing dredging----
Senator Lankford. Right.
Mr. James [continuing]. So they could handle the bigger
ships there too.
Senator Lankford. We just need to make sure all the locks
and everything work first. We would love to have the dredging
on it. But just making sure it gets off the critical list would
be essential to us because there are so many critical items all
the way down. If any one of them fails, then the whole system
breaks down.
Mr. James. Thank you.
Senator Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Senator Lankford.
I am going to go to the floor to make some remarks about
Barbara Bush, and Senator Hoeven has agreed to preside for the
remainder of the hearing.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here and for your
testimony.
Senator Merkley.
Senator Merkley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If I can complete these questions, can I yield the balance
of my time to Senator Udall, who also has the AUMF
(Authorization for Use of Military Force) meeting in Foreign
Relations?
Senator Alexander. Is that all right with you, Senator
Murkowski?
Well, yes. The answer is yes. You can, the rest of your
time, you certainly can.
Senator Merkley. Thank you. Someone asked for very quick
responses than the full exploration here, so this is kind of
the speed route from the beginning.
With the additional $50 million that Congress provided in
the omnibus for navigation operations and maintenance, we need
help making sure the small parts on the Oregon coast get the
dredging they need.
Mr. James, can you work with us to make that happen?
Mr. James. Sir, I will work with you. We will try to make
that happen. I will promise you that.
Senator Merkley. I know that you have done a very good job
in the past. It has meant everything to those coastal ports.
Second, also a question for you. We have worked with our
colleagues in the Northwest delegation, including Senator
Murray, to include language in the omnibus to enable the Corps
to finish the Village Development Plan at the Dells Dam Site.
This is the re-building of the fishing communities, tribal
fishing communities that we promised when we built those dams
in the 1930's and the 1950's.
We have run into an issue of will, not of authorization,
but of will because we used the language that your team had
given to us.
Will you work with us to try to, one, make the existing
language work by persuading OMB that this is an important
commitment that we have made to these villages, to these
tribes? And also, help us work to get even better language to
make it even clearer to get this longstanding commitment
fulfilled that we are now some 70 to 90 years behind on?
Mr. James. Yes, sir. I have personal feelings about that
situation as well and would work with you any way I can.
Senator Merkley. Thank you.
Commissioner Burman, we have worked very hard to get the
water conservation delivery line plus-up in the omnibus
successfully. It has the authorization. It has the funding, but
we need to make sure that that plus-up money gets to the
Klamath Basin very quickly for land idling and for pumping for
this summer.
And as well, to try to get a share of the $3 million that
is in a separate account to help with the fish on the Lake
where we have, on the suckers, no fish that are younger than 20
years. So we are really on the brink of a major catastrophic
development there.
Can you work with us to try make both those things happen?
Ms. Burman. Senator, we are looking at all of our
authorities and spending opportunities to help prevent crisis
in Klamath this year.
Senator Merkley. I know you are looking at it, and I thank
you for doing so. We appreciate it, and Congressman Walden
appreciates it, Senator Wyden appreciates it. We all appreciate
the fact that you are working with us on that.
I yield to my colleague.
Senator Hoeven [presiding]. Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In New Mexico, there are critical programs for which we
must always seek funds through the Department's work plan
because they are generally not in the President's budget, even
though the programs and projects are authorized.
Fiscal year 2018 is no exception. The Rio Grande
Environmental Management Program, Acequias Irrigation System,
flood control for the city of Alamogordo, and reimbursements to
communities under the 593 program, all need funding from the
Army Corps of Engineers.
Mr. James, when you and I spoke during your confirmation,
you committed to working with me to make sure priority projects
for New Mexico, that were not included in the President's
budget, would be addressed in the work plan.
Can you reaffirm that commitment today?
Mr. James. Sir, I reaffirm the commitment that I will work
with you to get them into the work plan.
Senator Udall. Okay.
Mr. James. I cannot make a guarantee, of course, to put
them in there.
Senator Udall. Thank you, thank you.
Mr. James. Yes, sir.
Senator Udall. Commissioner Burman and Dr. Petty, will you
commit to prioritize funding for longstanding priority projects
in New Mexico, such as the Eastern New Mexico Rural Water
System and the Anacostia Dam Fish Passage?
Ms. Burman. Senator, the rural water program this year, we
had very difficult numbers to reach and we have prioritized
operation and maintenance of existing projects, and the tribal
units or tribal projects.
And so we were unable to request money for your project,
but we are certainly trying to work with stakeholders to see
what is possible there.
Senator Udall. Great. And you understand this Eastern New
Mexico Rural Water System has a national security connection.
We are talking about water for Cannon Air Force Base.
I believe there is language in the fiscal year 2018
appropriation bill that talks about when you all look at these
kinds of decisions, consulting DOD (Department of Defense) and
making sure--Mr. Petty is nodding his head here, so I guess I
am accurate--but making sure that you look at national security
as a part of the water projects.
Thank you very much and really appreciate it. I have other
questions for the record and just wanted to get that statement
in, and hope you will give us timely and thorough answers to
those additional questions.
Senator Hoeven. Senator Murkowski.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here. First, let me begin with you,
General, and this is quickly relating to the issue of the
proposed Pebble Mine. I appreciate the communications that your
Office has had with mine.
As you know, we had requested an extension of the scoping
period that was agreed to. I think that that was important
given the project that we now have in front of us, and the fact
that, for many, it is a very different project than what they
might have imagined it would be.
I had an opportunity, just yesterday, though, to meet with
a good handful of folks from the Bristol Bay region. They
shared with me some concerns with where we are in process right
now.
I feel it is appropriate to share with you that they
expressed that there were issues with regard to how the
hearings were being noticed, a lack of flexibility with the
schedule, and that further police protection had been asked for
by those who were coming with the Corps. I cannot imagine if
sometimes we get a little raucous in our public comment, but
never to the point where anyone should feel that they are
threatened.
So I raise that with you. I know we are going to have an
ongoing discussion about it, but it is important. I think we
recognize that on the process side that nobody would be able to
really know what has gone on. You are concurring with me with
your body language there.
General Semonite. Senator, I just will be real fast.
So we definitely went to the 90-day. We have done nine
different sessions, which is more than we normally do, but we
want to be very, very open.
We have also continued to be able to have a lot of
different forums. We have had now 25 different iterations as to
where the Tribes are coming back in to be able to do outreach.
I had not heard about the police issue, but I will follow
back up with the Colonel up there. Normally, we get great
support from local police if, in fact, we need to.
We want everyone to be able to come together, and in this
particular hearing, this actual permit has been on the Web for
175 days. So this hearing is not necessarily a public hearing.
This is where we want to be able to get awareness of what is
out there, then we will come back through that process, and
have another whole series of hearings.
We want to be very deliberate on that process, exactly what
you said. And we want to be responsive. If there are other
things you want us to do, let us know.
Senator Murkowski. Well, good. I think the more transparent
you can be and then give that heads up, I think it is
appreciated all around.
This is a question for you, Secretary James. It is going to
go broader than my example here. We have a community,
Utqiagvik, formerly known as Barrow, top of the country up
there in the north. It has been facing some very severe winter
storms.
With the sea ice being further out, you have greater
coastal erosion that we are seeing. We have a utility corridor
that is in danger of washing away due to the beach erosion.
We also have an old landfill that is now about 100 feet
away from the water. This landfill is maxed out, but you also
have some old military waste in there from cleanup projects
that have gone on; tens of thousands of drums of waste. This is
a slow moving disaster is the way that I have described some of
the erosion threat that we are seeing.
So here you have the most significant community in the
North Slope there and the potential to lose the utilities, but
also from an environmental perspective, a real threat.
The question they have asked me to ask you is: how quickly
are we moving in providing any level of assistance? Not only to
protect the utility corridor, but to deal with the potential
for this environmental issue?
It is bigger, though, than Utqiagvik. It is bigger than
Kivalina, and Shishmaref, and Unalakleet. This is the issue we
are facing of coastal erosion. The reality is that these are
high cost when you look at it from a cost-benefit ratio, and
this is where we always fall off the radar, because our cost-
benefit ratio never pencils out.
This is where the small and subsistence harbors came into
being because otherwise places like Alaska would never be
heard.
Well, we are now in that same situation. I do not know, but
I would hope that you are looking at this whole benefit-cost
ratio score reform; when we talk about pre-disaster mitigation,
being able to look at things like what coastal erosion, the
potential for erosion and the damage coming, the seismic
issues.
So I am not giving you a chance to answer my question here,
and my time is just about up. But I need to know that we are
having a bigger, broader discussion internally with all those
that are in the right places to help with these policy
directives, that we have a plan going forward.
I have people that are going to bed at night afraid. They
are afraid of the next storm coming their way. They are afraid
they are going to lose their utilities. They are afraid they
are going to have an environmental disaster. They are afraid
that their home is going to drop into the ocean like the people
in Newtok are facing.
They keep coming to me and saying, ``Lisa, you have to have
an answer here.'' We have put the Denali Commission in front as
the lead coordinating agency on village relocation. The Denali
Commission was lucky because we got $15 million to them this
year; $15 million.
I am not giving you a chance to answer my question, but I
hope you know it is not just a question. It is a plea. It is an
urgency. It is a demand. We must be working together more
aggressively because peoples' lives are in danger and the
potential for an environmental disaster is very real.
Mr. James. Thank you, ma'am. They would a lot rather listen
to you than me anyway, so do not worry about that.
I have your questions. I have got them. We will get back
with you with some more specific answers just as soon as
possible, but I understand what you are saying. I have lived
part of that myself.
Senator Murkowski. I would love to sit down with you. We
have shared a lot of time with the General in my office. We
will be doing more sharing.
Mr. James. Okay.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. James. Thank you.
Senator Hoeven. Senator Graham.
Senator Graham. I actually do have a question. I am going
to let you answer it, but you need to help her because that
sounded terrible.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you.
Senator Graham. You need to help these people.
Number one, do you all agree that this budget is much
better in terms of your ability to help the country, the budget
increases? You got more money. Are you glad about it?
Mr. James. You mean the appropriations from the Congress?
Senator Graham. Yes. Is it helpful?
Mr. James. Yes, sir. Absolutely.
Senator Graham. That was not a trick question.
So the reason it is helpful is you have a lot of tasks out
there and a lot of stuff has been deferred because
sequestration has been hard on the Army Corps and everybody. Is
that fair to say?
Mr. James. Yes, sir.
Senator Graham. General, do you agree with that?
General Semonite. Yes, sir.
Senator Graham. So I just think not only did we need to
spend more on our military, I think what the Corps of Engineers
and what you do on Civil Works is important to our
infrastructure.
So to those who are upset about the budget, we did spend
more than last year. But we are spending $2 billion less in
2018 on nondefense, discretionary spending than we did in 2010.
I imagine it has a toll on you all.
General Semonite, you have been to Charleston many times,
and I cannot thank you enough for your visits. So there are
seven or eight States, I think North Dakota may be one, where
the State puts up money for Federal projects. And under the
current formula, when you look at the benefit to the Federal
Government, really, it is not included.
We are going to try to change that in the WRRDA bill. Are
you familiar with that, General Semonite?
General Semonite. Yes, sir.
Senator Graham. So I just want to let you know that when
South Carolina put up $300 million to make sure that the
State's matching part for the Port of Charleston would be there
available that was during really difficult economic times for
the State. I want to compliment my State for putting $300
million aside at a time when they could have used the money for
something else.
So I just urge you to understand that all these States who
go ahead and forward the funds, that I want to make sure that
they are rewarded, not punished. And when it comes to the Port
of Charleston, you have been generous; $17.5 million, I think,
last year.
We are moving now into the construction phase pretty
aggressively and we made a request of $90 million. The State
has got their part of the money. I would just urge you to help
us as much as you can. We are going to change this formula
later, but time is money and it would be a shame to have this
project fall behind.
Would you do your best, General?
General Semonite. Sir, as I said earlier in this hearing
and a lot of other hearings, I see unbelievable value in harbor
deepening when it comes to jobs, and the economy, and we would
continue to support those projects.
Senator Graham. Okay. And what I want to do with Senator
Hoeven, and others, is to make sure that when a State forwards
funds, puts their money up, that the Federal Government sees
that as a benefit because you have a partner with the money on
the table and in these projects, time is money. So you do not
have to wait for the money to come down the road. You can get
ahead.
So anything you can do to make sure that the Federal
Government's allocation allows those projects to stay on track
and meet the State's forward funding, we would appreciate.
In terms of the Corps and Civil Works, how much has this
additional funding changed what you can do? I want the American
people to understand, at least from your point of view, what
this additional money will allow us to do in terms of making
the country a more efficient place to do business.
Mr. James.
Mr. James. Well, one thing it has done is allowed us to get
to projects that would not have been gotten to otherwise in the
budget, not only from a money standpoint, but from other
standpoints as well when it comes through the Congress.
Senator Graham. What about you, General Semonite?
General Semonite. Sir, not only is it a very generous plus-
up, but on the other hand, it goes with what the Secretary
said. It allows us to apply some common sense to where the best
value needs to go to the Nation. It is all for the taxpayers
and for life safety.
When we get that money and we can put it in a work plan
based on engineering and science, you cannot argue that.
Senator Graham. So you get away from having to rob Peter to
pay Paul and do duct tape. Now you make some really smart
decisions going forward?
General Semonite. Yes, sir.
Senator Graham. Is that true for the rest of you, Ms.
Burman?
Ms. Burman. Absolutely, Senator.
Dr. Petty. Yes, Senator. It sure does.
Senator Graham. Thank you. And to the taxpayer, we are
trying our best to be fiscally responsible.
Twenty-eight percent of Federal spending is outside the
mandatory realm. Half of that is defense, the other half is
nondefense. You are in the nondefense category, but I would
argue this plus-up is going to make American infrastructure
more vital, make our ports deeper, and make the waterways safe
to navigate. That is just one example.
So thank you all very much for what you do for the country.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Hoeven. Thanks, Senator.
We have talked about the backlog of projects. The best way
we can cut through that is with these P3 projects, and so the
scoring that Senator Graham is talking about in terms of OMB
adjusting their scoring to reflect the contribution of the
State and local entities will be a big benefit to you.
Would you not agree with that, Mr. Secretary, and also
General Semonite?
Mr. James. I would, sir. Yes.
General Semonite. And Senator, you and I have talked, I
think, eight times to date on exactly this scenario. You were
not here right on my opening comments, but we have proposed a
lot of innovative legislation changes, and we are working with
staff now and the Secretary, to be able to offer up some good
solutions where we can solve some of this.
Senator Hoeven. Yes, we need to do that on the scoring.
That will absolutely bring resources to you, help get projects
done. It is fiscally responsible for the Federal Government and
gets results in terms of building vital infrastructure. So we
do need to get that done legislatively.
Also, I have a bill in with Senator Cory Booker, so it is a
bipartisan bill on WIFIA (Water Infrastructure Finance and
Innovation Act), so that you can use the EPA's (Environmental
Protection Agency) authority to bond projects.
Again, General Semonite, to both you and Secretary James, I
would ask if you are supportive of that legislation.
Mr. James. Absolutely, sir.
General Semonite. Definitely, sir.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you. I want to commend you for moving
authority for Section 408 request to the district level. Thank
you for doing that. That is the kind of thing, again, that is
about getting work done and I really appreciate that attitude.
So I want to commend both of you on that and thank you.
General Semonite, I would ask you first in regard to Minot,
we are trying to get the feasibility study done so that we can
get to the Chief's Report. We would like to get in the WRDA
bill and so right now, that is not scheduled to be done until
2019.
I would like to ask for anything you could do to help
expedite that so that we can have a Chief's Report pre-WRDA.
General Semonite. And sir, we are very, very conscious of
the WRDA cutoff. We are trying hard to really, wherever we can,
to continue to keep due diligence, but eliminate unnecessary
steps to try to push this stuff back to the left. I will
continue to look at that one specifically.
Senator Hoeven. Yes. That is one where I think we can get
there, again, if you will just work with us to help expedite. I
think a lot of that work has been done, and so we would
appreciate your help there.
Also, in regard to the Red River Valley, I think you are
aware that the States of North Dakota and Minnesota now are
working together. The Governors' Offices are working together
to make sure that they resolve any concerns regarding getting a
permit from the Department of Natural Resources from the State
of Minnesota.
And so, again, I would just ask what can you do to help
both move that forward? But then, also make sure that we are
funding into the project as soon as we have that agreement. We
will have that agreement approved here this year, including the
court reviewing and approving the agreement.
General Semonite. So Senator, again, we have talked about
this. We are getting ready to propose to the Secretary the work
plan.
Right now, what we would anticipate is that if, in fact,
that permit gets approved by the State of Minnesota, and that
injunction and the litigation goes away, then we would continue
to be able to move forward. There could be some potential in
the work plan to be able to do some of that.
The main thing is if it does not somehow let the litigation
go away, there are two parts right now that could be done on
Fargo-Moorhead that would continue to be able to honor the
judge's decision. And that is probably about $25 million of
continuing work to be able to support the diversion inlet and
another $10 million on other types of things.
There have been some changes in the plan. That $10 million
would allow us to continue to move forward.
So just because the litigation does not go away does not
mean we have to come to a screeching halt. If you need to, we
come to see your staff and walk you through that. That is all
dependent on Secretary approving the work plan once we submit
it to him.
Senator Hoeven. Are you working on the work plan now?
General Semonite. We are, definitely, right in the middle
of it.
Senator Hoeven. Okay, so that is something we should be
talking to you about.
General Semonite. Sir, we are tracking every one of these
requirements from all of Congress.
Senator Hoeven. Okay. So General Semonite, I want to thank
you for your help and your very sincere, and I think, creative
efforts to get things done, not just talk about these projects,
but get them done. I truly appreciate that.
And Secretary James I appreciate, you and I have a little
background together bringing that same attitude. These are the
kinds of creative ideas we are going to have to undertake if we
are really going to get after that backlog and get these
projects done.
Mr. Secretary, I do not know if you had anything else that
you wanted to offer in that regard.
Mr. James. No, sir. I do not. I just wanted to thank you
for your questions today and good to see you again.
Senator Hoeven. Well, we appreciate you very much.
Commissioner, we have three projects we are working on with
the Bureau of Reclamation. One is regarding Lake Patterson. One
is regarding the Jamestown Reservoir. And the other is in
regard to moving irrigation from the Missouri River. All three,
the Bureau, I think, is onboard with us.
I just want to check in with you to see if you had any
comment on any of those three. We have talked with your people.
They have been responsive and helpful. I just want to verify
that everything is tracking and that you are onboard with us on
those projects.
Ms. Burman. Senator, we are working with all of the
stakeholders to move forward with those projects.
Senator Hoeven. Yes, we appreciate your help as well.
Is there anything else that you would like to offer for
this hearing before we adjourn?
All right. If not, the hearing record will remain open for
10 days. Senators may submit additional information or
questions for the record within that timeframe, 10 days.
Then the subcommittee requests that all responses to
questions for the record, if you would, try to have the
response in within 30 days, if could.
SUBCOMMITEE RECESS
Senator Hoeven. And so with that, there are no further
questions.
Again, thank you for being here, and we appreciate your
good work on these important issues.
[Whereupon, at 4:29 p.m., Wednesday, April 18, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]
[all]