- MOON LANDINGS TO MARS EXPLORATION:. THE ROLE OF SMALL BUSINESS INNOVATION IN AMERICA'S SPACE PROGRAM
[Senate Hearing 116-139]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-139
MOON LANDINGS TO MARS EXPLORATION: THE
ROLE OF SMALL BUSINESS INNOVATION
IN AMERICA'S SPACE PROGRAM
=======================================================================
FIELD HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
JULY 19, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Small Business and
Entrepreneurship
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-871 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
----------
MARCO RUBIO, Florida, Chairman
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland, Ranking Member
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JONI ERNST, Iowa
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
CHRISTOPHER A. COONS, Delaware
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Michael A. Needham, Republican Staff Director
Sean Moore, Democratic Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Opening Statements
Page
Rubio, Hon. Marco, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from Florida.........
1
Scott, Hon. Rick, a U.S. Senator from Florida....................
3
Waltz, Mike, Representative, 6th District of Florida.............
4
Witnesses
Panel 1
Cabana, Robert, Director, John F. Kennedy Space Center, Merritt
Island, FL.....................................................
6
Gustetic, Jenn, Program Executive, SBIR/STTR Program Management
Office, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC......................
12
Panel 2
Rush, Andrew, President and CEO, Made In Space, Inc., Mountain
View, CA.......................................................
28
Nelson, Gordon L., Ph.D., Principal, Gordon Nelson and
Associates, Melbourne, FL......................................
38
Alphabetical Listing
Cabana, Robert
Testimony....................................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
9
Gustetic, Jenn
Testimony....................................................
12
Prepared statement...........................................
14
Nelson, Gordon L.
Testimony....................................................
38
Prepared statement...........................................
40
Rubio, Hon. Marco
Opening statement............................................
1
Rush, Andrew
Testimony....................................................
28
Prepared statement...........................................
30
Scott, Hon. Rick
Opening statement............................................
3
Waltz, Mike
Opening statement............................................
4
MOON LANDINGS TO MARS EXPLORATION:.
THE ROLE OF SMALL BUSINESS
INNOVATION IN AMERICA'S SPACE PROGRAM
----------
FRIDAY, JULY 19, 2019
United States Senate,
Committee on Small Business
and Entrepreneurship,
Merritt Island, FL.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:30 a.m., in
Room M6-306, Kennedy Space Center Visitors Complex, Hon. Marco
Rubio, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Rubio and Scott.
Also Present: Mr. Waltz.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARCO RUBIO, CHAIRMAN, A U.S. SENATOR
FROM FLORIDA
Chairman Rubio. The Senate committee on Small Business and
Entrepreneurship will come to order. I want to thank everyone
for being here today. I want to especially begin by thanking
our witnesses. I want to thank my colleague from Florida,
Senator Scott, and Representative Waltz also from Florida, who
are here serving as honorary members of the committee today as
well. I also want to recognize a couple of our State officials
that are here. State Senator Tom Wright and thank you for being
here. My friend Debbie Mayfield, State Senator Debbie Mayfield.
We have known each other for a long time. And also State
Representative Thad Altman who I have also known for a long
time. He is the CEO of the Astronaut Memorial Foundation, which
is our host here today, and we want to thank him for that. I am
pleased everyone can be here, and of course, a special thanks
to the Kennedy Space Center for welcoming us.
So the hearing today is about the role of small business
innovation in America's space program, and since the 1960s,
this Center has served as the world's leading human space
flight launch center. There is frankly no more appropriate or
more fitting place to mark the 50th anniversary of humanity's
first steps on the moon than in this place, the place from
which the Apollo 11 mission launched our brave astronauts.
There is also no better place to look forward to what the next
50 years of space exploration will require than here at the
Nation's premier spaceport. It is from this place America
launched the first human to the lunar surface, solidifying the
United States as a dominant world leader in space achievement.
And of course, there is no better place to examine the
critical role of small business in America in space exploration
than our State of Florida. It is the space capital of the
world, and it is America's gateway to the stars. Fifty years
ago, Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin left mankind's first steps
on the moon. The Apollo lunar landing and returning the
astronauts safely back to Earth was the greatest technical
achievement the world had ever seen. It was an astonishing
testament to the spirit of American ingenuity, exploration, and
courage. It was also a testament to the strength of America's
commitment to national development. It took a nationwide
dedication to our own innovation and advancement, to power and
achievement as monumental as the lunar landing. It took
partnerships between the government and private businesses
working together to build possibilities that did not previously
exist.
The shared commitment that took us to the moon is essential
if we are to remain the global leader in space exploration, and
it is essential that America does remain the leader in space
because there is a lot at stake. Our national security depends
on American leadership in space and our continued innovation in
space-based technology. The success of American space
exploration is shared with our local communities. The Kennedy
Space Center alone is responsible for approximately 20 to 3,000
jobs here in the State of Florida. It contributes more than
$3.9 billion in total economic impact to the State. When we
consider aerospace in the context of national defense, the
economic impact is even larger. Patrick Air Force Base, Cape
Canaveral Air Force Station, and the Naval Ordnance Test Unit
together account for over 47,000 jobs and over $5.3 billion in
total economic impact in Brevard County alone. Florida is a
global leader in the aerospace industry with dozens of
innovative companies focused on manufacturing, commercial space
flight, and aeronautics.
Finally, I believe that great nations do great and
remarkable things. I always tell the story of my grandfather.
He was born in 1899 in rural Cuba. So if you think about, if
you are born in 1899 in rural Cuba, there aren't even
airplanes. You have never seen anything flying in the sky that
is man made. And then in 1969, he watched an American step foot
on the moon. And I recall him telling me that when he saw that
image is when he knew for sure that Americans could do
anything, and I think we all know him to have been right in
that assumption. We have an obligation to our children to
ensure that we are living up to that potential. Getting it
right is not inevitable. Leading the advanced industries of the
21st century is a necessity. Innovating our way back to the
moon, and to Mars, and beyond, must be prioritized.
Since the last time we visited the moon, research and
development spending has fallen meaningfully. Our economic
status quo has allowed too many advanced manufacturing jobs to
depart our shores to places like China and elsewhere. China has
dedicated itself to dominating the critical industries of the
21st century, and one of those is space. We need to commit
ourselves to catalyzing the kind of innovation that will
maintain our technological edge and our leading role in space
exploration. We need to commit to the big ideas that may seem
impossible but are worthy investments, much like the ones made
that took us to the moon over 50 years ago.
Small businesses have always been critical to our efforts
in space and will continue to be in the future. Numerous small
businesses throughout the history of American space exploration
have done the research and development to provide critical
components that have enabled Americans to safely launch and
return to the moon and back. NASA has expressed this commitment
to partnership with small- and medium-sized businesses since
its early days and it continues to do so now. I applaud NASA's
recent decision to invest more than $45 million in innovative
small business through its Small Business Investment Research
Program. NASA also recently announced that it has awarded $106
million for 142 Phase II proposals covering 28 States. These
awards will help develop technologies that, among other things,
will help humans live on the moon and Mars. The Small Business
Innovation Research and Small Business Technology Transfer
Programs are critical tools in strengthening the partnership
between the Federal Government and innovative small businesses.
These programs have been proven time and again as impressive
examples of what investment in research and development by
small businesses can accomplish. Because of these programs,
firms like Made In Space, who we welcome as a witness today,
have been able to pioneer the development of 3D printers to
manufacture structures and microgravity.
The Navy found in a study of their SBIR and STTR programs
from the Fiscal Years 2000 to 2013 that $2.3 billion in
investment into these programs generated an economic output of
$44.3 billion--$2.3 billion generated $44.3 billion. That kind
of return on investment is astonishing, and it is something
that we should be encouraging as policymakers. The committee
that I chair, this committee, is currently working hard to
reauthorize our Nation's Small Business Act and modernize the
programs of the SBA, including the SBIR and STTR programs. And
chief among these improvements is making these outstanding
programs permanent in law which will provide certainty and will
improve their performance.
Using the SBA to promote innovation, including in space-
related technologies, is indispensable if we are to return
American development to where it needs to be at home and in
space. America's future will be the result of ingenuity and
investment of real assets, like the materials and components
that small businesses have been innovating for the space
program since its early days. If an American is to be next to
walk on the moon, Mars, or beyond, he or she will do so as a
direct result of our investment in small businesses and
technologies that they can create.
Now, I want to recognize Senator Scott.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RICK SCOTT, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
FLORIDA
Senator Scott. First it is great to be here. I want to
thank Senator Rubio for hosting this here. Thank him and
Congressman Waltz for their unbelievable commitment to NASA and
for space exploration. I want to thank my predecessor Senator
Nelson for his commitment to NASA. I want to thank my own State
government.
When I became Governor a little over eight years ago,
manned flight had stopped here, thousands of jobs have been
lost, and with Debbie and others, Thad and others' commitment,
we invested over eight years $230 million to get more jobs
here. And you can see the names of all of the buildings of
these big companies like Blue Origin, and SpaceX, and OneWeb,
and what they are doing is they are helping a lot of small
businesses prosper. And a lot of--this is unbelievable the
growth here and how we do not have enough engineers, which is a
good problem.
I want to thank Dr. Cabana for his absolute commitment to
bringing in the private sector and making sure that this is a
place that could prosper when we found out less expensive ways
and more effective ways and faster ways to get to space. And it
would not have happened but for Dr. Cabana's absolute
commitment, so I want to thank him for that.
I just had the opportunity to come visit the Visitors
Center and the best thing out of it was I brought seven-year-
old and a five-year-old grandson, and I talked to my seven-
year-old--both of them couldn't believe I was not bringing them
back today and told me how interesting this would be, and they
would love to sit here for a couple of hours and listen to
everything. But the seven-year-old told me that his plan is he
is going to be the first person on Mars. And so that would be--
and as Governor my goal was that every kid in the State believe
they could be anything, and so if we can get every child in
this country to see the value of becoming the next astronaut to
get to wherever, think about we are going to get, what is going
to happen.
So it is great to be here. I am on the Commerce committee.
Mr. Bridenstine has already testified a couple of times. He was
there last week. He is absolutely committed to making sure--as
long as I know, everybody I know is absolutely committed to
getting the funding to make sure we not only get to the moon,
but we get to Mars as quickly as we can in a safe manner. By
the way, my grandson said it is completely safe to go to space
now. There is no risk.
[Laughter.]
So I am sure that is absolutely true. So it is great to be
here, and I look forward to hearing everybody's points.
Chairman Rubio. Well, I am glad to hear that because
apparently, NASA is offering either you or I a chance to go to
space because----
Senator Scott. I thought that was my spot.
[Laughter.]
STATEMENT OF MIKE WALTZ, REPRESENTATIVE, 6TH DISTRICT OF
FLORIDA
Mr. Waltz. Well, thank you. Thank you, Senator Rubio and
Senator Scott. I am joined today, I will embarrass her a little
bit, by my 15-year-old daughter Anderson here in the audience
and taking her through the launch sites this morning. Thank
you, Bob, for your time this morning. Was just truly an honor
as an American, as a soldier, as a businessman standing here
where it all happened, this week, is really special, and thank
you for holding us this week.
You know, when I was reading the book Moonshot over the
last couple of weeks and just realizing that when President
Kennedy made his famous speech, his second State of the Union
as it was called at the time, saying that we would go to the
moon before the end of the decade, there was no rocket capable
of doing it, there was no spaceship, heck, there was not even a
computer small enough to power any of these things in the moon.
And he ended up garnering--unbelievable now that I am in
Congress--garnering the support of the Congress for the
equivalent in today's dollars of $280 billion, 4% percent of
our national budget to unify the country to be able to achieve
such a great feat. It is just, I think, worth remembering, and
it has certainly been inspiring to me and should be inspiring
to all of us.
That said, I do feel like as a member of both the Armed
Services committee where I see the military side of what is
going on in space, both on our side and our adversaries', and
then also in the Space committee with oversight of NASA, NOAA,
and the civilian side of space, I do feel compelled to ring the
alarm bells to some degree. We are no longer alone up there,
and we cannot take for granted American leadership in space.
The Chinese and Russians have and are continuing to develop
the ability to take down our infrastructure through anti-
satellite weapons, through killer satellites, through lasers,
through different types of cyberattacks, and it is, I think,
worth reminding everyone and continuing to educate everyone how
the dependencies we have now in our own economy in 2019 that we
did not have in 1969, from our banking system to our financial
systems, to how things arrive in Walmart from around the world
at a cost-effective price, and then of course from a military
standpoint, the Russians and Chinese have stated explicitly,
publicly that if we ever have any type of conflict, that they
are not going to match us tank to tank or plane to plane, it is
going to be the infrastructure in space that all of that
depends on.
It is also worth remembering that the Chinese do not have a
NASA equivalent. Everything that they are doing in space has
the Chinese military behind it. Their new space station, their
plan to put a manned station on the moon, all will be there for
military purposes. And it is not just them. The Indians are
going to the moon. The Israelis are going to the moon. The
Chinese and the Russians, of course, have done so and planned
to do so. So the United States needs to step up.
I think the Congress needs to step up, and we need to
compete and lead. Part and parcel, and the tip of the spear for
that leadership will be Florida, of course, and I think the
engine will be the private sector. I also served as a small
business CEO that competed and won and grew our company on
government contracts. That was an incredible experience. Could
also be a very painful experience. As I am looking a lot of
people nodding around the room. I have walked the walk, whether
it comes from bid protest to RFPs, to what it takes, I think,
to be able to also serve through the private sector. What I
love about the civil program at my company--we have
participated in it--is everything that has come from it, from
anti-icing to virtual reality, to surgical robots. So many
amazing spin-offs have come from this program. And I thank you
again for looking at how we can further it.
And then finally I will just leave us with, we can never
lose sight of the human capital piece of this. Just in the
North of here, in my district, we have Embry-Riddle
Aeronautical University, with the premier Aeronautical
University in the world, Daytona State, which really focuses on
the vocational pieces, but importantly STEM education and that
STEM has to start before secondary school and has to start
before higher education. It has to start in elementary school.
There is an amazing Elementary School in Oak Hill just to
the North of the cape called Burns Science and Tech where you
have kindergarteners coding and building robots, and half of
every class are girls. And we have to improve the diversity
that is in STEM education.
So America must continue to lead the bottom line. It is
competitive space and this type of conversation I think is
absolutely critical to that leadership and having that public-
private partnership be the engine for America's future in
space.
Thank you.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you. Let me bring in the first panel
here. Robert Cabana, the Director of the John F. Kennedy Space
Center. He is our gracious host. Thank you for having us. He is
responsible for all NASA facilities and activities, which as
you can imagine is no small task, but he is also a veteran of
four spaceflights. Has logged 38 days in space. He is a
distinguished member of the Astronaut Hall of Fame and is a
recipient of the distinguished Flying Cross. He was
commissioned Second Lieutenant in the U.S. Marine Corps and
completed Naval flight officer training in Pensacola in 1972.
Thank you for being here and for allowing us to have this
hearing. We also have Ms. Jenn Gustetic?
Ms. Gustetic. Gustetic.
Chairman Rubio. Gustetic. I practiced last night----
[Laughter.]
Is the Program Executive at SBIR, STTR Program Management
Office at NASA headquarters. She served in numerous roles prior
to this one, including serving in the White House Office of
Science and Technology Policy. She is a graduate of MIT, but
most important of all she is a graduate of the University of
Florida.
[Laughter.]
Go Gators. Thank you for being here. So, Mr. Cabana, I will
recognize you first for opening statements.
STATEMENT OF ROBERT CABANA, DIRECTOR, JOHN F. KENNEDY SPACE
CENTER, MERRITT ISLAND, FL
Mr. Cabana. Chairman Rubio, thank you for the opportunity
to appear today to discuss Kennedy Space Center's partnerships
with the business community, especially small businesses as we
enter a new period of space exploration with the Artemis
Program that will take us forward to the moon. I have submitted
a written statement for the record, but I would like to make a
few brief remarks. NASA's John F. Kennedy Space Center is the
Nation's preeminent multi-user spaceport for both government
and commercial access to space.
KSC's rich history dates back to 1962 when it was first
established as the NASA Launch Operations Center. Our many
accomplishments include those first steps on the moon whose
50th anniversary we celebrate tomorrow, 30 years of space
shuttle operations, the completion of the International Space
Station, and very soon the return of U.S. astronauts to space
on U.S. rockets from U.S. soil right here at the Key with our
Commercial Crew Program.
We have also played an integral role in NASA science
missions, expanding our knowledge of the universe and our home
planet. Today, Kennedy is an integral part of the local
community, providing nearly 10,000 jobs for civil servants,
contractors, tenants, and construction crews. NASA partners
with more than 90 companies across private, academic, and
public sectors, and small business is well represented in those
partnerships. NASA has been charged with landing the first
woman and next man on the moon by 2024 with the Artemis
Program. Small businesses will play a critical role in our
success as we move forward in partnership with our commercial
partners, establishing a sustainable human presence on the moon
by 2028.
Using what we learned from the moon, we will take the next
giant leaps, sending astronauts to Mars as we establish a
presence in our solar system beyond our home planet. When I
served as Commander of Endeavour on STS-88, the first space
station assembly mission, I noted in the first log entry, from
small beginnings great things come. Since then, the ISS has
served as a world-class microgravity laboratory, a superb
engineering testbed, and a model of international partnership
for the future. Today NASA is opening the International Space
Station for commercial business so U.S. industry, innovation,
and ingenuity can accelerate a thriving commercial economy in
low Earth orbit.
Since the first log entry of the ISS and during my tenure
as Director here at the Kennedy Space Center, I have watched
many small beginnings grow into something greater. J.P. Donovan
Construction was a small business started in nearby Rockledge,
Florida. This general construction firm now specializes in
aerospace steel fabrication and marine construction. They
worked with the Exploration Ground Systems Program here on the
refurbishment of historic Launch Pad 39B to support the
upcoming test flight of SLS that will send the Orion spacecraft
around the moon on Artemis 1. They also made significant
structural modifications on the mobile launcher for the initial
Artemis missions as well as installing the systems on it.
J.P. Donovan Construction has been in business for 27 years
now, and thanks to their work for NASA and KSC, they are no
longer a small business. They have grown and now serve other
defense contractors, port authorities, and local governments,
including several beach restorations serving our coastal
community. Our goal at KSC is to help small businesses navigate
the world of government contracting and provide private
industry with maximum business opportunities at KSC by
increasing contracting competition and strengthening
socioeconomic programs.
KSC has exceeded all goals for the past two years, and NASA
received an A grade on the most recent SBA small business
scorecard. As of July 8th, KSC's total expenditure this year
for small business is more than $159 million. The NASA's Small
Business Innovation Research and Small Business Technology
Transfer Programs fund the research, development, and
demonstration of innovative technologies that fulfill NASA's
needs and have significant potential for successful
commercialization. These programs are vital to NASA and to our
Nation's prosperity and security, and KSC is very proud of the
role we play in helping these programs succeed.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Scott, Representative Waltz, thank
you for your time and attention this afternoon, and more
importantly, thank you for support of NASA and America's space
program.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cabana follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Ms. Gustetic.
STATEMENT OF JENN GUSTETIC, PROGRAM EXECUTIVE, SBIR/STTR
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT OFFICE, NASA HEADQUARTERS, WASHINGTON, DC
Ms. Gustetic. Chairman Rubio, thank you for inviting me
here today to discuss the incredible impact that American small
businesses are making across the country within the space and
aeronautics industries. On behalf of the NASA SBIR and STTR
programs, we are honored by the genuine commitment that members
of this committee have shown to the American small businesses.
Chairman Rubio, as you noted in your remarks, we are
especially pleased to read your June statement applauding not
only the $55 million in investment NASA will make this year
through our Phase I awards, but more broadly the critical role
that SBIR and STTR programs play in helping small businesses
across Federal research and development funding. NASA's SBIR
and STTR programs are key components of the agency's technology
portfolio, which are managed by NASA's Space Technology Mission
Directorate.
At NASA, we like to say technology drives exploration. And
as we all know, American small businesses and entrepreneurs
drive innovation, transformation, and economic prosperity. Our
path returning to the moon and forward to Mars will literally
go through hundreds of small businesses across this great
Nation. As the program executive for the SBIR and STTR programs
at NASA, I have the privilege of overseeing programs designed
to encourage small businesses and research institutions to
develop innovative ideas that make specific research and
development needs for the Federal Government and have
significant potential for commercialization.
Since the formalization of the SBIR program in 1982, NASA's
SBIR programs have made over $3.6 billion in awards to small
group businesses across all 50 States and Puerto Rico. With
these awards, we fund an exciting frontier of technology
interests across NASA, including human exploration, space
technology, science, and aeronautics related investments.
NASA's SBIR and STTR awardees have played a central role in
nearly all of the agency's programs and missions. Currently,
the SBIR and STTR programs are working with small businesses on
their research and development to contribute to landing the
first woman and the next man on the moon by 2024, followed soon
thereafter by landing the first Americans on Mars.
For example, Astrobotic, a space robotics company
headquartered in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, was one of several
companies selected by NASA to deliver demonstration payloads to
the moon under the agency's Commercial Lunar Payload Services,
or CLPS, contracts. Astrobotic is a successful multiple SBIR
and STTR awardee that has been expanding operations and growing
its team thanks in part to 16 NASA SBIR and STTR contracts it
has been awarded since 2010. As our Nation reflects on the 50th
anniversary of Apollo 11 and works toward a return to the moon
surface, we at NASA recognize that we are in a new era of space
exploration, one anchored by an emerging commercial space
sector that includes cutting-edge companies growing and
innovating at a faster pace than ever before.
NASA's SBIR and STTR programs are critical in seeding the
growing, emerging commercial space ecosystem while also bearing
a responsibility and providing the patient capital for small
businesses to succeed in bringing their innovative technologies
to market in a high-cost industry. Our role is particularly
important because the space industry can be a hard place for
small businesses to work, requiring a significant investment of
time, expertise, and resources to scale up.
While many small businesses have achieved great success, it
does not happen overnight. For example, Aurora Flight Sciences
was selected for its first NASA SBIR award in 1990 and
continued to work with the program for 26 years until being
acquired by Boeing in 2017. Another 26-year-old NASA SBIR
partner and recent notable acquisition, Honeybee Robotics,
became a standalone, wholly owned subsidiary of Ensign Bickford
Industries in 2017.
For companies such as these, we serve as an important
source of R&D funds and a forward-leaning resource available to
small businesses looking to launch and scale their innovative
products and technologies. These companies have leveraged their
SBIR success to develop breakthrough technology and become
industry leaders. We are living in an exciting time, a time
that will see American astronauts return to the moon's surface
and explore farther than they ever have before, but NASA cannot
do this alone. Our programs will continue to look to the
brightest minds and most innovative ideas in our country's
small business community to bring Americans to the moon, to
Mars, and safely back home.
We know that we cannot do this also without the support of
Congressional members and committees like this one. By
including qualified small businesses in the Nation's R&D
investments, high-tech innovation is stimulated, and the U.S.
economy grows as agencies meet their specific R&Ds.
Thank you to Congressman Waltz, to Chairman Rubio, and
Senator Scott for your continued support of NASA.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gustetic follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you both for being here. I am going
to keep my opening questions brief so I can get my colleagues
in first, but I want to ask just to make it real for everybody,
do you have any doubt that the first person to walk on the
surface of Mars will be an American?
Mr. Cabana. We are going to make it happen.
Chairman Rubio. And is that American alive today? And if
so, how old are they more or less?
Mr. Cabana. Absolutely. So we will have to see. I would
have to think about that, sir, but you know----
Chairman Rubio. Are they in their teens?
Mr. Cabana. They could be in their teens or younger.
Chairman Rubio. The reason I am asking----
Mr. Cabana. They could still be in school. This could
happen--in the 2030s we are going to put Americans on Mars.
Chairman Rubio. The reason why I asked you that there was
a--you mentioned earlier from backstage before we started,
there was a poll out that said that the number one profession
the Chinese kids want to be is astronauts. The number one
profession Americans want to be is YouTubers. I do not see the
conflict with a YouTuber from Mars, right? But----
[Laughter.]
But I think that is our fault. I do not blame it on young
Americans because we have not spent enough time outside of the
confines of this debate in Washington talking about this. So it
is important to go into our schools and our universities and
tell people that the first person to walk on the surface of
Mars is alive today in one of our schools and so we need them.
And we need to do everything we can to be in that position.
The second question I have is, will it be possible to execute
that mission without the assistance of dozens and dozens of
small and midsize businesses who find unique solutions to
problems or things that we need to solve in order to make that
mission possible?
Mr. Cabana. No, I absolutely think that we have to have
small businesses as part of this architecture with their
innovative thinking, and they are going to be critical to our
success. They will be a part of it. They are a part of it right
now in these CLPS payloads that are going to the moon in these
initial small landers gaining that knowledge in science, and
they will continue to grow. So I totally agree with that, sir.
Chairman Rubio. So I know the mission is still being
defined, but can you just give us like an example of the kinds
of things that you need to come up--some of you, as you walk
through what it would take to put a human being in space on the
moon, anywhere, for any extended period of time, the sort of,
you may think them small but critical problems that emerge that
people realize we have got to have a solution for this, and it
may not be the big contracting famous company that goes out and
solves it for you.
Mr. Cabana. So, well, robotics was mentioned. We have one
of our scientists here at KSC was working with them extensively
on developing a drill to be able to drill for water on Mars, to
drill down into the regolith to find the ice when they get to
the South Pole and they have it work in those conditions.
So that is one. You know, it is a lot easier to send probes
than it is humans. As soon as you start sending humans, now you
have got to provide a pressurized environment for them, give
them oxygen, scrub the CO2, provide for food, take
care of their waste, maintain the temperature, and having
reliable systems that can do that. Especially if we are going--
you are talking a Martian mission right now with current
propulsion technology, it is a year and a half to two years. It
is like six to eight months to get to Mars, another six to
eight months on the lunar surface, for another six- to eight-
month trip home.
To have the systems reliable enough to do that, we have got
a lot of work to do, and I believe that small businesses are
going to be part of helping us innovate and helping these large
companies be successful.
Ms. Gustetic. Yes, and I will add to that and that if you
look the Mars Curiosity Rover that is on the surface of Mars
today, a number of SBIR companies that have technologies
actually on that rover that are enabling critical science to be
done on the surface of Mars, whether it is gearboxes, whether
it is drills, whether it is just removal tools. We estimate
that we spend roughly $9 million in SBIR awards that were
leveraged with about $72 million of other NASA funding to fly
six different companies solutions that enabled even more
science to be done on the surface of Mars through our SBIR
program.
Mr. Cabana. And you know, if I could go, sir, real quick go
back to your first question on motivating students. I get out
and talk at a lot of schools, especially, you know, even at the
elementary level, and I have not been to a school yet where
every student was not engaged and excited when we talked about
going into space, going to the moon, exploring beyond our home
planet. So I agree with you. We have to get the message out and
we have to show the art of the possible.
Chairman Rubio. Yes. And the last question I have is, when
you talk about these solutions, the drill, you know, the
ability to manufacture in space because you cannot ship a
replacement part over there, these things do not stay there. If
you can drill on the surface of Mars, I imagine whatever it is
you innovated, you are learning things that have applicability
here on Earth. How those products transition over into
commercialization and they actually lead to technologies that
solve problems for us here.
Ms. Gustetic. Yes, so SBIR companies at NASA drive a ton of
what we call the spin-offs content that we talk about annually.
So one of my colleagues that runs the tech transfer program at
NASA publishes an annual spin-off publication that tells the
stories of how NASA investments are actually transferred into
technologies that we see in our everyday life, and in this
year's edition of the spin-offs magazine, a third of those came
from SBIT investments.
And on average over the last five years, it is around 27
percent of the things that we are seeing pop up and spin-off
come out of the SBIR program for other applications.
Chairman Rubio. All right, thank you.
Senator Scott.
Senator Scott. So, what do you need from Congress to be
able to get to Mars besides--I know you need money.
Mr. Cabana. Money and support. And primarily, we have to be
funded properly if we are going to be able to do this. And you
know, Senator Rubio mentioned earlier we were talking to
Congressman. Waltz, you know, the Apollo program in today's
dollars is $280 billion. Well, we know what we need to do to
get back to the moon. We have to use the lunar surface, lunar
operations to develop those systems that will allow us to get
to Mars and it is going to be costly, but I think it is
critical that we continue to expand, you know, the presence in
our solar system beyond our home planet to explore and to
learn. Every dollar that is--no dollar has been spent in space,
they have all been spent here on the Earth enabling our
economy, and growing it, and growing our technology to keep us
a world leader.
If as Senator Rubio said, great nations do great things, if
we are going to remain a world leader, I believe we need to
continue to lead in space. And we are looked upon as a world
leader now in space and I do not want to lose that. And I think
that showing that we can get to Mars, to make that happen, to
develop the systems, to get the reliability, we need to keep
humans alive and expand us to Mars is crucial and it is going
to require proper funding to make it happen in a timely manner.
Senator Scott. How do you determine whether it is--I mean,
how do you decide what grants you are going to put out and how
you are going to spend your money?
Mr. Cabana. I am sorry, how we do what?
Senator Scott. How do you decide how you are going to spend
your money in these grants, and how do you measure whether you
did a good job or not?
Ms. Gustetic. So for the SBIR program, we go through an
annual process where we develop what we call subtopics that are
actually problem statements. And there are just a hundred
problem statements of research and development needs that we
know that either NASA has a loan or that the broader commercial
aerospace industry has, and we pose a challenge to small
businesses and we say, how would you solve this particular
challenge through a Phase I feasibility study, and then
potentially through a Phase I, Phase II prototype? And then a
whole bunch of post Phase II investments that help those
prototypes transition to increase their commercialization
success because oftentimes a one single $125,000 Phase I and
one single $750,000 Phase II is, you know, does not necessarily
translate to a final product for the aerospace industry where
things are quite expensive.
So we do a lot post phase also to try to help companies
transition their technologies, but there are a whole host of
different problem areas and it is across NASA's whole
portfolio. So we have challenge statements for science, for
space technology, for aeronautics, and for human exploration
ranging on almost any emerging technology area you could
imagine, autonomy, UAVs, Eclipse systems. Anything that we do
we likely have an SBIR subtopic to get small businesses
involved in R&D.
Senator Scott. What changes have you made in how you do the
grants to make sure you are successful?
Ms. Gustetic. Yes, so we certainly are consistently
listening not only to our internal community of folks that are
trying to solve particular problems through working with small
businesses to ensure that we are able to get the most relevant
problems on the street in a timely way to solve those problems
in NASA, but also from the small businesses that participate as
our solvers. Without the small businesses participating in the
problem, we cannot be that matchmaker between the people that
have the problems and between the people that have the
solutions. So one thing that we started to do annually over the
last few years is introduce an annual request for information
process to our small businesses, seeking not only input on the
problem statements we are asking for, but also on program
processes and things that we could improve about the way that
we conduct the process of our program.
Senator Scott. So what type of grant have you done that you
are most proud of?
Ms. Gustetic. I think that recently the contracting
vehicles that we have offered post Phase II. So we have
expanded the vehicles that are available to actually, as I
mentioned before, help to transition companies after a Phase II
award to more commercial success. I think diversifying those
vehicles that are available for companies to compete for,
whether that is our Commercialization Civilian Readiness Pilot
Program, it is one of the pilot programs, Chairman Rubio, under
the SBIR authorization bill, whether that is sequential Phase
II or Phase III awards. We offer many paths for companies to
customize their path for commercialization, not assuming that
it is a one-size-fits-all solution for companies. So I am
particularly proud of the fact that we are diversifying the
ways that companies can navigate our program, and not assuming
that we have it all figured out, one path that companies need
to take in order to commercialize.
Senator Scott. What changes are going to happen at Kennedy
Space Center to make sure we can get to Mars?
Mr. Cabana. Make sure that the Kennedy Space Center what,
sir?
Senator Scott. That as a country we get people to Mars.
What changes are you going to have to make here?
Mr. Cabana. So at the Kennedy Space Center, our
infrastructure is in place now. I believe that the
modifications we have made to Launch Pad 39B, the new mobile
launcher, the modifications in the vehicle assembly building,
we will not be the reason that we do not launch SLS and Orion
on time. That rocket needs to grow to have more capability with
enhanced upper stage to get us to Mars. It is going to be a
partnership with our commercial partners this time. It is not
going to be a pure government operation. And what we have done
to establish this multi-user spaceport, enabling these
commercial companies the ability to launch in an environment
where we have reduced regulations, we have worked closely with
the Air Force and the FAA to make it more commercially friendly
to make launches easier.
I think having that environment in place is excellent. I
think we need to continue to build on that, but we have the
infrastructure in place. We are going to have to improve some
of it. But we have what we need to get to Mars. We need the
vehicles and the path forward.
Senator Scott. Thanks. Thanks, Senator Rubio.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Congressman Waltz.
Mr. Waltz. Relatively briefly, Director Cabana, as I engage
industry, they often refer to Florida space triangle, you know,
between here and the Cape, up to Daytona and Embry-Riddle, over
to Orlando. With the increased frequency of launch, the
President's goals of a space force, lunar 2024, Mars, we are
seeing industry locate to the area, which is fantastic.
We are seeing, of North of here, we are seeing the
development projects like Space Square. Can you discuss, or for
either of you, why space triangle, this kind of a regional
approach, is inevitable given the projected growth of launch,
and how important is that to KSC's ability to execute NASA's
goals?
Mr. Cabana. So for us to be able to execute as a spaceport,
I think, is critical. As we move forward, it seems that we have
less and less of a discretionary budget. So enabling commercial
operations--and it is not commercial space or government space,
it is if we are going to be successful as a Nation, we need
both of them integrated together. And I think the
infrastructure that we are putting in place here as we draw
these companies, and now as the prime companies come, the
supply chain is following. And you know, the Space Coast is
doing extremely, well a lot of it with partnership of the State
of Florida.
And in space, Florida is an economic development tool, and
down in Melbourne with the aerospace industry picking up down
there. This is the place to be. I mean, we came to the Cape
back in 1962 because it was geologically in the right spot. It
is close to the equator as far, as the United States goes, to
have the orbital velocity help that you need. We are doing
about 910 miles an hour right now sitting still. It also has
the ability to launch with the ocean out to the East as a place
for hazardous cargo to drop not on populated areas.
So from a geographical point of view, it is an excellent
place for a launch site. And now, as we have grown and made it
more commercially friendly, I think is critical to our future.
But again, it is not government or commercial. It is both of
them integrated together to make us successful.
Ms. Gustetic. Yeah, from a small business perspective,
local and regional ecosystems are absolutely critical as I am
sure you can appreciate. Small businesses need a village to
support them as they grow and they develop and they scale, and
money is not the only thing that is a determinant of a small
business' success.
So when you look at all the variety of services that are
offered that are complementary to awards, many of which are
offered by the Small Business Administration, things like their
regional small business development centers, the vast programs
that actually provide support for underrepresented communities
to be able to apply to programs and get the support they
needed, but also efforts that we have done in partnership with
the Small Business Administration to go to the places that are
actually lower applicant rates than other parts of the country.
We participate in their Road Tours where we actually go and
visit parts of the country that might have less participation.
We have a Road Tour actually coming up this November in Miami
and Puerto Rico, trying to go toward communities to actually
bring the agencies to them as opposed to expecting them to
figure us out, you know, the Federal Government out. So we also
at NASA have prioritized trying to reach out to HBCUs and MSIs
to increase their participation as research institutions in the
program.
So there are a number of different ecosystem services that
are necessary to support a small business, and we see those as
being critical to the long-term success of small businesses,
not just our funding.
Mr. Cabana. Every year, the Kennedy Space Center hosts a
small business expo, and we work really hard on mentor-protege
partnerships to help grow these small businesses but to help
them understand how to do contracting here, and not just at the
Kennedy Space Center, but with the government, and it is
extremely successful every year and it continues to grow
bigger. And we are very appreciative that Port Canaveral always
offers up a facility to help host this. And it is--I think we
do a good job.
Mr. Waltz. Along those lines, can you just spend a moment
talking about the apprenticeship program and how critical it is
to pass on some of those technical trade to the Space Coast
apprenticeship program?
Mr. Cabana. So, right here in Eastern Florida, ASRC
Aerospace research with Lockheed Martin has a program working
with the university to intern and grow technicians to take
over. For example, the tiles on the Orion spacecraft that is
going to take astronauts back to the moon and on to Mars, our
technology that was developed during the shuttle era, the tiles
are made here at the Kennedy Space Center in our thermal
protection facility. And the workforce to do that is aging, and
it is as much an art as it is a skill, learning how to do it
correctly. And so we are bringing in this apprenticeship
program, these younger folks to take over and learn how to do
this to be able to continue to build these spacecraft tiles for
the future.
Mr. Waltz. Just, last question. I think from my
perspective, our job as a government is to create the
infrastructure and the network for all of this to thrive, which
I think is a fantastic example of public-private partnership
and how that can grow rather than just throwing funding at a
government agency. But we do have a responsibility for the
infrastructure piece. Can you just talk to the Indian River
Bridge and the space way connector and how important that is to
keep funding going?
Mr. Cabana. Absolutely. So right now, the Kennedy Space
Center and NASA own the Indian River Bridge. Our gate used to
be on the West Bank of the Indian River in order to get into
the Kennedy Space Center in Merritt Island. Over time, we have
drawn that gate back. We drew it back further when we created
Exploration Park in partnership with the State of Florida, the
research and development park that allows commercial companies
to actually come here and be close to Kennedy in close
proximity, but outside our secure perimeter.
Over time, that bridge has become more than just access to
the Kennedy Space Center. It has become a major thoroughfare
for the community on North Merritt Island to and from the
mainland, as well as a major hurricane evacuation route. It is
also a bridge that is required for payloads from Titusville
from Astrotech to get to both KSC and Cape Canaveral Air Force
Station. That bridge is reaching the end of its useful life,
and it has always been our plan to replace it. Currently, we
are in partnership with Space Florida.
During our furlough, we could not submit an info grant
request in time and Space Florida submitted an info grant
request to Department of Transportation for funding to replace
that bridge. NASA currently is maintaining that bridge. I put
about $2.5 million in a year to keep it operable. We paid for
the design of the bridge that meets Florida Department of
Transportation standards. We are paying for the environmental
impact statement for the new bridge, and we are going to work
with, if the State wins this grant, it will also require NASA
funding in addition to Air Force funding. The State is only
going to end up paying 20 percent or $20 million out of what it
is going to cost to replace this bridge.
I will get you the exact figure, sir. So we will see how
the info grant turns out, but in the end, NASA, it is our
responsibility. If we do not get this grant, we are going to
have to find another way. In the meantime, we are going to do
what is required to continue to maintain the bridge so that it
allows access.
It would be a shame to bring in all these commercial
companies and create this great vibrant spaceport and not be
able to have access to it with payloads and all the commodities
that need to come from the outside in. So, yes, the bridge is
critical to our future and we are working to have a proper plan
to replace it that meets everybody's needs.
Mr. Waltz. We will continue to work with your staff----
Mr. Cabana. I am sorry?
Mr. Waltz. We will continue to I think work with your staff
to get that done, and then also the Halls River Bridge to the
North of here heading up----
Mr. Cabana. That is another one. We spend a lot of money on
State Road 3 on the North part of Merritt Island on the refuge
that is also going to need to be replaced in the not-too-
distant future.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you. Senator, I yield.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you. And just to close the loop, a
couple of you just mentioned Space Florida. As an editorial
statement, but I remember back when the shuttle program ended
and there was the real fear, and we got 10,000 jobs sort of
vanished overnight, and there was a real fear that this part of
our State would kind of be left behind. There was real concern
about the future and a lot of people ended up moving too
because of it.
And you look at just the figures up to 2017, we do not have
the latest here, but almost 9,000 jobs have been created, many
more that are ancillary, and there has already been national
media coverage of the sort of resurgence of the area. And I can
just--an editorial statement, the Governor was there for much
of the period of time. In fact, this whole period of time that
we are talking about, Space Florida. Without Space Florida,
they deserve a tremendous amount of credit as really a model
for the country to keep this part of our State and our Space
Coast with its head above water while we at the Federal level
sort of figured out what was next. And had that work not been
done, it is quite possible that this hearing and all these
conversations we are having today would be, may be, occurring
somewhere else in the country.
And so I think they deserve a tremendous amount of credit.
I know you have a great partnership with them. I wanted to ask
you about the Pentagon, the Department of Defense, because NASA
and Apollo trace its roots back to military spending. The
majority of the astronauts, I think going back to Mercury,
Gemini, Apollo, they all served in the military, had also
served in the military.
There is also a component of the small business contracting
that is tied to the defense industry. And how is their synergy
there with hypersonics, their own space ideas? I mean, separate
from the NASA program, is there not also spin-off and ancillary
and sometimes direct benefit at some of the small business
endeavors that are being pursued through that funding stream at
the Department of Defense?
Ms. Gustetic. From the SBIR perspective, we see a lot of
handoffs between NASA awards and Department of Defense awards.
Many companies that work with us also work with a particular
part of the Department of Defense, and oftentimes the DOD also
piggybacks off of our awards and will offer second Phase II
awards to companies that we funded the Phase I or the Phase II.
So, and we see them do a lot of Phase III on our Phase I and
Phase II because there is certainly technology areas that are
of mutual interest.
Chairman Rubio. Sounds like a good argument for why we need
the space force to be in Florida.
[Laughter.]
But the--I'm sorry, Ms. Gustetic, let me ask you about, you
know, one part of what we are trying to do is with
reauthorizing the Small Business Administration, two decades
since we have done that, and is that the programs that we are
discussing expire in 2022. So a lot of these, and the stuff
that people are going to be--a lot of these endeavors that
people are undertaking need some patience. They take some time.
And the uncertainty about whether--if you get closer to 2022
and we do not reauthorize this program, what is the practical
impact it begins to have on folks coming forward and looking to
be a part of it?
Ms. Gustetic. It has an impact not only on the Federal
agencies that pre-plan for those activities but also on
regional ecosystems that plan and create positions, for
example, to help companies that are local to them prepare for
these kinds of funding opportunities. It also certainly affects
companies that may not know if this funding resource will
actually be as predictable as it has been historically. We hear
all the time from our small businesses, and also from other
countries, that will come and talk to us to learn about how the
small business program in the U.S. works, where they say just
how much of a gem this 37-year-old program is. That the United
States is a consistent, predictable, repeatable source of
funding for small businesses on the innovation side of things.
They actually develop new and advanced technologies.
And so the predictability of that funding, even if there
might be a little bit more bureaucracy associated with applying
and also complying with contract terms, the predictability of
that funding is something that diversifies the overall
availability of money in the ecosystem, whether it is also
angel investing, venture capital, and other sources of funds,
that make it a really critical and important player in the
ability for our small businesses in this country to thrive.
So that permanence increases predictability and it can
allow a whole ecosystem of other support services to form
around that permanent and predictable program in order to
better leverage it.
Chairman Rubio. And the last question I have really has
more, not NASA specific, but it is part of our bill. One of the
things we want to do is, and right now this is all housed under
the Office of Investment and Innovation, and our view in our
bill we are trying to do is bifurcate that we are going to sort
of leave the Office of Investment, but then create a separate
office for innovation and technology, put these programs with
its own so that it has its own specialized focus and attention
paid on it.
And I do not know if you have any thoughts or views on how
that could or could not impact the program. I know the SBA will
have its own views about how to staff and how to fund it, but
just having an office that is dedicated to that sole mission of
innovation and technology, and technology transfer peace. Would
that in your view be helpful to helping the program be more
successful and do you have any views on that?
Ms. Gustetic. I think anything that enables that SBIR
program to get direct connections to their leadership to
increase the support that they continue to have in their
programs is likely a positive thing. The SBA, we work with them
on the policy directive that they issue and also the activities
that they do on behalf of all the agencies. It does not make
sense for all ten of us to do our own individual outreach
efforts. That is not the best use of our money.
So we work together to--actually, an SBA coordinates those
things. We work together with them in order to get the best use
of the money that you are giving us. And so, their ability to
operate at a high level and an innovative level just makes all
of the other agencies able to execute at a higher level as
well.
Chairman Rubio. Well, thank you both for being here. I
appreciate it very much. Thank you for hosting us, and we look
forward to working with both of you in the months and years to
come. And tomorrow will be a big day. I will be around here as
well, so, but again, thank you both for coming here. I am going
to start introducing the second panel. Thank you. And so let me
introduce the second panel while the staff here transitions the
name tags. Our second panel, Mr. Andrew Rush of Jacksonville,
Florida, is the President and CEO of Made In Space, Inc., which
specializes in manufacturing in space and other extreme
environments. He holds a Bachelor of Science and Physics from
the University of North Florida, and a Law Degree from Stetson
University. I have got to ask you about that. You know, the
physics and then philosophy your brain is like, you can stretch
in two very different directions there. But thank you for being
here.
Dr. Gordon Nelson is a Principal at Gordon Nelson and
Associates in Melbourne, Florida. The Gordon Nelson Associates,
working with the Florida Institute of Technology, has been a
recipient of NASA SBIR, STTR awards, and I want to thank both
of you for being here, but we will start with you, Mr. Rush.
Thank you. You are recognized for your opening statement.
STATEMENT OF ANDREW RUSH, PRESIDENT AND CEO, MADE IN SPACE,
INC., MOUNTAIN VIEW, CA
Mr. Rush. Chairman Rubio, Senator Scott, and Congressman
Waltz thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today.
Fifty years ago, American innovation put American boots on the
moon for the first time.
Today, American innovation in space, driven by emerging
companies like Made In Space, is alive and kicking today. We
and our fellow innovators are ready to progress beyond Apollo,
not only putting humans back on the moon to stay and on to Mars
but revolutionizing the way the spacecraft are built and
creating sustainable commercial business operations in low
Earth orbit.
As CEO of Made In Space, I have the great honor of leading
a talented and passionate team and support international
exploration goals. We are an industry leader in developing and
deploying space-capable manufacturing technologies, a suite of
technologies that will enable more capable, cost-effective in-
space operations and make human spaceflight missions safer and
more responsive. Made In Space has been able to achieve
multiple world's first because of the support of space
technology development programs led by NASA, DARPA, and others.
As a young bootstrap company, our approach has been to take
small practical steps toward our goal of opening the frontier
of space via manufacturing. As we have talked a little bit
about today, after initially demonstrating 3D printing in
microgravity via NASA's Flight Opportunities Program, Made In
Space was granted a series of SBIR contracts, allowing us to
work with Marshall Space Flight Center and others to build and
launch a 3D printer to the International Space Station in 2014.
Since manufacturing its very first parts, we have been
manufacturing tools, and fixes, and other objects for use by
the ISS crew and others. This capability is paradigm-shifting
because it reduces the need for costly spares and allows tools
and fixes to be manufactured on the spot on demand. Consider
the life-threatening calamities that befell Apollo 13 or the
fictional tribulations of Mark Watney in the Martian. Now
consider that if the crew of Apollo 13 had had a 3D printer
onboard, they could have more readily repaired their
CO2 scrubbing system, and perhaps had Mark Watney
been provided with 3D printers and other manufacturing tools,
that book would have been a little bit more boring and his
survival might have been, you know, not quite so heroic.
Without infrastructures like the SBIR program and the
International Space Station, we could not have developed this
capability, a capability which will make future human space
flight missions safer and more responsive than ever before.
Building on the success, a Made In Space-led team began work
for NASA's Space Technology Mission Directorate to develop a
large-scale, in-space additive manufacturing, and assembly
system. We call the system Archinaut.
Archinaut technology will enable optimization of spacecraft
structures for their operational environment rather than
primarily designing them simply to survive the ride to space.
This technology enables providing large structures at lower
costs, including robotic manufacture, and assembly of
reflectors, space stations, and other applications for civil
defense and commercial space customers. STMD has recently
funded the first Archinaut satellite for flight. This satellite
will prove out this foundational technology in the operational
environment, establishing the flight heritage that will enable
mission managers to confidently integrate this technology into
operational human spaceflight, national security, and
commercial missions in the future. The SBIR program enabled
transformational ideas like 3D printing in space to go from the
drawing board to demonstration in space.
The vision of NASA's Space Technology Mission Directorate
to invest in disruptive technology, like in space robotic
manufacturing and assembly, will enable satellites to one day
self-assemble and repair and augment. In the future, this
technology will transform how we build spacecraft, opening
after for human and robotic exploration of the cosmos, and
enabling commercial space operations to get more capability per
kilo sent to space. Made In Space and its customers have
benefited enormously from the virtuous cycles of development
enabled by a strong SBIR program, a strong independent STMD,
and DARPA, and others. Made In Space strongly encourages NASA
to look more to small businesses to serve integral roles in
taking the United States back to the moon and on to Mars via
their technological innovations.
Hand in hand with that, Made In Space encourages increased
investment in space technology development, in particular,
increasing support throughout the technology development
pipeline of mission-enabling technologies will minimize the
risk that at early stages of development these technologies
languish. These investments are crucial to achieving America's
near-term ambitions in space and avoiding being overtaken
militarily or peacefully by China and others in space.
This committee is uniquely positioned to extend the legacy
of Apollo and help propel the Nation back to the moon and on to
Mars by unleashing the time-tested power of American small
business innovation.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rush follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Dr. Nelson.
STATEMENT OF GORDON L. NELSON, Ph.D., PRINCIPAL, GORDON NELSON
AND ASSOCIATES, MELBOURNE, FL
Dr. Nelson. I appreciate this opportunity to provide
comments on the role of Small Business Innovation in America's
Space Program. My comments are based upon my experience on a
NASA STTR, which began in 2012, focusing on new, flexible,
flame-retardant polyurethane foams for energy absorption
applications. That STTR has progressed through Phase I, Phase
II, Phase II E, and now in Phase III. Polyurethane foams can be
items such as seat cushions, mattresses, all of which you are
very familiar. However, significant flame retardancy is
required in high hazard seating, Navy mattresses, and many
other applications.
This STTR project represents the development of a unique
family of highly flame retardant, environmentally friendly,
flexible polyurethane foams. The flame retardant package is
nonhalogen, chemically bound-in, meaning it is non-migrating,
with low volatiles, resolving key concerns for environmental
stakeholders. The goal was to exceed the flame retardancy of
BX265, NASA SOFI spray-on foam insulation for the shuttle that
had a peak rate of heat release of 354. Project foams perform
down to 148 peak rate of heat release, less than half that of
SOFI, and over 90 percent reduction versus the base foam. Foams
meet Cal 133, British Standard 5852, standards for high-
hazardous seating, the Federal standard for mattresses, Cal 129
and NFPA 267 for high hazardous mattresses, and the FAA oil
burner test for commercial aviation seating, without additional
fire barriers.
All foams, of course, meet NASA's 6001 test method. Some
foams meet the U.S. Air Force dynamic cushioning test for
packaging. Foams can be made to any needed static stress
performance, useful for energy absorption foams in automotive
or aerospace applications. Some members of the family show
enhanced cryogenic insulating performance versus SOFI at soft
vacuum. Thus there is a broad family of potential performance.
Part of the NASA vision was flexible insulating foam which
could be used for cryo line repair yet serve a variety of other
applications during a mission. Indeed, project foams provide
cost-effective, flexible polyurethane foams for cryogenic
insulation, packaging, energy absorption materials, and flame
resistant materials, including high-hazardous seating and
mattresses, energy-absorbing foams, packaging foam, and
anechoic chamber materials.
NASA likes applications beyond NASA mission materials.
During Phase III, working with several leading companies, we
have focused on foams for prison mattresses, rail car seating,
automotive headliners, and anechoic chamber materials. Using
the automotive headliner materials as an example, current
headliner composite, now think of your automobile, is a fabric
of foam behind it and polyethylene film barrier behind that. It
must meet the flammability requirement of the motor vehicle
safety standard, MVSS302, utilizing a flame retardant fabric.
As one, however, goes to an autonomous vehicle, a more pleasing
environment will be needed versus the few colors currently
available for headliners. Flame retardancy will no longer be
met by the fabric, but MVSS302 performance will need to be
provided by the 3 to 4 mm of foam.
So our project materials, in fact, can do that. The project
has been very productive. I do have the following comments
based upon my seven-year STTR experience. The project had a
commercialization panel using three internationally recognized
consultants with polyurethane formulation, application, and
standards of regulation experience. Several times at NASA
briefings the question was raised, well, why commercialization
panels were not required. Well, maybe they should be.
I served as the Small Business Concern, the SBC, for the
project. Florida Institute of Technology served as the Research
Institute, the RI, for the project. STTR requirements allowed
the RI 40 percent of project funds and the SBC 60 percent. It
is up to half for consultants and at least half spent as 30
percent directly by the SBC. This allowed me, as a sole
proprietorship, to function effectively.
However, some STTRs and SBIRs require the SBC to have at
least 50 percent of project direct expenditure which
effectively excludes sole proprietorships. We had that issue
with an Army SBIR. That is my first concern. STTRs many times
involve universities. The RI, in this case, Florida Institute
of Technology, involved 14 students, 6 M.S., and 8
undergraduate students, in the project. Five of the six M.S.
students were women, and three of those were Hispanic. Students
have commented that they appreciated the exposure to real
industrial applications as part of their project work, having
the responsibility to meet real project goals and timelines.
One should not forget that STTRs offer a great opportunity
for student experience and exposure. Indeed, the lead M.S.
student, Caitlin McKinnon, has had great exposure in managing a
project research group. During Phase I, under $125,000, the SBC
needed to front $60,000 to $70,000 since expenses are billed
after the fact by quarter. That is difficult for sole-
proprietorships and would be particularly so for younger
entrepreneurs. A Phase I upfront initial payment would be
useful and encourage new innovation. So that is a
recommendation.
I was approached on several occasions by individuals at
other institutions about being the SBC on their projects. Their
issue was the time necessary to complete the System for Award
Management Registration Project, SAM. Hearing about a potential
award topic and being able to respond with the required
documentation limits some people with clear specific expertise
to respond.
In my case, I have been doing work at Kennedy Space Center
for a good number of years. But, someone starting fresh would
find it difficult to accomplish registration in the time and
context of a specific project submittal deadline. That clearly
limits fresh innovations. So, I hope these comments have been
helpful. The STTR project over the last seven years has been a
whole lot of fun.
Thank you for your attention.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Nelson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you. I guess, Mr. Rush, let me ask
you, in May Made In Space was selected for two SBIR of Phase II
awards that could be worth about $1.5 million each. If you
could just describe to people that are not as aware of the
program how support from the SBA, and this program, in
particular, has helped you grow to this point as a company.
Mr. Rush. Yeah, absolutely. So we have been very fortunate
to win, I think, over a dozen Phase I and Phase IIs throughout
the eight- or nine-year period that we have grown as a company.
We really started with SBIR, with just an idea, and you know
received our first Phase I, and from there received Phase II
and Phase III actually simultaneously to put printers on the
ISS. And from there, you know, have been able to expand out
that technology space into multiple different areas.
So like those two SBIR Phase II we won recently, one of
those is focused on a structurally interconnected
interferometer in the small satellite that is going to be
manufactured using our space-capable 3D printing technology,
which was the subject of our first SBIR, to make an
interferometer that can spot near-Earth objects if it was put
up in space in a really small form factor.
The other SBIR that we won there is in what we call the
space-enabled materials area that, you know, is going to
manufacture a process class in orbit that because it was made
microgravity, it has these really interesting and economically
viable properties.
So, and we think that is the key to multiple businesses
manufacturing in space that are making, you know, that are
profitably manufacturing things in space that we are using back
here on Earth, which ultimately we think will be the anchor
tenants for commercial space stations and modules in low Earth
orbit, which is, you know, which is the low Earth orbit goal of
the post ISS future.
And all of that has been enabled, you know, by a really
great relationship with NASA and with the SBIR program. Without
SBIR, we probably would not have accomplished the things that
we have accomplished. We certainly would look really, really
different.
Chairman Rubio. Well, Dr. Nelson, and for you Mr. Rush,
both, how would you make SBIR better, easier for other
companies like yourselves to get into this to do what you have
done? What could we do to make it even easier and better than
it is now?
Mr. Rush. Two things come to mind, and both have to do with
speed. As a small business, you know, speed and cash are king.
So the time period between submittal of a proposal and notice
of award, and then, you know, getting on contract, the more
effort that can be spent to compress those timelines the
better. And then----
Chairman Rubio. What are they typically now?
Mr. Rush. Six months, you know, six months to get onto a
six-month contract, and then similarly between Phase I and
Phase II. So phase I's are typically six months and Phase II is
typically two years. There is a gap of three to six months. You
know, you put a proposal into the end of the Phase I and then
you wait three to six months to find out if you won, and then
to get on contract.
And you know, that is a challenge from a cash flow
perspective of you are sort of speculating and saying, okay do
we think this is going to win, do we keep these folks available
for this project, or do we put them on something else? And if
that time period was compressed or if there was no gap, I think
that would enable the program to be that much more effective.
Chairman Rubio. Dr. Nelson, do you have any suggestions on
how to make SBIR even better?
Dr. Nelson. I would certainly agree with Andrew in the
issue between the transition between phases. That is, you know
when you have a team and you have no money for some months,
that is clearly a problem.
Chairman Rubio. But, why do they tell you it takes longer
than you hoped it would? What is your sense of why it takes so
long or longer?
Mr. Rush. I think across multiple agencies, that is the
structure. It is between Phase I and Phase II, you submit your
proposal for Phase II at the end, and then there is, you know,
an evaluation period, and then there is a negotiation period,
and then you get on contract for the Phase II. So that is I
think just kind of the cadences of the program as it is
currently structured.
Chairman Rubio. Meaning this is the way they have always
done it. You know, it is just kind of built into the way it is
handled. That is the culture of the program.
Mr. Rush. Right, right. And you know, and so we as a small
business, you know, we adapt to those rhythms, and, you know,
with via close relationships with the technical folks that we
work with try to get a feel for if that is the direction we are
going to be able to continue to go. But that is certainly a
challenge from a forecasting perspective.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Scott.
Senator Scott. So, what is the benefit of Kennedy Space
Center, NASA's contract with a small company versus a large.
Why should they do business with small companies?
Mr. Rush. Historically, as I have kind of mentioned
earlier, small businesses are the epicenter of innovation in
America, right. Small businesses are, you know, are extremely
capable and sustainable innovation, and where large companies
are good at are very capable, it is the same sustainable
innovation.
And going forward to the moon to stay and on to Mars, we
have to have new ways of doing things, new mission
architectures, new technologies to be able to go and stay. The
way that we have traditionally done, you know, human space
exploration has been some camping trips. And what we need to do
is more like pioneering. We need to go and have manufacturing
technologies to allow us to adapt to the circumstances that
exist, you know, and eventually be able to sort of live off the
land.
You know, the ISRU and other technologies. And you see that
creativity in small business, you know, not to deride our
friends at larger companies, but that is where you see a lot of
innovation, and I think we work really well with larger
companies, where they can say, hey, this is the well-trodden
path that we have gone down and small business can say, hey,
have you thought about doing it this way, and then work very,
very well together.
Dr. Nelson. And I think the other cases, and certainly, we
were one of those, where we have expertise test facilities, so
forth, that really very few other people have.
Senator Scott. Have you--when you got these grants from
Kennedy Space Center, has it allowed you to raise private
money?
Mr. Rush. So as a company, we have never taken diluted
outside capital. We have been fortunate to grow by our
customers. The SBIR program has enabled us to diversify our
client mix. Actually, when we put our first 3D printer on the
space station, the second one we put up was a commercial
printer, and at the time we launched that, we had over a year
of commercial customers including like Fortune 500 companies
and large aerospace companies who were signed up to utilize
that device. So we have been able to, you know, commercialize
that very, very quickly because of SBIR.
Senator Scott. So, how about you, Dr. Nelson?
Dr. Nelson. In our case, we are looking to transition our
technology to in fact large companies for the applications that
I talked about. And so that is really our focus. Simultaneously
with that is looking at our technology and how can that
technology meet other critical needs.
Senator Scott. So how have each of you been able to move
outside of just the government contracting into the private
sector? Have you both been able to do that?
Mr. Rush. So one of the ways that we have been able to move
out, you know, into the private sector, is building on our
expertise in developing manufacturing technologies that work in
a zero-gravity environment. We have developed one and now we
have multiple payloads in development with our own money or
with other private money to make these kinds of space-enabled
materials.
So we have actually launched four times a payload that
makes an exotic optical fiber called Z Bland on the
International Space Station, and this is actually the first
kind of commercial industrial utilization of the space
environment to make a product that because it was manufactured
in space, it has got really, really valuable properties. And we
have both follow-up projects to make bigger and more capable
payloads to make more of that material, as well as just explore
other potential space-enabled materials going forward.
Dr. Nelson. For us, the vision of the project was, in fact,
broad utilization of the technology and thus the importance,
from really day one, the commercialization panel, international
experts who really have the understanding of the use of these
kinds of materials in a broad industry application. And so we
have done that from the beginning, and we have in Phase III--
Phase III, in fact, is commercial industry-funded, not
government-funded, and looking for some very specific high-tech
applications that will utilize our technology.
Senator Scott. So the money you have received from NASA, do
you think NASA has gotten a good return?
Mr. Rush. I would hope so. You know, we have been able to,
you know, just in very practical terms demonstrate technologies
that have accelerated technology road maps with manufacturing,
you know, in space and that kind of local real-time
manufacturing, and how many catalogs that, hey, if this breaks
we can just print this part rather than in bringing more and
more spares and taxing our mass budgets that much more.
That has really been a, you know, really been a kind of
align shift that we hope our friends at NASA have benefited
from. And similarly, with our Archinaut technology, that is a
truly transformational technology for how we are going to
approach manufacturing and assembling satellites. You know, and
going forward, you know, one day we think that maybe the sort
of successors to James Webb, you know, will be manufactured and
assembled in orbit in a much more, you know, efficient fashion
and a much more reliable fashion than maybe we can currently
accomplish.
Dr. Nelson. Materials are enablers and thus what NASA in
fact wanted was materials that could have multiple
applications. And so yes, you have a flexible polyurethane foam
that can be used to repair cryo lines rather than the hazard of
using a spray insulation in space, but simultaneously with
that, you have a material that can be used for a whole variety
of other applications.
For example, I mentioned packaging and meeting the Air
Force packaging standard. So yes, I think they have not only
got their money's worth but beyond that given its commercial
utilization, one has it at a price of a couple of dollars a
pound. In fact, it is very affordable.
Senator Scott. What would you think if NASA said the next
time, they said, I am going to give you a grant, but I am going
to take out royalties if you use anything you have learned from
this if you use it for the private sector. What would you think
about that?
Dr. Nelson. But in fact, we are doing that under
confidentiality agreements with a number of key potential
users. So we are actually doing that.
Senator Scott. So NASA has a royalty interest?
Dr. Nelson. NASA would not have a royalty interest. That is
the NASA royalty is based upon any NASA application is royalty-
free. But the small business may, in fact, get royalties on the
basis of private sector use.
Senator Scott. If you were spending--if you were given the
money out of your NASA, do you think they should ask for a
royalty?
Dr. Nelson. No, I think that increases the complexity,
which is already complex enough, and I think the key for NASA
is in fact that they are able to use those materials for their
applications in a very cost-effective way. And I think what it
does is decrease the cost for them when we can get it out into
the commercial sector.
Mr. Rush. So we have been very fortunate to grow, you know,
in double several times in the last, you know, last four or
five years, and we have taken the long view and said, hey, we
have this great technology and we are really fortunate we have
some really smart folks on our team that are able to invent
these great things, but we want to get to product. We want to
get to the capability. We want to change the way, you know,
broad-based satellites are manufactured for government and for
commercial. We want to make human spaceflight missions safer
and more reliable through in-space manufacturing.
And as such, we take basically every dollar that we have we
plow it back into the business, to grow the business more
aggressively and to do internal research and development to
help move the needle on this technology. And our partners at
NASA generally, and the SBIR program specifically, have been
great allies in that endeavor. I would view--I think that
taking a royalty in that technology would serve as a drag on
that, you know, on a scaling-up because rather than us being
able to take that money and put it back in the business to grow
bigger and faster, you know, that money would be diverted
somewhere else.
Senator Scott. Thank you. Thanks, Senator Rubio.
Chairman Rubio. Congressman Waltz.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Senator. I want to commend you both
for, you know, as an entrepreneur as well for just sliding
everything that you ever thought you owned, planned to own,
aspire to own, and you know across the table for a product, for
an idea, for a service, that you believe in. Mr. Rush. I do not
see how we get the quantities of stuff that we need back and
forth from Earth. We have to manufacture it in space in terms
of getting to the moon, getting to Mars, and really getting the
infrastructure that we need up there.
I want to take a step back for a moment and go back to
human capital and, you know, on the one hand, I have five great
universities in my district producing a lot of STEM talent and
other talent, vocational as well, but I also hear from a lot of
manufacturers, a lot of industry that they cannot find the
skills that they need. We would love for you to share your
experiences in terms of your human recruiting and what you are
seeing out there in the workplace.
Mr. Rush. The very first job I had in the space industry
was working for this really small rocket company called Masten
Space Systems in Mojave, California, which Mojave is in the
middle of the desert in Southern California, and some of the
other space companies out there kind of joke that one of the
things that folks do is when they hire people out there and
they bring their spouses, they see how much their spouses cry
at, you know, being in this little like you know one truck stop
town. But people go and work in Mojave and they come and work
in this industry, in this economy, more generally because of
the incredible transformational capability and potential that
we have.
We believe that what we are working on and the space
economy, you know, has the potential to be as disruptive to our
daily lives in America both from a military perspective and
from a fiscal perspective as, you know, sort of the e-commerce
revolution. And because of that, as a small company we have
been able to find and, you know, attract talent and retaining
talent as we have grown. It is absolutely essential that, you
know, programs, you know, from kindergarten through post-
secondary education encourage people to understand STEM and
view it as something that is accessible.
You know, in my hometown of Jacksonville we have a really
prolific FIRST Robotics team that, you know, from elementary on
getting folks really involved in that. And I think those things
are really, really important. The other thing that I think is
important from a workforce development perspective is focusing
not just on the engineering jobs, but on, you know, on all the
disciplines it takes to run a successful business and to grow a
successful business. It is just as important for us to have
really talented finance folks as it is to have really talented
engineers.
Mr. Waltz. I am from Jacksonville as well, Mr. Rush. Just
great to see such talented entrepreneurs coming out of there.
Dr. Gordon, anything?
Dr. Nelson. Yes, and I think that is where perhaps STTRs
are a little more special particularly with a university as the
SBIR. As I said, in our program, we have had fourteen students.
All but one of those, in fact, has become an engineer. And as I
said, of the six Masters students involved, five of those have
been women so that one, STTRs I think are special. And that in
fact, the students have commented that they appreciated the
exposure to real industrial applications with the
responsibility of real project goals and real timelines.
So they are getting a chance to see all of that. And one
student, the lead Master student, in fact, has done a fantastic
job in managing a project group and learning how to do that.
And so I think that STTRs really have a great opportunity to
extend STEM into the real world and get students excited about
it.
Mr. Waltz. Well, thank you. One other questions, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Rubio. Yes, of course.
Mr. Waltz. If time allows. I want to follow up with what
Senator Scott was kind of pressing on in terms of put yourself
in NASA shoes, put yourself in the government's shoes, there
are a lot of reasons we have these types of hearings and our
oversight role. You know, in hearing from industry, what would
you do different? I have so far cash flow. Cash is king and I
know it is brutal when one we don't have it, and two when you
cannot predict when you are going to have it.
So if I hear you correctly, Dr. Nelson, providing those, at
least those very initial small grants upfront. If I heard you
correctly also, getting away from SAM registration in terms of
speeding. I don't know how we would get around that. Maybe some
regulatory exemptions. I am not sure if I hear you properly
there.
Dr. Nelson. Correct. I think it may well be a regulatory
exemption but certainly looking at the process and how can one
ensure that those who are not already in the grant business
can, in fact, bring their special technology to bear on the key
agency needs.
Mr. Waltz. But that is exactly what I--that is kind of what
I wanted to get into my last question. So there are a number of
companies out there that have the expertise and have products
that NASA and the military need in spaces.
Is there anything else that you can think of and how to
pull them kind of into the ecosystem, that would make it more
attractive, easier? I know in my own experience, I recall a
study from Ernst & Young that anyone seeking to do business
with the government had to add anywhere from 20 to 30 percent
in overhead to handle all of the regulatory requirements. While
we all have each other here, is there anything else that you
recommend?
Dr. Nelson. I think focusing heavily on the sort of post
Phase II directions of things is important. As we heard
earlier, you know, there is Phase II E, there is sequential
Phase II. There is, you know, lots of other tools available.
But there existed, you know, sort of technology wasteland,
right. You know, these really great transformational
technologies that you know, bought for and, you know, paid for,
a few million dollars more or a few hundred thousand dollars
more, and from a space technology perspective, that is a huge
opportunity for improvement. That if we can smooth the path and
provide multiple paths up that TRL ladder to get to not only to
higher, you know, prototype technologies, but to get to flight
heritage technologies. I think that that would be an area to
really, you know, an area worth exploring and improving.
Mr. Rush. I think my concern is on the start side. And that
is, how do you help young entrepreneurs, how do you help young
academics, get into the process in a speed that they can do and
without the initial cash investment, which they can't do? So,
you know, whether that is a special program or not, perhaps,
but I think there is--you know, I have been in academia for a
long, long time, and I know there are a lot of ideas that are
really beyond the cutting edge. And I think a question is, how
can you tap those? How can you get those more quickly into the
NASA and other government agency utilization? And that is
really my concern.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you. Thank you both. Senator, I yield my
time.
Chairman Rubio. You know, just to close the loop, I think
people would be shocked at how much of the things that we deal
with every single day began as a government research project to
solve a space, national security, or scientific need. So, you
know all the press clippings about Uber and Lyft and all that,
they would not exist without GPS technology that was first
innovated, I think it was a DARPA project. Same thing with the
internet. The internet started as a government project. There
are others. I wrote a list here. The first programmable
computer was not made by Apple or by Microsoft and some you
guys, it was the result of a government need for optical
scanners. Apparently low-fat mozzarella cheese. I do not know--
--
[Laughter.]
So, maybe I should have left that one out. But the point
being that these are all, and it strikes me that some of the
things you are both talking about doing have extraordinary
commercial application, but they also have DOD applications as
well.
I want to use as an example. I would imagine if you were
deployed halfway around the world, it is going to be a lot
easier for troops in the field or major craft carrier to solve
a problem it has by being able to carry enough raw material to
manufacture on board and spare a part that they need or
solution they need than it would be to have it shipped there.
The logistical challenges of getting things there. Likewise
with the materials that you were talking about, Dr. Nelson.
So I want to talk a little bit about the DOD part of it.
Now, we are in the NASA facility that we have already outlined
how they interplay with one another. I think that DOD is about
half--my notes say about half of SBIR awards, but it continues
to experience sort of a shrinking industrial base where we are
seeing more and more of the procurements are going to, a larger
piece is going to less and less contractors, large contractors.
I wanted to ask you both, have you had experience and what has
your experience been doing the SBIR program with the DOD, the
Department of Defense?
Mr. Rush. So to your point about, you know, having local
manufacturing being something that could be really helpful to a
warfighter, one of the interesting things that we found when we
developed the 3D printer for the space station is that making a
printer that can survive a rocket and then operate in space
means that you also have made a printer that you can put on
like a submarine or in a small draft vessel at sea and have it
successfully operate----
Chairman Rubio. Or an oil rig?
Mr. Rush. Yeah, or an oil rig. Exactly. So those are areas
that we have explored some and, you know, done some initial
testing on, but I think to another one of your points that we
do see on the DOD side, you know, perhaps a larger percentage
of the pie being driven by very large contractors. So the
transition sometimes from, you know, from NASA SBIR and
development over to DOD or from, you know, tech to operational
can be a significant hill to climb.
And, you know, the fact that we are, you know, making that
hill easier to climb would be really great. Likewise, we have
also done some good work on SBIRs for Air Force and for DARPA,
and their cycles are a little bit different than NASA. You
know, they have maybe more frequent cycles, but generally, you
know, during, those processes have been very good and kind of
system-focused rather than component-focused
Chairman Rubio. Dr. Nelson.
Dr. Nelson. Yes, I mentioned an army SBIR, and basically
what that was all about was a small inner line. And so if you
have a vehicle and you have a shell coming into it, it is the
metal that hits the spall liner and that is to stop shell
fragments from going on around the vehicle. The whole idea is
to have an inner liner. So whatever happens to that vehicle,
the vehicle tumble, so forth, you now have a flexible inner
liner which will be an energy-absorbing material. So you will
have less injury of those people inside the vehicle.
So our material could have played, in fact, a role. Or as I
mentioned, since it was an SBIR in DOD, you had the company
needed to spend 50 percent of project direct expense. Well,
that immediately excludes the sole proprietorship. So we then
had to go out, get a company that would be the SBC, very
interesting company but did not have the direct spall liner
relationship that we in fact had. So I think there is an
example were setting something up that does not allow certain
kinds of companies to participate simply limits innovation.
Chairman Rubio. In the Phase III part of the program, where
you can there is some opportunity for sole source, which is a
huge back-end carrot that draws people into the program and no
longer involves the direct funding, it is a contract if by
chance you got it, but we have heard, at least that on the DOD
side, many of the small businesses say they have mixed results
with the contracting officers. Some of them know about it. Some
of them don't or they are not as fully informed about all the
attributes of the program. Have you had that experience with
DOD or anyone for that matter in your work? Either one?
Mr. Rush. Yeah, we certainly experienced varying levels of
education at the contractor level about----
Chairman Rubio. Just to let people know, this is the person
at the agency or the branch or whatever that is your liaison,
your inner interface.
Mr. Rush. Absolutely. So we have had very varying
experiences there because it is a powerful tool not just for us
as a small business, but for, you know, for folks within a
given agency trying to accomplish things, right, to say, hey,
we can avoid the competition process, we can just sole source.
You know, not only that but we have also had some times we
run into issues where, you know, with the SBIR law says that if
you have a technology that extends, derives, or completes work
that was done on an initial Phase I, you should go back to that
first SBIR awardee and have them do that work unless you can,
you know, tell your SBIR, here is a reason why not. Those two
things. We have seen varying levels of education, and sometimes
folks really educated about that and other times, you know,
other times there are some opportunities for improvement there
that could lead to things maybe not being accomplished in the
ways that they might otherwise be accomplished or going slower
than we would otherwise like.
You know, from a NASA perspective and from a DOD
perspective, like going fast is really crucial right now. We
are--China is out publicly saying, hey, we are going to in-
space manufacture and assemble giant solar ray farms and, you
know, we want to get back to the moon and stay, you know, and
by 2024. Both of those are things where we cannot, you know, we
do not have the luxury of missing some quarters as it were.
Chairman Rubio. Dr. Nelson.
Dr. Nelson. I really don't have a comment.
Chairman Rubio. So, let me ask you about my last question
for both of you, and this touches on the large, but I think
small businesses and mid-sized businesses have a special
problem with this potentially.
We are all aware you invent something unique and there are
companies and countries out there that specialize in finding
out what it is you are doing and reverse engineering, and all
of a sudden you wake up one day and realize even if you have
never done business in that country, that either someone stole
it from you through a cyber intrusion, or you had an employee
that gave it to them for money. It happens all the time. So it
would be interesting if the American taxpayer is helping you an
American company build this capacity that is in our national
interest, and we have done all this work and taking all the
risk, and all of a sudden we wake up one day and we find that,
for example, China is doing what we do, except their company is
funded and backed by the government and so they are now
competing with you in the commercial space with the advantage
of not having to initial make a profit so they can drive the
price down and force you out.
Do you feel you are properly postured, and do you have the
defenses that you need against whether it is a cyber intrusion
on the intellectual property--I know what the law is about. You
know, patents and protecting things legally. We know how well
that works in parts like China and other places. Do you both
feel like you have what you need to protect yourself whether it
is a cyber intrusion or insider transfer, and how real risk is
that moving forward? And how much do you think about that?
Mr. Rush. So I think what you have just described as a CEO
of a small company, it is something that I think about, but it
is also something that we almost view is as unchangeable as the
weather, right. That is the environment that we operate in,
that we play in.
And there are folks within the government that, you know,
on a sort of an ad hoc basis have reached out to us and said,
hey, you are in this emerging technology field, here are best
practices, and I think that is really, really great. Perhaps
like systematizing that and focusing that on SBIR would be
prudent one day, but really our approach to that is our
approach to any competitor, to any competitive, you know,
outside force, which is to just go as fast as we can, and trust
our team, and trust the innovations that we have, and
ultimately do our best to be successful that way.
Chairman Rubio. Any comments, Dr. Nelson.
Dr. Nelson. In our case, and with chemicals materials, is
that we are not doing patents, we are doing trade secrets. The
reason we don't do patents is the purpose of patents is to give
away the technology.
Now, these polyurethane foams are very complex technology,
which is very difficult. In fact, to do analysis to find out
really how they are made is just what the constituents are, but
how you do it. And so from a technology protection standpoint,
it has been trade secret and working with companies only after
a nondisclosure agreement. And so certainly that has been
working very well for us.
Chairman Rubio. And one of the areas, to close the loop on
it, that we have been concerned about is small and midsize
businesses are facing nation-state level cyber threat, but do
not have nation-state, much less large corporate cyber
defensive posture capability because of the cost associated
with is real costs. I mean, we have some of the largest
companies in America having massive data breaches. So just
imagine how difficult it is for someone who is busy innovating
and spending all their time, energy, and resources on making
something.
And so we have seen numerous cities and municipal entities
in Florida be held hostage, had to pay ransom, to someone
probably from North Korea in order to get their records back.
So it is an area that we filed some legislation on that we
do want to sort of incorporate as part of what we are doing
because it is a 21st century threat. You don't even have to
have somebody here. You can get into the network because it
could be as simple as somebody clicking on an attachment that
they shouldn't, and obviously we want to make sure that we can
figure out the best way as part of these programs to also
protect it, because these technologies are also in our
competitive advantage and some cases are not just trade
secrets, they are in our national interest, potentially our
national security interests to become a significant strategic
advantage. Anyone have anything else?
[No response.]
I want to thank you both for being here. I think it has
been insightful and helpful. Congratulations on your success,
and we look forward to seeing you both again. Thank you.
Again, I want to thank Congressman Waltz, my colleague
Senator Scott for being here today as part of this hearing. As
I said, we are moving over next week to hopefully reauthorizing
all of this. So a lot of these comments that we have gotten
here today are going to be very helpful in that regard. And I
want to, of course, thank all of our witnesses and our two
panels for being a part of this.
The hearing record will stay open for two weeks. You may
get some questions from my colleagues around the country that
are not here today. We only ask if you could answer them just
because they become part of our record and we point to this
when we do legislation, we point to testimony and things that
are said to justify why we are for something or why we are
against something, so it is helpful. That record is going to
stay open for two weeks so any statements or questions for the
record are going to be submitted by the 2nd of August at 5:00
p.m.
Thank you again. With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:15 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[all]