- DOE MODERNIZATION: LEGISLATION ADDRESSING CYBERSECURITY AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
DOE MODERNIZATION: LEGISLATION ADDRESSING
CYBERSECURITY AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MARCH 14, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-108
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-558
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee
GENE GREEN, Texas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi
G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey
DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
JERRY McNERNEY, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
Subcommittee on Energy
FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
GENE GREEN, Texas
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi
MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
KATHY CASTOR, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
PAUL TONKO, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
Massachusetts
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
officio)
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
3
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................
21
Prepared statement...........................................
22
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................
23
Witnesses
Mark Menezes, Under Secretary, U.S. Department of Energy.........
25
Prepared statement...........................................
28
Answers to submitted questions...............................
169
Tristan Vance, Director, Chief Energy Officer, Indiana Office of
Energy Development.............................................
64
Prepared statement...........................................
67
Zachary Tudor, Associate Laboratory Director for National and
Homeland Security, Idaho National Laboratory...................
77
Prepared statement...........................................
79
Mark Engels, Senior Enterprise Security Advisor, Dominion Energy.
86
Prepared statement...........................................
88
Kyle Pitsor, Vice President, Government Relations, National
Electrical Manufacturers Association...........................
104
Prepared statement...........................................
106
Scott Aaronson, Vice President, Security and Preparedness, Edison
Electric Institute.............................................
117
Prepared statement...........................................
119
Submitted Material
H.R. 5174........................................................
5
H.R. 5175........................................................
7
H.R. 5239........................................................
10
H.R. 5240........................................................
14
Statement of the American Public Power Association and the
National Rural Electric Cooperative Association................
140
Report entitled, ``Cybersecurity Program Update,'' The American
Puclic Power Association,......................................
143
Letter of January 24, 2018, from the Committee to Secretary of
Energy Rick Perry..............................................
155
Letter of March 13, 2018, from Secretary of Energy Rick Perry to
the Subcommittee on Energy.....................................
158
Statement of Siemens Energy......................................
165
DOE MODERNIZATION: LEGISLATION ADDRESSING CYBERSECURITY AND EMERGENCY
RESPONSE
----------
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 14, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Fred Upton
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Upton, Olson, Barton,
Shimkus, Latta, Harper, McKinley, Kinzinger, Griffith, Johnson,
Long, Bucshon, Mullin, Hudson, Walberg, Duncan, Walden (ex
officio), Rush, McNerney, Peters, Castor, Sarbanes, Welch,
Tonko, Loebsack, Butterfield, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Mike Bloomquist, Staff Director; Daniel
Butler, Staff Assistant; Kelly Collins, Legislative Clerk,
Energy/Environment; Jordan Davis, Director of Policy and
External Affairs; Wyatt Ellertson, Professional Staff, Energy/
Environment; Margaret Tucker Fogarty, Staff Assistant; Adam
Fromm, Director of Outreach and Coalitions; Jordan Haverly,
Policy Coordinator, Environment; Ben Lieberman, Senior Counsel,
Energy; Mary Martin, Chief Counsel, Energy/Environment; Drew
McDowell, Executive Assistant; Brandon Mooney, Deputy Chief
Counsel, Energy; Mark Ratner, Policy Coordinator; Annelise
Rickert, Counsel, Energy; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary; Peter
Spencer, Professional Staff Member, Energy; Jason Stanek,
Senior Counsel, Energy; Austin Stonebraker, Press Assistant;
Madeline Vey, Policy Coordinator, Digital Commerce and Consumer
Protection; Hamlin Wade, Special Advisor, External Affairs;
Everett Winnick, Director of Information Technology; Priscilla
Barbour, Minority Energy Fellow; Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff
Director; Jean Fruci, Minority Energy and Environment Policy
Advisor; Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Deputy Staff Director and
Chief Health Advisor; Rick Kessler, Minority Senior Advisor and
Staff Director, Energy and Environment; John Marshall, Minority
Policy Coordinator; Alexander Ratner, Minority Policy Analyst;
and C.J. Young, Minority Press Secretary.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN
Mr. Upton. Good morning. Good morning. So, this DOE
modernization hearing is going to focus on the proposed
legislation relating to core energy security missions of the
Department. This mission is to ensure the supply and delivery
of energy that is vital to our economic and national security,
our public welfare, and health.
For the last two Congresses we have been working to update
the Department's authorities and capabilities both to mitigate
against and respond to energy supply emergencies, especially
with respect to critical energy infrastructure and to
cybersecurity.
For example, we directed the Department to modernize its
strategic petroleum reserve and response capabilities. We
clarified and enhanced DOE's role as the sector-specific agency
for the energy sector, especially for critical electric
infrastructure. We moved through the House H.R. 3050 last
summer to strengthen DOE's support for state energy emergency
offices in their cybersecurity efforts and the common theme has
been to update DOE's cybersecurity and emergency coordinating
functions and provisions of technical assistance to other
agencies, states, and asset owners. So in keeping with these
modernization efforts, the legislation today continues that
work.
H.R. 5174, the Energy Emergency Leadership Act, introduced
by Mr. Walberg and Ranking Member Rush, elevates the role in
DOE and specifies certain emergency and preparedness functions
to ensure full attention to the risks of cybersecurity and
other threats to the energy sector.
Given the reliance on energy in modern society, ensuring
that supply has become of such surpassing importance that we
have to be able to make sure that the agency has sufficient
leadership focus to meet its responsibilities.
Similarly, H.R. 5175, the Pipeline and LNG Facility
Cybersecurity Preparedness Act, which I introduced along with
Mr. Loebsack would enhance DOE's ability to coordinate the
interconnected systems of energy delivery and supply which
includes ensuring the security of digital systems in pipeline
and grid operations.
Although several governmental authorities play a role, DOE
has got to have the adequate visibility across the energy
sector to ensure the Federal, State, and asset owners are
sufficiently prepared and coordinated and to efficiently
deploy, where needed, its world class technological
capabilities. This bill certainly aims to assure that it can be
done.
Both H.R. 5239, the Cyber Sense Act of 2018, and H.R. 5240,
the Enhancing Grid Security Through Public-Private Partnership
Act, have been introduced by Mr. Latta and Mr. McNerney, two
leaders on grid innovation. The Cyber Sense bill, a version of
which passed the House as part of H.R. 8 back in 2016, seeks to
establish a voluntary DOE program that would permit cybersecure
products intended for use in the bulk-power system.
And the Enhancing Grid Security Act bill seeks to
facilitate and encourage public-private partnerships aimed at
strengthening the physical and cybersecurity electric
utilities, especially mid-size and small utilities which may
not have met the resources to identify and address
cybersecurity vulnerabilities and system risks.
Two panels of witnesses this morning are going to provide
their perspective on these bills and discuss what other
measures may be helpful to ensure DOE can fulfill its energy
security and emergency missions.
I want to welcome back Undersecretary of Energy Mark
Menezes, who returns from his appearance in January. I look
forward to his comments and to talk about his own plans to
elevate DOE's leadership in emergency response. He's
accompanied by Pat Hoffman, Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary in the Office of Electricity, who can provide
technical perspective from her experience addressing
cybersecurity and energy emergency functions.
Our second panel will feature a range of energy security
and emergency perspectives. One witness from DOE's Idaho
National Lab will help us understand federal capabilities to
support cybersecurity in the energy sector.
We are going to hear from the State of Indiana's Emergency
Response Authority from Dominion Energy on pipeline security
from EEI on electric cybersecurity and from the National
Electrical Manufacturers Association to talk about
cybersecurity of grid components.
We welcome you all and with that I would yield to the
ranking member of the subcommittee, my friend, Mr. Rush.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton
Our DOE modernization hearing today will focus on proposed
legislation relating to a core energy security mission of the
Department. This mission is to ensure the supply and delivery
of energy that is vital to our economic and national security,
our public health and welfare.
For the past two Congresses we've been working to update
the Department's authorities and capabilities both to mitigate
against and respond to energy supply emergencies, especially
with respect to critical energy infrastructure and to
cybersecurity.
For example, we directed the Department to modernize its
strategic petroleum reserve and response capabilities; we
clarified and enhanced DOE's role as the sector specific agency
for the energy sector, especially for critical electric
infrastructure; we moved through the House H.R. 3050 last
summer to strengthen DOE's support for state energy emergency
offices and their cybersecurity efforts.
The common theme here is to update DOE's cybersecurity and
emergency coordinating functions and provision of technical
assistance to other agencies, states, and asset owners. So, in
keeping with these modernization efforts, the legislation today
continues this work.
H.R. 5174, the Energy Emergency Leadership Act, introduced
by Mr. Walberg and Ranking Member Rush, elevates the role in
DOE and specifies certain emergency and preparedness functions
to ensure full attention to the risks of cybersecurity and
other threats to the energy sector.
Given the reliance on energy in modern society, ensuring
its supply has become of such surpassing importance, we should
be sure the agency has sufficient leadership focus to meet its
responsibilities.
Similarly, H.R. 5175, the Pipeline and LNG Facility
Cybersecurity Preparedness Act, which I introduced along with
Mr. Loebsack, would enhance DOE's ability to coordinate the
interconnected systems of energy delivery and supply, which
includes ensuring the security of digital systems in pipeline
and grid operations.
Although several governmental authorities play a role, DOE
must have adequate visibility across the energy sector, to
ensure the Federal, State, and asset owners are sufficiently
prepared and coordinated, and to efficiently deploy, where
needed, its world class technological capabilities. This bill
aims to assure this can be done.
Both H.R. 5239, the Cyber Sense Act of 2018, and H.R. 5240,
the Enhancing Grid Security through Public-Private Partnership
Act, have been introduced by Mr. Latta and Mr. McNerney, two
leaders on grid innovation. The Cyber Sense bill, a version of
which passed the House as part of H.R. 8 in 2016, seeks to
establish a voluntary DOE program that would promote cyber-
secure products intended for use in the bulk-power system.
The Enhancing Grid Security bill seeks to facilitate and
encourage public-private partnerships aimed at strengthening
the physical and cybersecurity of electric utilities,
especially mid-sized and small utilities, which may not have
the resources to identify and address cybersecurity
vulnerabilities and system risks.
Two panels of witnesses this morning will provide
perspective on these bills and discuss what other measures may
be helpful to ensure DOE can fulfill its energy security and
emergency missions.
I'd like to welcome back Under Secretary of Energy Mark
Menezes, who returns from his appearance in January. I look
forward to his comments and to talk about his own plans to
elevate DOE's leadership on emergency response. He is
accompanied by Pat Hoffman, Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary in the Office of Electricity, who can provide
technical perspective from her experience addressing
cybersecurity and energy emergencies.
Our second panel features a range of energy security and
emergency perspectives. Our witness from DOE's Idaho National
Lab will help us understand federal capabilities to support
cybersecurity in the energy sector.
We'll hear from the State of Indiana's emergency response
authority; we'll hear from Dominion Energy on pipeline
security, from the Edison Electric Institute on electric
cybersecurity, and from National Electrical Manufacturers
Association, to talk about cybersecurity of grid components.
Welcome, and I look forward to the discussion.
[H.R. 5174, H.R. 5175, H.R. 5239, and H.R. 5240 follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this important hearing today on legislation addressing
cybersecurity and emergency response.
Mr. Chairman, I support the four bills before us and I want
to specifically and respectfully acknowledge Mr. Walberg of
Michigan who worked with my office on the Energy Emergency
Leadership Act. This bill will establish a new DOE assistant
secretary position with jurisdiction over all energy emergency
and security functions related to energy supply,
infrastructure, and cybersecurity.
Mr. Chairman, while cybersecurity is an important issue, I
would be remiss if I did not point out that today at this very
same time students have declared this as National Walk-Out Day.
And as we speak, Mr. Chairman, students from across the country
are leaving their classrooms to honor the lives of the 17
people killed at Stoneman Douglas High School last month and to
press policy makers to pass commonsense gun control laws.
Mr. Chairman, cybersecurity is a serious issue that must be
addressed. However, nothing can be more urgent than answering
the cries and the pleas emanating from our Nation's youth--
students who have had enough of being scared and anxious and
frustrated by the lack of leadership coming from both the
administration and this Congress on the issue of gun violence.
Mr. Chairman, as policy makers, as parents, as
grandparents, as adults, and as leaders we are failing our
youth by letting politics and influential interest groups come
before our most sacred responsibility, and that is protecting
our children.
Mr. Chairman, every single Democrat on the four Energy and
Commerce committees sent a letter to Chairman Walden on March
7th urging him to hold hearings as soon as possible to address
gun violence in America. That followed a February 16th letter
also signed by all 24 Democrats on the full committee to
Chairman Walden and Health Subcommittee Chairman Burgess urging
the Republican leadership to hold a hearing as soon as possible
on federal investment in gun violence prevention research.
Mr. Chairman, we owe it to our children at the very least
to examine this problem in a serious and thoughtful manner and
I can assure you that this issue will come up again and again,
regardless of the planned topic of discussion until we hold a
hearing.
With that, I yield the remainder of my time to my friend
and colleague from California, Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the ranking member for yielding
and the chairman for holding this hearing.
Today, we will examine several legislative proposals
concerning our Nation's grid security. As co-chairs of the Grid
Innovation Caucus, Bob Latta and I are focused on providing a
forum that advocates for grid investments and examines the
risks and opportunities with our grid.
Our work, through the Grid Caucus, has led to the
introduction of two bills we will discussing today. H.R. 5239,
the Cyber Sense Act of 2018 would create a program to identify
cybersecure products for the bulk power grid system through
testing and verification. The bulk power system is the backbone
of American industry and provides all the benefits of reliable
electric power to the American people. It's essential that we
make this system as secure as possible as cyberattacks pose a
serious threat to our electric grid. Any vulnerable components
of our grid is a threat to our security and this bill will go a
long way to strengthen our system.
Mr. Latta and I are also co-leads of H.R. 5240, the
Enhancing Grid Security Through Public-Private Partnerships
Act. This bill will create a program to enhance the physical
and cybersecurity of electric utilities through assessing
security vulnerabilities, increase cybersecurity training, and
data collection. It will also require the interruption cost
estimate calculator, which is used to calculate the return on
investment on utility investments, to be updated at least every
2 years to ensure accurate calculations.
These two bipartisan bills, along with the other bills we
have before us today, will help put us on the path to better
securing our electric utility system.
I welcome the panelists and look forward to hearing their
insights on the useful of our legislation and how it may be
improved.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Upton. Gentleman's time is expired.
The chair will recognize the chairman of the full
committee, the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Walden.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON
Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank my colleague from California for his good
work on these issues. This is really important stuff for our
country and those of us who have been briefed up on it know the
importance of the work that's going on in our agencies and the
security issues that are really before us.
Today's hearing examines legislation addressing
cybersecurity and emergency response. It will help us respond
to some of the most urgent challenges--the reliability of our
Nation's energy infrastructure. Because our energy
infrastructure drives the entire Nation's economy, I've made it
a top priority for this committee to focus on emerging threats
and proposed solutions to make our infrastructure more
resilient. We are looking ahead to make sure we are doing
everything we can to protect our electric grid and our oil and
natural gas infrastructure as well and improve our ability to
respond when the unexpected happens.
Because nearly all of our Nation's energy infrastructure is
privately owned and operated, the Federal Government needs to
work closely with representatives of the energy sector and the
companies in the supply chain that manufacture equipment and
technologies. In today's highly interconnected world, the
threat of cyberattacks is ever present. So we have to be
vigilant. We must also be prepared for physical threats whether
they be sabotage or natural disasters like the hurricanes we
experienced last year.
As the sector-specific agency for energy, the Department of
Energy has a very important coordinating role to play and this
function was on display earlier this year in response to
Hurricanes Nate, Maria, Irma, and Harvey. Many of us followed
DOE's situation reports on the storms' impacts and the energy
industry's recovery and restoration activities. The Department
of Energy's emergency responders in the field provided critical
subject matter expertise and assisted with waivers and special
permits to aid restoration. To prevent a major fuel supply
emergency, the Department of Energy's strategic petroleum
reserve provided much-needed oil to refiners. TDOE also
analyzed electricity supply to determine whether it needed to
draw on its Federal Power Act authorities to secure the energy
grid.
So today's hearing will examine four bipartisan bills
designed to improve DOE's energy security and emergency
response authorities. I want to thank all our members for
working across the aisle on these important issues.
I join Chairman Upton in welcoming back Under Secretary of
Energy Mark Menezes to our panel. I look forward to your
comments on the Department of Energy's security priorities and
its views on the legislation.
I also want to welcome the witnesses appearing on the
second panel where we will hear a range of perspectives from
state government, the energy industry, and supply chain
manufacturers. We are also joined by a witness from DOE's Idaho
National Lab. I was there on Monday. I very much appreciated
the briefings including the classified ones and so I am very
impressed by the work that goes on at INL and our country
should be very proud of the incredible men and women and the
work they do there in every regard. I also saw the unique
capabilities to test system wide cybersecurity applications on
a full scale electric grid loop. INL is one of 17 DOE national
labs tackling the critical scientific challenges of our time
and the threats that come our way and I want to thank INL
leadership and staff for sharing their research and expertise
with the Committee.
This subcommittee has held dozens of hearings on energy
infrastructure and produced several bipartisan bills to improve
the resilience and reliability of our Nation's energy delivery
system and these bills will ultimately make our nation more
energy secure, reduce the cost of fuels and electricity for
consumers.
So at the end of the day, if we focus on what's best for
consumers we will continue to make good public policy
decisions.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time and thank our witnesses for their participation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden
Today's hearing, examining legislation addressing
cybersecurity and emergency response, will help us respond to
some of the most urgent challenges to the reliability of our
Nation's energy infrastructure. Because our energy
infrastructure drives the entire Nation's economy, I've made it
a top priority for the committee to focus on emerging threats
and propose solutions to make our infrastructure more
resilient. We're looking ahead, to make sure we're doing
everything we can to protect our electric grid and our oil and
natural gas infrastructure, and to improve our ability to
respond when the unexpected happens.
Because nearly all our Nation's energy infrastructure is
privately owned and operated, the Federal Government needs to
work closely with representatives of the energy sector and the
companies in the supply chain that manufacture equipment and
technologies. In today's highly interconnected world, the
threat of cyber-attacks is ever present, so we must be
vigilant. We must also be prepared for physical threats,
whether they be sabotage or natural disasters, like the
hurricanes we experienced this summer.
As the sector-specific agency for energy, the Department of
Energy has a very important coordinating role to play. This
function was on display earlier this year in response to
hurricanes Nate, Maria, Irma and Harvey. Many of us followed
DOE's situation reports on the storms' impacts and the energy
industry's recovery and restoration activities. DOE's emergency
responders in the field provided critical subject matter
expertise and assisted with waivers and special permits to aid
restoration. To prevent a major fuel supply emergency, DOE's
Strategic Petroleum Reserve provided much needed oil to
refiners. DOE also analyzed electricity supply to determine
whether it needed to draw on its Federal Power Act authorities
to secure the grid.
Today's hearing will examine four bipartisan bills designed
to improve DOE's energy security and emergency response
authorities. I want to thank our members for working across the
aisle on these important issues.
I join Chairman Upton in welcoming back Under Secretary of
Energy Mark Menezes to join our first panel. I look forward to
his comments on the department's energy security priorities and
its views on the legislation.
I also want to welcome the witnesses appearing on the
second panel. We'll hear a range of perspectives from state
government, the energy industry, and supply chain
manufacturers. We're also joined by a witness from DOE's Idaho
National Lab, which I had the privilege of visiting earlier
this week. Idaho National Lab, or INL, is the nation's leading
nuclear research laboratory. INL also has unique capabilities
to test system-wide cybersecurity applications on a full scale
electric grid loop. INL is one of seventeen DOE national labs
tackling the critical scientific challenges of our time and I
want to thank INL leadership and staff for sharing their
research and expertise with the Committee.
This subcommittee has held dozens of hearings on energy
infrastructure and produced several bipartisan bills to improve
the resilience and reliability of our Nation's energy delivery
systems. These bills will ultimately make our nation more
energy secure and reduce the cost of fuels and electricity for
consumers. At the end of the day, if we focus on what's best
for consumers we'll continue make good policy decisions.
Mr. Upton. Gentleman yields back.
The chair recognizes the ranking member of the full
committee, the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Pallone.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing revolves around a quartet of bipartisan
bills designed to enhance the security of our Nation's energy
infrastructure. However, before we get to cybersecurity, I'd
like to talk for a minute about the security of our Nation's
children.
Today, 1 month has passed since the tragic shootings at
Marjorie Stoneman Douglas High School that took the lives of 17
children and educators, and as we sit here students all across
the Nation have just completed a 17-minute walkout in memory of
those killed in that attack as well as to protest this body's
refusal to take action on the gun violence epidemic.
Students and their families are justifiably frustrated with
the inaction here in Washington. They are sick and tired of a
president who says one thing in front of the cameras and then
works behind the scenes to push the NRA agenda as soon as he
thinks the cameras are focused somewhere else. And they are
also sick and tired of a Republican leadership in Congress that
won't move forward on any common sense legislation, some of
which has strong bipartisan support.
Americans have legitimate questions about the ever-
increasing capacity of guns to kill in large numbers and the
ease with which people who are in danger to themselves and
others can obtain them in the marketplace and those questions
at least deserve to be explored through hearings in this
committee.
Every Democrat on this committee has asked in two separate
letters to the chairman for a series of five hearings on the
gun violence epidemic. We have not received a response and no
hearings have yet to be scheduled. So I hope that the chairman
and my Republican colleagues will finally see the need to
schedule the five hearings we requested.
We don't expect them to necessarily agree with us or those
participating in today's walkout on all the solutions to the
gun violence epidemic. However, we do hope that they will
finally acknowledge the legitimate need to explore the
questions we are asking and for this committee to take action.
And now, with regard to cybersecurity, I appreciate the
majority taking these small but important bipartisan steps to
enhance the Department of Energy's authorities with regard to
our Nation's energy infrastructure.
These four bills build upon the good work done by this
committee and the FAST Act under Chairman Upton's leadership. I
think it makes sense from both the security and business
standpoint to have the department with the best knowledge of
the energy industry taking the primary role in coordinating
efforts to prevent and respond to cyberattacks on these
facilities.
In general, I am supportive of each of these bills. H.R.
5174, the Energy Emergency Leadership Act sponsored by
Representative Walberg and Ranking Member Rush, would create a
new DOE assistant secretary position with jurisdiction over all
energy emergency and security functions related to energy
supply, infrastructure and cybersecurity.
H.R. 5175, the Pipeline and LNG Facilities Cybersecurity
Preparedness Act, was introduced by Chairman Upton and Mr.
Loebsack. It would require the secretary of energy to carry out
a program to establish policies and procedures that would
improve the physical and cybersecurity of natural gas
transmission and distribution pipelines, hazardous liquid
pipelines and liquefied natural gas facilities.
Representative Latta and McNerney's bill, H.R. 5239, the
Cyber Sense Act of 2018, is based on McNerney's language
included in the last Congress energy bill. It would require the
secretary to establish a voluntary program to identify
cybersecure products that can be used in bulk power systems.
Mr. McNerney and Mr. Latta also introduced H.R. 5240, the
Enhancing Grid Security Through Public-Private Partnership Act,
which directs the secretary to create and implement a program
to enhance the physical and cybersecurity of electric
utilities.
In addition to these bills, I also wanted to direct the
Committee's attention to the LIFT America Act, the
infrastructure bill that committee Democrats introduced last
year.
A number of the bill's provisions would enhance the
security and resiliency of the grid through new grant programs
and by requiring certain projects receiving DOE assistance
including the cybersecurity plan written in accordance with
guidelines developed by the secretary.
And the bill would also establish a strategic transformer
reserve program to reduce electric grid vulnerability to
physical and cyberattacks, natural disasters, and climate
change, and these are provisions that will better assure the
security of our energy infrastructure and I hope this committee
will consider them as we move forward.
And again, Mr. Chairman, thanks for bringing up these
bipartisan bills and I yield back.
Mr. Upton. Gentleman yields back, and as I indicated, we
are joined for our first panel with the Honorable Mark Menezes,
the undersecretary of energy.
I would just note for those of us that went on the
bipartisan trip to look at the hurricane damage in Puerto Rico,
on my local radio website this morning I see that the bridge
that we saw that was washed out was rededicated yesterday with
the governor and it's opened up. It's been 6 months. It
connects 60 families in a town of about 33,000 folks. So I know
we were there for an hour or so back in December. So I just
thought I'd give that little update.
And with that, Mr. Menezes, welcome back again to the
Committee. We look forward to your testimony. You know the
rules. Thank you in advance for your testimony. We will give
you 5 minutes to sum it up and then we will ask questions from
that point.
So welcome.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARK MENEZES, UNDER SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Mr. Menezes. Thank you, Chairman Upton, Ranking Member
Rush, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Good morning, and thank you for the opportunity to
participate in this legislative hearing to discuss the
strategic priorities addressing the cybersecurity threats
facing our national energy infrastructure and the Department of
Energy's role in protecting these critical assets and
responding to emergencies.
Maintaining and improving the resilient energy
infrastructure is a top priority of the secretary and a major
focus of the department. You referred to the written statement.
I have submitted a much more comprehensive written statement so
my remarks will be limited to just the highlights.
To demonstrate our commitment and focus on this mission,
the secretary announced last month that he is establishing the
Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency
Response, to be known as CESER. This organizational change will
strengthen the department's role as the sector-specific agency
or energy sector cybersecurity supporting our national security
responsibilities.
The creation of the CESER office will accomplish several
goals: One, build on the programs that we have today; two,
elevate the department's focus on energy infrastructure
protection and response; three, enable a more coordinated
preparedness and response to cyber and physical threats and
natural disasters; and most importantly, four, create a
structure and an office with an evolving mission to ensure
sufficient authorities and resources are in place to address
present and future threats.
The focus of the office will necessarily include
electricity delivery, oil and natural gas infrastructure, and
all forms of generation. The secretary's desire to create
dedicated and focused attention on these responsibilities will
provide greater visibility, accountability, and flexibility to
better protect our Nation's energy infrastructure and support
its asset owners.
As more fully explained in my submitted written testimony,
DOE works in collaboration with other agencies and private
sector organizations including the Federal Government's
designated lead agencies for coordinating the response to
significant cyber incidents--DHS, the FBI, the National Cyber
Investigative Joint Task Force, as well as DOT, PHMSA, U.S.
Coast Guard, and FERC and others through the Energy Government
Coordinating Council and other coordinating councils.
The FAST Act designated DOE as the sector-specific agency
for energy sector cybersecurity. Congress enacted several
important new energy security measures in the FAST Act as it
relates to cybersecurity. The secretary of energy was provided
new authority upon declaration of a grid security emergency by
the President to issue emergency orders to protect, restore, or
defend the reliability of critical electric infrastructure.
This authority allows DOE to respond as needed to threats of
cyber and physical attacks on the grid, and although the
administration does not have a formal position on any of the
legislation under discussion today, we are pleased to continue
to work with the committee to provide technical assistance. And
this morning, I would like to provide the subcommittee with
some high-level priorities of the department in the context of
the President's fiscal year 2019 budget request and which is
the subject matter of today's bills.
Overall, investing in energy security and resilience from
an all-hazards approach is vital, given the natural and manmade
threats facing the Nation's energy infrastructure, the energy
industry, and the supply chain. The fiscal year 2019 request
would provide the department an opportunity to invest in early-
stage research, network threat detection, cyber incident
response teams, and the testing of supply chain components and
systems.
Beyond providing guidance and technical support to the
energy sector, our Office of Electricity supports R&D designed
to develop advanced tools and techniques to provide enhanced
cyberprotection for key energy systems. OE cybersecurity for
energy delivery systems' R&D program is designed to assist
energy sector asset owners by developing cybersecurity
solutions for our energy infrastructure. OE co-funds projects
with industry, our national labs, and university partners to
make advances in cybersecurity capabilities. These research
partnerships are helping to detect, prevent, and mitigate
consequences of a cyber incident for our present and future
energy systems.
It's important to emphasize that DOE plays a critical role
in supporting the entire energy sector's efforts to enhance the
security and resilience of the Nation's critical energy
infrastructure. To address today's ever increasing and
sophisticated challenges, it is critical for us to be leaders
and cultivate a culture of resilience.
We must constantly develop, educate, and train a robust
network of producers, distributors, vendors, public partners,
regulators, policy makers, and stakeholders acting together to
strengthen our ability to prepare, to respond, and recover. As
part of a comprehensive energy cybersecurity resilient
strategy, the department supports efforts to enhance visibility
and situational awareness of operation networks, increase
alignment of cyber preparedness and planning across local,
State, and Federal levels and leverage the expertise of DOE's
national labs to drive cybersecurity innovation.
As always, the department appreciates the opportunity to
appear before this committee and discuss cybersecurity and
emergency response in the energy sector and we applaud your
leadership.
We look forward to working with you and your respective
staffs and continue to address cyber and physical security
challenges, and I look forward to your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Menezes follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Upton. Thank you for your testimony and, as you know,
we are talking about several bills this morning.
We want to make sure that DOE in fact does have the clear
authority in the energy sector to be prepared for emergencies,
particularly concerning the distribution of oil and gas and
electricity, and we welcome your commitment to work with us and
the bill's sponsors, as you indicated in your testimony, to
provide the technical assistance to make sure that these
proposals provide the tools that the agency can use.
I want to particularly thank, as Chairman Walden indicated
in his opening statement, the willingness to work with the
Idaho National Lab. I know that he had a very productive day
out there earlier this week and I will tell members of our
subcommittee that we are planning to have a classified briefing
with them at some point in the near future so that we can know
precisely what we have to be ready for and be able to ask
questions in a classified setting. We are looking forward to
setting that up in the next couple of weeks.
Let me just ask if you can help us identify other areas we
might be able to clarify and strengthen your authorities to
respond to energy supply emergencies, if we can have that
commitment again today, and if you want to share any specifics
today or certainly down the road where you can help us make
sure that the worst doesn't happen and we will put out
thousands, maybe hundreds of thousands, maybe even millions of
folks without the ability to hook into the needed energy
resources for their daily lives.
Mr. Menezes. Thank you for the question, Chairman Upton.
Indeed, having a robust communications and coordination
system with our industry asset owners is critical to do this.
We currently serve on a variety of and coordinate subsector
coordinating councils. We work closely with industry. We have
regular meetings. We coordinate. We make our labs available to
those that need it. We train, we practice, and we prepare. We
do all that and, to be sure, we work with our sister agencies
through the Energy Government Coordinating Council and work
really on a daily basis with, as I mentioned, DHS and the other
agencies.
All of that we are doing today. When the system is stressed
when we have the emergencies in Puerto Rico, the art then is to
put all that in place and respond in real time and to work with
our sister agencies, and I have testified before that the
expectations that the DOE has and the technologies that we have
and the abilities to mobilize and to react are sometimes
exceeded by the authorities and the resources that we have.
It is important for the department with the bills that you
have to be clear on the authorities, you know, that we have and
if I could say, too, it would be important to ensure that we
have the authority to get the resources that we have when we
are working with the other committees to ensure that we have
the resources. So we thank you for your leadership on that. But
clear direction and the authorization to have the resources
would be very helpful.
Mr. Upton. So DOE works with the Department of Homeland
Security, TSA, and other agencies to ensure the protection of
pipelines. But these agencies, as we know, certainly have other
priorities. It is my understanding that TSA, despite having
some 50,000 employees, is only able to dedicate some--a handful
of folks, literally, three or four--to pipeline security.
So the question I might have is are you concerned by that
fact, that a lead agency for pipeline safety is so stretched
that only a handful of people would be working on pipelines?
Mr. Menezes. Well, I can't speak directly to the resources
and demands that they have but I can tell you from the
experience that we have at DOE, having been over there now
almost 4 months, all agencies are constrained to use existing
resources to respond to new and additional obligations, for
example, and it is a constant effort to find adequate resources
to do things to accomplish our statutory obligations.
I will say that with pipelines both DHS and DOT co-chair,
that sector-specific pipeline industry. We are involved through
the oil and natural gas subsector coordinating council. And so
we have regular interaction with the agencies that you
mentioned and other agencies but also with the industry.
So, we are involved in it. But, again, it's always a
challenge to find adequate resources within the current
budget--to do the things that are expected of you.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
I yield for questions to the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Rush.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Under Secretary, to date we have not experienced any
large-scale cyberattacks on our energy grid. However, there
have been minor incidences, maybe even what we might call
probes into the system.
In your professional opinion, would you say that we have
not experienced any large-scale attacks due to our defenses or
is it simply because no entity has as of yet really attempted
to launch a full-scale attack?
And do we really even know, rather, what their capabilities
are of some of these foreign entities or rogue states that may
eventually try to do us some harm?
Mr. Menezes. Thank you for the question, Ranking Member
Rush.
Yes, a very important question. We are at probably a
historical turning point from what has been going on in the
past. I had mentioned the ever increasing level of
sophistication and the ever increasing number of threats. What
has happened in the past simply is over and every day presents
new challenges.
Some of the questions you asked would involve classified
material that I can't get into today but it is public that we
are facing threats today that we haven't seen in the past. The
Internet of Things, all software, all of these are providing
opportunities for those that are very creative to try to attack
our systems, and it's ongoing. It's daily. It's 24/7. It is
around the clock. Interestingly, as we know, that now it is
machines that are doing all this and they're using artificial
intelligence. So you have machines.
Our goal, of course, would be to counter their machines
with our machines and our artificial intelligence. But it's an
ever-escalating battle.
So you're right to ask the question. We don't even know
what the future threats are. And this is part of the reason why
we are standing up this office. We want this to be highly
visible. We want this to be accountable to other agencies, to
the Congress, so that you all have a much higher visibility on
what DOE is doing.
So you asked the right questions. We are concerned about
not only current but future threats and having the resources.
Pat, did you want to say something?
Ms. Hoffman. I just would also like to credit the strong
partnership we have with industry and that we are keeping pace
with respect to intelligence and classified information
sharing, partnership with the ISAC for alerts and getting
information out to industry as soon as possible, as well as
partnerships and looking at engineering solutions and looking
at technology solutions that will help mitigate some of the
issues.
Mr. Rush. That leads me to another concern, and that's our
Nation's workforce preparedness when it comes to cybersecurity.
Are we doing all that we can to ensure that we have a highly
skilled trained workforce both presently and in the future to
address cybersecurity issues?
Mr. Menezes. We are doing what we can. I am not sure that
we are doing everything that we can but we certainly are
elevating education in the realm of preparedness in addition to
response and ultimately recovery. But it's going to be research
and development and breakthrough technologies to be able to
protect and defend our system and to be able to respond.
So we currently have training programs in place where we
deal with not only our workforce but also the industry's
workforce because they have to have the benefit of everything
that we see, we know, and that we are developing so that they
can train and they can instill a culture of resilience within
their organizations.
And I can testify firsthand on the past success of the
leadership of this committee and working with the ESCC and the
industry partners in DOE's role. I can assure you it was
important for the electricity sector to have their CEOs
participate, and when the CEOs participate they return to the
company and they instill a culture of compliance and resilience
and that they make many changes and they make sure that the
workforce is very educated on these very technical and highly
sophisticated programs.
So we are committed to ensuring that we have a dedicated
and educated workforce.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Upton. The chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's always good to
see our good friend here in such a highposition.
This is an important hearing that we are having today
because it addresses an issue that we really haven't done a
very good job of addressing--this issue of cybersecurity and
emergency response.
I am not real sure what cybersecurity is, first of all. So
I guess my first question would be does the Department of
Energy have a definition of cybersecurity?
Mr. Menezes. Well, let me go back to the days that I was on
that side of the dais in '05 when we decided to add the word
cybersecurity into the mandatory reliability provisions that we
put in EPAC of '05.
We thought whether we should define it back then, to be
frank about it, and we decided then that it was better to have
it as, frankly, broad as it could be because we weren't sure
what it would become.
And so consequently I am not sure if we have a formal
definition. I am looking over at----
Mr. Barton. So far you have done a very good job of
dissimulating and not saying a darn thing so----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Menezes. I know that.
Mr. Barton [continuing]. But roles do change.
Mr. Menezes. Yes. I don't think we have a formal
definition. But----
Mr. Barton. Well, do we need one.?
Mr. Menezes [continuing]. Again, the Internet of Things and
software typically are ways that they seek to gain entry into
systems via those mechanisms.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Chairman, let's let the record show that I
stumped the under secretary of energy on the first question,
but in a polite way, because he and I are friends.
Well, would you say that cybersecurity deals with the
internet intercepting--somehow making it difficult for computer
systems to operate, hacking into a controlled system or power
plants or pipeline controls? Would that be a practical type of
cybersecurity attack--something like that?
Mr. Menezes. Yes, and you mentioned those are threats,
right. But there's a security part of that, too. So it would
include the communication systems, making sure you have
resilient communication systems, control systems that you can
monitor and detect and react and take action.
You had mentioned the threat detection and the analysis,
and it's not limited to just one sector of the energy industry,
for example. So you have points of potential entry into any
systems and we are talking about supply chain today but we have
generation. We have all the distribution. We have transmission.
We have the producers, the vendors. It's all up and down the,
every point.
Mr. Barton. Well, let me ask another simple question, which
you may not want to answer.
Which of our industries are sectors that the Department of
Energy has responsibility for would you consider to be most
vulnerable to a cybersecurity attack?
Mr. Menezes. I think any that use the internet and use
computers and are part of a system. And so when you get the
briefings, we are members.
DOE is a member of the National Security Council and as
such we have intelligence and counterintelligence and access to
all of our sister agencies and we have eyes on things.
When you look at it, those that wish to penetrate our
system will try all segments. So in that respect, we are all
vulnerable. We are all constantly vulnerable.
Mr. Barton. Let me ask my final question. To the
department's knowledge, have there been any cybersecurity
attacks on our energy sector that the Department of Energy is
responsible for?
Mr. Menezes. Attacks?
Mr. Barton. Yes. Have there been attempts to----
Mr. Menezes. Our systems are constantly being attacked.
Constantly. Not only the DOE system but also the energy system.
Mr. Barton. OK. Well, if you say constantly then I would
interpret that to mean that we've successfully fended them off,
since I am not aware of any breakdowns in our energy
infrastructure.
Mr. Menezes. Well, there have been some reported breaches,
if you will. We are fortunate that we haven't had a major
consequence of attacks and thus far we have been successful in
identifying.
Part of this analysis involves modeling, information
sharing, and monitoring. You may collect data and then you will
use our experts' abilities to evaluate what we are seeing and
then try to figure out what is happening.
Mr. Barton. My time has expired. But would the department
be willing to have a bipartisan briefing where you could go
into some detail about the attempted attacks?
Mr. Menezes. Yes, sir.
Mr. Barton. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Upton. Gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the Chairman and, again, I
thank the witness.
Are you familiar with the two bills that Mr. Latta and I
have proposed--the Cyber Sense Act and the Enhanced Grid
Security Through Public-Private Partnerships Act?
Mr. Menezes. Yes, sir.
Mr. McNerney. Do you think those bills serve a good
purpose?
Mr. Menezes. We applaud the committee for the leadership
that you have shown and I think--has one of them passed
already, I believe? In past Congresses?
Mr. McNerney. Right. So----
Mr. Menezes. And I will say that on the supply chain--you
have already seen action, right. You have seen action from NERC
in proposing critical infrastructure protection standards. So
you see it pending at FERC so certainly your past efforts have
generated that activity. It's also generated activity here in
this administration because in the fiscal year 2019 request we
requested additional moneys to do what your bill is proposing
to do.
Mr. McNerney. Do you have any suggestions on improving
either one of those two pieces of legislation?
Mr. Menezes. Again, my suggestions would be as you choose
to send direction over--and obligations over to the Department
of Energy if you can authorize resources we find that that
helps us because otherwise the department typically would be
forced to figure out where to get resources that it's currently
using for other----
Mr. McNerney. But speaking of resources, the fiscal 2019
budget looks like a 40 percent cut in the electricity delivery
and reliability account, which then is split into two further
accounts.
So you're saying on the one hand that you need resources
and on the other hand the administration is proposing
significant cuts in program funding.
So how can they reconcile those notions?
Mr. Menezes. I think the OE budget cut--I believe it's the
case where it shows that we are pulling out almost $96 million
and moving it into CESER. So it's creating a new office. But we
are still----
Ms. Hoffman. We see an increase in CESER budget line for
the 2019 request to $96 million.
Mr. McNerney. I saw that, but I mean, I hear that you keep
saying we need more resources and yet some of these line items
are being significantly slashed.
Mr. Menezes. Well, can I point out a victory that this
office had with the administration?
As many of you know, because of the several trips that
we've taken to Puerto Rico, for example, on the emergency
response, OK, a very critical part--I know we've been talking
about cybersecurity but if you will allow me to talk about
that.
Again, when we got over there and looked at our resources,
it was surprising. It was surprising to me that all the work
that DOE was doing on emergency response in this hurricane
season, for example, the resources were, I thought,
insufficient.
We asked the White House and they agreed to double the
budget of the emergency response, of ISER--our Infrastructure
Security Energy Recovery.
Mr. McNerney. So you're saying that in general terms the
administration is acting in a way that'll increase your
resources. Is that what you're saying?
Mr. Menezes. In this area. In this area.
Mr. McNerney. In this area?
Mr. Menezes. Yes, and it's in our fiscal year 2019, to set
up CESER. It's all in the congressional justification for it.
So----
Mr. McNerney. So, I mean are you----
Mr. Menezes [continuing]. So we have support in the
administration on the topics that we are talking about today.
Mr. McNerney. So in a sense, are you robbing Peter to pay
Paul for the CESER?
Mr. Menezes. No. No, we are not. No, we are moving some
existing programs over to CESER just to begin to set up the
office and so that was not a--in fact, that's an increase. That
is actually an increase.
So, again, together it's going to be $96 million and that
is an uptick of about maybe 16 percent, I think, from what it
was in fiscal year 2018.
Now, CESER didn't exist--fiscal year 2017. So it's a
positive story here.
Mr. McNerney. All right. Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield
back.
Mr. Upton. I would just note that we've got Secretary Perry
scheduled to come next month to talk about the budget as well.
Mr. Olson.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair. Welcome to our two witnesses.
My first question will be about Hurricane Harvey. I
followed your reports on Hurricane Harvey--the situation
reports very closely as the storm hit and after the storm hit
and the impacts on our energy sector--the Port of Houston and
the petrochemical complex.
DOE was a good partner. Worked hand in hand with Governor
Abbott, with the local county judges, my county judge, Bob
Hebert, Fort Bend County, county judge Matt Sebesta, Brazoria
County, county judge Ed Emmett, Harris County. He helped to get
waivers they needed and the assistant had to ensure the permits
and waivers were issued without delay. That's very important.
You mentioned, Mr. Menezes, that the budget has been
doubled now since lessons learned from Harvey for recovery
efforts.
What are some lessons learned like that that we could apply
in the future, going forward, from Hurricane Harvey? Feel free,
both of you, to make comments about that question.
Mr. Menezes. Well, I am aware that we did an after activity
report, I believe. I might defer to Pat. I think she's in
possession of that report.
I am not sure if it's finalized or not but certainly we
will make it available to all members of the committee.
Pat, do you have specific comments on that?
Ms. Hoffman. Yes, thank you very much for the question.
I think I would applaud industry's effort as well in
Hurricane Harvey and Irma and Marie and the strong work that
they've done.
Some of the lessons learned is as we continue to move
forward the industry is on the front line so exchanging
coordination of information is critical and absolute for having
an effective recovery and restoration process and I think
that's where you have seen the success as well as some of the
lessons learned. From a department perspective, being able to
engage our power marketing administrations, to be continuing to
use the strategic petroleum reserve are all important aspects
of how the department can help in a restoration process. The
waivers and the coordination with industry were always very
positive and helpful to support so being proactive in those
areas as we continue.
As we look forward on cyber, as we think about that, some
of the needs and the issues are really being proactive in
looking at threat analysis, continuing to support the mutual
assistance program, and I think whether it's hurricanes or
cybers, we really want to be able to engage stronger in the
mutual assistance program in support of industry.
Mr. Olson. And you all read my mind. Let's now talk about
cyber.
Attacks happen on America every single day in cyberspace.
Bad actors have attacked our power industry. They've attacked
refineries, chemical plants, pipelines, all across the
spectrum.
You mentioned, Mr. Menezes, about AI--artificial
intelligence. I formed a caucus here in the House to look at
those issues and I have a bill out to get us on board with AI
because that's our future to prevent some of these attacks.
My bill just basically says let's partner up with the
private to make sure these attacks don't happen through
cyberspace and use AI as a weapon. AI is to empower people.
It's not to have machines run our world but it's to empower
people with information to make sound decisions when a disaster
hits, like a hurricane. And just like you commented about, the
bill basically says let's have a true public-private
partnership, support the private sector, empower them with the
public sector's assistance, make sure we adjust jobs because
there's lots of jobs being lost or jobs being created, have
facts about jobs. Also bias--there's natural bias can be around
information that may be biased--avoid that, and also privacy--
big issues.
But how can AI help out with the recovery from Harvey and
those you're facing?
Mr. Menezes. Well, thank you for that question, Mr. Olson.
You raise a very important point. AI will be the future of
how strong and resilient we can be because of the ever-growing
sophistication of these attacks.
With respect to your bill, again, the administration
doesn't have a formal view of it. But as a general rule----
Mr. Olson. It's good. Trust me.
Mr. Menezes. As a general rule, all the direction that you
can provide to us, particularly in the use of tools that we can
use within industry, former Chairman Barton had asked about
attacks on the system and we are here representing the
department and to be sure, the department is subject to
attacks.
It is our industry, however, that typically would be front
line because the bad actors would look for soft targets. It
might not spend a lot of effort in going after government
assets that they think are going to be hard targets.
So they're developing artificial intelligence to probably
identify those risk levels. Well, industry is going to be on
the front line and so it's very important that we get a set of
tools and resources to be able to work with industry and to
help industry have the resources and the knowledge and the
wherewithal to be able to anticipate, predict, react, respond,
and to make their systems more secure.
Mr. Olson. Amen. Machines to empower people, not take over
the world. Thank you for your comments. We're working for this.
I yield back. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Upton. Gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to Secretaries Menezes
and Hoffman. Welcome. It's good to have you back again.
I know DOE is taking its role as the sector-specific agency
for cybersecurity seriously. But I have a few questions on the
reorganization of the Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy
Reliability. And, for the record, I am not necessarily opposed
to the change but I would like to understand how it might
affect DOE functions as we move into the future.
Last month, Secretary Perry announced the creation of the
Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency
Response which, as I understand it, will take existing programs
from the Office of Electricity.
Can you explain the vision for this cybersecurity office
moving forward and do you expect to add new programs or
functions to this office over time?
Mr. Menezes. Thank you for that question. It's a very good
question.
When the secretary arrived over at the department, and you
have your security clearance, right, you get briefed and your
world view changes, and almost immediately it became very
apparent that one of the top priorities will be resources for
cybersecurity and, again, the physical security--and we were in
the hurricane seasons as well and so those three things came
together very quickly. Just from an experience point of view.
The department, of course, had a history of dealing with
these issues and so we began a process where we evaluated
everything within the department, our stakeholders.
We talked to members of Congress and staff. We talked to
the appropriators. We talked to OMB and the White House to
formulate a process to bring the visibility and enhance the
importance of these three topics.
Since this is an initial establishment, the DOE Org Act has
given us the authority to do this--but it wouldn't surprise you
to find out that our appropriators and others had some very
keen views on what assets and what could we do to begin the
process.
So I would like to emphasize this is an initial step and so
what we did was we identified within the department those
successful programs to begin to process to move them over into
a new office. So it was to simply begin that process.
So we identified those two, the R&D within OE and the ISER
function also within OE. It just happened to be that they're
both in OE.
It doesn't diminish what we continue to expect out of OE,
the Office of Electricity, and it's just a beginning point for
this new office.
Mr. Tonko. And what will happen to other programs from the
Office of Electricity?
Mr. Menezes. What will happen with what?
Mr. Tonko. The other programs from the Office of
Electricity.
Mr. Menezes. Well, they will continue and we will--in a----
Mr. Tonko. In that realm? In that given division?
Mr. Menezes. No, the Office of Electricity will, of course,
help in seeing the transition of them. But the Office of
Electricity has other critical functions too that they will
continue to do and----
Mr. Tonko. Does that include the non-cyber R&D portfolio
focused on grid modernization and storage?
Mr. Menezes. Yes. Yes. They will continue to do that.
The other thing I want to point out is that one thing that
we started at this department is it's a hallmark of this
administration at DOE because of our backgrounds is to engage
in much more of a collaborative effort between all of the
programs.
We are about busting these silos. Now, we are limited to
the actual offices due to revenue streams. But as a practical
matter, we collaborate. We share responsibilities and you know
that we coordinate certainly all of our labs. So what you're
seeing over there is a coordinating effort and a collaborative
effort so that we can make use of the resources that we
currently have to do the things that are important.
Mr. Tonko. Will there be any split of the Office of
Electricity staff--the FTEs, or full time equivalents going in
another direction or will they stay intact as it is now?
Mr. Menezes. Well, we are in the process of identifying
which employees will ultimately report to or be part of the new
office and there's a series of procedures and policies that we
have to follow in order to do that. But we are going to be in
full compliance with all of the regulations that we need to do.
Mr. Tonko. Well, it's important, I believe, that
cybersecurity gets proper consideration in resources. I also
believe the work being done by the Office of Electricity on
grid modernization, on micro grids and on storage is also
critical and I hope that these offices will be working together
and not having to compete for resources. I think that's very
important.
Mr. Menezes. You have our commitment from that, sir.
Mr. Tonko. OK. With that, I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Shimkus.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It's great to have to have you--good to see you again, and
welcome to the committee.
So I hate acronyms. So CESER is the Office of
Cybersecurity, Energy Security and Emergency Response
Management, correct?
Mr. Menezes. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. When you use CESER that's what you're
referring to and that's a new organization within the
Department of Energy to address grid resiliency, which can be
defined by either concerns of attacks or cybersecurity or the
like. Is that fair?
Mr. Menezes. That is fair, and it will be headed up by an
assistant secretary.
Mr. Shimkus. You used a good terminology--you want to bust
the silos that occur in major bureaucracies so we have people
talking to each other.
Mr. Menezes. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. So, so far so good. I think it's needed. It's
something we've talked about for a long time.
So let me address a couple questions, and former Chairman
Barton had raised just the whole cybersecurity--how do you
define.
So that's the whole issue of what could be points of entry.
My colleague, Mr. Tonko, mentioned the micro grids, which kind
of are developing in our country and then the question would be
cybersecurity of entry through a data control system that then
could make instructions to transformers, through generation,
through the like.
So that's one way there could be disruption. And isn't that
also the reason why we want--which we did in the last Congress,
talked about quite a bit--I think you mentioned the fact that
we had moved the bill--we do want some communication between
our government agencies and the private sector. Why is that
important in this debate?
Mr. Menezes. They're on the front line. It is they're, A,
providing the service. They are doing the things that we've
come to expect from our energy infrastructure. They own and
operate the actual facilities, they develop the software, and
they rely on the supply chain, all of which could be
vulnerable. And so as the government agency responsible for
that, we need to ensure that they do have the training, they
have the know-how.
We share with them information upon which they can
identify, train, and respond and recover, ultimately. So
they're on that front line, which is not easy. It's a lot more
than----
Mr. Shimkus. So, they're seeing some front line attacks
that they can then talk to you and we can address training
and--not remediation but countermeasures, I guess, would be.
Is CESER able to then also talk to our intel communities
for higher level cyber concerns that could be then passed on to
the private sector and say, hey, watch out for this?
Mr. Menezes. Correct. In fact, the information sharing and
analytical center has developed CRISP, which is the
Cybersecurity Risk Information Sharing Program.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Mr. Menezes. Yes. Just threw out a couple more acronyms
your way. And the importance of that is that while the ISAC
manages that, it uses information that is shared by our
intelligence-counterintelligence that we receive.
I had mentioned previously as members of the NSC, we have
resources that some agencies do not have and with special
protections in place for classified information we share that
information to the extent that we can, and it has been very
helpful and useful in identifying threats that without it we
still would not necessarily know that our system was even
attacked.
Mr. Shimkus. Let me go quickly. My time is almost expired.
Talking about electromagnetic pulses either intentional or
naturally occurring, the hardening of systems, the cost, and
the communication with the private sector, I mean, the private
sector when we talk about it they just say, oh, the cost is too
much--can't do that. And there is some cost, but I think it is
a concern that I hope that you all and maybe even this CESER
subsection of DOE is talking about.
Mr. Menezes. Well, I would say that a hallmark of any
technology that we develop, any training system, it has to be
cost effective. Clearly, we cannot give them information that
imposes such a burden that----
Mr. Shimkus. But are we talking on EMPs both naturally
occurring or bad actors? Is that part of what you're discussing
or----
Mr. Menezes. Yes. CESER does have the energy security part
of it so it would include the EMPs as well and the GMDs, if you
want another acronym.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Loebsack.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing and I do appreciate both of you being here as
well--the witnesses. Thank you so much.
I don't think that we can argue with the fact that it's
absolutely critical that we do ensure the safety of our energy
infrastructure and in the 21st century we all know that a very
critical emerging threat that's been talked about today is
cyberattacks and we've got to just work as hard as we can to
make sure that we protect that energy infrastructure.
I am very proud to work with Chairman Upton. We actually
can do some things on a bipartisan basis in this committee and
I think we've done a lot, but to make sure that we get adopted
eventually and implemented H.R. 5175, the Pipeline and LNG
Facilities Cybersecurity Preparedness Act. So I want to thank
the chair for working with me on that, and vice versa. It's
great.
I do think it's absolutely critical that we make progress
to ensure the cybersecurity and safety of our natural gas and
LNG facilities and I believe that this bill is a step in the
right direction.
Physical threats to pipelines and energy infrastructure do
remain a significant threat, as everyone on this committee
knows and you folks know. But these days our pipeline system is
increasingly technologically sophisticated as we get new
pipelines put in place and that does, I think, probably
increase our vulnerability in some ways to cybersecurity
attacks. And for the life of me, since I speak a little Spanish
and even more Portuguese, I cannot figure out yet how to
pronounce your name--why it's only two syllables.
Mr. Menezes. It's Americanized Portuguese.
Mr. Loebsack. Yes, I am aware of that.
Mr. Menezes. You were right on that. And so we've
apparently had the middle E become silent. So it's Menezes.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you for explaining that. Mr. Menezes.
Thank you so much. Thanks for being here today.
As we mentioned, DOE has to play a critical role in
ensuring the safety and security of this infrastructure can you
elaborate a little more about the level of vulnerability of our
pipeline system to cyberattacks? You have spoken about that
some this morning already but can you elaborate even more,
within the context of an open hearing, at any rate?
Mr. Menezes. Right, and so I will keep it general.
Perhaps the vulnerability on the pipelines exist because
it's a transportation system at its sense and it--probably the
control mechanisms, the communication systems, and the
operations systems, they may not be as fully integrated, say,
as a fully operating electricity company in all sectors, for
example, in the--and so as a consequence it may be the
assumption that because they're more simplified, if you will,
you might not have to develop technologies to make them as
resilient as any other point of entry.
So as they are improving their efficiencies they are
bringing in new softwares and new devices and, again, the
result is you see the flow of product. But as they become more
sophisticated, we need to ensure that what they put in has the
resiliency programmed in at the front end----
Mr. Loebsack. Right.
Mr. Menezes [continuing]. So that it's resilient, and
that's going to be the key. So----
Mr. Loebsack. Because I was kind of shocked actually at an
earlier hearing when I found out that there isn't a lot of
Federal involvement when it comes to pipelines in the first
place. There's sort of oversight after they're already in place
but there's precious little involvement as they're going in. I
think that's one area where there can be more involvement to
make sure that these things are put in properly and that they
are secure.
Mr. Menezes. Yes. We are doing what we can in our role for
the oil and natural gas subsector coordinating council and we
do have monthly meetings with the group and we have quarterly
meetings as well with the larger group that is co-led by DOT
and DHS and we do bring in all those other agencies. So we have
a structure within the existing authorities to try to address
that.
Mr. Loebsack. Yes.
Mr. Menezes. There's a lot of information sharing and it's
important. You have got to be at the meetings. You have got to
be willing to participate. And they are, by the way. I mean,
they are.
Mr. Loebsack. And just very quickly--my time is running
short. Thank you very much. I want to make sure that you folks
are prepared as a department in the event that this legislation
is passed, be able to put this into effect.
I do have one other question. Maybe you could respond in
writing to me if that's possible. We have a lot of existing
pipelines now that may not be as subject to cybersecurity
threats.
I don't know the answer to that, and maybe you could
distinguish in writing for me those that are already in the
ground, already exist, versus the newer ones which might be
more vulnerable, given the technology, and I would really
appreciate an answer to that question, perhaps in writing if
that works for you.
Mr. Menezes. We'll be happy to get back with you on that.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you so much.
Mr. Menezes. Thank you.
Mr. Loebsack. Thanks. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I yield
back.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Latta.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for
holding today's hearing. This is very, very important when we
are talking about cybersecurity and also the emergency
response.
But before I do, and I know he's stepped out right now, but
I just want to recognize Mr. McNerney from California who's
been working with me and all the hard work that he's done on
the issues, especially with grid security.
Mr. Under Secretary and Ms. Hoffman, thank you very much
for being with us today because, again, this is a very, very
important topic that we are dealing with today.
In your testimony you noted that securing the electric
sector supply chain is critical to the security and resilience
of the electrical grid and products must be tested for known
vulnerabilities in order to assess risk and develop
mitigations.
Would you explain the consequences of having a device or a
component in the electric system that poses a cybersecurity
vulnerability and, more importantly, do we have the adequate
measures right now in place to protect that supply chain?
Mr. Menezes. Great question, and thank you very much for
it.
Our supply chains probably would be our most vulnerable
areas and by supply chain it could be any component part that
any of our energy partners would rely on. That could make our
entire system vulnerable. If point of entry could be on what
you think is a routine software program, perhaps to do
accounting for a supplier of valves, for example.
OK. So the importance has been noted in a couple of ways.
NERC has already proposed CIPs--the critical infrastructure
protection standards--which is pending at FERC to address this
very supply chain issue with respect to the agencies that are
responsible for developing our mandatory reliability provisions
for the electricity grid and this administration in fiscal year
2019 has requested additional money so that we, with our labs
and our experts, can similarly test these products for their
vulnerabilities and we can mitigate those vulnerabilities. So
we can make the whole system stronger by really addressing
those most vulnerable, if you will.
Mr. Latta. Also in your testimony you referenced the budget
proposal to invest in testing supply chain components and
systems and under the Cyber Sense bill seeks to authorize a
related program focused on identifying and promoting
cybersecure products using the bulk power system.
Again, would you elaborate on the work that the DOE is
doing to test the supply chain components and systems and also
in a follow-up of that, how does the quality control for supply
chains help in ensuring that cybersecurity?
Mr. Menezes. I will allow Pat has more experience directly
on this.
Ms. Hoffman. So, through the Electric Sector Coordinating
Council and our discussions with industry, the supply chain
need has been highlighted as extreme importance and so I
appreciate the committee's efforts in this area.
What we are looking at is actually partnering with industry
to test and do a pilot program to test several components that
are critical in the industry to do a deep dive testing of the
components and subcomponents. What the industry would like to
understand is all the vulnerabilities so they can assess their
risk and the risks that they are facing. So part of what the
NERC standards also emphasize is the disclosure of
vulnerabilities and the continued testing. One of the things
that we want to emphasize is as we are looking at testing of
components there may be a new vulnerability or a new threat
vector that's discovered tomorrow. So what should be
institutionalized is a process for continual improvement in
cybersecurity.
As we've talked about the definition of cybersecurity being
secure, information technology, secure firmware software, the
information side of the industry, we really need to continually
test products, continually improve products, just like we would
do from a manufacturing point of view.
So that philosophy of continual improvement is absolutely
critical and testing with the national laboratories can help
identify some of the vulnerabilities and continue to advance
the improvement of products.
Mr. Latta. When you're testing the products, how do you get
that information out to the industry? Because just like this
past Friday I spoke at one of my electric co-ops in my
district--I have the largest number of co-ops in the State of
Ohio--and not too far in the past from that I also spoke at
another one. But how do you get that information out,
especially with these products, to make sure that they know
that they're, A, available and, B, that they're tested and they
ought to be utilized once they're approved?
Ms. Hoffman. So the goal is to get the information out
through the supply chain community and I am sure the next panel
will talk about that and details of having that disclosure and
that collaborative relationship with the industry with the
mitigations and the solutions. But the other area is through
our national laboratories and through, say, the ISAC program to
continue to really identify some of the vulnerabilities but get
it out to industry and all the components and all the sectors
in the industry.
Mr. Latta. Yes. Well, thank you very much, and I yield
back.
Mr. Upton. OK. I would recognize Mr. Kinzinger. No, I am
sorry--Mr. McKinley.
Mr. McKinley. Well, I wasn't expecting that. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Menezes--or Secretary Menezes, a couple questions
quickly, if I could.
Three years ago we had Tom Siebel--he's the CEO of C3
Energy--testify before us about cybersecurity and the grid, and
he made a very revealing comment.
He said that just a small group of engineers would be able
to shut down the grid on the East Coast in 4 days, and it would
shut down the grid between Boston and New York. Did you ever
see his testimony or respond back to him on that?
Mr. Menezes. I did not see it.
Mr. McKinley. The fact that a lot of things have happened
and I appreciate your answers back to Barton where you said
that we are constantly under attack. And maybe it's worked but
I am saying there are groups saying the engineers can do this.
They can still get past your system if they want to do that.
So the other thing, and just maybe it was coincidence in
2015 Ukraine was faced with a cyberattack. The Russians
apparently are the ones that contributed to that. What have we
learned from that? Did we interact with the Ukraine and find
out how that was shut down so we could prevent that from
happening here?
Mr. Menezes. Since that occurred before I arrived, I will
just----
Mr. McKinley. Just quickly, because I've got a series of
more questions. Yes or no, have we interacted with them?
Ms. Hoffman. The answer is yes. We worked closely with
them. We actually gained some knowledge of the attack. We have
had training sessions with industry and analyzing so lots of--
--
Mr. McKinley. OK. But we've learned something from it.
But then let me go also now go back even further in
history. Back in 2007 there was an Aurora generator test that
was maybe controversial. Are you familiar with it, Secretary?
Ms. Hoffman. Yes, I am very familiar with it.
Mr. McKinley. OK, you are. OK. Because they were able to
display that just by entering 21 codes they could blow up a
generator and thereby set in motion a blackout in the United
States.
What have we done to prevent those 21 codes from being
introduced?
Ms. Hoffman. So we worked with industry in analyzing the
Aurora attack and looking at the focus on relays and the
vulnerabilities in that. The industry has looked at mitigation
solutions. We've done information sharing with industry.
So it's been an active engagement with the industry.
Mr. McKinley. Have they taken action, implemented things to
prevent that from happening with that?
Ms. Hoffman. The industry has implemented and has taken
action per some of the requests from NERC in doing that.
Mr. McKinley. OK. The third question or second question has
to do with vulnerability because you talk about emergency, and
we have a report here from New England saying that they're not
going to have enough gas if there's an emergency situation
that's coming up and they say that because during the cold
weather they're having to divert that gas to homes and so
there's not going to be gas for power plants.
We've experienced that in West Virginia. We had a black
start plant that had to shut down during the Polar Vortex and
just this last winter was told that they were on day to day--
they may have to shut down as well.
So I am wondering about in an emergency how are we going to
make sure that we have gas available for our power generation,
let alone cyberattack? Is there a solution to that?
Mr. Menezes. Well, we need more infrastructure, to be sure,
both what you referenced. The New England ISO, together with
NERC, has identified areas in the country where we rely heavily
on natural gas for our power generation to ensure our
resilience and the reliability of our grid.
It's in those constrained areas where it's important that
we try to increase the infrastructure so that we can have
adequate supply. That has been the hallmark of this
administration so that we have a sufficient diversity of fuels
including natural gas.
Mr. McKinley. If I could, Mr. Secretary, but we are relying
on Russia for bringing in LNG to New England and now they've
unloaded their second tanker on this.
So if we are going to be energy dominant, how are we energy
dominant if in an emergency if we are going to rely on a
foreign government to provide us a natural resource to be able
to provide electricity in New England?
Mr. Menezes. Well, good question. Well, the President has
announced his efforts for the infrastructure bill and contained
therein or recommendations on how we can help to site and
build, construct, and permit these--in this case, natural gas
pipelines to address the issue that you raised.
Mr. McKinley. Right.
Mr. Menezes. It's not limited to that but it is a component
part of that. So it's also a function of working with the
States because under federalism the states have a big role to
play as to any interstate gas pipelines ----
Mr. McKinley. I understand. I don't want a heavy hand----
Mr. Menezes. There's so much we can do.
Mr. McKinley. I don't want the heavy hand of the Federal
Government stepping in. But there is a concern.
Just in closing quickly, could you tell me what keeps you
up at night? What is your biggest concern, from your position?
Mr. Menezes. Well, in the cybersecurity, clearly. Your
worldview changes as you get a security clearance and you get
briefed on what's happening.
I think you all have been read into a lot of this stuff.
But yes, that causes me to stay awake and, frankly, as we have
seen what are becoming common winter events when our system is
stressed it seems as though we may be faced with an inadequate
supply of what used to be baseload. So the premature closing of
what historically has been--whether it's nuclear or clean coal,
these facilities are going offline.
We are becoming more reliant on natural gas, which is not a
bad thing. But it does have to get through pipelines and we've
seen in the cyclone bomb, if you will, on the East Coast we see
natural gas actually having price spikes, which forces the
operators to go to nuclear, coal, and, believe it or not, oil.
So those are the things that keep me up at night.
Mr. McKinley. OK. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here.
I know we all recognize the very serious threat we face
with cyberattacks. It can be especially difficult as the
threats we face are constantly evolving and can vary
significantly. Individual bad actors are constantly attempting
to obtain bank routing numbers or medical records from everyday
Americans--while state actors, for example, North Korea's
attack on Sony Pictures or China's break of the OPM files,
represent a very different kind of threat. And for a lot of
these nonstate actors, a very low barrier of entry.
In the energy sector, we have to prepare for any level of
attack, given the innerconnectedness of the grid. Even a
relatively small scale attack on a single asset could have
serious consequences.
I will ask both of you, just whatever you can do with this.
If you can elaborate on how the work the DOE does, like R&D,
industry information sharing, and physical hardening of assets
to combat cyberattacks, is flexible and able to evolve as the
threats change.
You might have addressed this to some extent.
Ms. Hoffman. Sure. I appreciate the question. We've been
actively engaged with industry and we know that the core
components of a strong cybersecurity program really looks at
building capabilities. And so our goal is to help industry
build as much capabilities as possible so our R&D program is
focused on supporting that capability development.
So from an information sharing program, let's look at a
continuous monitoring or an ability for intrusion detection.
It's a capability that the industry needs to have and a support
that we've been providing through the risk information sharing
program that we've developed with industry.
Other activities is really trying to get ahead of the game
and looking at threat analytics but engineering some cyber
solutions to prevent and mitigate some of the events that are
occurring or the events that could cause damage to the
equipment.
One of the things that we want to do is look at continued
sharing of programs but also incident response and I think that
is the next phase of which we must advance in is supporting the
development of incident response capabilities so those tools
and capabilities to identify where actors are on the system but
also to prevent them from continuing to progress from a
cyberattack point of view.
So our R&D program, we also have two strong university
programs, one with the University of Illinois and one with the
University of Arkansas, to develop the next generation
solutions as well as partnerships with the national
laboratories, looking at a moving target type activity to think
about how could we make the system more dynamic.
Mr. Kinzinger. And to drill down a little bit, it was
mentioned, sir, in your testimony that the cyberattack on
Ukraine, which the CIA attributes to Russian military hackers,
we've experienced a number of attacks by state actors here.
Does DOE plan for these kinds of coordinated attacks
differently and what systems are in place to ensure that the
DOE is receiving the most pertinent and up to date threat
information from our intelligence agencies?
Mr. Menezes. Right. As Pat Hoffman had testified earlier,
the lessons that we learned with respect to the Ukraine.
But I would like to point out that we work with NERC on the
GridEx exercises where we have these kinds of situations and we
bring industry in, government in, all the stakeholders in, and
they participate in a real live situation, if you will, that
brings to bear the most sophisticated approaches that we have
seen to date.
So it's been ongoing. It had been a success story by all
measures. We gain a lot from that. The industry gains a lot
from that. I can vouch from industry that you take those
lessons learned and you implement them. And they could be as
simple as revealing, for example, that you might need satellite
phones, for example, because when you lose your power you need
to be able to communicate and you need to have enough satellite
phones.
So it can be something as simple as that to something much
more sophisticated to developing, a more resilient software
program, for example.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you.
And DOE has a long history of promoting a strong energy
workforce and I think we all recognize the need for well-
trained cybersecurity professionals in both the private and
public sector.
As part of the new announced Office of Cybersecurity,
Energy Security, and Emergency Response, does DOE plan to
engage in cybersecurity workforce development? For whoever
wants to answer that.
Mr. Menezes. Right, to repeat what we had previously said,
the short answer is yes. We currently have in place training
programs throughout the process, whether it be at the front end
on preparedness. We make sure that you have training to
anticipate, identify the new threat vectors, how do you
recover. And, of course, what's most important is to have the
innovative R&D in place. So while driven primarily by our labs
together with industry it's important that we train the
workforce, and the workforce is not just in the departments or
the governments. It's in the industries themselves and it's not
limited to just the big player in the industries but it's all
the participants which we have in place right now to cover the
large utilities of all sizes whether you're a muni or a co-op.
So we are trying to develop and implement and train and
maintain and enhance these programs.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you all, and thanks for your service
to the country.
I yield back.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Griffith.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you, Mr. Under Secretary, for being here. I appreciate all your
work on emergency response and Puerto Rico, and I know you're
passionate about trying to make everything safer.
I am going to shift gears a little bit. My colleagues have
asked some great questions on what we already have and I
appreciate that, and my colleague on the other side of the
aisle, Congressman Loebsack, touched on this earlier and asked
you all to get back with him on whether the new pipelines with
more technologies are more vulnerable than older ones already
in the ground.
I would hope that you would include me in whatever response
you give him because I am interested in that. And we have a new
pipeline that's being built in my district and a lot of my
constituents are concerned about all kinds of issues. And so I
would also ask, and not expecting you to have an answer today,
but also ask that you take a look at what can we do as far as
making sure that the new pipelines have technology in them that
lets us know if there's an earthquake in the area, a collapse
somewhere. The faster that people know about it the faster we
can respond. Folks are very concerned about possible breaches.
I've mentioned natural disasters but it could also be bad
actors from outside. And also I think maybe we need to look and
would like your help in figuring out if we need to draft
legislation that would get DOE in on the front end, as Mr.
Loebsack pointed out, because I am not sure that FERC is
looking at, OK, how can we make this pipeline less vulnerable--
should we move it away from the more occupied area of a
particular--let's say we have a farm. Should we move it away
from where the house and the barn are and--to an area that's
less likely both to be attacked by bad actors or to create a
problem should there be some kind of an issue.
Likewise on that same vein--I am going to give you a second
here but I just want to get it all out before I forget
something--it would also seem to me that DOE would want to know
who had extra capacity and a new pipeline with the right kind
of technology could tell you instantly whether or not they had
the ability to take on more natural gas at a particular moment
should there be a failure in some other area so that we can get
that natural gas to where it needs to go by rerouting it
possibly. And we've got two coming through Virginia, one
through my district, one going through Bob Goodlatte's and
other districts.
While we are laying this pipe is the time to put in any new
innovations and new thoughts into that, and I am just hoping
that DOE has some thoughts and plans. And I will give you an
opportunity to respond to that now but also ask that you get
back to me on all those thoughts that are important to me
intellectually but also important to the constituents in my
district--that they want to feel a little bit safer about this
pipeline coming through their back yard.
Mr. Menezes. Well, thank you for the series of questions
and the commentary.
Of course, we agree with the issues that you have
identified. If I can just take a quick crack at it, if you
will, Pat, and then I will defer to you. But, first of all,
with respect to developing the technology on the resiliency
side of it, first of all, you hit on a key point.
As you know, our system is becoming more and more open. We
are actually excited about all the possibilities of getting
more inputs on either side of the meter. Individuals will be
able to gain input. We are increasing the flexibility of our
grid for a variety of good reasons--make it more resilient,
more reliable. However, every time we make it smarter it's a
new entry--it's a potential new entry. So in my conversations
with the lab directors, for example, whom we meet with
regularly on this, as they're developing ways to make things
more efficient or greater access, more individuals who can get
electrons--produce whatever they want when they want it, as an
example, I make sure that my message to them is as you develop
that new technology, please, at the front end, design it in
such a way that it is resilient and it is secure. And so that
message is out and they are doing that. So that's on that
question.
With respect to the question on the extra capacity to take
on more natural gas, I will say that we work with our other
partners. I mean, we work with FERC. We work with NERC.
We are aware of the interoperability issues there. We are
also aware of other potential issues that might give rise, when
you're talking about sharing market information and that kind
of thing. So those things have to be looked at and considered
carefully.
But the short answer is yes, to the extent that as we are
making these improvements and we are spending these resources
and we are developing these programs and we are improving
technologies, I think you can look at it holistically, if I can
use that word, to describe what you were discussing.
And with that, I will pass it to Pat if she wishes to say
something.
Ms. Hoffman. Just really quick, adding the resiliency
looking at four and minus one contingency or single point of
failures.
I think also another point that I would like to bring up is
you're absolutely right, having the ability to increase the
amount of sensors in the system to be able to predict and get
ahead of the game as we look at failures as a critical
component that we think is an important part of our program in
improving resilience.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate it, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
both of you for being here today. Such an important topic,
cybersecurity, particularly as it relates to energy and our
energy infrastructure.
I dare say that most people don't really think about the
implications of cybersecurity when it comes to infrastructure
and the importance of it. So when looking at emerging
cybersecurity risk and particularly threats of the highest
consequence to energy infrastructure, it seems critical to me
that DOE have full visibility on the greatest infrastructure
risks and consequences.
Do you believe, Mr. Under Secretary, at this point that DOE
has sufficient visibility to day on what those risks and
vulnerabilities are?
Mr. Menezes. Well, we currently have sufficient visibility
but it is the future that we need to anticipate. And so today's
hearing is about how it is that these increasing threats will
require us to have greater visibility and the resources which
is why we've set up this office that we affectionately refer to
as CESER.
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Menezes. So we are doing OK today, as several members
have identified. It seems as though while we have the constant
threats we've been able to avoid a major catastrophe. But we
want to make sure that going forward we have the visibility and
the resources. I think Ms. Hoffman would like to say something.
Mr. Johnson. Sure.
Ms. Hoffman. I think it's important to continue to support
the information sharing between industry and the Department of
Energy in understanding the number of events that are going
out. The critical need, as the under secretary has talked
about, moving forward, is that we want to get ahead, we want to
see what the next generation threats are. And so that close
public-private partnership and information sharing and the
flexibility and the freedom for the industry to voluntarily
share information with the department is absolutely important.
Mr. Johnson. OK. I am encouraged by that answer because
I've long held the belief and I still do that this is not an
issue that has an ending to it. This is not a race that we are
going to run and cross the finish line. As soon as we figure
out how to keep the bad guys from getting into our networks,
especially in the digital world where everything is connected,
as soon as we figure that out, we've got another problem right
on the tail end of that.
So I appreciate that there's a forward look and an
understanding that that's the case. So what measures can you
take to increase visibility of security threats today?
Now, you mentioned some of them. You have created this
office. Can you give us some examples of what some of the
future look areas are?
Mr. Menezes. I will take the larger view and I will defer
then to Ms. Hoffman on the specifics.
But the creation of the CESER or the establishment of the
CESER program is just an initial step and we are taking
existing programs and putting it in.
Our vision, though, is much greater and so we want to work
with this committee and other members of Congress--the White
House, our other agencies--to actually put in place other
programs, projects, and the resources to anticipate the
increasing threat.
And so that's the big picture and that's why it's
important, we think, to set this up and have it under an
assistant secretary.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Ms. Hoffman. So I would just add three things. It's really
active threat investigations, so going after and looking at
future threats and tactics and techniques that a bad actor
would utilize against the system. So it's really being
proactive, moving forward.
It's continuing to support the threat analysis programs
such as the CRISP program where we are actively looking at
indicators and looking at sharing of information, whether it's
an indicator that's discovered by industry or by the Federal
Government and allowing that to be shared with industry as
quickly as possible. And then it's really getting to the point
that we can get to machine-to-machine sharing and we can get
proactive whether it's with artificial intelligence, whether
it's with other capabilities.
But it's very--I would say going from the current
understanding mode to more of a proactive mode are the areas
that we want to move forward on.
Mr. Johnson. One of the things that--when I was on active
duty in the Air Force even as far back as the mid-'90s as the
world began to be interconnected and we started talking about
things like network-centric warfare and the digital age and
what that meant to national security, risk management and risk
assessment began to be pushed down in the Department of Defense
as part of our overall culture. So it's one thing to have our
leaders talking about it.
I know I am over my time. Can you give us 30 seconds on
what you're doing to make risk assessment and risk management
where cybersecurity is part of the culture in DOE?
Ms. Hoffman. Just really quick--we have a risk management
tool that we've provided and work with industry on. We have a
cyber capabilities maturity model, which is also a risk
assessment tool.
The industry is looking at the NIST risk assessment
capabilities. So that is being filtered down. But it is a
continual process that we want to show in advance. And so there
are tools and best practices that the legislation has
recognized and it's very important--a success in industry for
advancing those capabilities.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, thanks for the indulgence and I yield back.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Long.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Menezes, when
you opened this morning you mentioned I believe that the cyber
threat from the bad actors, sometimes it boils down to their
artificial intelligence attacking our systems and our defense
is our artificial intelligence trying to prevent their
artificial--can you speak to that for just 30 seconds and,
that's a----
Mr. Menezes. I will let----
Mr. Long [continuing]. Can of very severe worms, I think.
Mr. Menezes. I will let Ms. Hoffman answer that one.
Ms. Hoffman. So when we talk about cybersecurity, it's
really looking at information, technology, and control system
technology. But a lot of it is layering computer protections
against computer attacks and computer protections, and so you
keep layering on different information technology solutions to
thwart information-based attacks on the system.
So it becomes an information and a controlled system but a
capability of an actor to use that information technology
against the industry and so it becomes a very broad attack
surface. And so what we need to do is think about what is the
right information technology placement in industry that
provides the capability industry requires but doesn't provide
that broader attack surface.
Mr. Long. Kind of reminds me of a friend of mine 40 years
ago that had a restaurant and he said that he laid awake half
the night trying to figure out how to keep his employees from
stealing from him. But the problem was that his employees laid
awake the other half of the night trying to circumvent his new
system.
So, Mr. Menezes, as we live in an increasingly digitized
world with the ever-growing threat of cybersecurity attacks, I
think it would be important for the Department of Energy to
identify the greatest security risk in order to mitigate
potential damage.
How does the Department of Energy prioritize any security
risk and how are you working with private energy asset owners
to plan for the possibility of cyberattacks?
Mr. Menezes. Well, our priorities are typically a result of
what we are seeing and what we are anticipating. So it's in
real time because information that we gathered--both you and
Congressman Johnson mentioned the digitalization of our systems
and, indeed, we are producing not only more data but more
access points as all of our systems become more digitized.
So when we prioritize those things that we are addressing,
obviously we have to address those threats that we know as
those threats are evolving. That's the first thing. We have to
continue everything we've done in the past because they can
always revert to prior technology, so we can't ignore that. We
build on what we know and then we try to anticipate where we
think the next threats are coming from. So we have to make sure
that we can respond to what we know and we have to be able to
identify those threats.
As I mentioned earlier, we have a lot of hits on our
systems. They could appear random. Because of our modeling
techniques it could be that we are witnessing new ways that
they are trying to figure out ways to gain access to the
system.
So we need to make sure that we have that priority in place
so we can almost see into the future, if you will, to make our
current system resilient to those threats.
Mr. Long. OK. And you also talk a lot in your testimony
about the Department of Energy working with the Department of
Homeland Security, Department of Justice, and the FBI on energy
sector cybersecurity.
As the sector-specific agency for cybersecurity in the
energy sector, what is the Department of Energy's role during a
potential cyberattack on the energy infrastructure?
Mr. Menezes. I will defer to Pat.
Ms. Hoffman. So in the event of a cyberattack, first of
all, we coordinate very closely with industry in looking at
what is happening on the system.
We coordinate the primary function through the National
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center--the NCCIC
at DHS, which is the focal point for cyber coordination in the
Federal Government. So we will work with them. We will work
with the FBI as well.
We will look at the capabilities that industry has for
dealing with this attack, trying to understand what is the root
cause of the attack but then also work with industry on
providing mitigation measures and any support that's needed.
We would utilize NERC and the ISAC for getting information
out to the rest of industry from a prevention and preparedness
point of view and that capability is very strong and used, is
aware across all the sectors of the industry to pay attention.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you.
I have run out of time so, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
highlighting my legislation, H.R. 5174, as part of this
hearing, and I appreciate the panel being here, Mr. Menezes and
Ms. Hoffman, and your attention to these concerns.
Back when the Department of Energy was organized as a
Cabinet agency back when I was in graduate school in 1977, the
largest energy security concern was fuel supply disruptions,
not electricity disruptions or cybersecurity, as we are talking
about now. As you would expect, the department's Organization
Act reflected those concerns. Times have changed and we should
be thinking differently now about energy security and emergency
preparedness. So I am glad we are doing that here today.
Mr. Menezes, the secretary's efforts to elevate the
agency's leadership on emergency and cybersecurity functions
are commendable. But I would like to see DOE leadership
continue under future administrations. It can't be catch as
catch can. We need that continuity.
Do you think it would help to codify DOE's assistant
secretary functions into DOE Organization Act?
Mr. Menezes. Well, thank you for that question,
Congressman, and let me take a minute to express our
appreciation for working with the committee and its efforts to
review our DOE structure and its authorizing statutes.
Your staff and other members work in a very collaborative
way to try to identify ways as we seek to realign and modernize
the department that you seek to modernize the enabling
statutes.
So we support the effort. We appreciate the collaboration
and exchange of information and we continue to look forward
with you as you move legislation through the process.
Mr. Walberg. In H.R. 5174, we specify functions to include
emergency planning coordination response. Can you talk about
your work to elevate these functions in the new office?
Mr. Menezes. Right. Well, and the secretary announced the
setting up of CESER. That is a clear demonstration of his
commitment and his organizational vision for the department, to
highlight it, to increase the visibility, to coordinate
efforts, and to be a source of additional guidance from
Congress, the White House, and other agencies. So he's
committed to that and he's showing it in a very real and
measurable way.
So that's what we are proposing and that's what we are
doing. And then we look forward to working with you, the
appropriators, others, to ensure that it has the adequate
resources it needs to accomplish the goals that we hope it
accomplishes.
Mr. Walberg. Ms. Hoffman.
Ms. Hoffman. I would just like to add to what the
undersecretary said, that any sort of event that occurs the
effective response really is built off of information sharing
and coordination.
So in the preparedness when we are conducting exercises,
when we are sharing classified threat briefings, when we are
coordinating with the intelligence community, it's all critical
components of how we support preparedness and so that we are
actively coordinating ahead of any event that may occur and
that will allow the Federal Government and industry to be very
efficient in making sure that we understand the root causes but
also the opportunities for mitigations and restoration.
Mr. Walberg. Good. So, clearly, you will work with us to
identify any gaps with--of authority or ambiguities--maybe I
should have left that word out--in the system so we can make
sure it continues to work.
Mr. Menezes. Yes, sir.
Mr. Walberg. Let me ask one more question, Mr. Menezes. Do
you believe that elevating cybersecurity functions to a Senate-
confirmed assistant secretary level will help intergovernmental
and interagency communication as well as multidirectional
information sharing with DOE's ability to appropriately and
quickly address cyber-related emergencies?
Mr. Menezes. I do. The key part about being a Senate-
confirmed appointee is the accountability that you have to
maintain with the two branches of government. You're in the
executive branch and you're confirmed by the Senate, and so it
forces you to work with Congress and to fully explain yourself
to the executive branch.
Secondly, it increases the visibility and the
accountability. So as of today, we come up here regularly to
testify and so it's a way that we can ensure that we are doing
what we said we were going to do and we are doing what you
think that we told you that we were going to do, and you can
give us instructions as to how we can better do what we need to
do.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, and you can review the acronyms
too, as you come up.
I yield back.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Mr. Chairman, thank you. You saved the best for
last, I guess. Maybe.
There's been a lot of talk today about electromagnetic
pulse and grid hardening. YSolar flares, coronal mass
ejections, CMEs, resulting geomagnetic storm effects are real.
So EMPs could be manmade and be a natural event, and we
sort of discount the natural event but just did a little
research--1989 we had a huge CME event that knocked out power
to 6 million people in northeastern Canada, and we just missed
another one this year in 2017 where a huge solar flare happened
and the Earth just was not in its path, thank goodness, and
thank God we weren't.
But we are not immune to that happening in the future. So
too many times when we talk about EMPs, people look at us like
we have on a tinfoil hat--that we are talking about some rogue
state possibly launching a nuclear weapon in to the atmosphere
above the Earth and creating an EMP and knocking out our power
grid. That's a real possibility too when rogue states have
nuclear weapons.
So whether it's a natural EMP or whether it's manmade,
we've got to be prepared for it and one thing that I talk about
a lot in this committee is my alma mater, Clemson University,
and they partner with the Savannah River National Laboratory--
DOE, regional utilities, and stakeholders to develop the
Nation's largest grid emulator, the 20 MVA Duke Energy e-grid
and are working on the next phase, a high-voltage transmission
scale user facility that can be used to test large-power
transformers and other critical transmission assets to develop
protection schemes from both cyber and EMP attacks.
It's a prime example of enhancing grid security through
public-private partnerships, which is the title of one of the
bills we are reviewing today. So I encourage DOE to continue
looking for these opportunities, especially since the new
Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency
Response. I guess you're going to pronounce that as CESER.
Everything in government has an acronym, right?
Can you further discuss what CESER's plans to harden the
grid and protect the EMPs are? Either one.
Ms. Hoffman. So thank you for the question.
As you are well aware, the department takes an all-hazard
approach. So we are looking at a multitude of threats that face
the electric grid and the energy industry.
The national laboratories have important testing
capabilities. You mentioned one of them. There are several
capabilities that we are utilizing from an EMP perspective. We
have partnered with the industry in looking at an EMP strategy.
We have also worked with EPRI as they're looking at their
mitigation and testing plan. We are looking at what the
department can do to support EMP testing. As you know, it's a
very expensive process to do EMP testing.
Mr. Duncan. You mentioned the cost but were you familiar
with what Clemson is doing, before today?
Ms. Hoffman. Yes, I am familiar with Clemson several other
activities in the labs.
Mr. Duncan. Have you visited the research facility in
Charleston, South Carolina, or has anybody from DOE done that?
Ms. Hoffman. I don't know if I've visited that facility but
I've visited the----
Mr. Duncan. Can I invite you on behalf of my alma mater to
visit the drivetrain and test facility in Charleston, South
Carolina?
Ms. Hoffman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Duncan. Both of you?
Mr. Menezes. Yes, sir.
Mr. Duncan. OK.
Let me shift gears real quick. President Trump has talked
about a huge infrastructure package and we are talking about
within Congress and I guess TNI is working on this package.
When people think about infrastructure they think about
roads, bridges, water, sewer, airports, port deepening, et
cetera. But grid hardening and our transmission of power
supplies, so talking about--I think Morgan Griffith talked
about natural gas pipelines and other things. But are elements
within DOE, discussing with the White House and members of
Congress, specifically probably TNI Committee--transportation
and infrastructure--plans to include grid hardening and
cybersecurity as part of the infrastructure package or elements
within the DOE having those conversations?
Mr. Menezes. Well, thank you for the question and pointing
out the importance of the issue and the opportunities to work
with everyone who's working on the infrastructure bill and who
will be working on the infrastructure bill.
To be sure, a resilient strong operating energy system
relies on infrastructure and so those component parts should be
part of an infrastructure bill to the extent that it's
necessary.
The secretary, in fact, is testifying today in the Senate--
in the other body, excuse me.
Mr. Duncan. On this subject?
Mr. Menezes. On the other body--on the President's
infrastructure bill. And so----
Mr. Duncan. So let me just--because my time is running
out----
Mr. Menezes. So energy is a----
Mr. Duncan [continuing]. Is this a priority for the White
House with regard to an infrastructure package--grid hardening
and cyber security as part of the infrastructure package and
should it be?
Mr. Menezes. I know that energy components are a part. I am
not sure if the phrase hardening would be in----
Mr. Duncan. Let me encourage you to go back to Secretary
Perry and go back to your bosses and others in the White House
you have conversations with and let's make this a priority in
the upcoming infrastructure package.
But I can tell you it's going to be a priority of a number
of people here in Congress.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Walberg [presiding]. I thank the gentleman. Seeing that
there are no further members wishing to----
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walberg. Mr. Rush.
Mr. Rush. Before we adjourn, I want to ask unanimous
consent to allow me to ask the Under Secretary a couple of
questions.
Mr. Walberg. Without objection.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Secretary, I understand that the Secretary
will be appearing before the committee in the near future to
discuss the Department's fiscal year 2019 budget request.
The Department routinely provides detailed budget
justification to Congress. But a number of the detailed buy-ins
of the fiscal year 2019 request are not available. Does the
Department plan to release Volumes II, III, V, and VI prior to
the Secretary's appearance before the committee?
Mr. Menezes. We plan to release it when it's complete. Yes,
sir.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman.
Again, seeing that there are no further members wishing to
ask questions, I would like to thank the panel for being with
us today and providing us the answers and probably further
questions that we'll have down the road.
Mr. Menezes. Happy to answer any questions for the record.
Thank you.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, sir.
We'll change panels here now, and move on with the
continuation of the hearing.
[Pause.]
We appreciate the quick changeover here and we want to
thank all of our witnesses for being here today and taking the
time to testify before our subcommittee.
Today's witnesses will have the opportunity to give opening
statements followed by a round of questions from members.
Our second witness panel for today's hearing includes
Tristan Vance, Director--Chief Energy Officer, Indiana Office
of Energy Development--welcome; Zachary Tudor, Associate
Laboratory Director for National and Homeland Security Idaho
National Laboratory--welcome; Mark Engel, Senior Enterprise
Security Advisor, Dominion Energy--welcome to you; Kyle Pitsor,
Vice President, Government Relations, National Electrical
Manufacturers Association--welcome you; and Scott Aaronson,
Vice President, Security and Preparedness, Edison Electric
Institute. Welcome.
We appreciate you all being here today. We'll begin the
panel with Mr. Tristan Vance, and you are now recognized for 5
minutes to give an opening statement and I am sure you're well
aware of the lighting format.
Welcome. We recognize you.
STATEMENTS OF TRISTAN VANCE, DIRECTOR, CHIEF ENERGY OFFICER,
INDIANA OFFICE OF ENERGY DEVELOPMENT; ZACHARY TUDOR, ASSOCIATE
LABORATORY DIRECTOR FOR NATIONAL AND HOMELAND SECURITY, IDAHO
NATIONAL LABORATORY; MARK ENGELS, SENIOR ENTERPRISE SECURITY
ADVISOR, DOMINION ENERGY; KYLE PITSOR, VICE PRESIDENT,
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS, NATIONAL ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS
ASSOCIATION; SCOTT AARONSON, VICE PRESIDENT, SECURITY AND
PREPAREDNESS, EDISON ELECTRIC INSTITUTE
STATEMENT OF TRISTAN VANCE
Mr. Vance. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Rush, and members of the subcommittee.
I am Tristan Vance, the Director of the Indiana Office of
Energy Development. I also serve as the Chief Energy Officer
for the State of Indiana and I am testifying on behalf of the
National Association of State Energy Officials--NASEO.
Our testimony is in support of H.R. 5174, the Energy
Emergency Leadership Act; H.R. 5175, Pipeline and LNG
Facilities cybersecurity Preparedness Act; H.R. 5239, the Cyber
Sense Act; and H.R. 5240, the Enhancing Grid Security Through
Public-Private Partnership Act.
We appreciate the subcommittee's actions on energy
emergency preparedness as demonstrated by the passage of H.R.
3050, which reauthorized appropriations for the U.S. State
Energy Program--SEP--and strengthened its emergency and
cybersecurity provisions.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rush, Full Committee Chairman
Walden, Ranking Member Pallone, and the original sponsor of the
SEP legislation and sponsors of the Dear Colleague letter
calling for $70 million for the SEP program, Mr. Tonko and Mr.
McKinley, you all deserve special praise for your leadership.
My state energy director colleagues from across the country
visited Washington, D.C. in February and strongly encouraged
many of your Senate colleagues to act on H.R. 3050.
First, NASEO would like to note the U.S. Department of
Energy's exceptional response to last year's hurricanes. The
support for energy emergency response from DOE combined with
SEP resources, collaboration among states, tribal, and local
governments and industry worked to save lives and lessen
economic losses.
In particular, the electric and petroleum industries'
efforts to restore services were exceptional. Secretary Perry's
call for the cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency
Response Office, or CESER, would further improve both States'
and the Nation's ability to respond to and mitigate the risks
of energy supply disruption from all hazards.
NASEO's 2017 bipartisan recommendation to the Trump
administration called for such action. In my capacity as a
NASEO board member, I co-chaired the NASEO transition task
force, which developed this important recommendation. We
believe such action will save lives and protect the economy of
communities in every region of the country.
The Energy Emergency Leadership Act will elevate this core
DOE function and we strongly support the bill. I also want to
stress the importance of CESER having a well-defined state
energy security program and robust program management
resources. A strong DOE state energy emergency partnership such
as the one that exists today in the DOE Office of
Infrastructure Security and Energy Restoration is critical to
respond to emergencies effectively.
Joint state-federal coordination and data sharing is the
heart of emergency response. In Indiana, for example, the
propane crisis in 2014 needed a rapid response and government's
ability to connect stakeholders from three sources in order to
keep Hoosiers safe and protect our local economy from
potentially devastating poultry industry losses.
While our Nation has not faced a cybersecurity event with
significant energy supply impacts, we should adopt the lessons
learned from recent natural disasters for our cyber
preparedness. We share the subcommittee's concerns and the
threat cybersecurity presents to the energy system--
electricity, natural gas, and petroleum.
A cyberattack to the energy system during a natural
disaster is a horrific scenario. However, we must address such
possibilities. For example, the DOE-NASEO-NARUC Liberty Eclipse
emergency exercise in 2016 focused on a combined cyber and
natural disaster event. These low-cost regional exercises are
essential.
We also strongly support H.R. 5239 and H.R. 5240 and
believe States can leverage these activities. They build upon
the work of utilities, DOE, and the States. For example, in
Indiana we created the Indiana Executive Council on
Cybersecurity to lead a public-private partnership and have
created a State-led exercise series focused on SCADA systems
for electric and water utilities.
Equally important is mitigating energy system risks. For
example, states using public-private partnerships such as
energy savings performance contracting to upgrade energy
systems at mission critical facilities and we are working with
DOE's Clean Cities program to add natural gas, propane, and
electric vehicles in first responder fleets to enhance
resiliency.
NASEO believes the four bills discussed today are a
significant step forward on an urgent nonpartisan national
security issue. We greatly appreciate the subcommittee's
continued leadership on these issues.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Vance follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
I recognize Mr. Tudor for your 5 minutes of testimony.
STATEMENT OF ZACHARY TUDOR
Mr. Tudor. Thank you, Chairman Upton, Ranking Member Rush,
Mr. Walberg, and distinguished members of the committee for
holding this hearing and inviting Idaho National Laboratory's
testimony on the energy sector's cybersecurity and emergency
response. I request that my written testimony be made part of
the record.
In my role at Idaho National Laboratory, also known as INL,
I lead an organization that conducts research for the cyber and
physical protection of critical infrastructure with an emphasis
on the energy sector.
INL has capabilities that will support the Department of
Energy's Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and
Emergency Response, or CESER, in achieving the new leadership
role for critical infrastructure protection, consistent with
the authorities directed in the FAST Act for assuring the
energy sector's capabilities and coordination for cyber and
physical protection of emergency response.
Persistent, capable, well-resourced, and highly motivated
cyber adversaries are a threat to our Nation's energy sector.
These adversaries continue to develop the skills, capabilities,
and opportunities for potential compromise of the Nation's
energy infrastructure.
The potential consequences of a sophisticated cyberattack
create an imperative that Federal agencies, labs, and
industries collaborate to build capabilities and develop
innovations that reduce the unacceptable risks associated with
a cyberattack. DOE, INL, and our other national laboratory
partners are providing leadership and resources to assure that
the Nation has detective capabilities to reduce these risks.
These capabilities include a broad array of science and
engineering programs, extensive teams of multidisciplinary
national laboratory researches, unique user facilities and test
beds for experimentation at scale, and a breadth of
collaborative relationships with industry, universities, and
Federal agencies.
With regard to reducing cyber risks, INL's Cybercore
Integration Center, known as Cybercore, performs research,
development, testing, and evaluation of technologies and
information products to prevent, detect, and respond to cyber
vulnerabilities and intrusions. When shared through public-
private partnerships, these solutions create barriers to
attack, mitigate the consequences of an attack, and enable
rapid restoration of energy sector operations. Specific
examples of technology advancement that are reducing risks
include, with DOE and other agencies, INL supported the
recovery and information sharing in response to the cyberattack
on Ukraine's electric grid. After our post-event analysis, INL
developed and is conducting unique cyber strike workshops for
U.S. asset owners and operators to learn how to protect against
similar attacks.
INL developed and completed a pilot study of our
consequence-driven cyber-informed engineering methodology, or
CCE, with Florida Power and Light. CCE leverages an
organization's knowledge and experiences to engineer out the
potential for the highest consequence cyber events. Briefings
of the study's results were shared with the Section 9 electric
utility partners, congressional staffers, and government
leaders. A second pilot is currently underway.
INL also is advising the National Security Council on
implementing the methodology with a larger set of participants.
INL is one of several national laboratories providing technical
information and strategic planning guidance to assist CESER
leadership to develop infrastructures, capabilities, and
processes for reducing cyber and physical risk.
This includes providing principles to establish a research
portfolio that delivers impactful solutions and response to
cyber and all hazard threats, standards for security-informed
design to engineer in cyber physical protections for future
grid infrastructure and next generation energy systems,
guidance on best practices for coordinating incident response
with DHS and other federal and private organizations.
Some examples of INL's current partnerships that are
reducing cyber risks are research collaboration with the
electric industry partners at the California Energy Systems for
the 21st Century Program and Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory is leading to new capabilities for machine-to-
machine automated threat response.
DOE's pilot program, Cybersecurity for the Operational
Technology Environment, is providing a forum for situational
awareness for cyber risks among industry partners and
stakeholders. Examples I described demonstrate that DOE and INL
are making significant progress in reducing the risks to our
energy sector. However, with the increasing capabilities of our
adversaries and the increasing complexity of our energy system
technologies we will not completely eliminate all risks.
Hence, INL will continue to prioritize initiatives that
emphasize the advancement of protection and response
capabilities that reduces risks. We do this with the
understanding that the U.S. will continue to identify new
requirements for technology and innovation, expect solutions
through expansive organizational leadership, coordination, and
integration, and prioritize funding and focus for research.
I look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tudor follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
Mr. Engels, you're recognized.
STATEMENT OF MARK ENGELS
Mr. Engels. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rush, and members
of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify.
My name is Mark Engels and I am a Senior Enterprise
Security Advisor at Dominion Energy. Dominion Energy is one of
the largest producers and transporters of energy with a
portfolio of approximately 26,200 megawatts of electricity
generation, 6,600 miles of electric and transmission and
distribution lines, 15,000 miles of natural gas pipeline, and
the Cove Point liquefied natural gas facility in Maryland. We
operate one of the largest natural gas storage systems in the
U.S. with one trillion cubic feet of capacity and serve more
than 6 million utility and retail customers.
I've been with Dominion Energy almost 40 years and with a
focus on cybersecurity for 19 of those years. As a
representative from Dominion Energy, I appreciate the
opportunity to provide comments and input to this committee and
applaud the committee's focus to advance public-private
partnership between the Department of Energy and the oil and
natural gas sector.
For Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7, both the
Department of Energy, the Department of Homeland Security in
coordination with the Department of Transportation function as
the sector-specific agencies for natural gas pipelines and LNG.
The fact that pipelines have two SSAs comprised of three
different federal agencies cannot be understated, especially
when it comes to interagency coordination in advance of,
during, and post-incident operations. The key to this
coordination is maintaining a productive relationships between
the energy government coordination councils' two co-chairs--DOE
and DHS--and the oil and natural gas sector coordinating
council.
The ONGSCC is comprised of owners and operators from 20-
plus industry trade associations representing all aspects of
the oil and natural gas sector. I encourage DOE and TSA, who
has regulatory authority for pipeline security, to develop a
memo of understanding that outlines roles and responsibilities
for dealing with cyber and physical security of natural gas
pipelines and LNG. TSA already has an MOU with the Department
of Transportation's Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration, or PHMSA, which has responsibility for pipeline
safety.
The recent announcement of DOE's new Office of
Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response should
continue to improve the coordination for pipeline, cyber, and
physical security.
The language in H.R. 5175 Section 22 could introduce
complexity and confusion when it comes to DOE's involvements
with States. Individual pipeline companies, Dominion Energy
included, already have longstanding relationships with state
emergency response organizations, public utility commissions,
and law enforcement for all hazard events. H.R. 5175 directs
DOE to focus on advanced cybersecurity applications, pilot
demonstrations, develop workforce curricula, and provide
mechanisms to help the energy sector evaluate, prioritize, and
improve physical and cybersecurity capabilities.
Dominion Energy has worked with DOE and several national
labs on a number of efforts that align with the proposed
legislation. They include being a peer reviewer for the
Department of Energy's Cybersecurity for Energy Delivery
Systems Program, participation in workforce and training
efforts, Cyber Strike--a hands-on workshop communicating
lessons learned associated with the Ukraine grid attacks--and
Attack, an approached developed by INL to aggregate and
evaluate cyber risk-related information.
Dominion Energy is a member of both the downstream natural
gas and electricity information sharing and analysis centers,
both of which have benefited from intelligence provided by
DOE's Cybersecurity Risk Information Sharing Program, or CRISP.
Dominion Energy and other natural gas pipeline companies have
worked very closely with TSA and DOE on cyber and physical
security to build a partnership based on trust and respect.
The proposed legislation should make sure that roles and
responsibilities are clearly defined and understandable by
pipeline operators who ultimately have to face the growing
threat every day.
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide comments and
I will be glad to answer any of your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Engels follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
Mr. Pitsor.
STATEMENT OF KYLE PITSOR
Mr. Pitsor. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Rush, members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify on such an important topic today, the
physical and cybersecurity of our Nation's electric system.
My name is Kyle Pitsor, Vice President of Government
Relations for National Electrical Manufacturers Association,
representing about 350 manufacturers of electrical equipment
and medical imaging technologies. NEMA and our member
manufacturers have made cybersecurity a top priority. As the
manufacturers of essential grid equipment, NEMA companies are a
key line of defence against both physical and cyberattacks in
the electricity transmission and distribution system.
We understand that a secure product supply chain is
inherent to a secure grid and cybersecurity aspects should be
built into, not bolted onto manufacturers' products whenever
possible. Manufacturers also understand that managing
cybersecurity supply chain risk requires a collaborative effort
and open lines of communication among electric utility
companies, Federal and State and local governments, and
suppliers of the full spectrum of grid systems and components,
both hardware and software.
I would like to mention briefly some of the industry-wide
efforts NEMA and its members have pursued to establish best
practices for supply chain and manufacturer cybersecurity
hygiene and then make a few comments on the Cyber Sense Act and
the Enhancing Grid Security Through Public-Private Partnership
Act.
In 2005, the electrical industry took a step toward
improving supply chains' security of manufacturers' products by
publishing a technical best practices document that laid out
the steps for securing supply chains.
NEMA published a white paper on cybersecurity, supply chain
best practices for manufacturers that addresses supply chain
integrity through four phases of a product's life cycle: the
manufacturing, delivery, operation, and end of life of a
product. This month in March, NEMA members have approved a new
technical document detailing industry best practice cyber
hygiene principles for electrical manufacturers to implement in
their manufacturing and engineering processes. The document
raises a manufacturer's level of cybersecurity sophistication
by following seven fundamental principles that are outlined in
my statement.
With the above-mentioned two industry developed and
cybersecurity best practices documents in mind, I will make a
few comments about two of the bills under consideration today.
First of all, with respect to the Cyber Sense Act, NEMA member
manufacturers support voluntary cyber evaluation of products
used in the transmission, distribution, storage, and end use of
electricity. However, the specific requirements of any such
program need to be carefully designed in close collaboration
with manufacturers and other stakeholder groups and developed
via an open and transparent process.
We recommend that any cybersecurity evaluation program
abide by a set of principles that we've outlined in our written
statement. With respect to the Enhancing Grid Security Through
Public-Private Partnership Act, NEMA supports the concepts
included in the draft legislation. With respect to Section 2,
NEMA agrees that voluntary technical assistance efforts should
be available to provide electric utilities with information and
resources to effectively prepare for and combat both physical
and cybersecurity threats.
We also agree that this technical assistance should be
provided in close collaboration with State governments and
public utility regulatory commissions as well as with equipment
manufacturers. Including manufacturers in the training and
technical assistance efforts will ensure that products are
installed and maintained as intended to limit the risk of
cyberattack resulting from the possible misuse of a product.
NEMA also supports the recommendations included in Sections
3 and 4 of the legislation. One additional outage index that we
recommend be included in Section 4(b) of the draft legislation
is the Momentary Average Interruption Frequency Index.
Momentary outages cost U.S. electricity consumers over $60
billion in 2014 and account for more than half of all power
outages. Inclusion of this index, we believe, will improve the
interrupter cost estimate information produced by the
Department of Energy.
In conclusion, NEMA and member company manufacturers
recognize that cybersecurity risks are constantly evolving and
changing and requires a shared responsibility by all
stakeholders.
NEMA looks forward to working with you as a resource to
this committee as you continue your work to address
cybersecurity concerns in the energy sector.
Thank you, and I look forward to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitsor follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Aaronson.
STATEMENT OF SCOTT AARONSON
Mr. Aaronson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rush,
and members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity
to testify here today. For EEI's member companies, which
includes all of the Nation's investor-owned electric companies,
securing the energy grid is a top priority. I appreciate your
invitation to discuss this important topic on their behalf.
The electric power industry, which includes investor-owned
electric companies, public power utilities, and electric
cooperatives, supports more than 7 million American jobs and
contributes $880 billion annually to U.S. gross domestic
product--about 5 percent of the total. That 5 percent is truly
the first 5 percent, responsible for generating and delivering
the energy that powers our economy and our way of life.
Our members own and operate some of the Nation's most
critical infrastructure and they take that responsibility
seriously. EEI's member companies prepare for all hazards--
physical and cyber events, naturally occurring or manmade
threats, and severe weather of every kind. To address multiple
threats, our companies take what's known as a defense in-depth
approach with several layers of security. I would like to
highlight three main areas of focus: standards, partnerships,
and response and recovery.
First, standards--through a process created by Congress the
electric power sector is subject to mandatory enforceable
critical infrastructure protection, or CIP, regulatory
standards for cyber and physical security. Through these
standards, the bulk power system enjoys a baseline level of
security. Standards are important, but with intelligent
adversaries operating in a dynamic threat environment,
regulations alone are insufficient and must be supplemented.
That brings me to the second area of focus, which is
partnerships, which you have heard a lot about today. You heard
it from DOE and you will hear it from this entire panel--
security is a shared responsibility. None of us can do this
alone. To be successful in this environment, industry and
government must partner, and as you heard earlier, we are.
I am here this morning in my role as EEI's Vice President
for Security and Preparedness but I am also privileged to be a
Member of the Secretariat for the Electricity Subsector
Coordinating Council. The ESCC is comprised of CEOs of 22
electric companies and nine major industry trade associations
representing the full scope of electric generation,
transmission, and distribution in the United States and Canada.
Through partnerships like the ESCC, government and industry
leverage one another's strengths. This partnership manifests
itself in many ways including deployment of government
technologies, like CRISP, which you have heard about,
multidirectional information sharing, drills and exercises, and
facilitating cross-sector coordination.
What makes the ESCC effective is CEO leadership across all
segments of the industry. This structure provides resources,
sets priorities, drives accountability. Furthermore, CEOs serve
as a draw to other senior counterparts in industry sectors and
in government. The unity of effort driven by industry working
with government has produced significant tangible results.
Finally, the third area of focus is response and recovery.
The electric power sector is proud of its record on reliability
but outages do occur. The past year has made one thing
abundantly clear--we can't protect everything from everything
all of the time and investments help companies restore power
and be prepared. Our industry invests more than $120 billion
each year to make the energy grid stronger, smarter, cleaner,
more dynamic, and more secure. In addition, the industry's
culture of mutual assistance unleashes a world-class workforce
amidst the toughest conditions to restore power safely and
effectively.
Today, we have supplemented that traditional response in
recovery with a 21st century edition--cyber mutual assistance.
So far, more than 140 entities are participating in the
program, covering more than 80 percent of U.S. electricity
customers. That brings me to the bills before the subcommittee
today. We appreciate both Congress and the Trump
administration's support of the electric power sector.
Just as EEI's member companies evolve to meet new threats,
our government partners continuously improve their posture
through these new initiatives. For example, we applaud DOE
Secretary Perry and his team for establishing DOE's new Office
of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response, or
CESER.
Legislation passed by this committee codified DOE's role as
the sector-specific agency--thank you--and we believe the
elevation of CESER will deepen the relationship between our
industry and DOE on issues of cybersecurity and energy grid
response initiatives.
In his testimony, Secretary Menezes mentioned DOE's
establishment of the supply chain testing facility. We are
interested in the details of that program. The subcommittee is
also aware that through the NERC/FERC process as mandatory
supply chain standard will be implemented soon. The committee
should consider those efforts when adopting legislation related
to supply chains.
Finally, I would like to mention a report included in the
Enhancing Grid Security Through Public-Private Partnerships Act
looking at distribution, cyber, and physical security. EEI
supports this report because it could address several emerging
questions that many in the industry also are asking. What
considerations should be made to protect a distribution system
that is outside of mandatory NERC CIP standards? How can we
secure newer technology that is largely consumer grade but may
increase the energy grid's attack surface?
A collaborative risk-based approach to security at the
distribution level is essential. This report should drive that
approach and consider the many different entities in the
distribution grid, electric companies, and others.
Again, I appreciate you holding this hearing. I look
forward to answering any of your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Aaronson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. Thanks to the panel for your very
efficient use of the 5 minutes time. Maybe it would be an
example to myself and my colleagues.
Now privileged to represent the neighbor to the south who
guards my border, Mr. Latta.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate our panel for being here. And again, this is a
really important hearing that we are having today because it
affects us all.
Mr. Pitsor, if I could start with my questions with you, if
I may, please. In your testimony you state that you support a
voluntary cybersecurity evaluation of products used in bulk
power systems such as the program described in H.R. 5239 Cyber
Sense.
One point you raise is that once products are sold
manufacturers often don't know where or how these components
are used, installed, or operated. You suggest that asset owners
should maintain a system of tracking products. Would you
explain in detail why it is important to track these products?
Mr. Pitsor. As we look at evaluation of cybersecurity
threats of different components and how they're assembled in
the manufacturers, once they have sold a product, they're
assembled in the field. They're not necessarily aware of who
purchased them and how they were assembled. And so the tracking
concept here is to have a database and that could be shared so
would be more familiar with where products have been placed,
how they've been assembled, how they've been installed, how
they've been commissioned. So that if patching is necessary due
to a cyber-related event or testing for that product, we would
then be able to contact the asset user as to what patches
should be installed and how they should be installed.
Mr. Latta. Let me follow up, when you're talking about the
database because in Section 2(b)(2) of the Cyber Sense bill
establishes a cybersecurity vulnerability reporting process and
related database for products tested and identified as
cybersecure under this program.
Would this help address the need for a system for tracking
those products by having that, as you just mentioned?
Mr. Pitsor. I think a database would be very helpful in
terms of addressing that need, yes.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Aaronson, if I could ask you, and I think you mentioned
in your testimony about when you were out with co-ops, and I
know I just was at two of my co-ops. I represent the largest
number of co-ops in the State of Ohio.
But if I could ask this question--as the new technologies
are becoming increasingly interconnected within our electric
grid, new vulnerabilities are emerging across the system
including at the distribution level. Currently, the physical or
cybersecurity of the bulk power system or the interstate is
addressed through the Critical Infrastructure Protection
Standards issued by NERC. But the distribution system
intrastate is outside the jurisdiction of the mandatory NERC
standards and the question is are there implications for this
perceived gap in oversight and protection of the cybersecurity
of the distribution portion of the Nation's electrical grid?
Mr. Aaronson. So a couple of things to respond to there. As
I mentioned in my testimony, we operate one big machine, right,
with thousands of owners and operators from really large
investor-owned electric companies that EEI represents to co-ops
and municipal systems of varying sizes. And so as you know, the
ESCC incorporates all of those and we work very closely. I know
both APPA and NRECA provided written testimony or written
statement for the record. So I would refer to that.
With respect to gaps, and I call them perceived gaps, just
because distribution level components are not subject to the
Federal CIP standards does not mean that there is not security
happening at that level. That said, we do think that anything
we can do with respect to components that make up that part of
the grid--the intrastate--the distribution level, is going to
be an important approach to continue to advance security for
all of us.
The other thing I would say about distribution security is
we need to prioritize. In security you protect diamonds like
diamonds and pencils like pencils, and to be sure, there are
diamonds at the distribution level that we need to be aware of.
There are components that are crown jewels at the distribution
level that we need to be securing. And so approaches like Cyber
Sense may allow us to do that and some of the things that
Secretary Menezes and Assistant Secretary Hoffman were
discussing with respect to really looking closely at those
components and drilling down on the most critical, because if
you have a hundred priorities you have no priorities--but
really finding those most critical components and beating the
heck out of them so that we can understand if there are any
vulnerabilities in them, again, will make us all more secure.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. My time
is about to expire and I yield back.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman.
Now I am privileged to recognize the ranking member, the
gentleman from Illinois--in fact, the district I was privileged
to be born in--I quickly add long before you represented the
district, Mr. Rush.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, it's still the best district in the
Nation.
Mr. Vance, in your written testimony you noted that DOE
held a cybersecurity contest which brought together students
competing to address the challenges of protecting
infrastructure and firms that might employ the same students
after they graduate.
Do you think that on both the public and private sector
that we are doing enough to ensure that we have a skilled
workforce capable of meeting the challenges we will inevitably
face in regards to cybersecurity? And I will invite any other
members of the panel to weigh in on some of these issues.
Mr. Vance. I think what we've been doing in Indiana is
specifically trying to bring together the public and private
sides together to analyze what some of the weaknesses are, what
we are good at, what we are not good at, and as Mr. Aaronson
from EEI spoke about just a second ago, I think we need to
prioritize and figure out where those diamonds are and where
those pencils are.
It's one thing for me and my colleagues in the public
sector to sit in a room and try to figure out what we need to
focus on. We are going to miss a lot of things. What we need to
do is sit down with the private sector and work through a
collaborative process to identify where our weaknesses are and
how to strengthen those.
So the bills being discussed today, I think, are four steps
in the right direction to help strengthen those partnerships.
Mr. Rush. Anybody else want to chime in?
Mr. Tudor. Mr. Rush, thank you for the question.
I agree that public-private partnerships are key to moving
these forward and these four pieces of legislation are
definitely great steps toward that.
At the Idaho National Lab, we know that the partnerships
are the strongest part of our operation, whether it's with
vendors, asset owners, with other government agencies and
that's the way that we will be able to develop the structures
to keep our cyber resilience in our energy systems.
Mr. Rush. And does anyone have any suggestions on how the
Congress could help you to ensure that we have enough skilled
workforce other than what's information in these four bills?
Mr. Vance. I will add, real quick, just to give a little
bit more perspective on what we are doing in Indiana. Our
approach with our cybersecurity council has been to bring
together all the potential industries involved in
cybersecurity. So right now, I've got about 250 or so members
of that council spanning about 20 different industries with
industry subgroups that then things can bubble up through those
subgroups into the full committee to address in a cross-sector
manner.
So I will give you an example. One of the committees is
focused on personal identifiable information because that's
something that's not unique to any one specific industry and it
really needs to be a topic in and of itself. But it can't just
be its own council or committee. It has to be part of a bigger
picture because it ties back to energy, water, finance--all
these other things.
So what we've been trying to do in Indiana is to build a
large council that integrates all these different aspects so it
can be addressed in a cross-sector manner across different
industries.
Mr. Aaronson. Mr. Rush, I would add, I know you're very
committed to workforce development in particular with respect
to cyber and I think one of the things that you're hearing both
from the previous panel and all of us is this is a shared
responsibility.
It's a whole of community issue. I reference in my verbal
testimony the cyber mutual assistance program. To us, that is a
force multiplier. That is when a company is being attacked
their counterparts come from around the country and around the
Nation and around North America, frankly, to support them. And
so I think that's great for the electricity sector and we are
very proud of that. But to be able to work with the National
Guard, to be able to work with other sectors, to be able to
prioritize restoration when cyber incidents maybe are impacting
more than one sector.
We need to look at this again far more holistically. And
then from a workforce perspective, we are very proud of the
development that we do within our sector through things like
the CEWD. It's the Energy Workforce Development--Committee for
Energy and Workforce Development is a great example of how we
can find those gaps that we have in our workforce and work
through education, work through public-private partnerships to
improve our staffing in our most critical needs.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tudor, I am going to come to you first but I am going
to take what's more or less a point of personal privilege and
just say that I saw you sitting throughout that first panel and
all those questions on that second row there with a couple of
young people who are very well behaved. Are they connected with
you?
Mr. Tudor. Yes, sir. That's my son, Miles, and my niece,
Sydney. They're getting a civics lesson today.
Mr. Griffith. Well, not the most riveting of hearings but
one that's very important and they have done a great job and I
thought they were--you could tell they were doing some stuff
back there and I thought they were like my kids, playing on an
electronic device. But, apparently, they have a numbers game
that they're working on that's all done with their hands and
they've been very quiet and very well behaved. So you and your
family are to be commended for having such well-behaved
children.
That being said, let's get down to business. You make
reference to the consequence-driven cyber-informed
engineering--CCE methodology. You say this is more about
getting ahead of the problems of vulnerabilities and threats
rather than chasing them. Can you describe what role this
approach may have in strengthening cybersecurity and critical
infrastructure?
Mr. Tudor. Yes. Thank you for that question, sir.
So consequence-driven cyber-informed engineering, or CCE,
kind of identifies the problem--that we are constantly seeing
new vulnerabilities, new threats every day. So an organization
does a risk assessment on a Monday and by Wednesday when new
vulnerabilities are discovered, many of the activities
described in that risk assessment may be moot.
But if we go back and look at the key consequences of any
organization and we take an electric utility at this, if
keeping the lights on is their mission but maybe there's
several key components that if they were lost may prevent that
mission from being carried out. Looking at the engineering
methods of those consequences, looking at the way an adversary
might go about attacking those infrastructures, using a threat-
based methodology and at INL we do a lot of work considering
the threat first and we use that mindset when we look at our
different mitigations, and then developing mitigations with the
asset owner who is a key component of this.
So if we can engineer out those severe consequences,
irregardless of the threat or the current risk or a new
vulnerability then we believe that that has a chance of
maintaining that resiliency over a longer period rather than
just addressing new vulnerabilities as they show up.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that, and there's a pilot
program but it's had very limited deployment. Are you confident
this methodology is an effective approach and, if so, what are
you trying to examine before deciding whether this program
should be expanded?
Mr. Tudor. Yes, thank you again.
We have conducted one pilot. We are on a second, and I
think that as we've been briefing this across Congress, the
National Security Council, and others, we've been very
encouraged that people do believe that this type of methodology
will be able to go forward.
So we are working with the DOE and others to develop some
ways to do CCES scale. In our next few pilot engagements we'll
be bringing more partners along to provide training for them
and they can go out and provide training for others. So we hope
to be able to scale out this methodology in the next several
years.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that.
Mr. Engels, you have got a new pipeline coming near my
district, although not through my district, and I asked before
about some, for lack of a better term, smart pipe technology. I
know you're not expecting that question today and so if you
could just get me an answer later as to what you all might be
doing in regards to letting us know if there's some kind of a
break in the line quicker using some smart technology.
Mr. Engels. I will be glad to follow up with you on that.
Mr. Griffith. And likewise, I have a friend who's got a
farm where there's going to be a pump station and whatever you
all could do to reassure folks that they're being placed in the
safest location and likewise if there's any smart technology in
there I would appreciate having that information.
Mr. Engels. I understand. We'll make sure we follow up.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you. All right.
Mr. Aaronson, you mentioned in your written testimony that
approximately 75 percent of U.S. customers are served by a
company that participates in cybersecurity risk information
sharing program.
Do you have any insight what's going on with the other 25
percent?
Mr. Aaronson. So CRISP is a wonderful technology and the
beauty of it is it was something that was actually developed by
National Labs. It was piloted for a few years by a small subset
of companies--did some proof of concept, and that was then.
We'll call it commercialized, although maybe that's not a fair
characterization because it is still a public-private
partnership with the Department of Energy, the North American
Electrical Reliability Corporation through their information-
sharing analysis center--I am trying to not use acronyms--and
then the companies that deploy it.
What we are looking to do and what the ISAC is planning to
do now is to expand the program. So it started with five
pilots. It has expanded to more than that, to the 75 percent of
customers being represented by a company that has deployed
CRISP. The other thing you should note is that information,
while it is gleaned from the companies that have deployed the
sensors that make up CRISP, the information that is gleaned is
actually socialized to the entire electric utility sector.
So while there are sensors on 75 percent of companies, we
are going to get a much broader cross-section in the coming
years.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that. Thank you for the answer.
I thank all of you for being here today, and I yield back.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman and I recognize the
gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. I want to thank the chairman and I thank the
witnesses. Good testimony and informative.
Mr. Aaronson, in your testimony you pointed out that the
EEI members do work to prepare for hazards and cyber or natural
events. What are your members doing to prepare for climate
change events? Is there a standard or is there some sort of
work that needs to be done that's being done?
Mr. Aaronson. So, again, I think we look at this as all
hazards, and whether it is an act of war or an act of God,
whether it is a natural disaster, whether it's an earthquake,
whether it's the wildfires that I know that your district has
been impacted by, we are looking at ways we can be more
resilient, and a lot of what we do kind of crosses, again, acts
of war and acts of God and is more about consequence
management. Why the lights were turned off--why there was a
power outage becomes a little less relevant and how quickly can
we get them restored. And so a lot of our focus is on that
response and recovery and resilience component of preparation
for all manner of hazards.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Pitsor, I appreciate your comments on the enhancing
grid security through public-private partnerships. You
mentioned that you wanted to see a Momentary Average
Interruption Frequency Index included in the ICE calculation.
How would that improve the calculation? How would that improve
the results?
Mr. Pitsor. Well, the MAIFI index represents some nearly 50
percent of all the momentary outages that occur in the U.S. and
these are momentary outages that are usually 5 minutes or less.
We think that the overall interrupter calculation, if it's
missing those 50 percent of the outages, it's not capturing
fully the economic costs that are associated by these smaller
momentary outages. For instance, electric motors trip off,
computers don't have backup power trip off. There are costs
associated with that that should be captured in the overall
estimator.
Mr. McNerney. OK. You mentioned the Cyber Sense Act. How
would your members respond to nonvoluntary requirements for--
including cybersecurity in their products?
Mr. Pitsor. We are very supportive of the evaluation
testing of electrical equipment. I think the key is going to be
what type of equipment we are speaking of--the scope of the
testing, what protocols we are testing against, who's paying
for that testing, and the follow-on work that will be done to
address vulnerabilities that are found in terms of patching,
recommissioning, the continuous process that goes on in
addressing cyber----
Mr. McNerney. It seems that your members would want to have
a set of standards they could link their products to.
Mr. Pitsor. Exactly. Working on supply side standards that
I mentioned, a new cyber security index standard and then
looking at how we test different products and different
configurations against different vulnerabilities. We segment
those products because some products, as has been recognized,
are behind layers of security. So the testing of those maybe
are less than those that have outward-facing connection to the
internet. There are different levels of testing that would be
required for those products.
Mr. McNerney. Do you have concerns about cuts that are
being proposed in the fiscal 2019 budget's impact on
cybersecurity or security in general? I guess Mr. Aaronson
would be the right person to ask that question of.
Mr. Aaronson. So we appreciate what the Department of
Energy has done with respect to CESER and elevating some of
these issues. We've worked really closely in particular with
the Office of Electricity and their Infrastructure Security
Energy Restoration Office, which will ultimately matriculate
over the CESER.
This last historic hurricane season and the nor'easters the
last several weeks, and with that response from Puerto Rico--so
between that, our partnerships with the labs and our
partnerships with the sector coordinating council we have
really appreciated the ability to work closely with this
administration and the previous administration. This has been a
priority for Department of Energy for several years now.
Mr. McNerney. So you don't see any sort of a drawback with
the cuts that are being proposed?
Mr. Aaronson. At this point, I think the priorities that we
care about most have not been impacted in our day-to-day
interactions with the department.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman.
Now I recognize the good doctor and gentleman from Indiana,
Mr. Bucshon.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Vance, good to have you here from Indiana.
Mr. Vance. Thank you.
Mr. Bucshon. You're welcome. As you know, electric
cooperatives serve more than 1.3 million customers in the State
of Indiana, primarily those in rural parts of the State, which
is southwest Indiana, the Wabash Valley that I represent. An
additional 300,000 individuals are served by municipal electric
utilities. Both cooperative and municipal utilities are
generally much smaller than their investor-owned counterparts.
What are some of the specific challenges that you see these
smaller utilities face in terms of defending their assets
against cybersecurity threats?
Mr. Vance. I think the challenge is that a co-op or a
municipal utility face are very similar to what an investor-
owned utility face because they have the same issues in that
every time that you move toward a networked piece of equipment
you're exposing yourself to potential cybersecurity attacks.
So in Indiana we've been very aware of including our co-ops
and our municipal utilities in our conversations on energy
security and cybersecurity. They sit on our cybersecurity
council established by the governor.
I think one of the important things we are trying to do in
Indiana as we continue exercises is to build those
relationships so that we know we have those personal
connections and when an energy emergency hits we cannot spend
hours searching through a binder of 300 pages trying to figure
out what to do.
I think to some extent the movie ``Ghostbusters'' summed it
up well when it said, ``Who are you going to call?'' You have
to know who you're going to call in those situations. We can't
spend hours trying to figure it out.
So we've been including our munis and co-ops in our
conversations.
Mr. Bucshon. Are there financial challenges to making sure
that your networks and everything are secure that the State
helps with or anything?
Mr. Vance. There's always finding constraints when it comes
to infrastructure. But to the best of my knowledge, I am not
aware of any specific constraints with munis and co-ops. But we
can get back to you on an answer to that.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. One of the bills we are discussing, and
somebody mentioned this a little while ago, Enhancing Grid
Security Through Public-Private Partnership Act specifically
requires the Secretary of Energy to take different sizes of and
regions served by electric utilities into account when
administering cybersecurity programs.
Based on your experience in Indiana, what might this look
like?
Mr. Vance. I think that would be something that we'd be
very interested to work with DOE on. What that would look like
I am not entirely sure, off the top of my head.
Mr. Bucshon. Anybody have any comments on any of this
stuff? No?
Good. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman.
Seeing no one else on the panel, I recognize myself for 5
minutes. Thanks to the panel for being here.
Mr. Aaronson and Mr. Vance, I asked some questions to our
DOE panel earlier and I would appreciate hearing your answers
to them as well. I appreciate the secretary's efforts to
elevate the agency's leadership on emergency and cybersecurity
functions and I believe they are commendable. But I would like
to see DOE leadership continue under future administrations, as
I mentioned. Do you think it would help to codify DOE's
Assistant Secretary functions in the DOE organization chart?
Either one--Mr. Vance or Mr. Aaronson.
Mr. Vance. From our perspective, I would have to discuss
with my other members of NASEO before I could make a statement
one way or the other.
But I would defer to DOE on that.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Mr. Aaronson.
Mr. Aaronson. I would just simply say I see no problem with
that. I think it could be useful, and to Mr. McNerney's
question also, I think anything that provides accountability,
that elevates something not just within the organization but
then visibility as a Senate-confirmed position and across the
various verticals within the department that acknowledges these
intersector relationships between electric, gas, and other
generating capabilities, and then I think anything that can get
more resources.
I don't want to be dismissive of your question, Mr.
McNerney. I think anything that--more resources so we can do
some of these partnerships more, better, faster, and focus on
all of the things that are happening in this--with respect to
security in the sector is going to be valuable. So I think
codifying it, elevating it, funding it, supporting it are all
good outcomes.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Let me ask, do you believe that elevating
the cybersecurity functions to the Senate-confirmed Assistant
Secretary level is a positive? Is it necessary?
Mr. Aaronson. I will leave that to policy makers on that,
sir. I think it's a positive development though, certainly.
Mr. Walberg. OK.
Mr. Aaronson, one of the bills we are discussing today is
the Enhancing Grid Security Through Public-Private Partnership
Act, which directs DOE to provide cybersecurity training and
technical assistance for electric utilities that have fewer
available resources due to size or region.
The legislation builds upon the existing public-private
partnership between DOE, the electric cooperatives, and power
utilities.
Could you explain for us the challenges facing certain
electric utilities in improving the cybersecurity of their
assets?
Mr. Aaronson. Sure. So, again, I would point everybody to
the statement by the American Public Power Association and the
National Rural Electric Cooperative Association with whom I
serve as secretaries on the sector coordinating council with.
So one of the benefits of the sector coordinating council
is that we do all come together with common cause, whether they
are large investor-owns, smaller investor-owns, cooperatives,
municipals, Canadians, independent power generators, the
nuclear sector, gas, and on and on and on. So we work really
well together on these issues, again, of sort of mutual concern
with respect to protection of our infrastructure.
With respect to challenges among the smaller entities,
there are workforce challenges. There is the ability to ingest
intelligence. There is the ability to implement some of the
good information that is coming out of the government and some
of the mitigation measures that are recommended. And so
anything that we can do as a community--again, whole of
community so that it is a rising tide that lifts all boats--
ultimately helps all of the infrastructure that we own and
operate together.
So we are very supportive of that particular provision for
our co-op and municipal brothers and sisters but also for some
of other smaller entities that are going to need help
implementing the things you all recommend.
Mr. Walberg. So this Section 2 of H.R. 5240, the Enhancing
Grid Security Through Public-Private Partnerships Act, does
that strengthen and further these existing public-private
partnerships?
Mr. Aaronson. I think it does.
Mr. Walberg. OK.
Thank you. The gentleman from New York is here, my friend,
and we recognize you for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here this afternoon.
Mr. Aaronson, the utility industry has a long tradition and
culture of mutual assistance. When a disaster strikes, everyone
responds, and I know there are still crews from New York
working in Puerto Rico. The industry has a good idea of how to
deal with supply disruptions and restorations after a natural
disaster. But cyber is still uncharted territory. When the
industry comes together to think about the future of mutual
assistance, does that include how you might respond to a cyber
incident?
Mr. Aaronson. Very much so.
One of the things that we have done as a sector--and
actually I will give a little bit of a timeline because I think
it's instructive.
So you will recall the end of 2015 we had both GridEx III,
which is a biannual exercise that NERC puts on, and then just a
month later there was the attack in Ukraine that had impact on
their distribution system. The CEOs of the sector coordinating
council got together for a meeting in January of 2016 and asked
the question, do we have the surge capacity to deal with either
the imagined threats in the GridEx scenario or the real ones
that were perceived from the Ukraine scenario? And the answer
was sort of, which is never a good answer for chief executives.
And so they told us as the sector coordinating council
support staff to go put something together. We put together
something known as cyber mutual assistance, and so from that
time just a little over 2 years ago we scoped what cyber mutual
assistance would look like. We developed a legal structure
around it. We developed a play book. We exercised it. We've
utilized it, and now 142 companies representing nearly 80
percent of all customers in North America have a company that
is a member of the cyber mutual assistance program.
It's in its very nascent stages. Traditional mutual
assistance has been around for more than 80 years. But it is a
platform that we can begin to surge and support each other in
the eventuality of a cyberattack.
Mr. Tonko. And in that collaboration, are there any
differences that you would cite that they could make a
distinction from the regular emergency planning and response
efforts?
Mr. Aaronson. It is in some ways very similar in that the
goal is to restore power and one of the things I tell people is
the best way to not have cyber vulnerabilities is to not have
cyber infrastructure.
So another thing that we are pursuing is to actually be
able to operate in a degraded state manually, which is
something Ukrainians were able to do and, again, which we have
some capacity to do but are going to develop even more so.
With respect to the differences between traditional and
cyber mutual assistance, the first one is the obvious one.
You're not going to have bucket trucks of cyber linemen driving
down the highway to the affected area. But there is the
capacity to support each other remotely. There are things that
can be done to develop both information sharing in the event of
these attacks and the sharing of equipment and the bringing in
of noncompromised equipment to support the company that may
have had equipment compromised.
Last is with storms, you see them coming and they are
regional. And so companies from all over North America will
descend, and did certainly this last year, on the affected
region. Cyber doesn't know boundaries like that and so that is
a consideration for how do you respond--do I want to send my
people into a company that's been impacted when I may be next,
and that is something that the cyber mutual assistance program
is contemplating and addressing.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you very much.
And Mr. Vance, a common theme we are hearing today is how
partnerships--those between utilities and between different
levels of government--are critical to ensuring that our
electric system is reliable, resilient, and prepared for the
worst.
Can you give us a sense of the level of cyber expertise at
the state and local levels?
Mr. Vance. We have a number of folks at our Office of
Technology who are the co-coordinators of our cybersecurity
council who are spending their time on cybersecurity in
coordination with our Department of Homeland Security, our
Utility Regulatory Commission, and a number of folks across
state government.
So we do have some folks who are focused specifically on
the cyber issues. This is a relatively recent thing. I think it
started in 2016 but it's something we are trying to get up to
speed as soon as we possibly can.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And your testimony mentioned the
importance of a robust state energy security program. What kind
of services and resources can DOE provide to our given states?
Mr. Vance. I think that's something that can be defined as
we explore this more. But the first things off the top of my
head are more training and exercise.
A lot of this planning and exercise activities--for
example, the exercise we did in Rhode Island that mapped a
cyberattack on top of a natural disaster--is something that was
a very useful exercise, bringing people together and go through
these issues and also put a face to who some of these people
were at utilities, at DOE, at the states.
So I think more exercise and opportunities to plan
regionally are really helpful as well.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much.
And seeing that I have no time remaining, I yield back, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman.
Seeing there are no further members wishing to ask
questions, I would like to thank all of our witnesses again for
being here today and for the insights you shared with us and
considering our questions.
Before we conclude, I would like to ask for unanimous
consent to submit the following documents for the record:
Number one, a statement from the American Public Power
Association and the National Rural Electric Cooperative
Association; a cybersecurity update letter from the American
Public Power Association; a letter to Department of Energy
Secretary Perry; a response letter from the Department of
Energy Secretary Perry; a statement from Siemens Energy.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Walberg. And pursuant to committee rules, I remind
members that they have 10 business days to submit additional
questions for the record and I ask that witnesses submit their
response within 10 business days upon receipt of the questions.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:04 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]