[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
.
[H.A.S.C. No. 115-90]
SUBMARINE INDUSTRIAL BASE: OPTIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION
__________
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
MARCH 20, 2018
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-560
WASHINGTON : 2019
SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia, Chairman
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama, Vice Chair
JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
PAUL COOK, California
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma
COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
David Sienicki, Professional Staff Member
Phil MacNaughton, Professional Staff Member
Megan Handal, Clerk
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Courtney, Hon. Joe, a Representative from Connecticut, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.........
2
Wittman, Hon. Robert J., a Representative from Virginia,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.......
1
WITNESSES
Geurts, Hon. James F., Assistant Secretary of the Navy for
Research, Development and Acquisition, Department of the Navy;
RADM Michael E. Jabaley, USN, Program Executive Officer for
Submarines, Department of the Navy; and RADM John W. Tammen,
Jr., USN, Director, Undersea Warfare Division, Chief of Naval
Operations (OPNAV N97).........................................
5
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Geurts, Hon. James F., joint with RADM Michael E. Jabaley and
RADM John W. Tammen, Jr....................................
29
Wittman, Hon. Robert J.......................................
27
Documents Submitted for the Record:
[There were no Documents submitted.]
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]
SUBMARINE INDUSTRIAL BASE: OPTIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION
----------
House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, March 20, 2018.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:19 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Robert J.
Wittman (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT J. WITTMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM VIRGINIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES
Mr. Wittman. Call to order the House Armed Services
Committee, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.
I want to thank our witnesses for joining us today. And
today, we are meeting to discuss undersea warfare and options
to ease the impending overall reductions in submarine force
structure. This is not a good-news story, and I look forward to
discussing ways to strengthen our undersea capability and
capacity.
Appearing before us today to discuss these important topics
are three esteemed Navy witnesses: The Honorable James Geurts,
Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development and
Acquisition; Rear Admiral Michael E. Jabaley, Program Executive
Officer for Submarines [PEO SUBs]; and Rear Admiral John W.
Tammen, Jr., Director, Undersea Warfare Division, OPNAV 97.
I want to thank you all for your service, as well as for
appearing before this subcommittee to discuss our undersea
force structure.
As I previously discussed, the world watches our budget
deliberations and the decisions we make. Today we are at a
crossroads in regard to our undersea forces. We are currently
on a path that reduces our attack submarine force structure
from 52 boats today to 42 boats in 2028.
Admiral Harris, our PACOM [U.S. Pacific Command] commander,
constantly reminds us that his most critical shortfall is
attack submarines. As we all know, the silent service is
indispensable as a clear method to deter aggression, and offers
the combatant commander options during escalatory conflict.
Our crossroads offer us two options: One continues to
support the decline of our attack submarine force structure by
20 percent in the next 10 years, the other begins to rebuild
the capacity and reverse this downward trend.
Our adversaries are always measuring options and looking at
our funding decisions to determine how this impacts their own
strategic goals. If America is weak, adversaries are emboldened
to challenge the international system that we have principally
shaped since the last great war.
If we continue to allow the reduction in our attack
submarine force, potential adversaries may see this decline as
a strategic inflection point and an opportunity to attempt to
change the international balance.
I support the alternative path. Consistent with the Navy's
30-year shipbuilding plan, we need to increase our attack
submarine build rate and include additional submarines in
fiscal years 2022 and 2023. Additionally, we need to rapidly
extend the service life of available Los Angeles-class attack
submarines.
If we choose this alternative path, we will demonstrate the
resolve of our Nation and affirm our support to maintaining
credible maritime deterrence to potential aggressors.
I want to briefly discuss the Columbia class also. The
Columbia class is projected to carry about 70 percent of our
Nation's strategic deterrence. This is a program that we cannot
get wrong. And I know the Navy places the necessary priority in
this program.
The first boat is expected to be delivered in 2031, and we
are well on the development path that will allow us to
authorize the first boat in 2021. The program includes a myriad
of technical innovations and, when delivered, will offer an
unrivaled strategic capability.
While I am satisfied that PEO SUBs is on the right path to
deliver Columbia class, we must continue to commit our Nation's
best resources to this challenge. We must devote the right
science and technologies to this effort. And we must develop a
capable workforce that is sustained and will ensure the timely
delivery of Columbia class and appropriately managing the
expanding undersea industrial base. Our Nation is ready for the
challenge.
I am reminded of one of our Nation's greatest admirals,
Chester Nimitz, who reflected on the value of our submarines at
the beginning of World War II. Admiral Nimitz indicated ``We
shall never forget that it was our submarines that held the
lines against our enemies while our fleets replaced losses and
repaired wounds.''
I choose not to forget the lessons from our greatest
generation. I choose the alternative path that puts us on a
track for a strong submarine force. I choose a strong America
that emboldens allies and deters future aggression.
Ladies and gentlemen, I hope you choose the same.
I would now like to turn to our ranking member, Joe
Courtney, for any remarks that he may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wittman can be found in the
Appendix on page 27.]
STATEMENT OF HON. JOE COURTNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CONNECTICUT, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, again, to all of our witnesses here today.
You have been, obviously, regular visitors over the last couple
months or so, and, again, we are looking forward to today's
hearing to follow up on some of those conversations we have
had.
Over the past 2 years and in recent weeks, the House Armed
Services Committee has received testimony from our combatant
commanders that their requirements for attack submarines are
not being met. Admiral Harris of PACOM noted that for the
second year in a row, he only gets half the submarines he
needs. And General Scaparrotti of EUCOM [U.S. European Command]
testified that the North Atlantic region is now experiencing
Russian undersea activity not seen since the 1980s.
It is primarily that strategic challenge that has resulted
in December 2016 when the Navy published a Force Structure
Assessment, which concluded that the attack submarine force
requirement needs to grow from 48 boats to 66 boats. Our
subcommittee responded to this clear demand signal last year by
giving the Navy the authority to procure up to 13 Virginia-
class submarines in the next block contract, three more than
was planned.
This plan, which was passed on a bipartisan basis, starting
with this panel, is now law, was crafted to take advantage of
capacity in the industrial base between the years that we were
building the Columbia-class SSBN [ballistic missile submarine].
Last month, however, the budget we received from the Navy
indicates uncertain signals about whether they intend to
utilize the authority granted by Congress to expand our
submarine production plans.
Conversely, at the same time, the Navy published its 30-
year shipbuilding plan, which identified industrial base
capacity in the years 2022 and 2023, where we could increase
production to three Virginia-class submarines per year. Mr.
Geurts will recall that Admiral Merz explained all this a few
weeks ago and explicitly explained the plan with visual aid
charts to that effect.
Over the past few months, as the 5-year--as the new 5-year
block contract is under consideration, we have struggled to get
a clear answer on whether the Navy is going to work with
Congress to give the country an option to heed the demand
signal of our combatant commanders.
As I think our witnesses will recall, the last 5-year block
contract signed in 2014 represented a cooperative effort by
Congress and the Navy to achieve a 10-submarine block.
Initially, the Navy's plan was to build nine submarines in that
block.
With the Navy's input, Congress provided initial funding
for a 10th boat and provided incremental funding authority as a
way to finance the 10th submarine. The Navy and industry then
negotiated an option to add an additional 10th submarine, which
the Navy then requested and Congress then funded. It was the
ultimate win-win for the Navy.
As former Secretary Mabus was fond of saying, ``The country
got 10 submarines for the price of 9.'' I, for one, therefore
am concerned by the mixed messages that the Navy is now sending
Congress and the industrial base with the contract being
negotiated now.
If we do not make a strong push for these additional
contracts incorporated into--with options into this contract,
it will make that ability to go higher much more challenging
and significantly more expensive in the future. I hope our
witnesses today will provide clear answers about the Navy's
intention to utilize the strong support this panel has provided
to grow the submarine production plan.
As we work to add more submarines into the pipeline, I am
also concerned about ongoing challenges in managing our
existing fleet. Delays and backlogs in repair availabilities
has caused attack submarines to sit idle at their piers for
months and, in some cases, years. Even with the efforts by the
Navy to reduce repair backlogs, the latest projections still
show nearly 7 years of idle time as submarines sit at the dock
waiting for work to begin. At the same time, our industry
partners are working to ramp up the workforce to build the new
Virginia-class and Columbia-class submarines.
I have urged in the past for a return to the ``one
shipyard'' policy of years past where submarine repair work was
spread across the public and private sector to manage workload
shortages and backlogs in the yards. I believe in returning to
that approach would help both industry smooth their workforce
ramp up in the years ahead and get our submarines where they
need to be, out at sea and not tied up and unable to operate.
Finally, the Navy has identified the Columbia-class
submarine as its number one acquisition priority, something
which Congress clearly agrees and has endorsed with its funding
over the last few years.
Over the years, we have worked to respond to the Navy's
concern about the cost and schedule for this program by
creating the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund. Despite some
initial hesitation, I have been encouraged by the growing
acceptance by the Navy of the potential of the authorities
provided in the fund.
Last year, we had to fight in Congress to ensure that the
final defense authorization agreement included expanded
continuous production authority that the Navy said would save
$383 million in savings starting in 2019. I want to say
parenthetically that Secretary Spencer was a huge ally during
that conference process so that we actually got that language
as part of the final conference bill.
However, the Navy's 2019 budget has no stated plan at least
to utilize these additional authorities. This subcommittee
would like to have a clear understanding of why the Navy--or
whether the Navy has determined that it would not pursue these
additional savings.
There is no doubt that we face significant challenges as we
ramp up our submarine construction program in the coming years,
but it is also a time of great opportunity. We look forward to
working with the Navy to make sure that we give our sailors and
military commanders what they are asking us for to--and what
they need to protect our Nation.
I look forward to answers today to many of the questions
that I posed. And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Joe, thank you. And again, thanks so much for
your leadership. We really appreciate that.
So, Secretary Geurts, we are going to go to you now. I
understand that you are going to give the opening statement for
the panel, and then we will proceed to questions.
STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES F. GEURTS, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
NAVY FOR RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND ACQUISITION, DEPARTMENT OF
THE NAVY; RADM MICHAEL E. JABALEY, USN, PROGRAM EXECUTIVE
OFFICER FOR SUBMARINES, DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY; AND RADM JOHN
W. TAMMEN, JR., USN, DIRECTOR, UNDERSEA WARFARE DIVISION, CHIEF
OF NAVAL OPERATIONS (OPNAV N97)
Secretary Geurts. Yes, sir.
Chairman Wittman, Ranking Member Courtney, distinguished
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to address the Department of the Navy's
submarine force structure limitations and expansion options.
I am joined today by Rear Admiral Michael Jabaley, PEO
[Program Executive Officer] for Submarines, and Rear Admiral
John Tammen, Director of Undersea Warfare for the Chief of
Naval Operations. With your permission, I would like to provide
opening remarks for all three of us and submit my written
statement for the record.
Mr. Wittman. Without objection.
Secretary Geurts. Undersea forces provide the United States
with unique military advantages essential to our international
influence, our alliance partnerships, and our national
security. The U.S. Navy submarine force is experiencing a
significant growth in demand and must expand to support the
2018 National Defense Strategy. The maritime dimension of the
National Defense Strategy is to increase the American naval
power to building the Navy the Nation needs. To do so, we must
ensure our undersea force has the submarines and capabilities
necessary to deter and win in this rapidly changing world where
adversaries' challenges are felt in every operating domain.
Our undersea capability is underpinned by tens of thousands
of workers in our public and private shipyards, as well as our
suppliers. This industrial base represents a key element of our
national security, and we are thankful for their contributions.
We must consider them, as well as our capacity to recruit,
train, and retain our Navy submarine crews, any time we discuss
our current undersea capability and capability to grow.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank Congress
for your support of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018.
Enactment of this legislation will help provide the
predictability and the stability in funding that is absolutely
critical to our success and will support our efforts to
affordably procure submarines, reduce risk across programs, and
maintain a viable submarine industrial base.
We would like to thank the committee for this opportunity
to speak with you today, and we are here to answer your
questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Secretary Geurts, Admiral
Jabaley, and Admiral Tammen can be found in the Appendix on
page 29.]
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Assistant Secretary Geurts, thank
you so much for your opening statement.
We are now going to go to the members of the subcommittee
for their questions, and I will defer and turn to my colleague,
Mr. Courtney, for his line of questioning.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, again, thank you to the witnesses and to Admiral
Jabaley and Mr. Geurts for joining us on Saturday for a very
cold commissioning of the USS Colorado.
So, again, you know, looking at this subcommittee's sort of
track record in terms of, you know, really having an impact in
terms of the submarine force, you know, back in 2007, we had a
budget that came over that continued the one-a-year build rate
for Virginia class. And, again, on a bipartisan basis, we did a
$588 million plus-up, which really kind of jump-started, you
know, getting to the two-a-year clip.
And thank God we did it, because when we talk about, again,
the force level and, you know, how we are still inevitably
going to go into a dip, if we had not done that 10 years ago,
frankly, we would be in an even worse place today than what
Admiral Harris and, you know, General Scaparrotti was
describing.
You know, fast forward again, when the Block IV was
negotiated in 2013 and 2014, this subcommittee, again, passed
the incremental authority, which, you know, at least sent a
signal for the negotiators when Block IV was being done to go
bigger than what the Obama budget had come over for only nine
subs there.
And, again, we are in one of those sort of pivot moments in
terms of, you know, we are in the midst of Block V, which,
again, sets the--really, the law as far as acquisition for the
next 5 years.
So as I alluded to in my opening remarks, and we discussed
this offline, you know, that sort of history in 2014, when an
option was added to go higher than nine subs, it really had a
very, I think, healthy effect, both for the parties as they
were negotiating, Congress in terms of coming up with the
funds. And given the fact that, again, the Navy sent over that
chart that showed industrial capacity in 2022 and 2023, if you
could talk a little bit about, you know, how you see those
negotiations and whether, again, we are all going to continue
sort of pulling in the same direction to, you know, trying to
get to that three sub a year, at least towards the end of that
block contract.
Secretary Geurts. Yes, sir. I will start out and invite the
PEO also to embellish with some additional facts.
Certainly, you know, this committee's action went to work
and passed the law to get us to 355, as well as specifically in
the submarine arena, has been very enabling and, quite frankly,
put us, as you said, on a path. Had we not been on that path,
we would be in some dire circumstances.
As we look forward, you know, I do believe there is
capacity to get to three submarines a year in the off year of
Columbia, three Virginia submarines a year. I think that is the
case. As you know, we have gotten through going up to two
submarines per year, and we are in a sustainable serial
production right there. And so I am comfortable saying there is
actually capacity there in the yard.
As we negotiate this upcoming multiyear based on the
approval you got, we will absolutely look at putting the
options in for submarines. We will have to work through that
with your staff exactly how we do that and implications to the
economic order quantity requirements in the early years, but,
you know, we just got the proposal in from the contractor, I
think, on Friday. And so the time is right for us to look at
how to structure that and give the Nation options to add
additional submarines if that is what we choose to do.
Mr. Courtney. And I appreciate that answer. And, again, we
are on standby to sort of assist in any way that we possibly
can.
You know, again, I want to--at least for the record or
anyone who is watching, is that, you know, we are talking about
options and permissive authority as opposed to, you know,
handcuffing you in terms of, you know, this process, and we
want obviously what is practical and achievable.
So, Admiral, if you wanted to comment as well.
Admiral Jabaley. Yes, sir. Thank you very much for the
opportunity to add to this.
As you are aware, the 30-year shipbuilding plan identified
the years 2022 and 2023 as particular ones in which there is
additional capacity available in the industrial base. It is a
challenge to leverage and execute that capacity and is
certainly something that we are willing to work with Congress
to explore.
As Secretary Geurts remarked, we did receive the proposal
on Friday for the Block V contract. And as we start to analyze
the significant amount of information in that and then begin
the negotiation process with the shipbuilders, the alternatives
to add additional submarines are certainly something that we
are willing to work with Congress and fold into that
negotiation process.
The most important thing, I would say, is that an early
signal for funding to allow us to leverage the economic order
quantity buys for 12 ships instead of 10, if we were to add
ships in 2022 and 2023, that signal for funding to the supplier
base would be critically important. And as we go forward over
the coming months, we will certainly take that into
consideration.
Mr. Courtney. Great. And I am sure as we, again, put pen to
paper for the markup, you know, we are, like I said, going to
keep all that in mind and are on standby.
The other question is, I mentioned NSBDF, the National Sea-
Based Deterrence Fund, the authorities which, again, both CBO
[Congressional Budget Office], Congressional Research Service,
even the Navy itself, you know, gave high marks, particularly
to some of the, you know, potential efficiencies that we can
achieve through that. And now, you know, I guess, you know,
imitation is the highest form of flattery. We have got other
services and other programs now trying to sort of emulate that.
I was wondering if you could just sort of talk about, you
know, what your thinking is--you are pretty sort of new in the
saddle here and--you know, as a solution, you know, to
obviously the big bubble that we are looking at.
Secretary Geurts. Yes, sir. And I will take maybe a
strategic look at it and then, again, Admiral Jabaley can talk
about how we have actually enacted it.
What I would say is--and, again, in my opening remarks,
remarked--you know, the industrial base and our ability to
stabilize that, grow that in a sustainable way, is absolutely
critical. And your committee's help, even in fiscal year 2018
of recognizing it is not just the shipyard, it is all the
suppliers that go down there, is critical.
And these authorities allow us to address, you know, in
very specific terms but also strategically, how do we grow that
supplier base with the hope downstream that we would be in the
same position we are right now with two ships a year. We could
get to the point where we can easily sustain three ships a
year, whether that is three Virginias or two Virginias and a
Columbia. And I think that is a key tool.
So, one, I would like to thank the committee for putting
that tool in play. I think we have used it quite effectively to
date. And we intend to continue to use it in the future to
address kind of this--being able to spin up the base and then
sustain it.
And, Michael, if you could give some of the specifics.
Admiral Jabaley. Yes, sir.
As Secretary Geurts said, we are very appreciative of the
authorities that the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund has
allowed us to leverage. The two that we are using right now are
advanced construction using advanced procurement funding.
In fiscal year 2018, we funded additional money to allow
the shipbuilders to pull key activities to the left and start
elements of the Columbia even earlier in the prototyping and
construction. As a matter of fact, yesterday, at the Newport
News Shipbuilding company, they cut their first steel for the
Columbia piece of steel that will go to use the hemi-head
closures on the pressure hull. The Electric Boat has been doing
advanced prototyping of missile tubes for over 2 years already.
So we are well along using that advanced construction authority
to de-risking the Columbia construction.
The second one, continuous production, has been extremely
helpful in allowing us to execute a more smooth ramp-up in key
elements of production, in particular for the suppliers, for
the missile tubes of the Columbia.
So the fabrication of the missile tubes, the integrated
tube and hull assembly that fits it into the pressure hull,
those are well in hand. We have received the first four tubes
for the Columbia, plus one for the Strategic Weapons Systems
Ashore. At Quonset Point, they are already being outfitted and
readied for insertion into the first hull section.
Additional authority that has been granted that we have not
been able to execute so far is continuous production for
components outside the missile compartment. It was a vigorous
discussion in the budget construction process. And
unfortunately, as the budget took shape from the Navy, we were
unable to fund those additional components. But the authority
is certainly useful. And we looked to try to get it in next
year as well, and that would allow government-furnished
equipment, the propulsors, to go on a continuous production
ramp, launcher tubes to go inside the missile tubes, and also
key shipyard manufactured items such as high-pressure air
flasks.
Again, the primary benefit of this continuous production
authority is that if we can fund it and execute it, it de-risks
those early ship deliveries when it is so crucial that we get
the Columbias at sea to relieve the Ohios as they are coming
off the line. It also has cost-savings benefit, but to me, the
real benefit is that de-risking of deliveries.
Mr. Courtney. I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Courtney.
We will now go to Mr. Byrne.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Geurts, good to see you again. I am going to go back to
the industrial base for a second, drill down that a little bit.
Obviously, Electric Boat is going to have, at some point
out in the future, pretty steep incline in terms of hiring this
very skilled workforce to produce the Columbia-class submarine.
But between now and then, because of the lack of sustained
work, they are actually going to have layoffs. So layoffs and
an incline, which anybody out there in the industrial place
will tell you, whether it is making submarines or anything
else, it is not a good way to do business.
I know the Navy has been concerned about this, and it is
something you have been paying attention to. Has the Navy
considered any options such as additional repair work for
Electric Boat that would help reduce the risk on Columbia
procurement and smooth out the workforce ramp-up?
Secretary Geurts. Sir, as we discussed in our previous
hearings, industrial base is our national security. I mean,
that is absolutely critical, and we are very concerned. I would
say, I am looking at all options for that. We have not made any
firm decisions on that. But, obviously, I look at this in kind
of an enterprise approach, both new build, repair, and then
decommission. And my hope is as we look to synchronize those,
we can better deal with the industrial base concerns with ramp-
ups, ramp-downs, and then ramp back up.
I am concerned about the production ramp-up for Columbia.
That is a significant challenge, and I am looking at all
options to address that.
Mr. Byrne. Well, you and I have talked about this before,
because I was in charge of producing the workforce for the
shipyards in the Gulf Coast. And these people don't grow on
trees. They are highly skilled, highly trained workers in very
great demand in an economy with a very low unemployment rate.
And if Electric Boat lays any of these folks off, they are
going to find a job. I am not worried about them.
I am worried about our ability to get somebody to take
their place that has both their level of training, but also
that level of experience that enhances the training because of
their expertise. And I worry about this with regard to other
classes of ships, as you know.
We only have so many highly trained shipyard workers in
America because we only have seven shipyards making ships for
the Navy now. So I hope that you will sort of think outside the
box, because every one of those folks we lose is going to be
very difficult to replace.
Secretary Geurts. Sir, I absolutely agree with that. I
would also say, a number of the authorities we were talking
about previously, being able to spread out that build with
continuous production, looking at classes of ships across--so
we are looking at, in our nuclear enterprise forward, Columbia
and Virginia, how do we smooth across all those classes of
ships, because it--I agree, wholeheartedly, it is about the
industrial base and preserving that workforce.
Mr. Byrne. Well, if there is something we can do to help
you, on the committee and the legislation, whatever, please let
us know, because I think we all understand how difficult this
is both for the Navy and the shipyards. We want to make sure
that we are not only in the way, but that we are providing you
with the help that you need to get there.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Byrne.
We will now go to Mr. Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman.
I want to follow up on some of the previous discussions,
because the workforce is the key to making any of this work.
But you were going through some of the items that were allowed
to have the additional authorities to go ahead, but I didn't
hear about motors. And there have been some issues in the past
about some of the production issues. Without going into
classified, why wouldn't that be part of those?
Admiral Jabaley. Yes, sir. I believe you are referring to
the electric drive motor, and that is designed and procured
under the authority of the director of Naval Reactors and his
staff. But we work very closely with him to understand the
overall impact of the integrated power system being supplied
for the Columbia SSBN.
So they did have one manufacturing problem last year that
caused them to lose some of their additional margin to
delivery. They have worked very strenuously to recover that
margin. They still have 9 months to deliver that--of margin to
deliver that component on time. And so we are very confident
that that is not an issue. There is--it is not a new issue, and
it is one they have been working very closely on.
In terms of going to continuous production on the electric
drive motor, that is one of the earliest things that gets
procured on the build plan for the Columbia. And then it will
go to the compatibility test facility in Philadelphia for a
complete testing before it gets inserted into the hull of the
submarine.
Mr. Norcross. But isn't that where it was--excuse me. Isn't
that where they picked up the issue before?
Admiral Jabaley. It was actually before it got--it was
before it left the vendor. The vendor identified the problem,
reported it to the Navy, and then they went in and investigated
it. So it was before it even got to Philadelphia that it was
found.
So the--back to your original question, is that a candidate
for continuous production? It is not one that we have looked at
yet. But as the specific--the manufacturer begins to ramp up
and go on to the second and third articles, it is certainly
something that we could look at and make sure that we are not
overlooking an opportunity to further de-risk the deliveries.
Mr. Norcross. So just without digging in too deep, the
issue, they believe they resolved it, but it hasn't been
through its testing phase in Philadelphia yet?
Admiral Jabaley. That is correct.
Mr. Norcross. So, quite frankly, we won't know until it
gets through that?
Admiral Jabaley. That is correct. But with the current
plan, we still have an additional 9 months of margin, even
after the testing is scheduled to be completed, before it is
required to be delivered for the build process. So we are
confident that, even if we do find additional problems, we have
the ability to correct them. But you are correct; until it is
absolutely done, we don't know for sure.
Mr. Norcross. And that becomes what we call the panic
phase. So please keep that in mind, because there were some
real issues, as you recall.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Norcross.
We will now go to Mr. Conaway.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I missed the conversation about extending the life of
certain Los Angeles-class boats by new reactors, maybe the--I
hate to call them the youngest, but the least old five boats.
Can you visit with us about where that is progressing as well
as what impact it might have on shipyard work that is not
currently on the books?
Secretary Geurts. Yes, sir. In the 2019 budget, we have got
one programmed in on that. We believe we have four other
propulsion plans that are available. We are screening the ships
and identified the ships, so we are going to--we will work the
first one, and if that is successful, then we will program in.
That would give us another 10 years of life on those five
submarines, which would be critical, as Chairman Wittman
identified, where we have this bathtub, how that would be a key
enabler.
Mr. Conaway. So what would be--okay.
Admiral Tammen. I would just offer, those five refuelings
will actually fill in what used to be called the trough there
when we had a 48 SSN [attack submarine] requirement.
Mr. Conaway. So what are the technical--were those boats
ever designed to actually do this? So this would be a new
concept to put a new reactor in there? What are the technical
risks, for somebody who is not a nuclear scientist?
Admiral Jabaley. Yes, sir. So although the boats were not
designed for ease of refueling, it is not too difficult to go
back in and allow that eventuality at this point. The biggest
technical risks are taking a ship that was going to serve to 33
years of life and then extending it for an additional 10 years.
And as we learn more and more by doing the exact same thing on
the Ohio-class submarine, we get more and more confidence that
we can do this with Los Angeles class as well.
This one was really spurred by the fact that we already had
material available to refuel the submarines, and so it really
made sense to go back and take another look at the assumptions
that we had and see can we actually do this. So the first one
is in the budget for this year, and then the other four will
continue to be developed based on how this goes.
Mr. Conaway. So I am not familiar with submarines, but
other large ships go through some sort of a midlife soup-to-
nuts review. Have these boats been put through that review in
the past? How long ago was that? And do you anticipate, in
order to get that other 10 years, you have got to make sure
everything else stays together? What is involved?
Admiral Jabaley. Yes, sir. So each of these submarines
either has already gone through or will soon go through their
midlife overhaul, and that gives us a very good assessment of
the material condition of the ships. And then the NAVSEA [Naval
Sea Systems Command] engineering directorate goes and does a
material condition assessment as it approaches the availability
that we would use to turn into a refueling, and then identifies
any other maintenance that has to be done during the refueling
overhaul and any other things that we have to put on a watch
list to ensure we understand how the ship is aging.
So it is a significant amount of engineering rigor, and as
I said, we have gained a lot of experience in extending the
Ohio class already.
Mr. Conaway. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Conaway.
We will now go to Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank our witnesses for your testimony today
and for your service and dedication.
Is it on now? All right.
Gentlemen, I want to thank you for your service to the
Nation. Thank you for your testimony here today.
While it may seem like a long way off, in order to ensure
that the first Columbia-class submarine embarks on its
inaugural deployment in 2031, it is obviously critical that we
continue to provide advanced procurement funds to facilitate
early construction work in order to stay on schedule. As such,
we are--how are we strategically making sufficient investments
to drive down risk associated with any challenges that we may
face with the Columbia-class program?
Admiral, want to start with you?
Admiral Jabaley. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question,
Congressman. The government enterprise is keenly aware of the
absolute critical nature to get the first ship and then all
subsequent 11 ships out on patrol in the time organized,
because, as we have said before, there is no margin left
between the retirement of the Ohio and the fielding of
Columbia. It is a strict heel-to-toe lockstep turnover that,
not only do we have to deliver Columbias on time, but we also
have to sustain Ohios to make sure they make it to the finish
line.
So everything that we do in our program is charged with
buying back margin into the program, whether it is in terms of
cost, whether it is in terms of risk reduction for delivery
dates, or whether it is early prototyping. Our prime focus has
always been to buy back margin into the program to make sure
that the Navy continues to provide the fleet to support our
Nation's strategic deterrence.
As a result, many of the authorities that have been granted
with the NSBDF have been used for efforts specific to that end
of reducing risk and buying back margin into the program. And
as we go forward and continue to program future budgets, that
is, again, one of our top priorities.
Mr. Langevin. Is there some specifics that you can give to
the committee?
Admiral Jabaley. Well, the specifics are continuous
production, which is pulling some production to the left for
key components to allow a more smooth ramp-up for the supplier
industrial base to start building the increased volume, and
then advanced construction.
So the Columbia has built in six super modules. And working
with the shipbuilders, we identified key manufacturing
activities to start earlier, to get those modules delivered
earlier, and allow more progress towards what we call pressure
hull complete, where the six modules are joined to form the
finished submarine.
What that does is it moves some of that manufacturing
earlier and gives us more time to work out any problems that
occurred during the final assembly and test period. Because
previous experience has shown that that is where we see the
most growth in a construction span as everything is tested for
the first time and we have to go in and fix problems. That
takes time. So the more we can pull those module deliveries to
the left, the earlier we can start in the final assembly and
test program and, again, de-risk that delivery date.
Secretary Geurts. Sir, the other thing I would add is, we
are not only just looking at Columbia, but we look at Columbia,
Virginia, and the Ford, all of our nuclear ships together,
because there can be things we are doing in those other
programs that could either enable or impact Columbia.
And you may have seen, we are now asking for an RFP
[request for proposal] to accelerate to a two-carrier buy. That
will have a benefit to Columbia by, potentially, if we choose
to go down that path, bringing supplier builds for common
components for the carriers earlier as opposed to, right now,
they are laying on top of Columbia build, which would be a risk
that we would have to deal with.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
So I also want to know if you can give us an update on the
common missile compartment project that we are working on with
the U.K. [United Kingdom], and how is this strategic
partnership being leveraged? And what best practices are we
learning as we work with one of our closest allies?
And then the last question, before my time runs out. In
terms of planning for facilities, as we are preparing for the
Columbia class, for example, a lot of the dry docks are in need
of modernization. As we move forward with our build plans, how
will you ensure that we have the appropriate facilities to
support them?
Admiral Jabaley. Yes, sir. To start with the common missile
compartment, we are well on track and working very well with
our U.K. counterparts. My counterpart, Rear Admiral Paul
Methven, and then Rear Admiral Keith Beckett, who is the
counterpart for the director of Strategic Systems Programs, we
have an every-other-week phone call and then a quarterly common
missile compartment flag review. And the things that we are
working on there is exactly as you said, transfer of lessons
learned.
So the common missile compartment, the first five missile
tubes have been delivered to Quonset Point. Four of those will
become the first article quad pack for the Columbia. The fifth
one goes to Port Canaveral, Florida, for the--or Cape
Canaveral, Florida, for the Strategic Weapons Systems Ashore
facility.
And then the next four tubes will become the first quad
pack for the Dreadnought, the U.K. SSBN replacement. And that
is the way it was planned for, exactly as you said, for us to
learn all the lessons on the first four tubes that are going to
the U.S. boat so that it eases the timeline and the production
for the Dreadnought on the U.K. And it is going well.
Secretary Geurts. And, sir, on our facilities piece, we
have to, as we grow, and Congressman Courtney brought up, we
have got to make sure we have got maintenance and repair, both
program--healthy for the work we have and then programmed to be
able to take the work that will come as we expand the fleet on
it. And we have put together a facility optimization plan on
the public shipyard side to make sure the public shipyards are
going to be in a position to support all these programs, and
then we are looking closely at how to better synchronize a new
build, repair, and then retirement, again, looking at workforce
and facility usage and efficiency across the entire fleet.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you all very much. I have some
followups, but my time is way expired, so, Mr. Chairman, I will
yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Langevin.
We will now go to Mr. McEachin.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The 30-year shipbuilding plan the Navy projects said the
overall attack submarine force structure will decrease to 42
attack submarines. My question is, considering the undersea
domain is one area where we have a significant tactical
advantage over other nations, how does this diminishment of the
force structure support our advantage?
Admiral Tammen. So, first and foremost, I would like to
thank this committee in particular for the strong support we
have had for the submarine force, because it does ensure that
we do have the best submariners on the best submarines
available.
And to your point, we do have that advantage. And I think
these refuelings that we are getting after will do a large part
to get--keep us from getting down to 42. If you just do the
math, if we do all 5 refuelings, it will roughly be 47 issues
will be--you know, most of that trough, I mentioned earlier,
being filled back in. And then any efforts to get us above the
two per year would help us get to the actual Force Structure
Assessment requirement of 66 sooner rather than later.
Mr. McEachin. Last year, the Navy estimated that if the
continuous production authority was extended to other critical
components, $383 million in additional savings could be
achieved. The Navy further stated that they would need this
authority by 2019 to achieve the full savings. Unfortunately,
the fiscal year 2019 Presidential budget did not request these
additional authorities. Can you please explain why the Navy has
chosen not to pursue these additional savings?
Secretary Geurts. Yes, sir. You know, again, as we stated,
the authorities have been doing outstanding work for us and
been very impactful. Our challenge in the 2019 budget, with all
the different priorities, including $3 billion of advanced
procurement for Columbia, was we just--we couldn't add the
money in there that we would have liked to and we had to
balance it out. But I would not confuse that for any lack of
both appreciation of the authorities and the potential savings.
But in terms of just balancing the resources, we couldn't
achieve that with the 2019 funds we had.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. McEachin.
We will now go to Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a couple of things. We keep repeating here the need
for skilled workers and the potential unavailability if we
don't keep to schedules. Does the Navy have a program to
develop skilled workers?
Secretary Geurts. Sir, I will start out and then invite my
two folks here.
On the public yard side, we have laid in, starting in
fiscal year 2019, a 20-year plan that both grows on the public
shipyard side the number of skilled workers to balance it with
the workload we see, as well as make sure they have the
facilities we need.
On the private yard side, our challenge is what is the best
strategy to deal with the kind of ebbs and flows right now, and
then, you know, as Rep. [Representative] Courtney will--has
heard me say, I call it the big green wall of this giant growth
we are going to have to do on Columbia.
I think there are opportunities as we look at both repair
availability and then using some of these continuous production
authorities, to try and balance that workload, but we still
have work to go on on all the best strategies to get there.
Mr. Garamendi. Further comments?
Admiral Jabaley. Yes, sir. I will just add that on the
private yard side, the Navy has worked very closely with both
Electric Boat and Newport News as part of the integrated
enterprise plan to ensure that their plans for growing the
workforce are valid and sound. And they have both done
significant amount of work working with, in Electric Boat's
case, community colleges in Connecticut and Rhode Island to
provide a higher level of proficiency when the worker walks in
the door. They have hired almost 1,000 people over the last
year out of that community college pipeline and are already
seeing the benefits of that, the new employees in the workforce
being more proficient on day one.
Newport News approaches theirs through an apprentice
school, and they are increasing the capacity of that to ensure
that they can handle the ramp-up. So they both have very strong
plans, and we are working with them to make sure that they stay
solid.
EB's [Electric Boat's] was greatly aided by funding from
the Department of Labor to help that process, and that was
extremely helpful.
Mr. Garamendi. And so the Department of Labor budget and
appropriations become important?
Admiral Jabaley. Absolutely, sir. They are something that
Electric Boat has used very wisely in grooming their workforce.
Mr. Garamendi. Further comments?
Admiral Tammen. Nothing additional.
Mr. Garamendi. Okay. Well, it just seems to me that all of
the talk about smoothing out the construction of these
submarines has a great deal to do with the workforce, every
piece of the discussion.
There is also an age demographic issue that plays into
this. I would suppose that you are paying attention to that
also, retirements and the like. And the coordination of the
career technical education programs that are being presumed to
be defunded in the President's budget and how that plays into
this or it does not meet the needs of the Navy. And if those
budget cuts continue or actually happen, how will the Navy deal
with that?
Secretary Geurts. Yes, sir. I think demographics is a very
challenging issue. There is also some opportunities in the
technology front. And as Admiral Jabaley has said, as we go to
digital shipbuilding and use some of the digital tools, our
ability to get the skill level of the worker up faster, we are
seeing some of the opportunities there. But we are very
sensitive to that pipeline.
And as was noted earlier, it is not something that can be
fixed rapidly if we don't keep our eye on it. So we keep a very
close look at that, as well as all the different government and
State programs that support our shipbuilding.
Mr. Garamendi. I will let it go at that. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Garamendi.
Gentlemen, trying to draw a thread through some of the
questions that you have received, you have had inquiries about
how do we deal with the dip in submarines we are going to find
ourselves in in 2028. So I want to ask several questions.
First of all is, if we don't go above 42 submarines in
2028, what is the strategic risk to our Nation? Secondly is, we
have heard two alternatives to the 42, I think both of them in
combination. One is building more submarines, up to 3
additional submarines in the Block V, in addition to the 10
Virginia Payload Module submarines; and then using 5 existing
nuclear plants to do service life extensions on the Los
Angeles-class submarine, so a potential of 8 in addition to
that. So that would bring us potentially up to 50.
But first of all, what are the strategic risks to the
Nation? And what will that mean for our sailors and for our
Navy and for where we are to defend ourselves in light of what
the National Defense Strategy has laid out before us? And then
what specific congressional directions or authorities do you
need to fully pursue the three additional Block V submarines
and the five service life extensions for Los Angeles class?
Secretary Geurts. All right. So I will have Admiral Tammen
address the strategic issue, and then I will address your
second question.
Mr. Wittman. Okay. Very good.
Admiral Tammen. To start off, you captured it pretty well
in your opening statement when you talked about deterrence and
then options available to the combatant commander. And it is
really hard to mention deterrence, but I will tell you that,
you know, the fact that our attack submarines are always
operating or at least a portion of them are operating far
forward provides that conventional deterrence to keep potential
adversaries in check.
And I would say, you know, a 20 percent reduction in attack
submarines will then ultimately result in a, you know, a lower
number of options available to the combatant commander if
conflict does break out.
Then the other thing I would offer is, you know, the
submarine platform, because of its stealth, offers the
combatant commander and the National Command Authority, you
know, very unique intelligence and warning, as well as
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance-type data. And
without that, I think they are less informed as we move
forward, which provides some additional strategic risk.
Mr. Wittman. Let me ask just an additional question before
I go back to Mr. Geurts. Looking at the Nuclear Posture Review
and the definitions there of what hopefully will happen with
the development of a low-yield nuclear weapon that is going to
be sea based and a hypersonic weapon potentially sea based, how
important will the submarine platform, specifically Virginia
class, including Virginia Payload Module, be in providing
options for the Navy within that realm and deterring what our
adversaries may have in their arsenals?
Admiral Tammen. So I would offer, in terms of the submarine
launched cruise missile with a potential nuclear warhead would
be something that would be incorporated on Virginia with the
Virginia Payload Module and give National Command Authority an
additional tool for escalation control. Whereas, the low-yield
warhead would be incorporated likely in a D5 missile
incorporated on a ballistic missile submarine, which would give
Strategic Command another tool in their arsenal in terms of
escalation control and how things would play out.
Mr. Wittman. Okay. Very good.
Mr. Geurts, we will go to you about the congressional
authorities that you may need to bridge this gap we will face
in 2028.
Secretary Geurts. Yes, sir. I don't know of any additional
authorities as much as, you know, these signals that you were
sending through legislation with the 355, which includes 66, as
well as the interest in hearings like this and the dialogue and
the great support you had. And, quite frankly, adding funds, as
you fought hard for in 2018, to recognize the supplier base,
irrespective of growing another submarine, are instrumental.
So, again, we look at things at both the shipyard and then
the millions of parts that have to go into each ship, and we
have got to look all the way across those.
I would say, you know, our big push over the last couple
years was get confidence we could reliably and affordably crank
out two Virginia classes a year. We are there. We are
demonstrating that 2 years early. You know, we are going to
save $5.4 billion in this next multiyear. So that is a great
contribution. That gets us to a performance level.
Now, we are convincing ourselves we can do that plus
Columbia. Some work to go in terms of all the de-risking there,
but I am confident we are on the right path there. So now, it
is how do we set sails for three per year, whether that is two
plus one or just three Virginias. I think we can get there. We
have been doing a lot of studying that, and then it is just how
do we do that affordably and get spun up on that ramp curve.
And I am confident we have got the means to get there.
When I look at things, I look at it--naval power is a
combination of capacity, this discussion here, capability, what
are we putting on those, and we have got the most capable
submarines in the world and a great path that continue to grow
those. And then availability. So that is how do we either
extend their lifetime or don't have backlog sitting on the
pier. We are attacking each one of those elements. I think all
of those together gets us the naval power we need.
Mr. Wittman. I see. I would have to agree with you as far
as the future needs within the submarine force and the way that
we can grow that. I would also believe that it would be very
helpful and is the desire of this subcommittee to provide that
authorization, that direction as far as extending the service
life of those Los Angeles-class submarines, as well as
aggressively as we can trying to get to those three additional
Virginia-class submarines. So we will look for that within our
job here in the weeks to come as we go into this markup for
this year's National Defense Authorization Act [NDAA].
So with that, we will go back to Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I should note that as cold as we were with the USS
Colorado the other day, we weren't as cold as Mr. Garamendi
was, who was up on the polar ice cap over the weekend.
Actually, I wanted to ask Admiral Tammen, you know, one of
the things that--I mean, it seems we have so much on our plate,
obviously, to deal with the next 10 or 15 years. But, you know,
I know the Navy is always sort of thinking ahead in terms of,
you know, whether or not there is a new prototype--a new
version of an SSN, you know, that, again, will be--which
because of such a long game, you know, you have to sort of
think long term.
I was wondering if you could just sort of talk about that a
little bit in terms of just, you know, whether or not that is
something that the Navy is thinking about, and doing something
about, and what timeframe we are, you know, considering.
Admiral Tammen. Absolutely. So you are obviously familiar
with the 30-year shipbuilding plan, and part of the 30-year
shipbuilding plan was what we call the Tactical Evolution--or
Tactical Submarine Evolution Plan, the TSEP. And in there we
lay out our plan for Block V, Block VI, and Block VII Virginia
and the capabilities we are going to roll into each one of
those spiral jumps in Virginia procurement. And then following
Block VII, you will see we have laid in what we are calling new
SSN, where we expect to develop the next attack submarine,
looking at increased speed and other capabilities.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you.
I know, you know, we sort of had a--there was a bit of a
gap, you know, back in the late 1990s, early 2000, particularly
in terms of the SSBN program where there was absolutely no
design work happening at all. And that, A, created a workforce
almost crisis, which the RAND Corporation had to sort of get
Congress to pay attention to.
And so, you know, keeping that sort of in mind, I think, is
really smart in terms of, you know, again, making sure that,
you know, we are not going to run into what the Brits ran into
with their submarine program and what we almost fell into in
the early 2000s.
So thank you, again, to the witnesses for your testimony
today.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Courtney.
We will now go to Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Courtney, you raised a point that I was just going to
slide by, and that is the opportunity I had over the weekend to
spend several hours on the Connecticut, which I think is of
interest to you. Extraordinary experience. I thank the Navy for
that experience and what I was able to learn.
I see Mr. Hollenback back there, who has already provided
me with the answers to a few questions that I raised. Thank you
very much, and a lot more to be said about that as time goes
on. Thank you.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Garamendi.
I wanted to--well, before I do that, Mr. Conaway, any
additional questions?
I did want to close with one question concerning Columbia
class. We got into a little bit of it with the permanent magnet
induction motor and the challenges that were faced there. As
you know, that has consumed a significant amount of the flex
time that is in the schedule for delivery of that submarine.
I just wanted to get your perspective on our ability to
contain technical challenges. This is a very, very complex
platform, obviously, going down the road of developing this.
The question is, is with the significant amount of time that we
lost with this particular motor dysfunction that we had, are we
in a place to where we are confident that we can manage the
technical challenges that we are going to face going forward
with Columbia class?
Because we have become precariously close to what you would
expect as other, you know, challenges that we faced in other
technically complex programs. I want to get your perspective if
you feel like we have our arms around that and if we are going
to be able to make sure that we manage within timeframes for
delivery of this boat on time. As we know, we don't have a
choice. There is no alternative. We have to deliver this
because Ohio class will be retiring.
Secretary Geurts. Yes, sir. I will start and then ask the
PEO to join in.
From my perspective, yes, we have had some challenges on
the motor in particular. I think in the good-news category,
that didn't stop us from retiring risk in a lot of the other
areas of the submarine, particularly, again, some of the work
we have done in--this early work on the missile tubes and
whatnot.
And a lot of folks probably don't understand how much
Virginia is actually helping us retire risk on Columbia. So
getting this production rate up to Virginia two per year,
getting a larger workforce trained, a lot of the subsystems cut
across all the different platforms.
So while it is a new submarine, not all the pieces of the
submarine are new, and that is giving us a lot of--it gives me
a lot of comfort from what would normally be a, you know,
tremendously challenging activity.
It is still a very challenging and complex activity. I
don't want to push that down. But we have been working really
hard, and the advanced procurement funding that we have been
able to secure has been critical.
To your point of schedule, one thing we will be watching
really closely is, next year, getting full funding as soon as
the fiscal year starts. And that may be an area where we will
need some help, if we are in a continuing resolution [CR], so
that that doesn't become a schedule impact to us, which will
take more of that margin out.
So we will work very closely with you. That is a sensitive
area from an authorities and just fiscal timing perspective.
Mr. Wittman. Well, I am eternally hopeful that we will not
get another CR next year. There is no reason for us to be,
especially with the budget agreement that we had this past
year. And as I tell people all the time, if you were to dream
up a way not to run a business or not to run a government, what
would you come up with? A CR. So anyway, hopefully that we will
avoid that.
We will now go to Mrs. Hartzler.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, I do have to leave soon, so I appreciate it.
The recently released 30-year shipbuilding plan shows
additional submarine build capacity in the years 2022 and 2023.
What would be the most economic and efficient way to fund those
additional submarines if Congress were to make that commitment
beginning in fiscal year 2019?
Secretary Geurts. Yes, ma'am. I think the most efficient
way would be to get those into the multiyear, which would mean
that we would have to have some economic order quantity funding
in 2019 commensurate with those two additional ships so that we
could buy at a quantity for those ships, along with the other
ships. So that would be the first plug-in point for that.
And then we would have to work, obviously, the funding for
the rest of it. But that will be the sensitivity in the 2019
budget, would be ensuring we could order all those parts at the
quantity savings we would get with the rest of the multiyear.
Mrs. Hartzler. Very good.
The Columbia class has several technology development
programs that are challenging design and construction efforts,
including the coordinated stern electric drive and the nuclear
propulsion system. What is the Navy's assessment of risk
associated with the development of these technologies and
recovery efforts to regain schedule?
Admiral Jabaley. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
The Navy's assessment is that the risk is manageable and well
in hand. We have done things on this program to account for
technology development risk that are beyond what we have done
on previous submarine construction programs.
As Secretary Geurts alluded to previously, one of the
biggest ones is the amount of design pull-through from the
Virginia program. Many of the components are either identical
or simply scaled up from the Virginia.
The second thing is the level of design readiness at
construction start. We are targeting, and are on track, to
achieve 83 percent complete design when we start construction
in October of 2020. That compares to 42 percent on Virginia,
and even lower percentages on Seawolf. So having that design
stability and execution allows us to be more confident in the
ability to build it in the time span necessary.
Finally, many of the items that you discuss--the
coordinated stern, the integrated power system, and the nuclear
reactor--are well on their way through a series of prototyping
effort and confirmation models to ensure that they are well
ready for ship construction. They are beyond technology
development now and into simply engineering and integration
efforts.
So although there has been a lot of discussion about this
recently, we are confident that we are well positioned to start
construction on the first ship in October of 2021 and have very
few technological risks through the development program.
Mrs. Hartzler. Very good. Anybody else want to add
anything? We are all good?
All right. Thank you very much, gentlemen.
I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mrs. Hartzler.
Gentlemen, thanks again for joining us today and for the
information you have provided to us. We will continue to stay
in touch as we go through this year's NDAA to make sure that
you have the tools necessary to stay on track with the Columbia
class and do all we can to address the deficit of submarines in
the attack class it will have going in 2028.
So, again, thanks so much for your service. Thanks for
joining us today. And we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:38 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
March 20, 2018
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
March 20, 2018
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]