- REVIEWING THE STATE OF THE DAIRY ECONOMY
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
REVIEWING THE STATE OF THE DAIRY ECONOMY
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON LIVESTOCK AND FOREIGN AGRICULTURE
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
APRIL 30, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-3
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-361 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota, Chairman
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas, Ranking
JIM COSTA, California
Minority Member
MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania
JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
FILEMON VELA, Texas
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD,
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
Arkansas
ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
Vice Chair
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia
DOUG LaMALFA, California
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
ANTONIO DELGADO, New York
TED S. YOHO, Florida
TJ COX, California
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
MIKE BOST, Illinois
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
JEFFERSON VAN DREW, New Jersey
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
JOSH HARDER, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
KIM SCHRIER, Washington
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
ROGER W. MARSHALL, Kansas
CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DON BACON, Nebraska
SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota
AL LAWSON, Jr., Florida
JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
JIMMY PANETTA, California
ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
CYNTHIA AXNE, Iowa
______
Anne Simmons, Staff Director
Matthew S. Schertz, Minority Staff Director
______
Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture
JIM COSTA, California, Chairman
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina,
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
Ranking Minority Member
TJ COX, California
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
JOSH HARDER, California
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
FILEMON VELA, Texas
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
ROGER W. MARSHALL, Kansas
CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DON BACON, Nebraska
JIMMY PANETTA, California
JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
Katie Zenk, Subcommittee Staff Director
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Conaway, Hon. K. Michael, a Representative in Congress from
Texas, opening statement.......................................
7
Costa, Hon. Jim, a Representative in Congress from California,
opening statement..............................................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
3
Craig, Hon. Angie, a Representative in Congress from Minnesota,
submitted statement; on behalf of Roger Johnson, President,
National Farmers Union.........................................
53
Peterson, Hon. Collin C., a Representative in Congress from
Minnesota, opening statement...................................
6
Rouzer, Hon. David, a Representative in Congress from North
Carolina, opening statement....................................
4
Witnesses
Frericks, Sadie, Owner and Operator, Blue Diamond Dairy, Melrose,
MN.............................................................
8
Prepared statement...........................................
9
Mikhalevsky, Andrei, President and Chief Executive Officer,
California Dairies, Inc., Visalia, CA..........................
12
Prepared statement...........................................
14
McMahon, Michael P., Owner and Operator, EZ Acres, Homer, NY.....
18
Prepared statement...........................................
19
Submitted question...........................................
55
Brown, Ph.D., Scott, Director of Strategic Partnerships, College
of Agriculture, Food, and Natural Resources, University of
Missouri; Associate Extension Professor, Agricultural and
Applied Economics, University of Missouri Extension, Columbia,
MO.............................................................
21
Prepared statement...........................................
23
Submitted questions..........................................
56
Smith, David R., Executive Director, Pennsylvania Dairymen's
Association, Palmyra, PA.......................................
27
Prepared statement...........................................
28
.................................................................
REVIEWING THE STATE OF THE DAIRY ECONOMY
----------
TUESDAY, APRIL 30, 2019
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in
Room 1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Jim
Costa [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Costa, Brindisi, Hayes,
Craig, Harder, Vela, Carbajal, Bustos, Panetta, Peterson (ex
officio), Rouzer, Thompson, Hartzler, Kelly, Marshall, Bacon,
Hagedorn, and Conaway (ex officio).
Staff present: Lyron Blum-Evitts, Emily German, Ross
Hettervig, Matt MacKenzie, Tom Mattocks, Troy Phillips, Anne
Simmons, Katie Zenk, Bart Fischer, Ashton Johnston, Rachel
Millard, Patricia Straughn, Trevor White, Dana Sandman, and
Jennifer Yezak.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COSTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM CALIFORNIA
The Chairman. The Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign
Agriculture will now come to order. This hearing of the
Subcommittee of Livestock and Foreign Agriculture is entitled,
Reviewing the State of the Dairy Economy, all of us who
represent various portions of American agriculture understand
the importance of the dairy industry today and historically,
and we know the challenges that the industry has been facing.
Last year in a bipartisan effort, we decided to really take
a closer look at the dairy title, and we made changes. We made
changes because we thought it was a reflection of the need that
was resulting in the hard-hit changes that have been taking
place with the dairy industry across the country.
Part of this morning's hearing is to really get our
witnesses' take on what direction we need to be going, what
efforts that the Committee needs to be following with regards
to implementing the changes in the dairy title.
Let us begin with the opening statements, and we look
forward to hearing the witnesses' testimony.
As we understand, as I stated, the dairy industry in
America is facing a crisis. This hearing is just one part of
the Subcommittee's efforts to continually respond to those
challenges. There will be subsequent hearings and workshops
around the country as we work with the United States Department
of Agriculture to implement the new title. Addressing these
critical problems, I believe, is one of the highest priorities
of this Subcommittee. In speaking with our Chairman, Collin
Peterson, I know how much he feels that this is critical.
We all represent important parts of America's dairy
country. The United States, though, the reality is we have lost
almost 20,000 licensed dairies in the last 10 years, 20,000
licensed dairies. Nearly ever day it seems another national
story about the family farmers making tough choices on having
to sell their dairy. They don't do it by choice. My family has
been involved in the dairy industry for three generations. I
know how families feel. The dairy is a part of their sum and
substance, and in California, we have the nation's top dairy-
producing state. Dairies that have been passed down from
generation to generation, including the one I grew up on. This
issue: I have a lot of personal reflections on.
But let's be clear about the facts. The dairy industry
provides nearly one million jobs in the United States, an
economic impact of over $200 billion. In my district alone,
dairy contributes over $2 billion to the local economy. When we
lose a dairy farm, we lose those jobs, we lose the investments
that the farm provides.
As I said, we worked hard in the last farm bill to make
changes in the dairy safety net. Yesterday, I met with the
United States Department of Agriculture Under Secretary, Bill
Northey, who told me that they are making progress in getting
the new Dairy Margin Coverage Program implemented.
This morning, as some of you may know, the United States
Department of Agriculture will announce an online decision tool
that will let farmers estimate how the Dairy Margin Coverage
could work for them, and that is welcome news because we are
pushing them to get this process out there.
As soon as later this week, we hope, the USDA will send out
letters to dairy farmers that participated in the Margin
Protection Program and let them know what premium refund or
credit they will be able to receive.
These updates are good news, but unfortunately, the
expected start of the Dairy Margin Coverage signup is still
June 17. I appreciate the priority that Secretary Perdue and
the USDA has put on implementing the Dairy Margin Coverage
Program, but I know time is of the essence. For many of these
dairymen and women, they are looking as to how long they can
survive. And therefore, when they have had to endure years of
low margins when their input costs exceed their receipts on a
monthly basis, how much longer can they hold on? And of course,
the loss of the dairies over the last 10 years is a reflection
of that loss of equity.
When we look at the dairy industry across the country and
the regional challenges that we face, I have learned clearly in
the 15 years I have been in Congress that one program doesn't
fit all farms equally. And so, when we made the changes last
year, we tried to take that into account. That is why I
strongly supported the more Risk Management Agency insurance
products for dairy farms, and made sure that farms could
participate in both the Dairy Margin Coverage and Livestock
Gross Margin insurance for dairies. Both Chairman Peterson and
our previous Chairman that is here worked very closely in
trying to make sure that we kept all the options in the menu.
In addition to a thorough farm bill implementation
oversight, the Subcommittee will also focus on other issues
impacting our dairy farmers. And what are they? Well, they are
trade and labor. U.S. dairy is fighting hard in global markets
to face these challenges. We are hoping that progress is being
made on the reauthorization of the USMCA, or NAFTA 2.0,
whatever you want to call it, but Mexico is a top destination
for the United States dairy industry, and it needs to be
maintained, and I believe, expanded. And while the U.S.-Mexico
agreement allows Canada to keep the bulk of their current
domestic system under a supply management scheme, which we
actually looked at here some 5 years ago, recent International
Trade Commission economic analysis indicated that the proposal
forecasts, if we implement the new United States-Mexican-Canada
trade agreement, that would provide an additional $300 million,
they estimated, additional dairy exports under the agreement.
Frankly, I hope we can do better. That is positive, but I think
more can be done.
The last area that is of critical need to our dairymen and
women around the country is a reliable workforce. Trying to
come up with an immigration solution for agriculture is long
overdue. Some of us have been laboring on this for many, many
years under multiple Administrations. I have been calling for
comprehensive immigration reform. I don't think that is going
to happen in this Congress, but maybe we can get something done
incrementally to provide a more stable workforce for the
dairymen and -women, and agriculture industry in general.
We in Congress need to find ways to address these
challenges, both current and future workforce needs, including
access to a year-round visa program. And whether or not
modification in the H-2A actually is a way to do that remains
to be seen, but there are things that need to be done, clearly.
I know from my personal experience and generations in
California, working on a dairy was always considered a high-
skilled, valuable, good paying job, considered a blue collar
job basically among agricultural workforce, because it is year-
round, and there are number of benefits that come from working
on a dairy.
I hope a legislative fix that we are working on will come
to fruition. I take to heart Secretary Sonny Perdue's call for
legislative reform, and I hope that he will continue to be
engaged in this effort as we work on a plan.
With that said, we have our Ranking Member here, and I
would defer to him for an opening statement. And we look
forward to doing right by our dairy farmers, our men and women
who work every day, because cows are milked 365 days a year, to
put that food on America's dinner table every night.
I look forward to the conversation that we have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Costa follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Jim Costa, a Representative in Congress from
California
America's dairy industry is in crisis and today's hearing is just
one part of this Subcommittee's continued effort to respond to the
challenges facing dairy farmers across this country. Addressing these
critical problems is a top priority for the Livestock and Foreign
Agriculture Subcommittee. The United States lost nearly 20,000 licensed
dairies over the last 10 years. Nearly every day, it seems, there is
another national news story about family farmers making the tough
choice to stop milking cows.
California is the nation's top milk producing state and many
dairies in my district have been passed down from generation to
generation, including the one I grew up on. The issue of dairy is
personal to me and will continue to be a major focus, going forward.
Dairy directly provides nearly one million U.S. jobs with an
economic impact of over $200 billion nationwide. In my district alone,
dairy contributes over $2 billion to the local economy. When we lose a
dairy farm, we also lose the jobs and investment that the farm
provides.
Congress worked hard to make bipartisan improvements to the dairy
safety net in the last farm bill. Yesterday, I met with USDA Under
Secretary Bill Northey who told me they are making progress on getting
the new Dairy Margin Coverage program implemented. As soon as this
week, USDA will announce an online decision tool that will let farmers
estimate how Dairy Margin Coverage would work for them. Around the same
time, USDA will send out letters to dairy farmers that participated in
the Margin Protection Program to let them know what premium refund or
credit they will be able to receive.
These updates are good news, but unfortunately the expected start
of Dairy Margin Coverage sign-up is still June 17th. I appreciate the
priority that USDA has put on implementing the dairy program, but I
know time is of the essence for many dairy farmers who have endured
years of low margins and can't hold on much longer.
One program does not fit all farms equally. That's why I strongly
supported opening up more Risk Management Agency insurance products for
dairy farmers and made sure that farms could participate in both Dairy
Margin Coverage and Livestock Gross Margin insurance for dairy.
In addition to thorough farm bill implementation oversight, this
Subcommittee will also focus on other issues impacting dairy farmers.
U.S. dairy is fighting hard in global markets in the face of challenges
but the new wins we are seeing are wins that should have been there all
along. Mexico is the top destination for U.S. dairy and needs to be
maintained. While the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement still allows Canada
to keep the bulk of their current domestic system, the recent
International Trade Commission economic analysis of the proposal
forecasts over $300 million of additional dairy exports under the terms
of the new agreement.
A workable immigration solution for agriculture is long overdue and
I have been calling for one for years. We in Congress need to find ways
to address challenges with both current and future workforce needs
including access to a year-round visa program. A legislative fix is
being worked on and I took heart in Secretary Sonny Perdue's call for
legislative reform to ensure access to a steady workforce. When a plan
is finalized, I am hopeful the Secretary will continue to be a champion
for this cause.
With so many challenges bearing down on dairy farms, I am committed
to actively prioritizing policies that positively impact dairy farmers
and their families, and I will continue to engage with USDA as we get
closer to the beginning of the program sign up period on June 17. We
need to do right by our dairy farmers and the rural communities they
support, and I look forward to the conversation today.
The Chairman. Ranking Member Rouzer, I will defer to you
for an opening statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID ROUZER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM NORTH CAROLINA
Mr. Rouzer. Well, thank you, Chairman Costa, and the cows
don't take a day off, do they?
The Chairman. No, they don't.
Mr. Rouzer. And neither should we. I want to thank our
witnesses for being here today, and I really appreciate the
Chairman for holding this hearing to focus on the state of the
dairy industry.
All sectors of agriculture economy--this is no secret--are
facing challenging times, and of course, the conditions for our
dairy farmers are no exception. Dairymen across the country
have faced a multi-year period of low milk prices and trade
uncertainty, along with labor challenges that have remained
unsolved, quite frankly, for decades. These problems are
plaguing dairy producers of all sizes and in all regions of the
country, which is why House Republicans prioritized making key
improvements to the safety net and enhancing risk management
options for both large and small dairy operations during the
past several Congresses, leading up to passage of the new farm
bill.
I want to commend Ranking Member Conaway, who is here with
us this morning, as well for his work to remove the limitation
on livestock insurance policies in the Bipartisan Budget Act of
2018. Many of you will remember that battle well. He also did
an incredible job shepherding the 2018 Farm Bill through the
House, and of course, eventually to the President for his
signature so that it would become law. The focused effort he
led to increase coverage options, reduce premiums significantly
for catastrophic coverage in Tier 2, and eliminate the
restriction between Livestock Gross Margin insurance and the
new Dairy Margin Coverage Program are all improvements intended
to help producers better manage the risk and uncertainty that
they face.
Dairy farmers and their lenders are watching closely for
news from USDA about the availability of coverage under the new
program, and I want to thank Secretary Perdue and FPAC Under
Secretary Northey for making the implementation of DMC a
priority. And in fact, as the Chairman noted, as of this
morning USDA announced the web-based decision aid tool for DMC
is now available to producers to begin reviewing their options
before signup begins. I think we all can be pleased with that.
While the improvements to the safety net are critical to
helping producers survive the tough economic times, what our
farmers really need is improved market conditions. This is why
swift approval of USMCA is so critical for our farmers and
ranchers. According to the long-awaited analysis by the
International Trade Commission, as mentioned by the Chairman in
his remarks as well, dairy is one of the sectors with the most
to gain from the renegotiated agreement with Canada and Mexico.
While implementation will need to be closely monitored, the
additional access for U.S. dairy products and the elimination
of Canadian Class VI and Class VII dairy pricing strategies are
a major, major win for American dairy producers and processors.
As we would say back home, a big-time win.
I touched on this at the outset, but I want to highlight
again the shortage of adequate labor because of our broken
immigration system. Dairy producers essentially have no
reliable supply of workers. As we all know, the current
agricultural guestworker program is designed for seasonal labor
needs, not the year-round work required on dairies. This past
Congress, I was proud to be an original cosponsor of H.R. 4092,
the AG Act (Agricultural Guestworker Act), which attempted to
address the needs of farmers, ranchers, and other agriculture
businesses struggling to find labor. While immigration can be a
very complicated and highly emotional issue, we should all be
able to recognize the disservice Congressional dysfunction has
done for all sectors of the agriculture industry in failing to
pass meaningful reform of the guestworker program.
This has been a debate that has been ongoing for at least 2
decades, if not more. And going back to my years with Senator
Helms, I remember working on this in the mid-1990s and the late
1990s, and then we thought we had something in the mid-2000s.
And it has been on and on and on. The fact of the matter is,
we've got to get the job on this done. As we speak, cows go un-
milked, fruit gets left on trees, and crops rot in the field
because farmers cannot find a reliable legal source of labor.
Meanwhile, we in Washington always wait for the results of
the next election and the problems continue to grow. We cannot
continue to ignore this problem, and I urge all of us in
Congress to put aside all the politics related to it and for
once on this issue, start beginning to craft a commonsense
solution that the President can sign. American agriculture
needs it desperately. I think we all can agree on that.
Again, I want to thank all the witnesses for appearing here
today to share your perspectives on the state of the dairy
industry, and I look forward to hearing from each of you.
I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the Ranking Member, and we are
pleased this morning to have both the Chairman of the House
Agriculture Committee and the Ranking Member, and in tradition,
we will be pleased to hear them with any opening comments they
care to make.
Chairman Peterson?
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. COLLIN C. PETERSON, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM MINNESOTA
Mr. Peterson. Well thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
and the Ranking Member for holding this hearing.
It has been a tough number of years in the dairy industry.
We have made significant improvements in the farm bill, and I
hope people hang in there long enough to figure out what they
are.
One of my frustrations has been the length of time that it
has taken for them to roll this out, but that wasn't really
caused by us. That was caused by the Senate, and some of the
provisions that they put into the bill that have drug out this
situation, especially the refund thing. But they, apparently,
are going to get it done in June and it will be retroactive. I
just hope people will hang in there until they get time to
figure it out.
The other thing I am a little bit concerned about is that
there might be confusion sowed by what the Department is
talking about putting out there. I haven't seen it, but I am
hearing that they are putting out this decision chart that is
going to have people look through and figure out whether they
should have $5 or $9 or whatever this stuff is, and you know,
as if there is any question. And in my opinion, there is no
question about what to do. It is very simple. Unless you are
wealthy and have deep pockets, and if you want to stay in the
dairy business, you should take $9.50. You should take it for 5
years, and lock it in. And if you don't, don't come and
complain to me. And hopefully we won't have to use it.
Hopefully, the market will be there and we will not have to dip
into this. But, for a relatively small amount of money, you can
lock in a gross income for 5 years, and it is probably not as
much as people would like, but it is enough to get you through
some of these tough times.
We have made improvements for the smaller producers, but we
have also in what we did, it took care of all aspects of the
industry. We have a new revenue insurance program that is going
to be available for everybody. We went from 4 to 5 million
pounds and we improved the Livestock Gross Margin Program.
There is something in this dairy provision for everybody, and I
look forward to working with the industry and the Members as we
roll this out.
So far, we have not seen the industry splinter into
regional disputes, although there is some noise out there in
different parts of the country. Hopefully that will dissipate
and not grow into any kind of effort.
We have worked hard and long, Jim Costa and I, and others
to make sure that we have an industry that can work together
and not get back into the old fights between the Northeast and
the Midwest and California and so forth. We have been able to
do that. We have enough other problems without us fighting
amongst ourselves, so we have a program that is pretty good,
and it will be laid out here today, so I thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for holding the hearing, and I look forward to the
testimony.
The Chairman. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
the good work that you have done. Your observations you and I
share, and clearly, you have given good advice in terms of how
we implement this effort in a bipartisan way that reflects the
needs of our dairy industry. And certainly, it is part of the
responsibility of the House Agriculture Committee to try to
keep the dairy industry working together, because it does no
good when we get divided in between different regions of the
country.
The Ranking Member, former Chairman Conaway, we are pleased
that you are here, and we would love to hear any comments you
might have to say.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM TEXAS
Mr. Conaway. No comments, Mr. Chairman, other than to say
that the Subcommittee is in good hands with you as Chairman and
David Rouzer as Ranking Member, and David, I appreciate your
compliments in your opening remarks. And let's hear from the
witnesses. I think enough yapping has been done from this side
of the stage, so I yield back.
The Chairman. All right. Well, we thank the Ranking Member
always for the good work that you do, and have over the years
working in a bipartisan effort.
The Chair will request that Members submit their opening
statements for the record so the witnesses may begin their
testimony, and so we will have ample time to get to the
questions. And we would like to recognize our first witness--
and by the way, we have recognized people as they have come in
here based upon seniority, so I have a list, and that is what I
will do. I will follow the list, alternating between Democrats
and Republicans.
And we would like to begin with Chairman Peterson making an
introduction of a constituent who will be our first witness.
Chairman Peterson?
Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and we are pleased
to have Sadie Frericks here from Melrose, Minnesota. They own
and operate a 90 cow first generation farm in that area.
Anybody that has been to Melrose knows that the dairy industry
is ground zero there. Without them, Melrose would dry up.
Sadie, we are very pleased that you are willing to come out and
testify here today. I see that your son, Dan, is with you here.
Oh, there he is back there. We have an up and coming dairy
farmer there, huh? Do you work him hard? That is good. He is
shaking his head.
Anyway, the Frericks name is a very well-known name in that
part of the world, and we are pleased that you are choosing to
get into the dairy business, and we wish you all the success.
We are happy to have you here at the Committee, so thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you. Would you please begin, Ms.
Frericks? We are pleased to have you here this morning, and
your family.
STATEMENT OF SADIE FRERICKS, OWNER AND OPERATOR, BLUE DIAMOND
DAIRY, MELROSE, MN
Ms. Frericks. Good morning, Chairman Costa, Congressman
Rouzer, and Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Sadie
Frericks. I am a dairy farmer from Minnesota. Thank you for
inviting me to speak to you today about the state of the dairy
economy.
I would like to start by telling you a little bit more
about my farm. I own, manage, and operate a first-generation
dairy farm together with my husband, Glen, and our three
children, Dan, Monika, and Daphne. As Congressman Peterson
said, my son, Dan, is here with me today. We milk 90 cows and
manage 200 acres of pasture and cropland.
Fourteen years ago, we left secure jobs with full benefits
to answer the call to farm. We enjoyed the life we had created
in the suburbs, but something was missing in our lives. We
spent all of our weekends at either my family's farm or Glen's
family farm. It turns out the cows were calling us back.
We started our dairy career on my father's farm, but it
quickly became clear that we didn't have a future there. The
dairy industry was dying in that part of Minnesota and as farm
numbers dwindled, so, too, did the businesses that dairy farms
rely upon: milk processors, feed mills, equipment sales and
repair, et cetera.
We moved our dairy cows to the part of Minnesota where Glen
grew up, Melrose. We bought 20 acres with a house and a barn.
We rented 200 acres of cropland, on which we were able to grow
the corn silage and hay we needed to feed our cows.
A lot has changed since we bought our farm. We have doubled
the number of cows we milk. We have more than doubled the size
of our family. We discovered that we love more about dairy
farming than just the cows. We love spending every day together
and raising our kids on a farm. We love doing meaningful work
and giving tours of our farm so others can learn more about
dairy farming. We love utilizing our creativity and problem-
solving skills to overcome challenges.
And believe me, there have been some challenges.
First came 2009 and milk prices lower than anyone thought
possible. We got through that year with the help of our farm
business management instructor and our Farm Service Agency
lender. Then we ended up losing most of our cropland when a
neighbor offered our landlord a rental rate we couldn't afford.
We switched to buying most of our hay and corn silage and
relied more on grazing our cows.
Now we are facing our biggest challenge yet. We got into
dairy farming knowing that prices cycle, both for milk and for
feed. Accordingly, we planned for those cycles. We saved money
during the good years and spent carefully during the lean
years.
Unfortunately, prices haven't cycled for the past several
years. They are stuck at a level just below our cost of
production. Our challenge currently is that all of the money we
saved during the good years is gone. For the first time in our
farming career, we asked our bank for a line of credit so that
we could keep paying our vendors.
I cannot fully explain the level of mental and emotional
stress that comes along with watching your savings evaporate
and your short-term debt accumulate.
I can tell you that our farm business would not survive
another year like 2018. We talked countless times about how to
adjust our business plan so that we can keep doing what we
love. Each time, that discussion ended with reducing the size
of our herd and one of us getting a job in town.
We aren't having those discussions anymore. First, we set a
price floor through the new Dairy Revenue Protection insurance
that was approved by USDA last year. Second, by our
calculations, the Federal Dairy Margin Coverage program will
help us mitigate risk and secure a profit, going forward. We
will continue working together, with our children, to care for
our cows and our land.
While we would rather not have to rely on government
programs, I hope DMC and other risk management tools will allow
other family farms to continue doing what they love, as well.
Rural America needs successful farms, both for our engagement
in our community and for our economic contributions.
In a typical year, our farm spends $\1/2\ million, most of
that locally. Almost every dollar invested in DMC will
ultimately be invested in rural America.
I would like to finish by thanking Chairman Peterson for
his long-standing support of dairy farmers and all of the
Committee Members for these much-needed improvements to the
farm bill.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Frericks follows:]
Prepared Statement of Sadie Frericks, Owner and Operator, Blue Diamond
Dairy, Melrose, MN
Good morning, Chairman Costa, Congressman Rouzer, and Members of
the Subcommittee. My name is Sadie Frericks. I am a dairy farmer from
Minnesota. Thank you for inviting me to speak to you about the state of
the dairy economy.
I'd like to start by telling you a little about my farm. I own,
manage, and operate a first-generation dairy farm together with my
husband, Glen, and our three children, Dan, Monika, and Daphne. My son
is here with me today. We milk 90 cows and manage 200 acres of pasture
and cropland.
Fourteen years ago, we left secure jobs with full benefits to
answer the call to farm. We enjoyed the life we had created in the
suburbs--but something was missing in our lives. We spent all of our
weekends at either my family's farm or Glen's family farm. It turns out
the cows were calling us back.
We started our dairy career on my father's farm. But it quickly
became clear that we didn't have a future there. The dairy industry was
dying in that part of Minnesota and as farm numbers dwindled, so, too,
did all of the other businesses that dairy farms rely on--milk
processors, feed mills, equipment sales and repair, etc.
So we moved our 40 dairy cows to the part of Minnesota where Glen
grew up. We bought 20 acres with a house and a barn. We rented 200
acres of cropland, on which we were able to grow the corn silage and
hay we needed to feed our cows.
A lot has changed since we bought our farm. We've doubled the
number of cows we milk. We've more than doubled the size of our family.
We discovered that we love more about dairy farming than just the cows.
We love spending every day together and raising our kids on a farm. We
love doing meaningful work and giving tours of our farm so others can
learn more about dairy farming. We love utilizing our creativity and
problem solving skills to overcome challenges.
And, believe me, there have been some challenges.
First came 2009 and milk prices lower than anyone thought possible.
We got through that year with the help of our farm business management
instructor and our Farm Service Agency lender. Then, we ended up losing
most of our cropland when a neighbor offered our landlord a rental rate
we couldn't afford. We switched to buying most of our hay and corn
silage and relied more on grazing our cows.
Now we are facing our biggest challenge yet. We got into dairy
farming knowing that prices cycle--both for milk and for feed.
Accordingly, we planned for those cycles. We saved money during the
good years and spent carefully during the lean years.
Unfortunately, prices haven't cycled for the past several years.
They're stuck at a level just below our cost of production. In other
words, we're not turning a profit. Our challenge currently is that all
of the money we saved during the good years is gone. For the first time
in our farming career, we asked our bank for a line of credit so that
we could keep paying our vendors.
I cannot fully explain the level of mental and emotional stress
that came along with watching our savings evaporate and our short-term
debt accumulate.
I can tell you that our farm business would not survive another
year like 2018. We talked countless times about how to adjust our
business plan so that we can keep doing what we love. Each time, that
discussion ended with reducing the size of our herd and one of us
getting a job in town.
We aren't having those discussions anymore. First, we set a price
floor through the new Dairy Revenue Protection insurance that was
approved by USDA last year. Second, by our calculations, the Federal
Dairy Margin Coverage program will help us mitigate risk and secure a
profit, going forward. We will continue working together, with our
children, to care for our cows and our land.
While we'd rather not have to rely on government programs, I hope
DMC and other risk management tools will allow other family farms to
continue doing what they love, as well. Rural America needs successful
farms, both for our engagement in our communities and for our economic
contributions.
In a typical year, our farm spends $\1/2\ million, mostly in our
local community. Almost every dollar invested in DMC will ultimately be
invested in rural America.
I'd like to finish by thanking Chairman Peterson for his long-
standing support of dairy farmers and all of the Committee Members for
these much-needed improvements to the farm bill.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.
The Chairman. Sadie, thank you for that heartfelt and well-
stated testimony, and you are very correct. Congressman
Peterson does an excellent job not only in representing his
district, but America's dairy industry.
I am going to allow, as we progress with the witnesses
here, Members an opportunity to introduce some of the witnesses
that they have asked to testify here today, and we are going to
maintain the regular order, but as many of you know here, we
have multiple Committee hearings that are taking place on a
usual legislative day, and therefore, Members come and go. And
I want to make sure that they get a chance to introduce their
witnesses that are here, even though they may have to leave
during some of the testimony.
I will come back to you, Andrei, in a moment, but I want to
ask Mr. Brindisi, one of our new stars from New York, to
introduce a witness from his area, and then we will go through
the order.
Mr. Brindisi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my pleasure to
introduce Mike McMahon, who owns and operates EZ Acre Farms in
Homer, New York, and his wife, Edie, is joining him as well
today.
Their operation has set the standard on animal care and
environmental stewardship. He has also been a strong advocate
for commonsense labor solutions so that dairy farmers can
continue providing a safe and abundant food supply for our
country.
Upstate New York dairy farmers like Mike McMahon are why I
asked to serve on the Agriculture Committee, and I am happy
that he is joining us here today, and look forward to his
testimony. Thank you, Mike.
The Chairman. Thank you, Congressman Brindisi, and we are
looking forward to hearing your testimony at the appropriate
time.
I would also now like to recognize Congresswoman Hartzler
for her good work that she does on this Committee, and she has
a witness that she would like to introduce.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am very proud to
introduce my friend from the University of Missouri in
Columbia, Dr. Scott Brown. I am so glad that he is here again.
He has testified many times before Congress, and is viewed, I
believe, as one of the premier experts in our nation on dairy
policy. I am so proud of him. He is the Director of Strategic
Partnerships at the College of Agriculture and Natural
Resources, as well as a professor, and he has received many
awards that I could cite, but most importantly, he has helped
raise up my two ag staffers that I have had during my time
here, including Carly Esser, who is here in the audience today.
I want to thank you for that. You are a wonderful teacher
and a wonderful example for them, and certainly a wonderful
resource for us here in Congress. Thank you for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. We thank the Congresswoman, and we are
looking forward, Dr. Brown, to hearing your testimony at the
appropriate time.
Our last witness is a person that Congressman Thompson, who
I enjoy working with always, would like to introduce from
Pennsylvania.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much. It really is
a privilege and honor to introduce this gentleman, a friend and
leader on dairy in the Keystone State of Pennsylvania. It is my
pleasure to introduce Dave Smith. He is a fourth-generation
dairy farmer from Lebanon County, Pennsylvania. He is a
graduate of Virginia Tech where he completed a BS in dairy
science. Upon graduation, Dave returned home to the farm and
co-manages the family farm with his son where they also grow
crops and raise cows.
Dave also served as Executive Director of the Pennsylvania
Dairymen's Association, an organization he has been involved
with for more than 20 years. He is also very active with the
annual Pennsylvania Farm Show, which actually a number of
Members on this Committee have attended with me. The first
weekend in January, mark your calendars. The largest indoor
agriculture exposition in the country. Not too far from here,
either, about 2\1/2\ hours from here.
To all of our witnesses, thank you for being here today.
The Chairman. Thank you, Congressman Thompson, for that
kind introduction.
I will now introduce our second witness, a friend who I
have known for many years, Andrei Mikhalevsky, who serves as
the President and CEO of California Dairies, Inc., which is
based in Visalia, California. It is owned by 360+ dairymen and
-women who ship their milk to California Dairy, Inc. They sell
nearly seven percent of the total milk in the United States, it
is the second largest co-op.
Andrei is a seasoned expert in the dairy industry, which is
why we have asked him to testify today. He also serves as the
Trade Committee Chair for the International Dairy Foods
Association, and serves on the Dairy Advisory Board for
California Department of Food and Agriculture.
Mr. Mikhalevsky, we are glad to have you here, and we would
like you to begin your testimony.
STATEMENT OF ANDREI MIKHALEVSKY, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, CALIFORNIA DAIRIES, INC., VISALIA, CA
Mr. Mikhalevsky. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Costa,
Ranking Member Rouzer, and distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to provide my
perspective on the current state of the U.S. dairy economy,
with a focus on trade today.
My name is Andrei Mikhalevsky, and I am President/CEO of
California Dairies, Inc., known as CDI.
CDI is the largest dairy farmer-owned cooperative in
California, and the second largest in the United States. The
cooperative was formed to sell, market, and add value to our
members' milk. Our family-owned dairy farms represent seven
percent of all the milk produced in the United States. Mr.
Chairman, as you had noted and are fully aware, our home State
of California remains the leading dairy state, producing 18
percent of the country's milk. Our cooperative is the largest
producer of retail butter in the United States, and the largest
producer and exporter of milk powder.
Today, I will focus my testimony in three areas. First,
offer examples of industry current issues; second, I will
describe our trade views; and finally, I will outline some
suggestions to improve dairy's overall business health.
U.S. dairy is a dynamic industry made up of 39,000 dairy
farms and slightly more than 1,300 processing plants that with
associated businesses support three million U.S. jobs. Sixteen
percent of all U.S. milk production is exported. Thousands of
jobs are dependent on these U.S. dairy exports.
Today's dairy farmers face challenges on multiple fronts,
but also great opportunities. The U.S. dairy industry has
amazing potential and is ready to meet the growing domestic and
international demand for milk. Yet, the U.S. dairy industry has
been stressed, as noted, for several years due to low margins
and low worldwide prices. This has led numerous dairy families
to sell their businesses. These on-farm losses combined with
reduced market values for dairy cows are stressing bank
relationships. The end result is that more of our milk is
produced by fewer, larger, more productive operations.
Another challenge is that every dairy farm in the United
States has labor availability issues. An agricultural
guestworker program that meets year-round dairy needs for the
industry is critical.
The U.S. domestic price is highly influenced by global
prices and the global supply-demand balance of milk. The U.S.
is no longer isolated from world prices. U.S. milk price
recovery was halted in 2018, due to EU intervention stocks and
the retaliatory tariffs with Mexico and China. Our biggest
competitors producing milk and dairy products for the export
markets are the European Union and New Zealand. The most
valuable export markets for our industry are Mexico, Canada,
Japan, China, South America, and Southeast Asia, then followed
by the Middle East and Africa. Free trade agreements that open
markets and lower trade barriers are crucial to the dairy
industry's long-term economic health.
The U.S. has not completed or passed a new trade deal in
well over a decade. We need more comprehensive free trade
agreements. The EU has trade agreements completed or in process
with nine of the top ten dairy importing countries, while the
U.S. simply has four. Likewise, New Zealand has trade
agreements with most Asian countries where demand is growing at
a rapid pace. For the dairy industry, any trade agreement must
simply meet two criteria. First, and most importantly, a fair
and level playing field is critical. Second, any trade
agreement should include robust access for the whole bucket of
milk, all dairy products across the board. Too often, trade
agreements isolate dairy market access to a limited subset of
dairy products.
Now just a quick comment on current negotiations. Mexico is
the top market for all U.S. dairy exports, valued at $1.4
billion in 2018. Canada is second. The USMCA deal, as
negotiated, meets the dairy industry's top priorities, and that
is why we urge swift Congressional approval of this agreement.
China has been the third largest exporting customer for
U.S. dairy. Opportunities in China are significant, but the
U.S. has not been on a level playing field with our
competitors. Due to recently imposed retaliatory tariffs, we
are now seeing a precipitous decline in U.S. dairy exports to
China.
Japan is the fifth largest country for U.S. dairy exports,
and currently we face high barriers to trade in Japan. Dairy
market access in any trade agreement must match or exceed that
achieved under TPP and the new EU-Japan trade agreement.
In 2018, the EU exported nearly $1.7 billion in product to
the United States, but U.S. companies exported just $145
million back to them. High tariffs and other non-tariff
barriers, such as burdensome import licensing and certification
requirements stand in the way. We cannot afford to set a
precedent of negotiating with any trading partner that
sidelines agriculture. All free trade agreements must include
access for agriculture.
In my written testimony, I provided several short-term
industry solutions, and I will just highlight one. A policy
proposal that has great potential for improving sales for the
state of the U.S. dairy economy is establishing a national
enhanced standard for fluid milk products.
In summary, the dairy industry is a significant part of the
U.S. economy. Price volatility has had a significant impact on
dairy farms. Trade policy is a vital part of our future
success. Our industry needs increased access to a greater
number of markets and a level playing field. The U.S. dairy
industry envisions a bright future, capitalizing on
opportunities in the global marketplace.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mikhalevsky follows:]
Prepared Statement of Andrei Mikhalevsky, President and Chief Executive
Officer, California Dairies, Inc., Visalia, CA
Good morning, Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Rouzer, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to provide my perspective on the current state of the U.S.
dairy economy.
Today's dairy farmers face challenges on multiple fronts, but also
great opportunities. U.S. dairy is a dynamic and innovative industry
made up of approximately 39,000 dairy farms and slightly more than
1,300 processing plants that support nearly three million U.S. jobs,
generate more than $161 billion in wages and has an overall economic
impact of more than $628 billion. As the fifth largest commodity in the
United States, dairy generated $36.7 billion in sales in 2017. Mr.
Chairman, as you are fully aware, our home state of California remains
the leading dairy state, producing 18 percent of the country's milk.
The U.S. dairy industry has amazing potential and is ready to meet
the growing domestic and international demands. U.S. dairy farms are
getting better and becoming more efficient at finding innovative ways
to produce more with less. U.S. farm milk production has grown from 170
billion pounds of milk in 2003 to 218 billion pounds in 2018 and milk
production per cow has increased by more than 35 percent since 1998.
Today that means that the average cow is producing 23,150 pounds of
milk per year. This growth in milk production means that we have more
milk than is needed domestically, which presents an economic
vulnerability. It also means that our industry is poised to meet a
growing global demand for dairy products at a moment's notice,
presenting great opportunities for our dairy industry.
Today I will focus my testimony in four areas. First, I will
provide a short introduction of California Dairies, Inc. (CDI), and
next I will offer examples of current issues facing our industry today.
Third, I will describe our focus on the current trade landscape, and
finally I will outline some solutions and suggestions to improve the
overall business health of our dairy farmers.
California Dairies, Inc. (CDI)
Headquartered in Visalia, CA, CDI is the largest dairy farmer-owned
cooperative in California and the second largest in the United States.
The cooperative was formed in 1999 to sell, market and add value to our
member's milk. Our 360 family-owned dairy farms produce almost 16
billion pounds of milk per year representing seven percent of all milk
produced in the United States. Every day we pick up between 850 and
1,000 truckloads of milk from our farms. Half of these truckloads are
delivered and sold to bottlers or the milk is used as an ingredient in
other dairy products, primarily cheese. The other half of our milk goes
into our own manufacturing facilities.
CDI member farmers have made a large financial investment in seven
manufacturing facilities to process milk into transportable products,
primarily milk powder and butter products. Not only do these farmer-
owned manufacturing facilities ensure a home for the milk our members
produce, but they also are the key to balancing the steady milk
production on the farm with variable customer demand--a key function of
CDI and other manufacturing cooperatives that often gets taken for
granted.
Our cooperative is the largest producer of retail butter in the
United States. We manufacture almost 400 million pounds of butter a
year--more than 1 pound for each person living in the United States. We
wholly own Challenge Dairy Products, Inc., the number one branded
butter in the western United States. Nearly all of our butter is sold
to U.S. consumers with exceptions when pricing conditions are favorable
for export.
CDI is the largest producer of milk powder in the United States and
the largest producer of skim milk powder in the world. We produce about
700 million pounds of milk powder per year. Our exports of milk powder
have grown over the years and are now reaching sixty percent of our
total production. Clearly, we are highly dependent on global trade and
U.S. trade policy. CDI sells and markets our milk powder through
DairyAmerica, which is a federated cooperative made up of three other
farmer-owned U.S. dairy cooperatives located across the country.
Current Industry Issues
The U.S. dairy industry has been stressed for several years due to
low margins and low worldwide prices. The dairy industry is unique
within the agricultural sector. Almost all of the remaining U.S. dairy
farms are family run businesses. Our dairy families work very hard and
operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and 365 days a year. The supply
of milk is constant, but demand varies weekly.
These farms produce a highly perishable year round ``crop'' with
some seasonal swings in supply--specifically in the spring. This supply
requires adequate milk processing capacity. Some regions of the country
lack this capacity. Additionally, processing assets must also have the
capacity to process the short spring flush peaks in milk production,
leading to inefficiencies during non-peak periods when such capacity is
not needed.
The dairy industry continues to see consolidation, similar to other
sectors of the economy. Between 2012 and 2017 the number of U.S. dairy
farms contracted by 15 percent. Smaller farms with herds fewer than 100
cows declined by 29 percent contrasted with farms with over 2,500 cows
growing by 24 percent. Over this period, the total U.S. dairy herd
increased by three percent or over 280,000 head. Cows have also become
more productive over this time period as dairy farmers have excelled in
employing advancements in herd health, genetics and feeding practices
to produce more milk with fewer resources. The end result is that more
of the U.S. milk is produced by fewer, larger and more productive
operations.
All dairy farms operate on a profit margin determined by operating
costs on their farm and general market pricing. The U.S. domestic
prices are highly influenced by global prices and the global supply-
demand balance of milk. The U.S. is no longer isolated from world
prices. Price volatility has doubled over the last 5 years making many
of our farmers experts in utilizing financial risk management tools.
Global milk and dairy product prices have been depressed over the
last 3 years resulting in low or negative margins and subsequently
leading numerous farm families around the U.S. to sell their
businesses. These on-farm losses combined with reduced market values
for dairy cows are stressing bank relationships.
The operating cost side of the dairy margin equation is driven
primarily by feed and labor costs. Almost every dairy farm in the U.S.
has labor availability issues today. Milking cows is difficult, and the
job requires significant training and skill. Immigration policies will
have a substantial impact on our industry. An effective agricultural
guestworker program that meets the year-round needs of the dairy
industry is needed.
International trade is a critical component of the U.S. dairy
economy. Sixteen percent of U.S. milk production is exported. About 1
day a week our farmers produce milk that is destined for export
markets. Thousands of jobs are dependent on U.S. dairy exports.
Trade Policy
Due to the dependence on exports and world prices our dairy farm
incomes are highly entwined with trade policy matters, meaning that
expanding exports are vital to the health of our farms, and trade
conflicts that limit our ability to sell products around the world are
extremely damaging. It is a fact that a much-needed recovery in U.S.
milk prices was halted in 2018 due to trade retaliation tariffs with
Mexico and China.
Our biggest competitors producing milk and dairy products for the
export markets are the European Union (EU) and New Zealand.
Secondarily, Canada, Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay, Australia and India
would round out the competitive set, although on an infrequent basis.
The most valuable export markets for our industry are Japan, China, and
Southeast Asia, followed by the Middle East and Africa.
In 2018, the United States exported $5.58 billion of dairy
products, from cheese to whey to ice cream to skim milk powder and
everything in between. Free trade agreements that open markets and
lower trade barriers are crucial to continuing this trend of growing
U.S. dairy exports.
Dairy farmers are acutely aware of trade policy developments
because today, their livelihoods increasingly depend upon global
markets opportunities. It is particularly damaging from a dairy
perspective that the U.S. has fallen behind in negotiating trade
agreements, especially compared to trade agreements negotiated by the
EU and New Zealand, our primary competitors. Some examples of such
agreements are the EU-Japan Economic Partnership, the EU-Vietnam Trade
Agreement, and the New Zealand-China free trade agreement, which puts
us at an increasing disadvantage with the world's largest market. The
Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) going ahead without U.S. involvement
has affected our competitive position in a key region.
The U.S. has not completed and passed a new trade deal in well over
a decade. The EU has trade agreements completed or in process with nine
of the top ten dairy importing countries while the U.S. has four.
Likewise, New Zealand has trade agreements with most Asian countries
where demand is growing at a rapid pace. The U.S. trade agreements that
are in place today were negotiated before other agreements, and do not
always place the U.S. on a level playing field with our competitors,
putting the dairy industry at a comparative disadvantage
Trade Agreements
Dairy industry priorities in U.S. trade agreements are fairly
straightforward. First and most importantly, a fair and level playing
field is critical. The United States provides large export markets in
many sectors to our trading partners, and we must insist upon securing
more favorable export market access than what our competitors have been
granted through prior treaties. Some concerns include tariffs in China
and Vietnam, competitors benefitting from government interference
(Canadian--Class [VI]/[VII]) and the EU intervention programs that
distort and delay global dairy price recovery.
Second, any trade agreement should include robust access for the
``whole bucket of milk''--all dairy products across the board. Too
often, trade agreements isolate dairy market access to a limited subset
of dairy products, typically cheese and whey. The U.S. dairy industry
needs market access for products made from all components in milk.
Let me take a moment to comment on current negotiations.
United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA)
Mexico is the top market for all U.S. dairy exports, valued at $1.4
billion in 2018. Canada is second with $697 million in export sales.
The deal as negotiated meets the dairy industry's top priorities,
eliminates Canada's trade-distorting Class [VII] pricing program,
improves market access into Canada, and preserves our access into
Mexico. The agreement contains strong provisions on sanitary and
phytosanitary measures and has strong provisions on geographical
indications that serve as an excellent precedent from which to build a
more extensive list with additional trading partners. These are a
number of reasons why we urge swift Congressional approval of this
agreement. Furthermore, failure to pass the USMCA could hinder the
Administration's ability to finalize other trade agreement, because it
could be viewed as an inability of the U.S. to get trade agreements
through Congress
Last July, Mexico imposed a 25 percent tariff on U.S. cheese to
retaliate against Section 232 tariffs. This created significant turmoil
for U.S. cheese manufacturers and the producer community having a
direct impact in lowering milk prices. Mexico is the largest customer
for U.S. cheese exports. Between July and December 2018, volume sales
of U.S. cheese to Mexico fell one percent and the value of U.S. cheese
exports declined eight percent due to these tariffs.
China
China has been the third largest export customer for U.S. dairy,
with the business valued at $502 million in 2018, down $77 million from
the prior year. While the opportunities in China are significant, the
U.S. in the past has not been on a level playing field with its
competitors from New Zealand or Australia. Equal access in a trade
agreement with China would present a large opportunity for the U.S.
dairy industry.
This past year, China issued retaliatory tariffs that included
essentially all U.S. dairy products. This resulted in U.S. cheese and
whey exports declining 40 percent year-over-year. Today, U.S. milk,
cream, yogurt, whey, butter and cheese face a 25 percent retaliatory
tariff, while lactose and infant formula face up to a ten percent
retaliatory tariff. We are now seeing a precipitous decline in U.S.
dairy exports to China, including business that took years to develop.
While the opportunities in China are significant, the U.S. in the
past has not been on a level playing field with our competitors from
New Zealand or Australia. Restoring our full access to the Chinese
market is essential to the health and growth of producer companies and
supplying farmers. Yet restoring access is just the first step.
Provisions in the free trade agreements New Zealand and Australia enjoy
with China give both countries a critical leg up in this large and
fast-grown market. Equal access for the U.S. in a trade agreement with
China would present a large opportunity for the U.S. dairy industry.
Japan
Japan is the fifth-largest country for U.S. dairy exports, valued
at $270 million in 2018. Currently, U.S. dairy exports face high
tariffs, limited tariff-rate quotas (TRQs) and other barriers to trade
in the Japanese market. Market access in any bilateral trade agreement
must match or exceed that achieved under the TPP and the new EU-Japan
agreement for the U.S. dairy industry to be at a minimum on a level
playing field. Furthermore, the agreement must include an accelerated
phase-in of tariff reductions to ensure the U.S. is not facing a
disadvantage on tariff or TRQ quantity access compared to other
countries. Non-tariff barriers, such as sanitary and phytosanitary
measures, biotechnology, TRQ administration, and geographical
indications, must also be addressed.
Agricultural products and dairy must be addressed in any free trade
agreement with Japan.
European Union
In 2018, the EU exported nearly $1.7 billion in dairy products to
the United States, but U.S. companies exported just $145 million in
dairy products to the EU. The European Union has the potential to be a
significant export market for the United States, but high tariffs and
other non-tariff barriers such as burdensome import licensing and
certification requirements stand in the way.
We cannot afford to set a precedent of negotiating FTAs with any
trading partner that sidelines agriculture. A free trade agreement with
the EU must be comprehensive in scope and provide meaningful market
access for agriculture. Further, it must address all existing tariff
and non-tariff barriers that block our exports, including the
geographic indication threat to common cheese names that are currently
in use. Without a thorough and robust agreement that uproots this full
set of complex barriers to U.S. dairy exports, an FTA with the EU would
quite likely deepen our significant dairy trade deficit with the EU
rather than narrow it.
Short-Term Industry Solutions
As just discussed, a key to improving both the short- and long-term
outlook for U.S. dairy farmers is expanding the number of trade
agreements that include increased dairy market access. This includes
Congressional approval of the USMCA, concluding Administrative
negotiations with China and Japan, and expanding further opportunities
in the EU and other South Pacific countries. The U.S. must pursue a
robust trade agenda that expands opportunities as well as preserves
market access.
Another policy proposal that has great potential for improving the
state of the U.S. dairy industry is establishing a national enhanced
standard for fluid milk products. This proposal, which has been
discussed over the years and was recently analyzed by one of the
witnesses here today--Dr. Scott Brown--looks at the potential benefits
of adding additional nonfat milk solids to fluid milk products that
have had some or all of the milkfat removed. This ensures that
consumers drinking these reduced/low/non-fat milk products are getting
a wholesome product with additional nonfat nutrients replacing the
milkfat that has been removed. This would provide the consumer with a
better tasting and healthier product, and secondarily, would increase
demand for milk solids resulting in a higher price for U.S. dairy
farmers.
The Federal Milk Marketing Order is also in need of modernization.
Key areas of focus include more accurate and faster market signals back
to farmers on global pricing and marketing conditions through the
National Dairy Product Sales Report. Adjustments also could be made to
encourage new processing capacity to adequately handle growing domestic
milk production.
Summary
The dairy industry is a significant part of the U.S. economy. Dairy
farmers have been stressed by low margins and the industry is
undergoing rapid change. Trade policy is a vital part of the success
for the dairy industry in the U.S. Our industry needs increased access
to markets, a greater number of trade agreements and a level playing
field. The U.S. dairy industry envisions a bright future capitalizing
on opportunities in the global marketplace.
I would like to comment briefly on the farm bill and recent
legislative activity with respect to dairy. The farm bill dairy
provisions regarding Federal Milk Marketing Order Class I pricing and
the new Dairy Margin Coverage program were well received by the
industry and are a positive step forward. The Dairy Revenue Protection
Program is also a great enhancement to farmer risk management options.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to testify before the
Subcommittee. I look forward to answering your questions and engaging
in meaningful discussion about how to maximize the potential of this
great U.S. dairy industry.
The Chairman. Thank you, and we appreciate your comments
and look forward to the question period where we will get a
chance to dig a little deeper.
Our next witness has been introduced by my colleague here.
He is the owner and operator of EZ Acres in Homer, New York, a
wonderful part of the country. Mr. McMahon owns and operates
his operation there on standard on animal care and
environmental stewardship, and we are happy in the Subcommittee
to have you here this morning, and look forward to your
testimony.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL P. McMAHON, OWNER AND OPERATOR, EZ ACRES,
HOMER, NY
Mr. McMahon. Thank you, Chairman Costa.
Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Rouzer, and honorable
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
give testimony concerning the current state of the dairy
industry. I would like to address two major challenges to dairy
in this country: labor, specifically immigrant labor, and
environmental sustainability.
Labor is always an issue in dairy. In 1995, our farm moved
out of four old barns and into a new state-of-the-art facility.
One of our goals is to stop the endless turnover of labor that
we had been experiencing in our previous situation. With
comfortable working conditions, reasonable hours, and being
able to pay a higher wage due to modern efficiencies, we felt
this would be an easy accomplishment.
However, after 5 years, that wasn't happening. My wife,
Edie, behind me, who is responsible for our payroll calculated
that she had issued an average of 39 W-2s per year over those 5
years to maintain a crew of ten full time workers. In January
2000 we replaced half our crew with Hispanic workers and
instantly saw a change. Over the next 5 years, the average
number of W-2s issued was 18, which includes part time people
for the cropping program. It was a remarkable benefit, given
the cost in time and money to constantly train new people. Not
only did turnover nearly stop, but we found in the migrant
workers a work ethic, animal handling skills and a level of
respect for coworkers and owners alike that seem to be lost in
the local workforce.
While it is not this Committee's jurisdiction, immigrant
labor is absolutely critical to my operation. Regardless of the
unemployment rate in our county, local labor doesn't want to
milk cows.
A 2017 Texas A&M study found that 79 percent of the U.S.
milk supply is harvested by Hispanic workers. Agriculture needs
a way to secure an immigrant workforce that is steady, willing,
able and legal.
I realize that immigration is a difficult topic, but
agriculture's need for immigrant labor is undeniable. America
needs a safe, affordable, and abundant food supply produced
within its borders. Food security is part of homeland security.
I would also like to touch on environmental sustainability.
New York and the Northeast are blessed with luxuriant water.
This, and a temperate climate make us well suited as a current
and future dairy region. It differentiates us from other milk
producing areas such as the Southwest. This abundant water also
presents dairy with challenges. For us, environmental
sustainability equates with water quality protection. My farm
is situated in an environmentally sensitive area with 70
percent of my land in the Chesapeake Bay Watershed, and 30
percent in the Skaneateles Lake Watershed which provides
unfiltered drinking water to 230,000 people of the City of
Syracuse. It also lies over a sole-source aquifer which
supplies water to 24,000 people in our town. Our opportunities
to pollute are many, and we take our responsibility to protect
water seriously.
Since 1997, we have been a case study farm for Cornell
University, pioneering an approach to water protection referred
to as nutrient mass balance. In a nutshell, it is a whole farms
system approach to balancing the pounds of nutrients and
imports which are imported onto the farm annually with the
nutrients that leave the farm in the form of milk, meat, and
manure.
Nitrogen and phosphorus are the main nutrients of concern,
and we want to prevent excessive accumulations of these
nutrients on the farmstead, since they may be lost to the
environment and present a risk to surface and groundwater. The
goal is to reduce the amount of nutrients brought onto the farm
by tailoring feed and fertilizers to meet the exact needs of
animals and crops, reuse the nutrients by proper storage of
manure and timing of application to growing crops, and recycle
them into abundant, homegrown forage and grains to feed our
cows.
Since 2003, we have been able to reduce the amount of
excess nitrogen remaining on our farm by \1/3\, and phosphorus
remaining on our farm by 135 percent. These are significant
reductions. Herd health and milk production have improved, and
purchase feed costs have dropped. This approach has enhanced
both environmental and economic sustainability.
Every farm, regardless of size, can implement some or all
of this approach. The data collection required to calculate the
balance is not arduous. Nutrient mass balance analysis of
farmsteads can raise awareness of the opportunities to reduce
nutrient imports and their associated costs, and incentivize
dairymen to adopt nutrient reducing management practices. Every
pound of nitrogen and phosphorus that we don't import is a
pound that we don't have worry about ending up in our water.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McMahon follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael P. McMahon, Owner and Operator, EZ Acres,
Homer, NY
To Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Rouzer, and Honorable Members of
the Livestock and Foreign Agriculture Subcommittee:
Thank you for the opportunity to give testimony concerning the
current state of the dairy industry. I would like to address two major
challenges to dairy in this country--labor, specifically immigrant
labor, and environmental sustainability.
Labor is always an issue in dairy. In 1995 our farm moved out of
four old barns and into a new state of the art facility. One of our
goals was to stop the endless turnover of labor that we had been
experiencing in our previous situation. With comfortable working
conditions, reasonable hours and being able to pay a higher wage due to
modern efficiencies we felt this would be an easy accomplishment.
However after 5 years it was obvious that it wasn't happening. My wife
Edie who is responsible for our payroll calculated that she had issued
an average of 39 W-2s per year over those 5 years to maintain a crew of
ten full time workers. In January 2000 we replaced half our crew with
Latino workers and instantly saw a change. Over the next 5 years the
average number of W-2s issued was 18 which included part time people
for the cropping season. It was a remarkable change given the cost in
time and money to constantly train new people. Not only did turnover
nearly stop but we found in the migrant workers a work ethic, animal
handling skills and a level of respect for coworkers and owners alike
that seem to be lost in the local workforce.
While it is not in this Committee's jurisdiction, immigrant labor
is absolutely critical to my operation. Regardless of the unemployment
rate in our county--local labor doesn't want to milk cows. A 2017 Texas
A&M study found that 79% of the U.S. milk supply is impacted by
Hispanic workers. Agriculture needs a way to secure an immigrant
workforce that is steady, willing, able and LEGAL. We need to bring the
multitude of indispensable agricultural workers who are already here
out of the shadows without major disruption to the workforce. Let's
find out who they are and if there are felons among them then they
cannot stay. These workers are already contributing greatly to our food
system. They paid thousands of dollars to cross the border and
thousands more for forged documents, enriching the drug cartels who
provide these services. The United States might better have collected
that money for processing and issuing work permits. I realize that
immigration is a political minefield, but agriculture's need for
immigrant labor is undeniable. America needs a safe and abundant food
supply produced within its borders. Food security is part of homeland
security.
I would also like to touch on sustainability. New York and the
Northeast are blessed with luxuriant water. This, and a temperate
climate make us well suited as a current and future dairy region. It
differentiates us from other milk producing areas such as the
Southwest. This abundant water also presents dairy with challenges--for
us environmental sustainability equates with water quality protection.
My farm is situated in an environmentally sensitive area with 70% of my
land in the northern part of the Chesapeake Bay Watershed, and 30% in
the Skaneateles Lake Watershed which provides unfiltered drinking water
to 230,00 people of the city of Syracuse. It also lies over a sole-
source aquifer which supplies water to about 24,000 people in our town.
We also have two naturally stocked trout streams that run through our
farm. Our opportunities to pollute are many, and we take our
responsibility to protect water seriously.
Our approach is based on the simple concept of balancing the amount
of ``nutrients'' we import onto the farmstead each year--mainly in the
form of feed and fertilizer--with the amounts of nutrients exported in
the form of milk, meat and manure. The main nutrients of concern with
regard to water quality are Nitrogen (N) and Phosphorus (P). Typically
more of these come onto the farm than are exported. Excessive
accumulations of these nutrients are lost to the environment and
present a risk to surface and ground water. So we Reduce the amount of
nutrients brought onto the farm by tailoring feed and fertilizers to
meet but not exceed animal and crop needs, Reuse the nutrients by
proper storage of manure and timing of application to growing crops,
and Recycle them into abundant homegrown forage and grains to feed our
cows.
This concept is referred to as ``Nutrient Mass Balance''. It was
pioneered by Dr. Danny Fox of the Department of Animal Science at the
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences of Cornell University. It is
carried on today under the program name ``Nutrient Management Spear
Program'' by Dr. Quirine Ketterings and associates. Information about
the NMSP can be found at http://nmsp.cals.cornell.edu.
From beginning balance measurements in the pilot program in 2003 we
have been able to reduce the amount of N remaining on the farm by 33%
and the P remaining on the farm by 135%. These are significant
reductions. They also translate to reduced input costs, enhanced animal
and soil health and contribute to economic sustainability. Wells
sampled for Nitrates ppm along the valley we farm (including the
Village Municipal well) although never at levels of concern have shown
marked reductions in nitrate levels since 1997.
Every farm in water sensitive areas regardless of size can
implement some or all of this approach. The data collection required to
calculate the Nutrient Mass Balance is not arduous. Most information is
reasonably available from well managed operations. NMB analysis of
farmsteads can raise awareness of the opportunities to reduce nutrient
imports and their associated costs and incentivize dairymen to adopt
nutrient reducing management practices. Every pound of N and P we don't
import is a pound we don't have to worry about winding up in our water.
There are few people who farm the land that don't agree that
something is changing with our climate. Extreme weather events and
excessive rainfall are occurring with increasing frequency. The annual
average rainfall in New York has increased by 5" from 1895-2016. Our
locality has seen three ``hundred year storms'' in the past 10 years.
This means we have to get better just to stay even.
What can government do to help? I suggest the following:
Fund field staff at the USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service and the local Soil and Water District level to help
develop and implement nutrient management plans on farms of all
sizes.
See that there is adequate funding for land-grant colleges
to be responsive to applied needs such as the NMB program and
conduct outreach.
Encourage interagency cooperation between land-grant
colleges, NRCS and Soil and Water Districts.
Continue to fund EQIP grants so farmers can better address
resource concerns like manure storage.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. McMahon. Your
comments as it relates to both labor and well as the
environmental stewardship that you have stated is an example of
what, in fact, can be done and I always believe that farmers in
general and dairymen and women are among the best stewards of
the environment, because the whole notion of sustainability is
crucial for them to maintain their business. And it just is
common sense.
Our next witness was previously identified, the Director of
Strategic Partnerships from the College of Agriculture, Food
and Natural Resources, Associate Extension Professor in
Agriculture and Applied Economics at the University of
Missouri. Dr. Brown, good to have you here.
STATEMENT OF SCOTT BROWN, Ph.D., DIRECTOR OF
STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIPS, COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE, FOOD, AND
NATURAL RESOURCES, UNIVERSITY OF
MISSOURI; ASSOCIATE EXTENSION PROFESSOR,
AGRICULTURAL AND APPLIED ECONOMICS, UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI,
COLUMBIA, MO
Dr. Brown. Thank you, and thanks for the kind introduction,
Congresswoman Hartzler, and everything that you do for the
folks in the 4th District of Missouri.
Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Rouzer, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
regarding the financial situation for U.S. dairy farmers and
the expected results from the dairy policy changes made in the
Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018. I am an agriculture
extension economist at the University of Missouri, and I have
spent much of my career examining dairy industry issues.
Since the record-setting milk prices received in 2014,
prices have been at lower levels and shown less volatility.
Over the 2010 to 2014 period, there was a range of $11.10 from
the high to low monthly price. While over the 2015 to early
2019 period, the difference between the maximum and minimum has
been only $4.40. While the low milk price during these two
periods is very similar, the highest monthly price since 2015
is well below the maximum over the 2010 to 2014 period.
The factors that have led to this longer period of more
stable but lower milk prices are a combination of many market
factors. Despite an incredibly tough environment for dairy
producers across the country, milk supplies have continued to
expand. The most recent USDA milk production report showed for
the first time since January of 2016 a \4/10\ decline in
production relative to year earlier levels. The longer-term
expansion in milk production occurred despite continued
reductions in the number of dairy operations. The number of
licensed dairy operations fell by over 2,700, or 6.8 percent in
2018, as financial stress pushed many of these operations out
of business.
If the recent decline in milk supplies continue, that could
provide even more milk price strength in the second half of
2019. However, the structural change in dairy operations and
milk production that has unfolded over the past few years
highlights the increased possibility of these longer periods of
low profitability.
The stubborn continued growth in U.S. milk supplies over
the last few years has contributed to the tough financial
conditions that have plagued the industry. Dairy operation
equity built during the record 2014 milk prices and the
apparent economies-of-scale in the industry has left aggregate
milk supplies very unresponsive in time periods that are
financially strapped.
Despite slow supply response and low return periods, the
industry can expand rapidly in periods of strong profitability.
The cost of purchasing feed has fallen the last few years;
however, the cost required to grow feed stuffs have remained
high and created additional financial strain for those growing
a significant portion of their feed.
Poor domestic demand for some dairy products has
contributed to the weakness in milk prices. Per capita
consumption of two percent and low-fat milk has declined by 33
pounds over the 2010 to 2018 period, and has not been offset by
the recent increases in whole fat fluid milk consumption.
U.S. dairy exports are important to the outlook for U.S.
dairy farmers. According to USDA, U.S. commercial dairy exports
grew by 36 billion pounds on a milk equivalent skim solids
basis over the 2000 to 2018 period, while domestic commercial
disappearance grew by only 23 billion pounds.
The point remains that growth in U.S. dairy exports is
vital. The implementation of new trade agreements, like the
current efforts with China and the ratification of the new
USMCA agreement remain critical.
The long-term outlooks provided by FAPRI and USDA estimate
that the U.S. whole milk price will not exceed $18 per
hundredweight on an annual basis until after 2022. These
forecasts suggest a slow recovery that occurs over the next 3
to 4 years, barring some external unanticipated shock.
The new dairy provisions contained in the 2018 Farm Bill
considerably strengthen the dairy safety net relative to the
provisions in the 2014 Farm Bill. The level of coverage has
increased and the cost of program participation has declined.
It remains important to highlight the strengthened provisions
contained in the 2018 Farm Bill. Those that would have picked
$9.50 coverage will already have seen a payment in January of
$1.51 per hundredweight, and $1.28 per hundredweight in
February, making the 2019 decision easy.
The current Dairy Margin Coverage program is a milk price
less feed cost triggered program, and is meant to protect
against low milk prices and/or high feed costs. The DMC margin
is calculated on a national basis by using the most commonly
used national prices for milk, corn, alfalfa, and soybean meal.
The margin will not perfectly represent any particular farmer's
margin, but provides a national average margin. The DMC program
is a voluntary program that allows a dairy farmer to pick a
margin level to protect between $4 and $9.50 with higher
premiums at higher margin levels. Producers can cover between 5
and 95 percent of their FSA calculated production history. The
first 5 million pounds of production history covered occurs at
lower premiums relative to the production history covered above
5 million pounds.
It appears the DMC program will provide a needed boost to
the dairy safety net. The combination of lower premiums, added
flexibility, and production history covered, and higher margin
protection levels result in a more effective safety program
than the dairy industry has had for some time. Dairy producers,
regardless of size, must examine how the DMC program fits into
their overall risk management plan.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
many issues facing the dairy industry today. I look forward to
answering questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Brown follows:]
Prepared Statement of Scott Brown, Ph.D., Director of Strategic
Partnerships, College of Agriculture, Food, and Natural Resources,
University of Missouri; Associate Extension Professor, Agricultural and
Applied Economics, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO
Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Rouzer, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify regarding the
financial situation for U.S. dairy farmers and the expected results
from the dairy policy changes made in the Agriculture Improvement Act
of 2018. I am an agricultural extension economist at the University of
Missouri and over the last 3 decades I have spent much of my time
examining the economic outlook and Federal policies facing the dairy
industry.
Since the record setting milk prices received by dairy producers in
2014, milk prices have been at lower levels and shown less variability.
Over the 2010 to 2014 period there was a range of $11.10 per cwt from
the high to low monthly milk price, while over the 2015 to early 2019
period the difference between the maximum and minimum has been only
$4.40 per cwt. While the low milk price during these two periods is
very similar, the highest monthly milk price since 2015 is well below
the maximum from 2010 to 2014.
The factors that have led to this longer period of more stable but
lower milk prices have been debated within the dairy industry. It
remains difficult to attribute lower milk prices to any particular
reason, but rather a combination of many market factors.
Despite an incredibly tough financial environment for dairy
produces across the country, milk supplies have continued to expand.
The most recent USDA Milk Production report with data for March 2019
showed that for the first time since January 2016 (excluding leap year
effects), U.S. milk production fell by 0.4% relative to year earlier
levels. The longer-term expansion in milk production occurred despite
continued reductions in the number of dairy operations. The number of
licensed
dairy operations fell by 2,731 or 6.8% in 2018 as financial stress
pushed many of these operations out of business. If
Figure 1. Monthly U.S. All Milk Price
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
the recent decline in milk supplies continues for the rest of this
year, that could provide even more milk price strength in the second
half of 2019. However, the structural change in dairy operations and
milk production that has unfolded over the past few years highlights
the increased possibility of these longer periods of low profitability
occurring in the future.
The stubborn continued growth in U.S. milk supplies over the last
few years has contributed to the tough financial conditions that have
plagued the industry. Dairy operation equity built during the record
2014 milk prices and the apparent economies of scale in the industry
has left aggregate milk supplies very unresponsive in time periods that
are financially stressed. Although the equity built during 2014 has
dissipated, the increase in the average dairy operation size and
economies of scale may result in additional future periods of slow
reduction in aggregate milk supplies when the economic situation is
stressed. Despite slow supply response in low return periods, the
industry can expand rapidly in periods of strong profitability.
The cost of purchasing dairy feed has fallen the last few years as
most feed ingredient prices declined from the peaks of a few years ago.
However, the costs required to grow feedstuffs have remained high and
created additional financial strain for those producers that grow a
significant portion of their feed.
Poor domestic demand for some dairy products has contributed to the
weakness in milk prices. Per capita consumption of 2% and low-fat fluid
milk has declined by 33 pounds over the 2010 to 2018 period and has not
been offset by recent increases in whole fat fluid milk consumption. It
remains critical for future milk prices to find ways to expand domestic
consumption of U.S. dairy products.
U.S. dairy exports are also important to the outlook for U.S. dairy
farmers. According to USDA/ERS, U.S. commercial dairy exports grew by
36 billion pounds on a milk-equivalent skim-solids basis over the 2000
to 2018 period while domestic commercial disappearance grew by only 23
billion pounds. The story changes on a milk-equivalent milk-fat basis,
with domestic commercial disappearance growing by 44 billion pounds and
commercial exports growing by only 9 billion pounds. However, the point
remains that growth in U.S. dairy exports is vital. The implementation
of new trade agreements like the current efforts with China and
ratification of the new USMCA agreement remain critical.
With the supply of milk and demand for milk and dairy products
extremely price inelastic, small changes in either demand or supply can
move milk prices dramatically higher or lower in just a few months and
this potential volatility should not be ignored even though milk prices
have been moving in a small range for the past few years.
The current long-term outlooks provided by the Food and
Agricultural Policy Research Institute (FAPRI) and USDA estimate that
the U.S. all milk price will not exceed $18 per cwt on an annual basis
until after 2022. These forecasts suggest no quick relief from the
current financial downturn, but rather a slow recovery that occurs over
the next 3 to 4 years barring some external unanticipated shock that
cuts milk supplies or creates new demand.
The new dairy policy provisions contained in the Agriculture
Improvement Act of 2018 (2018 Farm Bill) considerably strengthen the
dairy safety net relative to the Margin Protection Program (MPP)
provisions in the Agricultural Act of 2014 (2014 Farm Bill). The level
of coverage has increased, and the cost of program participation has
declined. It remains important to highlight the strengthened provisions
contained in the 2018 Farm Bill.
The current Dairy Margin Coverage (DMC) program is a milk price
less feed cost triggered program. It is meant to protect against low
milk prices and/or high feed costs which make up most of a producer's
production cost. The DMC margin is calculated on a national basis using
the most commonly used national prices for milk, corn, and alfalfa from
USDA/NASS and soybean meal from
Figure 2. Monthly Dairy Margin Coverage (DMC) Margin
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
USDA/AMS. This margin will not perfectly represent any particular dairy
farmer's milk price less feed cost margin but provides a national
average margin. The key issue regarding how well the DMC margin works
for an individual producer rests in the degree of correlation between
the individual producer's milk less feed cost margin and the DMC
margin. My experience has suggested that in many cases there will be a
high correlation between an individual's margin and the DMC margin.
The DMC program is a voluntary annual program that allows a dairy
farmer to pick a margin level to protect from between $4.00 and $9.50
per cwt with higher producer premiums as the margin level covered
increases. Producers can cover between 5 and 95 percent of their FSA-
calculated production history. The first 5 million pounds of production
history (tier 1) covered occurs at lower premiums relative to
production history covered above 5 million pounds. The premium costs at
alternative DMC margin levels are listed in table 1.
Tier 1 premiums at the higher coverage levels are much lower than
the original 2014 Farm Bill MPP premiums. For example, the original MPP
premium cost at $8.00 coverage was $0.475 per cwt, lowered in 2018 to
$0.142 per cwt under the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018. The 2018 Farm
Bill tier 1 premium is lowered further to $0.10 per cwt at the $8.00
level. Even the new $9.00 coverage option has a tier 1 premium that is
less than the premium offered for $8.00 coverage under the BBA18.
Producers can shave a further 25 percent off their premium costs if
they sign up for the entire 5 year period during the initial signup.
Table 1. DMC Premium Costs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Premiums for:
Coverage
-----------------------------------------------
Tier 1, <5 Mill. Lbs.
Tier 2, >5 Mill. Lbs.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$4.00
$0.0000
$0.0000
$4.50
$0.0025
$0.0025
$5.00
$0.0050
$0.0050
$5.50
$0.0300
$0.1000
$6.00
$0.0500
$0.3100
$6.50
$0.0700
$0.6500
$7.00
$0.0800
$1.1070
$7.50
$0.0900
$1.4130
$8.00
$0.1000
$1.8130
$8.50
$0.1050
N/A
$9.00
$0.1100
N/A
$9.50
$0.1500
N/A
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A few points are important relative to the strengthened safety net
provided by the DMC program. Over the 2000 to 2018 period, DMC coverage
at $9.50 would have resulted in a triggered payment approximately 70
percent of the time while the $8.00 maximum MPP coverage level
triggered a payment a little more than 40 percent of the time. DMC will
trigger payments more often than MPP for those producers who choose the
new higher coverage levels allowed under DMC.
Using the 2019 FAPRI baseline, I estimate that at the $9.50 DMC
coverage level payments will trigger 56 percent of the time with an
average payment of $1.68 per cwt over the 2019 to 2029 period.
The DMC program change that increases to 5 million pounds the
amount of production history covered at lower premiums and the change
to cover between 5 and 95 percent of a producer's production history
allows for a larger proportion of U.S. milk supplies to be covered at
the lower premium levels. Even most large dairy producers can cover
their first 5 million pounds of production history.
Using recently released 2017 agricultural census data, roughly \1/
3\ of current milk production could choose to be covered under the tier
1 DMC program premiums. Given expected growth in U.S. milk production
over time, the percentage of current milk production that could be
covered will decline about 1 to 1.5 percent per year.
It remains important to think through the added support provided
under the DMC program. An individual producer who chooses not to sign
up for coverage under DMC while the majority of other producers do
could find themselves at a serious financial disadvantage, as those
that participate receive significant payment from the program to help
offset low margin periods. Given the program is not triggered off of
current production but rather a producer's production history lessens
the likelihood that the DMC program is supply-inducing but it may stall
a reduction in milk production during tough financial periods.
It appears the DMC program will provide a needed boost to the dairy
safety net and builds on the new policy direction laid out in the MPP.
The combination of lower premiums, added flexibility in production
history covered and higher margin protection levels results in a much
more effective safety program than the dairy industry has had for some
time. Dairy producers, regardless of size, must examine how the DMC
program fits into their overall risk management plan.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the many
issues facing the dairy industry today. I look forward to answering
questions you have.
The Chairman. We thank you, Dr. Brown, for those very
important facts that explain the challenges that the industry
has felt in the past, and where we are today. And we look
forward to a good opportunity to go over any questions we have.
Our last witness is Mr. David Smith. He is the Executive
Director of the Pennsylvania Dairymen's Association. He has
been previously introduced by Congressman Thompson. He is an
active dairy farmer near Palmyra, Pennsylvania. Thank you for
joining us, Mr. Smith. Please proceed with your testimony.
STATEMENT OF DAVID R. SMITH, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, PENNSYLVANIA
DAIRYMEN'S ASSOCIATION, PALMYRA, PA
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Chairman Costa, Ranking Member
Rouzer, and Members of the House Committee on Agriculture, we
want to thank you for this opportunity, this awesome
opportunity to provide testimony today and hosting this
hearing.
Again, as you mentioned, I do have a farm operation and my
son, Joel, is the fifth generation on that farm operation right
now. In addition, I am the Executive Director of the
Pennsylvania Dairymen's Association, which is a supporting
organization of dairy and agriculture programs within
Pennsylvania.
I would like to begin by discussing two key components of
the 2018 Farm Bill, offer a brief overview of the state of
Pennsylvania's dairy economy, and then provide five key points
of recommendations for your consideration.
First of all, thanks to the Committee for the hard work
that went into the 2018 Farm Bill. That legislation contains
several key things that were supportive of the dairy industry.
First of all, as mentioned earlier, the DMC coverage is a
positive move for dairy farmers. Second, I wanted to add that
the farm bill included a very innovative and new Farm to Food
Bank Program, which is probably, as you hear very often, that
it is a good and very logical program coming out of Congress
that connects the dots between surplus ag products and the
nation's food banks. A comment that you probably hear often,
that it is good and logical.
I would go on to talk a little bit about the Pennsylvania
dairy industry. According to the USDA Census of Agriculture,
Pennsylvania lost 915 dairy farms between 2000 and 2017. I
would add that last year, we continued to undergo significant
consolidation and loss of farms and cows, and our herd numbers
dropped 30,000 head last year alone, with a 6.9 percent
decrease in milk production.
The financial stress of our dairy farmers is real, as you
have heard before. I personally have seen dairy farm families,
friends struggle with seismic change within their family
business model, with some selling their farms, businesses, and
others seeing the painful loss of their family farm.
To help address challenges currently faced by the dairy
industry in Pennsylvania, across the country, in my written
remarks I do have a number of things that have been mentioned
prior to this. The trade is hugely important to dairy--and I
won't go into details. It is in the written statement. I would
also mention that the continual review of the Federal Milk
Marketing Orders is needed to keep monitoring those things. In
addition, as you heard before, also a workable guestworker
program needed year-round is very necessary.
The two items that I want to address that I am very, very
passionate about, our dairy farmers have worked hard over
generations to build a wholesome, nutritious image that milk
now has. Dairy cow milk is unrivaled as a beverage of
nutrition, and in recent years, many upstart beverages have now
used milk in their labeling. These alternative beverages are
riding on the coattails of the affordable, wholesome nutrition
of cow's milk. I do believe that in general, consumers are
aware of the difference in nutrition, but I believe and am
concerned that many consumers still do not know the difference
in nutrition of real milk and the nut juices. They are being
misled by the virtue of the name milk in the label, and they
are not getting a comparable product to milk. Dairy farmers
across the country call for the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration to vigorously enforce food standards regarding
the labeling of dairy products and prohibit the mislabeling,
misleading, deceptive labeling of nut and plant-based beverages
as real milk.
Finally, our dairy farmers have been incredibly discouraged
by the lack of choice of whole milk in school lunches. I
believe that what started as an attempt to curb childhood
obesity has done the opposite. In 2010, Congress passed the
Healthy Hunger-Free Kids Act, which amended nutrition standards
in the School Lunch Program and mandated that flavored milk
must be fat free within the program. I believe that this has
led to significant changes in beverage consumption habits of
children and has resulted in a nine percent decline in milk
consumption in schools. This nine percent decline tells me that
an additional nine percent of our children in this country are
not getting the calcium and the nine essential vitamins of
milk. We have made progress in 2017, allowing the one percent
into our schools, but it is now time to draw on recent and new
science-based research on dietary fats. Without the option of
having a full-bodied beverage to satisfy an appetite, our
children are seeking sugar-based drinks.
I recently had a conversation with a mother of an
elementary-age child. She mentioned her child likes milk at
home, but does not like it at school, does not like the taste,
and does not drink it there. I believe that we have lost a
generation of milk drinkers.
I want to thank Congressmen Thompson and Peterson on their
leadership of H.R. 832, the Whole Milk for Healthy Kids Act of
2019.
In conclusion, my wife, Sharon, and I became first-time
grandparents last year, and while it is true what I have heard,
that grandparenting is truly the best job that one could have,
it is unfathomable to me that in a nation that prides itself in
allowing choices and freedoms, my grandchild could enter a
school and not even have the option of whole milk with her
lunch.
The Chairman. I think that is a good note to end it on.
Mr. Smith. I am humbled to be here. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]
Prepared Statement of David R. Smith, Executive Director, Pennsylvania
Dairymen's Association, Palmyra, PA
Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Rouzer, and Members of the House
Committee on Agriculture's Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign
Agriculture, thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony today,
and for hosting this hearing to learn more about the state of the dairy
economy.
My name is Dave Smith. My family and I operate a farm in central
Pennsylvania where we grow crops and raise young dairy animals on a
contract basis for a neighboring dairy farm. When I received a call
last week to invite me to join this hearing, my first thought was that
I needed to be on the farm to plant corn so that the livestock would
have feed next year, but I quickly recognized the importance of
providing testimony, and I am humbled to be here. My son, Joel is the
fifth generation on our farm, and I have an amazingly active 84 year
old farmer father who does not know the word retirement. In addition to
my farm involvement, I am the Executive Director of the Pennsylvania
Dairymen's Association. The Association is a nonprofit organization run
by a board of directors who are active dairy farmers. Our main focus is
to promote and sell dairy products at events and use the proceeds to
fund scholarships, youth, next generation dairy farmer programs, as
well as consumer education about agriculture. Within the last 3 years,
the Association has funded agriculture programs with over $1 million in
financial support.
I will begin by discussing two key components of the 2018 Federal
Farm Bill, offer a brief overview of the state of Pennsylvania's dairy
economy, and provide five key policy recommendations for your
consideration.
2018 Federal Farm Bill
I would first like to thank the Committee for its good work in
helping to shape, and ultimately pass, the 2018 Farm Bill. The
legislation contains several positive aspects for Pennsylvania's dairy
industry. First, it strengthens support for dairy farmers by offering
reduced premiums and new coverage levels for milk produced under the
new Dairy Margin Coverage program. This new program remedies the issue
with dairy farmers not having an adequate safety net to protect
themselves from devastating low milk prices. Expediting the
implementation of the Dairy Margin Coverage program is essential to
providing dairy farmers the support that they desperately need as we
continue to move through this low-price period.
Second, the farm bill included a new Farm to Food Bank program,
which is a good and logical government program which connects the dots
between surplus agriculture products and our nation's food banks. The
program was, in part, modeled after Pennsylvania's successful
Pennsylvania Agricultural Surplus System, which provides an efficient
mechanism for the agricultural industry to donate safe, wholesome food
products while being reimbursed for the costs involved in harvesting,
processing, packaging, and transportation. This program has provided an
additional outlet for Pennsylvania dairy farmers to be able to re-
direct their surplus milk to families struggling with hunger.
Pennsylvania's Dairy Economy
Pennsylvania's dairy industry continues to undergo significant
consolidation and loss of farms and cows. We continue to be the only
major dairy state with significant declines in both milk production and
cow numbers, with the state's dairy herd dropping 30,000 head from a
year ago and total milk production down 6.9 percent. Milk production
per cow is also down 25 pounds or 1.4 percent from a year ago. And
according to USDA's Milk Production Report, milk production across the
U.S. fell for the first time in 6 years, down 0.4 percent year-over-
year to 19.1 billion pounds. This was the first year-over-year decline
since March 2013. Milk production per cow was up 10 pounds or 0.5
percent to 2,044 pounds, while cow numbers fell 86,000 head year-over-
year to 9.344 million head.
According to the USDA Census of Agriculture that was recently
released, Pennsylvania lost 915 dairy farms and 4,718 cows between the
2012 and 2017 census. While the number of U.S. dairy cows and milk
production continue to increase, the latest census data shows a drop of
more than 10,000 farms with milk sales between 2012 and 2017. We have
the second largest number of family farms in the nation. Agriculture is
the number one industry of the Commonwealth with dairy as the leading
sector. Pennsylvania dairy farms are the backbone of our communities
and generate $14.7 billion in annual economic revenue.
The financial stress of our dairy farmers is real. I have
personally seen dairy farmer friends struggle through seismic change in
their family business model with some selling their business and others
seeing the painful loss of their family farm. The source of this pain
is multi-faceted, but one reason is supply and demand. Milk production
has outpaced demand, which ironically is a good situation for our
nation's consumers who reap the benefits of having an abundant and
affordable supply of dairy products. Our consumers may share a
different view if there were a shortage of milk, cheese, ice cream, or
milkshakes.
Policy Recommendations
To help address the challenges currently faced by the dairy
industry in Pennsylvania and across the country, I offer a few key
policy priorities for consideration.
1.
Ratifying the United States-Mexico-Trade Agreement, in particular
the dairy provisions, has become very important. A report
from the International Trade Commission shows that the
United States dairy sector could become the benefactor of
increased dairy trade of $227 million upon completion of
the agreement. I would be negligent to not emphasis the
importance of trade, as nearly 20% of our nations milk
production is moved outside of our country. I urge Congress
to move quickly to ratify USMCA.
2.
Pennsylvania dairy farmers need longer term, continual review of
the Federal Milk Marketing Orders and how milk is priced
across the country. The Northeast is within a half day's
drive to 60 percent of the U.S. population. Having an
adequate supply of milk is essential to provide both fresh
fluid milk and processed dairy products to this population.
The Northeast has a higher cost structure than other parts
of the country, given land costs, environmental restraints
and farm size. The Federal Order pricing system may need to
be reviewed to protect the farms in this region as larger,
lower cost farms continue to come online in other regions
of the country. I am sure the Members can agree that there
are great consumer benefits provided when access to locally
produced milk is available.
3.
The need for a guestworker program for year-round dairy
operations is at an all-time critical high. A dependable
workforce is essential to the health of our animals and the
survival of our family businesses. Much of the dairy
industry's essential workforce consists of immigrants. Not
because it is cheap labor; in fact, dairies pay very
competitive wages in an effort to attract and retain
employees, but because as hard as we try, we cannot find
local people who are willing and able to do the dirty,
manual work, often in inclement weather on a dairy farm.
Dairy farming is a 24/7, all-weather job. The immigrant
labor that dairies often employ is not taking jobs away
from U.S.-born citizens who want the jobs we have to offer.
And with the unemployment rate at an all-time low, it is
impossible to find people willing and able to do these
essential jobs. These are not part time pickers; they are
necessary year-round . . . yet there is no year-round visa
for them.
We see genuine desire in Congress to help dairies hire and
retain foreign born workers year around. However, attempts
to address this critical need seem to continually get
caught up in the political debate of border walls and other
volatile immigration reform, and die as a result. I would
encourage you to take a leadership position in defining our
dire worker shortage not as an immigration issue, bit
instead for what it is; an agricultural workforce issue. It
could be a great starting point for finding common ground
for the benefit of struggling dairy farmers across the
nation.
The last two items I would like to share are the ones which I am
most personally passionate.
4.
Our dairy farmers have worked hard over generations to build on
the wholesome, nutritious image that milk now has. Dairy
cow milk is unrivaled as a beverage of nutrition but in
recent years, many upstart beverages have now used milk in
their labeling. These alternative beverages are riding on
the coattails of the affordable wholesome nutrition of
cow's milk. I do believe that in general, consumers are
aware of the difference in nutrition between real milk and
the nut juices, but I am concerned that many consumers are
being led to believe, by virtue of the name milk on the
label, that they are getting a comparable product. Dairy
farmers call for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) to vigorously enforce food standards regarding the
labeling of dairy products and prohibit the misleading and
deceptive labeling of nut and plant-based beverages as
``real milk''. The [DAIRY PRIDE] Act would classify these
disguised products as ``misbranded'' and be subject to
enforcement. The bill requiring the FDA to finalize
enforcement of mislabeling is long overdue.
5.
Finally, our dairy farmers have been incredibly discouraged that
the choice of whole milk has, with the stroke of pen, been
eliminated from school lunches. I believe that what started
as an attempt curb childhood obesity, has done the
opposite. In 2010, Congress passed the Healthy, Hunger-Free
Kids Act which amended nutrition standards in the School
Lunch Program and mandated that flavored milk must be fat
free within the program. I believe that this led to
significant changes in beverage consumption habits of
children, and it resulted in a 9% decline in milk
consumption in schools between 2010 and 2012--not only
impacting students, but dairy farmers. Progress has been
made since then, when in May of 2017, the USDA announced a
rule that allowed schools to receive waivers for low-fat
flavored milk, rather than only fat-free. It is time to
draw on science-based research on dietary fats. Without the
option of having a full-bodied beverage to satisfy an
appetite, our children are seeking sugar-based drinks. I
recently had a conversation with the mother of an
elementary age child. She mentioned that her son likes milk
at home but doesn't like the taste of milk in school. I
believe we have lost a generation of milk drinkers.
We thank Congressman Thompson and Congressman Peterson for
their leadership on H.R. 832, the Whole Milk for Healthy
Kids Act of 2019, which would allow for unflavored and
flavored whole milk to be offered within the School Lunch
Program.
In conclusion, my wife and I became first time grandparents
last year and while it is true what I had heard, that
grandparenting truly is the best job one could have, it is
unfathomable to me that in a nation which prides itself in
allowing choices and freedoms, my grandchild could enter a
school and not even have the option to choose whole milk
with her lunch.
I am humbled and thankful to be here to address this esteemed
audience, and available now to answer any questions you may have.
The Chairman. We thank you. I did not mention to not exceed
the 5 minute rule, it is the reason that we have the lights
that are before you there. The chair is in a good mood this
morning and gave you the benefit of the doubt of exceeding more
than 1 minute of your 5 minutes. We appreciate that, Mr.
Thompson, you owe me 1 minute.
We are going to defer to our Chairman, Mr. Peterson, who is
being called for another meeting, for an opportunity to ask a
question that he wants to pursue before the Committee hearing
ends. Chairman Peterson?
Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just one question
for Sadie.
You have, I assume, looked at the new Dairy Margin Coverage
program, and have you made a decision on your farm about what
you are going to do?
Ms. Frericks. Yes, we have, Chairman Peterson. We will
enroll all 5 years at the $9.50 level, and we will opt to take
the 75 percent credit on the premiums that we paid for the
Margin Protection Program.
Mr. Peterson. Good. Well, you are on the ball. See, we have
been out educating our constituents and apparently they are
listening, so that is good.
Ms. Frericks. Yes.
Mr. Peterson. And Sadie and her family do a wonderful job
in representing their area, as you can see. Thanks for being
here today, and that is it. I will yield it back to you, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. All right, thank you, Chairman Peterson, for
your leadership of our House Agriculture Committee, and we
continue to look forward to working with you on this effort and
a host of other issues we are dealing with.
I want to remind Members that we will be recognized for
questioning in order of seniority for Members who were here at
the start of the hearing, and after that, Members will be
recognized in the order of their arrival. I have a list here,
and if you care to check where you are on that list, come up
and see me.
With that said, I will begin with my questioning.
Andrei, in your comments you talked about the importance of
trade for America's dairy industry and in California. A 2018
study estimated that current retaliatory tariffs on the U.S.
would decrease dairy exports possibly by as much as $415
million in 2019. What would you view as a successful resolution
currently to the ongoing dispute with China?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. Sure. Thank you for the question.
The Chinese market is an interesting market for us, because
prior to any of the current discussions around China and the
activity that we had that began in 2018, the United States was
not on a level playing field with our primary competitors in
New Zealand and Australia. They had the ability to send product
in at reduced tariffs for a significant amount of product in
the beginning of each year. That is putting us at a competitive
disadvantage. As time went on and the retaliatory tariffs came
in place, 25 percent tariff came on most dairy products and ten
percent on infant formula over and above the current tariffs,
which put us way out of line.
In the U.S. cheese market, we were a primary supplier to
pizzas in China. That business has virtually gone away. For
California dairies, we ship just under $100 million----
The Chairman. Who has taken that business?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. The business primarily has been taken by
New Zealand, Australia, the EU.
The Chairman. That is part of a problem with, and I regret
that we pulled out of the TPP. I have asked Secretary Perdue,
and Ambassador Lighthizer, whether or not he thinks at some
point there may be a reconsideration of becoming a part of that
effort. Do you think that would make a difference?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. Yes. To answer your initial question, what
would be a successful outcome? It is not to go back where we
were a year ago. It is getting a level playing field against
all of our competitors in China, so a more robust agreement.
But TPP, the Pacific Rim, is the most valuable part to the U.S.
dairy industry. It has the ability to lift prices in the United
States. TPP agreements, including countries like Japan, are
critically important to us.
The Chairman. Thank you. Dr. Brown, you recently released a
report that shows that implementing the higher standards of
nonfat solids across the country can increase milk prices and
offset some of the losses that the dairy industry has
experienced. We have had these standards in place in California
for many years. What are some of the other impacts that you
think that adopting these standards might have for the broader
U.S. dairy industry?
Dr. Brown. When you look at powder prices as a result of
adopting those higher fortification standards across the
country, we certainly will talk about higher nonfat dry prices.
Part of the longer term results of that is maybe some
additional milk supplies occurring in the country as we get
higher all milk prices. The results of that study would have
shown about 70
higher U.S. all milk prices in the first year,
but by the time we get 5 or 10 years down the road, more like
15
additional higher U.S. all milk prices as additional
supplies drive down things like cheese prices and butter prices
as well.
The Chairman. Yes, more nutrition, better tasting milk, it
seems like a no-brainer.
Dr. Brown. You certainly can talk about the demand effects
of that. I have looked for a lot of studies that said higher
solids milk creates new consumer demand, which is ultimately
the win here, if we can find these products that create new
demand.
The Chairman. It seems to me like we on this Subcommittee
ought to be looking to figure out ways in which we can move
that forward.
For all the witnesses that are here, those who have not
commented, if you care to, we all know about the crisis that
the industry has felt over the last 10 years, the loss of
dairies and why we are where we are today. Would any of you
care to opine in terms of what you would like to see the United
States Department of Agriculture focus on in implementing these
dairy provisions that we worked so hard on last year? Sadie?
Ms. Frericks. Thank you, Chairman Costa. I would just urge
the USDA to move forward with the implementation as quickly as
possible. I know that there was a June 17 rollout talked about
with possible payments in July, there are farmers for----
The Chairman. No, we need it now. We are trying to push
them.
Ms. Frericks. Right, for stressed farmers those 3 months
will be a stretch.
The Chairman. And it is hard to convince your bank that
relief is coming. Mr. McMahon?
Mr. McMahon. I completely agree with what Sadie said, that
we really need to push this through, probably more for the sake
of the medium and smaller sized farms. Personally, our industry
can be impacted more by the trade things that Andrei was
talking about.
The Chairman. I think the trade is very important.
Mr. McMahon. Yes.
The Chairman. And I think there is bipartisan concurrence
here. Mr. Smith, you wish to add anything?
Mr. Smith. No, I just concur with what they are saying
about trade. It is of huge significance to dairy.
The Chairman. Thank you. I will defer at this point to the
Ranking Member, Mr. Rouzer, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Chairman Costa.
I want to focus in on the trade aspect here real quick,
particularly USMCA, and in my simple mind, the way I do an
analysis of things is I take all the various moving parts and I
set aside everything and just make it static and just focus on
one particular item to try to determine the true impact.
Obviously, there are a lot of factors that drive price, a
ton of different factors that drive price. But if you took
everything today and you made it static and you just focused on
USMCA, the impact of USMCA on price, any one of you have any
real sense of the impact of that? Or conversely, let's say that
nothing happens. The price impact of that scenario, assuming
that you keep all other variables constant at the moment. Do
you follow me, anybody? Andrei?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. Maybe I will take a stab at it.
If we don't have a USMCA and we lose the Mexican business,
I believe the U.S. domestic price will drop substantially, as
much as five to ten percent. Why is that? Mexico takes up about
25 percent of the total exported product. Right now, there is a
25 percent tariff, retaliatory tariff on cheese. It slowed the
cheese business down. If this is signed and the retaliatory
tariffs are lifted, I believe it could give as much as a three
or five percent increase in milk prices.
The reason USMCA is important, for another reason, is
because of the Canadian equation. We would have liked to have
had more access, but there has been predatory pricing with
their Class VII arrangement where they have gone on the world
market and undercut prices on skim milk powder, which does have
an effect on the U.S. Putting some controls around the Class
VII pricing should also give a lift to our prices. I believe a
signing of that is good for the industry. Not having it will be
very bad for the industry.
Mr. Rouzer. Yes, of course, there are a number of us that
push very, very hard--myself included--and push the
Administration to really focus in on getting rid of the Class
VI and Class VII, as it is very manipulative. Just how
manipulative are those two programs the Canadians have?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. Do you want me to take a stab at it? You
are asking kind of a follow up. How manipulative?
What happens is they had a shortage of milk fat in Canada.
They found a way to expand the milk fat, but milk can be
divided into pieces. And when you take the milk and the cream
off, you have nonfat dry milk left. In the United States, we
call it nonfat dry milk. In the world market, you standardize
it to Codex standards, standardized protein levels in that, and
you call it skim milk powder. They have taken skim milk powder
and here they have one of the highest prices in the world on
milk, and they are selling their skim milk powder at one of the
lowest prices in the world, which doesn't make any sense at
all. They are finding a way basically to dump the unneeded
parts of the product up in Canada, which has disrupted the
world marketplace.
Now, albeit small, I would call it more of an irritant than
a crisis, but it is a problem that needs to be addressed.
Mr. Rouzer. I want to move on to the immigration issue real
quick, since there is 1 minute 40 seconds left.
A number of you, I think every single one of you, mentioned
access to labor as being a critical, critical issue for you. If
you can talk about that and elaborate on that, particularly
specific examples. Just how hard it is to find a legal,
reliable labor source?
Mr. McMahon. Well, Ranking Member, my opening statement
about the W-2s that my wife was putting out there averaging 39
a year for ten full-time positions, it is that difficult. My
average worker on my farm is making $39,000 a year, plus a
three-bedroom house, plus all utilities, and if they are a
migrant worker, they get free transportation to wherever they
need to go as well. It is not a matter of how much we are
paying, a part of it is demographics. I am one of ten children,
Irish Catholic birth control, and I personally have three
children, and my brother and partner has two. Demographically,
we don't have these big farm families anymore, and
subsequently, as we move further and further away from
production agriculture, which really only about one percent of
the population is in that now, you don't have those families
and those cousins and like that that can come and work on the
farms. It is lost to them.
Mr. Rouzer. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Rouzer. My time has expired.
The Chairman. Your time has expired, but we thank you.
Actually, you gave us a little time. Good for you. Good for us.
Our next Member is the gentleman from New York, Congressman
Brindisi.
Mr. Brindisi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McMahon, I do want to pick up a little bit on that
topic we were just discussing. Although immigration isn't the
jurisdiction of this Committee, we here on the Agriculture
Committee are talking to farmers on a daily basis and hearing
about their workforce needs all the time. What would an ideal
guestworker program look like? Talking to farmers, the H-2A
Program is pretty cumbersome. It doesn't work for dairy because
it is not year-round. What would an ideal program look like for
dairy farmers?
Mr. McMahon. Well quickly, Mr. Brindisi, I would start by
allowing both producers and workers to come forward without
fear of punishment. At that point, workers that are here
already should be vetted, and anybody who doesn't make the
grade or has a felony or whatever in their background shouldn't
be here. Once they are vetted, a fine or fee, whatever you
would like to call it, could be assessed for that worker, which
employers would gladly pay. And then beyond that, it needs to
be set up so that agriculture could be the only industry that
could request new workers to come in. At that point, if they
are vetted by the consulate in their country of origin, they
should be issued a card of some kind. I know it has been called
the blue card, whatever. And then, that would allow them legal
work in this country for, say, 3 years, and then automatically
roll over for 3 more.
I would think that after, say, 6 years, perhaps those
workers could be allowed to move into a different industry, but
within those first 6 years, they could move farm to farm, but
not out of agriculture. And farmers would be glad, like myself,
to have e-verify and a swipe machine, as long as we had these
cards for these people. They should be allowed to travel back
and forth to their country of origin. One of our worker's
father died in February and there wasn't a thing he could do
about it. He couldn't go home and bury his dad. That is sad.
Beyond that, I think that if someone in farming needed
another worker, that they would have to show cause. They would
have to do diligence locally to try to find labor locally and
prove that they did before they could request a worker from
another country, and at that point, someone could be vetted by
the consulate and allowed to come in and take that spot.
I just think that it doesn't need to be as difficult as
what we have heard over the years. I have been working on this
since 2000, and I sure would like to see it come to fruition.
Mr. Brindisi. I think we all would.
Just real quick, I want to ask a question on the Dairy
Margin Coverage signup. I know we are approaching June 17, and
USDA has traditionally included multiple forms of contact, like
postcards, forums, and broad coordination with the dairy
industry. Given the challenges that dairy producers have faced
for years now, it is important that this outreach captures all
producers, not just those who signed up for the old program.
This really is open to any witness. In your opinion, are
dairy farmers across the country, are they aware of this new
Dairy Margin Coverage program and how it could potentially help
them? Are they signing up for it? Sadie?
Ms. Frericks. Mr. Brindisi, the awareness that the program
exists is growing. Full understanding of how the program will
factor into that farm's business plan is not quite where it
should be on all farms yet.
Mr. Brindisi. Okay. What could we do to get the word out
there? What can USDA do? Do you think forums around the
country, or what can we do to make sure that the word is
getting out there so farmers are taking advantage of it?
Ms. Frericks. Once the Farm Service Agency understands how
the signup process will work, the Farm Service Agency has done
a good job in the past of providing education and consultation
for farmers. Once the Farm Service Agency has the tools in
their hand to continue the outreach process, that will help
some of those farmers that are still making those decisions
about their signup level.
Mr. Brindisi. Okay. Any other suggestions?
Mr. McMahon. I agree with Sadie on that, Mr. Brindisi,
because FSA is very good about getting things out in the
newsletter just as soon as they have a handle on what it is
they could do.
The Chairman. I think Andrei had a comment.
Mr. Mikhalevsky. I was just going to make a comment. Most
of the big cooperatives in the United States have programs to
try to make sure everyone is educated, because this is a
wonderful opportunity. And I don't want to take anything away
from the program, because we are highly enthusiastic of what
happened in the farm bill and highly enthusiastic of what
happened with the Revenue Protection Program. But the average
cow sized dairy in California is 1,400 cows, and a 5 million
pound cap, while it was great to move 4 to 5 million pounds,
only covers a 200 cow dairy, which means most of the dairies in
California only have coverage on about \1/7\ of their total
production.
I am highly enthusiastic. I don't want to say we are being
critical, but it would really be nice maybe at some point to be
able to open that up a little bit farther for the larger
dairies. Right now, it is very good for the smaller and medium-
sized dairies.
Mr. Brindisi. Thank you.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman from New York, and one
of the areas that the Subcommittee is going to work on, I hope
aggressively with the Department of Agriculture is to make sure
that dairymen and -women across the country get all the options
that are available under the new farm bill. And so that they
are well-informed, we talked about what the Farm Service
Agency, the FSA offices around the country, that they make sure
that they have all the information at hand available to brief
the dairymen in their area. And I would suggest to Members, one
of the things that I am doing is holding a workshop here in the
next 6 weeks, inviting all the dairies in my area to come and
meet with the FSA and make sure that they understand what all
their options are, not only with the 5 million pound cap, but
the insurance program beyond and how that might help the larger
dairies as well.
So, with that said, our next Member is the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Thank you to you and
the Ranking Member for hosting this. We know that as we worked
on the last farm bill and we looked at the state of the
national economy, and specifically in rural America, farm
income decline was significant over the past 6 years. A lot of
that was due to two commodities: one that we are not talking
about today, cotton, but the other one we are talking about
today and I am very appreciative of that, is dairy. And I do
think in the 2014 Farm Bill we had a safety net program. When
it came out of the Committee, it was pretty good. It would have
done the job. Unfortunately, it got meddled with by other parts
of this body outside of the Agriculture Committee. And they
changed that program to make it fit into their financial needs,
and quite frankly, it failed. I am very appreciative of Ranking
Member Conaway and his role as Chairman to defend the product
of this body, this Committee, with the Dairy Margin Coverage
program when it came out of this Committee this time around. I
have a tremendous amount of confidence.
Mr. Smith, in your testimony you made reference to the
improved Dairy Margin Coverage program in the farm bill. I want
to follow up with you specifically on Pennsylvania. What is
your sense of how familiar Pennsylvania producers are with the
new program? Is there a problem with the bad experience they
had from the 2014 version, and is there anything that may be
discouraging them from signing up with this new and improved
and what I think will be an effective tool? Is there anything
you think we should be doing to help further inform producers?
Mr. Smith. The answer to your question, yes, I do believe
that the 2014 Farm Bill and that coverage put a damper on
things, and it was not successful to our Pennsylvania farmers.
And I don't think, going forward, it is more difficult to
convince them that the next program is beneficial for them. It
is an uphill battle to educate the dairy farmers there of a
better product.
We had some suggestions earlier here about educating. It is
going to be a continual process to try to pull more people into
that understanding of a better product.
Mr. Thompson. I would like to spend about 35 percent of my
time on the safety net issue, but I like to spend, when it
comes to dairy, 65 percent of my time on the market. Because,
until we get around to this, I want the safety net to be
effective, but I just don't want us to need the safety net.
And so, one of the things that we were successful and was
mentioned, not in this Committee, but unfortunately in the
Education and Labor Committee back in 2010, there was a change
of the school nutrition standards, and we basically demonized
milk fat. And as Mr. Smith said, we did lose an entire
generation of milk drinkers. Some of them are parents today.
They didn't have a great milk experience then and I am very
appreciative that Secretary Perdue has granted waivers for
schools to offer one percent flavored varieties.
I was at an incredible vocational agriculture career day in
one of my schools. They actually had nine other schools come
in. It was pretty cool, actually, to see these kids learn about
opportunities in agriculture, and I had lunch with them. And I
was very pleased to sit down and have a great glass of one
percent chocolate milk.
We are, as was said, proud to be working with Chairman
Peterson with the Whole Milk for Healthy Kids Act to allow
resumption of really the nutrition that kids need, but also, to
have them have a good milk experience. I am seeing whole milk
sales up. That is all anecdotal. Trying to work with USDA so we
can track that a little closer, as a result of a new generation
of milk drinkers.
I just wanted to weigh in and see what your thoughts were
in terms of that, how important it is. And I know that won't be
through this Committee. It is another committee, Education and
Labor, of restoring whole milk options. Not mandating it, but
options in our school meals. Sadie?
Ms. Frericks. Congressman Thompson, I applaud the efforts
to return whole milk to schools, because we all know that whole
milk tastes leagues better than its skim version.
However, to return whole milk to schools, we will also need
to increase calorie limits in the school lunch so that school
lunch program coordinators can include that option for students
without being penalized in their calorie counts.
Mr. Thompson. Right. To restore, or the other thing is to
exempt beverages. Nothing unreasonable about that as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. We pursue this as an
effort of the Subcommittee, and I think we do it on the basis
of nutrition. I think that is the key.
The next Member is the gentlewoman from Minnesota,
Congresswoman Craig, the land of lakes and milk, right?
Mrs. Craig. That is exactly right.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit a statement for the
record first on behalf of the National Farmers Union President,
Roger Johnson, please.
The Chairman. Certainly, without objection, we will deem
the statement adopted for the record.
[The document referred to is located on p. 53.]
Mrs. Craig. Thank you, sir, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to make it very clear to my colleagues this
morning that when it comes to the dairy farmers in my district,
we are talking about families who have known no other life than
dairy farming their entire lives.
In my district, in Wabasha and in Goodhue County, we have
lost roughly 15 percent of our dairy farmers since 2012. Our
family dairy farmers are part of the central fabric of greater
Minnesota. These family farmers aren't asking for much. They
just want a fair shot to make enough money to raise a family
and pass that farm on to the next generation. They are
resilient and hardworking people, but the last year has become
too much for many of these families.
Last week during the in-district work period, I had the
opportunity to host a rural mental health listening session in
my district. I heard from dairy farmers like Deborah Mills from
Lake City, Minnesota, about the mental stress of dairy farming.
She shared that: ``The economic reality of stagnant milk
prices, rising costs, and disappearing profit margins have
taken a toll on farmers' mental health.''
The state of the dairy economy is truly heartbreaking right
now. However, I am especially thankful for the promise that the
2018 Farm Bill gives many of our small dairy farmers.
I want to start my question with Ms. Frericks from
Minnesota. As you may know, the median income of dairy farms
surveyed in Minnesota dropped by \2/3\ last year, from $43,000
to less than $15,000. You mentioned in your testimony that last
year, you pursued a line of credit for the first time to
continue paying your vendors. Can you describe the credit
conditions in your area, particularly for small dairy farms,
and who do you turn to for advice when it comes to credit and
financing?
Ms. Frericks. Thank you, Congresswoman Craig.
I will answer the second part of your question first. We
work very closely with our Farm Business Management instructor,
which is a program in Minnesota that helps farmers become
better business managers. This individual helps us analyze each
enterprise on our farm for profitability and areas of
improvement. We met with him first to establish our cash flow
for the year, and determine where there might be some gaps and
some need for credit. Then we proceed with those numbers to our
lenders at either the Farm Service Agency or our local credit
union.
Our relationship with our lender is still in a positive
place. This is the first year that we have had to look for
additional credit. I have heard that it is not as promising for
farms that are rolling into their second, third, or fourth year
of needing additional credit. I can't speak to what those farms
are hearing for answers, but I just know that it is not as good
as it could be.
Mrs. Craig. Thank you.
I just want to follow up to you, Ms. Frericks, as well.
When we talk about the Dairy Revenue Protection, which is
obviously a relatively new private insurance product approved
by USDA, why did you decide to use this product, and how do you
expect it to impact your farm specifically?
Ms. Frericks. Sure, thank you. We decided to use this
product because it offers a risk management tool that sets a
floor for our price. I certainly hope that we don't use it and
we don't receive an indemnity, because that means that prices
have improved or market access has allowed prices to improve.
But it gives us a position of security in the event of a
catastrophic market failure. You know, when we started farming,
they told us that we would never see $9 milk again. They
promised us that sitting at the table, that you could build
your cash flow based on $12 milk. And 2 years later, we found
$9 milk. If we had a price floor program like this in place at
that time, we could have stemmed the loss considerably.
Mrs. Craig. Thank you.
And finally, I just want to talk about trade for 1 second.
Mr. Mikhalevsky, an industry study found that retaliatory
tariffs issued by China and Mexico on dairy products will
decrease farm revenues by about $16.6 billion and endanger
8,200 U.S. jobs over the next 5 years unless they are ended.
What are the long-term impacts if these retaliatory tariffs
don't end for our farmers?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. The first is we will see a drop in milk
prices, and if you see a drop in milk prices, it just
exacerbates the issue that we have on farm. You know, there
were two things that affected milk prices last year. One was
the EU interfering with the dairy industry with the
intervention stocks. They built up way too much product and it
took 2 or 3 years and expanded this period of time that we had
very low prices. Once those things moved out, which was last
year, at extraordinarily low prices, the retaliatory tariffs
kicked in and it has just been a double effect on the dairy
farms.
We absolutely, because of where we are today--well, if you
think about it, if we didn't have the exports, 15 percent of
the milk would come back into the United States and it would be
devastating to our industry. We would lose a significant number
of smaller farms, maybe not necessarily the larger ones. It
would be disastrous. Trade is critically important. It is the
single biggest issue right now for the dairy industry and dairy
pricing.
Mrs. Craig. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. We thank the gentlewoman, and we thank Andrei
for your response.
Our next Member is Congresswoman Hartzler from the great
State of Missouri. The ``Show Me State,'' right?
Mrs. Hartzler. That is right. That is right. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman, and our Committee is fortunate to have
someone who has a family history in the dairy industry helping
to lead this charge. I thank all the witnesses here today, and
I want to start off on the tail of what my colleague just
shared about the heartache of so many dairy farmers having to
sell out. Even last year, our close family friend who we had
grown up with, they had a three-generation dairy farm there in
Cass County, and they sold out. And hopefully with the passage
of the farm bill and the new program that we have put in place,
that won't happen and we can reverse that trend and the farmers
can get help.
I wanted to start with Dr. Brown. Thank you again for being
here. Thanks for your expertise. Could you just say, what do
you believe is the most important message to get out to dairy
farmers about the changes in the dairy title in the 2018 Farm
Bill?
Dr. Brown. The most important thing is to remind them it is
not the 2014 Farm Bill. It is not the Margin Protection
Program, that this is a new program. The fact that we are going
to talk about the ability to now sign up for $9.50, where under
the 2014 Farm Bill we were capped at $8, that $1.50 over the
last 18 years increases the probability of a payment by about
30 percent. About 40 percent of the time if you would have
taken $8 MPP coverage, you would have gotten a payment. If you
take $9.50 now over that same period, you would have gotten a
payment about 70 percent of the time. We have to really make
sure we send home the message that this program is different
than MPP, and by the way, it is less expensive for you as well.
Premium costs are much lower.
Mrs. Hartzler. What is the University of Missouri extension
doing to help get the word out about this? We have talked about
the important role of the FSA. I wondered there at the
University, as well as across the country, what are all of you
doing to try to help get the word out?
Dr. Brown. When you look at all the land-grants across the
United States, we are all trying to work together with FSA and
that education. Sometimes, FSA can talk to producers about the
mechanics of how the program works. Maybe we can go one step
further as land-grant institutions to say here are some of the
potential outcomes that you get. We work in combination. We
have already reached out in Missouri to our Missouri FSA office
to make certain that we do meetings together with them as we
try to educate on DMC.
Mrs. Hartzler. Sure, and I really related to what you were
sharing, Mr. Smith, about the school lunches. I am a former
home economics teacher myself, and I am very involved in
encouraging the new Dietary Guidelines that are being made at
the USDA, that they do it based on science, based on fact, and
I am hopeful that under the new process, we are going to have
some Guidelines that will be very helpful to us.
I was wondering what your industry is doing in this
process? Are you weighing in with USDA and keeping a close eye
on the Dietary Guidelines as they are being developed?
Mr. Smith. I think the opportunity for input to USDA on
those Dietary Guidelines is there. It is ongoing communication,
and everybody in the industry needs to have that communication
with USDA, and that is very important.
But thank you for understanding that there is new
information on dietary needs, and good fat versus bad fat.
Mrs. Hartzler. Sure. Well, I just want to go on the record
and let everybody know, my beverage of choice is milk and I
love milk. And as a former teacher, it is important that our
kids have the opportunity to drink milk and to grow up with it.
I know when I was teaching several years ago, the dairy
industry was very involved in providing classrooms with posters
of baseball players that had the milk thing there, and some
classroom supplies for the elementary teachers. I think that is
very important. Are you still involved in trying to work with
teachers and educate students about the benefits of milk?
Mr. Smith. Well, absolutely. The dairy industry in the
United States has a mandatory check off program that our dairy
farmers contribute money to promotion programs, and what you
mentioned is part of that promotion throughout the country,
educating young consumers, school-age children, about the
benefits of milk. It is ongoing. It is a challenge of a limited
number of dollars to reach a huge number of individuals.
Mrs. Hartzler. Sure. My final quick question, back to Dr.
Brown. What are the three key issues that you are watching to
gauge where milk prices are headed for the remainder of this
year?
Dr. Brown. Number one is just what is going to happen to
aggregate milk supplies. We are actually down for the first
time in several months. That could really be positive for the
second half of this year. And then the trade side is most
important, the growth that we need there for higher prices.
Those are really the two keys, for me, as we look through the
remainder of 2019.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you very much. I yield back.
The Chairman. All right. I thank the gentlewoman. Our next
Member is the gentleman from California whose district and mine
border one another, and one of our rising stars in California,
represents a lot of milk country, Congressman Josh Harder.
Mr. Harder. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you so much
to all our witnesses for joining us to discuss some of the real
challenges that I see facing our dairy industry.
As the Chairman said, I represent the California Central
Valley, and if you have ever seen those happy cows come from
California, that is us. All of them in my district, none of
them in the Chairman's. And obviously, we have a real history
of the dairy industry, stretching back generations. It is one
of the most critical keys to agriculture and to jobs. In my
district alone, we have about 7,000 people that are directly
employed by the dairy industry, and it contributes about $6
billion every year to our economy. But obviously, the indirect
effects are even bigger. And no matter what job you hold in the
Central Valley, whether or not you are working at a
supermarket, working at a hospital, how the dairy industry is
doing affects everyone.
And I hear again and again how much tougher things are
going. We have lost about 600 dairy operations just in the last
10 years alone in California. In my district, we have seen
about 90 dairy operations close in Stanislaus County and San
Joaquin, and when I talked to our dairy farmers, I hear a lot
of different perspectives on this. I was talking to one of our
prominent farmers, a guy by the name of Ray Souza from
Stanislaus County the other day, and he told me that the
sustained period of low prices and negative margins is
something he has never seen. It is not only the depth of the
dairy depression, but also the length of the period. And that
is a sentiment that I hear underscored a lot. It is not just
the fact that the price of milk has dropped by \1/3\ in the
last 5 years, it is how long this is going on.
Mr. Mikhalevsky, I would really love to hear from you. What
do you see as the drivers behind a slow recovery in domestic
prices?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. Sure, it is pretty simple, and I had
mentioned it earlier. The EU intervention stocks played havoc
on the world market, and then trade has created an issue and
slowed it down.
But I would like to just build on a point, that Dr. Brown
mentioned. He was talking about the worldwide supply of milk,
and when the intervention stocks were going on in Europe, the
Europeans continued to produce when market signals told them
they shouldn't be producing. The United States, I don't
believe, has had a couple of months with a negative supply
growth over the last couple of years. Market signals are not
going back to the farmers as they should so that we can get the
supply demand in balance.
Now, the nice part of that is the intervention stocks are
gone and the Europeans have actually seen a downturn. To Dr.
Scott's point, in March it was the first time we have seen a
contraction in U.S. milk supply by \4/10\ percent in quite some
time.
The other thing, which is a big thing to the world market,
is the New Zealanders, while they are in their off season
because of Southern Hemisphere and Northern Hemisphere issues,
are down about six percent year on year end growth. Which means
the worldwide supply is drying up and the demand is not. If you
look at powder prices, they have escalated three to five
percent in the last week. Fat prices are really good. And if we
could eliminate the tariffs on cheese, we would see a recovery
in the markets.
But to specifically answer your question, it is milk
supply, it is supply demand, and the intervention stocks and
trade. That is kind of it in a nutshell.
Mr. Harder. Yes.
Mr. Mikhalevsky. Thank you for the question.
Mr. Harder. Thank you.
One of the other things that I hear a lot when I talk to
our local dairymen is the challenges faced by the labor
shortage. And California as a whole, I mean, everywhere in
agriculture, \2/3\ of our farmers have a labor shortage. But it
feels especially acute with our dairy industry, given some of
the needs of a year-round labor force and the challenges faced
by not being included in the H-2A Program and others. And I
hear again and again that it is impossible to maintain a
reliable workforce. And I also hear that it is not about cost.
It is actually about making sure that we actually have
availability of the labor force. I know this is more on the
Ways and Means Committee than the Agriculture Committee, but
obviously, it is something that I work on very closely.
Mr. Mikhalevsky, I would love to go again for the
California perspective. What are you hearing? Are you hearing
the same thing, and what do you actually think we need to do to
get our labor shortage addressed?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. Yes, let me just build on some of the
earlier points rather than repeat what was said, in the
interest of time. I agree with the earlier points. A question
was asked about what we would like to see in immigration, and
this has a direct effect on California. The one thing that
wasn't mentioned was the Touch Back Program, which is
occasionally mentioned. You know, milking cows has been pointed
out as a 7 day a week, 24 hour day, 365. It is really hard to
send people home for 2 weeks, 3 weeks, touch back, issues
coming back in.
So, specific to California, where almost 100 percent of our
labor on farm is immigration labor, Touch Back Programs are
difficult. E-verify is okay if you have an agricultural
guestworker program in advance. But this is a massive issue for
California for our dairy farmers.
Mr. Harder. Thank you. Thank you. Time to get to some
solutions.
The Chairman. Okay. We thank the gentleman and the next
Member is Congressman Hagedorn, again, from the land of lakes
and milk. Mr. Hagedorn?
Mr. Hagedorn. Don't forget hogs. We have a lot of hogs in
our district, too.
It is nice to be here, Mr. Chairman. Thank you and Ranking
Member Rouzer.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Hagedorn. Witnesses, thanks very much, and a special
thanks to Ms. Frericks for being here from Minnesota and doing
what you can for generational farming.
I want to associate myself with Chairman Peterson's remarks
at the beginning, that how important it is to keep our
generational farmers in business when times are tough. Just
last week, I was at a Farmers for Free Trade get together just
south of New Ulm, Minnesota, a smaller dairy farm run by the
Hoffman's. And Mr. Hoffman, Steve, in very emotional terms
discussed how he and his son and his wife had to consider maybe
leaving the business rather than expanding it. And you know, it
is tough times and we get it. It has been 5 or 6 tough years,
especially for dairy farmers. Times when the milk prices were
low and somehow production went up, and it didn't seem to make
sense, but I know the work of the Committee and others to try
to right that program and to make things better, moving
forward, is very important.
There are a number of ways that we in bipartisan fashion
can work together in order to help all of our farmers, and one
of the those would be to get together. This Committee,
especially the way it works in bipartisan ways, should take the
lead in this Congress to make sure that everyone knows that we
support the new agreement with Mexico and Canada. Bringing
certainty to the marketplace and expanding opportunities for
our farmers would be very, very critical, and as a Committee,
if we can get together and demonstrate that type of
bipartisanship, that would go a long ways. And making sure that
when the President submits that agreement to Congress, that it
gets a fair vote within 90 days. We need that.
I also think that there are ways that we can look at good
government. You know, they always say we don't want farmers
going out of business for any reason, other than it is just
what they want to do. We don't want it because of bad
government. Because when our generational farmers sell out,
they sell out to bigger operators. Bigger operators are not bad
folks, but it means fewer people working and living on our
land, fewer people living in our rural communities, purchasing
things on Main Street, going to our schools. It puts enormous
pressure on rural America.
Today, we should be honest. One of the reasons that things
are going as well as they are--and I know times are tough--it
is because some of those burdensome regulations like Waters of
the United States has been sidestepped to this point. That
would be devastating for dairy and others if we had onerous
regulations. Obamacare has been very tough on farmers. I speak
with farmers all the time that are paying $20,000 and $30,000 a
year for premiums with deductibles so high, the underlying
insurance is virtually worthless. And they talk about maybe
leaving the farm, having somebody go into town for a job,
almost 99 percent of the time it is because of health insurance
that they are going to do that, because of those burdensome
costs.
I agree with the Chairman, the Ranking Member, and others
who said that we need a work program all year round for dairy.
They haven't had the same deal as other parts of agriculture,
but we need to be honest about it, that if we, in bipartisan
fashion, don't support secure borders, what are the chances
that we are going to get that through? And on top of that, any
work program that we have will be circumvented. It will be
undermined.
We have to get together in a number of ways in order to
make sure that we stand firm for these commonsense proposals
and we do it as Republicans and Democrats.
I would just like to say thank you for what you do. It is
hard work. I grew up on a farm near Truman, Minnesota. My dad
was a grain and livestock farmer. We had hogs. And I used to
ask him, ``Dad, why do we have hogs instead of cows like some
of our neighbors?'' And he said, ``Jimmy, I like to take a
vacation.'' He said if you are a dairy farmer, you are married
to those cows and it is all day, every day. And so, I
appreciate it. And what you do is so critically important for
our country. We have an abundant, reliable, safe, affordable
food supply. Every American wakes up every day and knows when
they go to the grocery store, there are going to be those
choices, diverse choices at an affordable cost. And because of
that, we are the envy of the world.
So, with that, I thank you for your testimony, and Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman for his comments, and
our next Member is a gentleman who I have known for many years,
and his family. He represents one of the wonderful parts of
California, the Central Coast, Congressman Jimmy Panetta.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate this
hearing and appreciate this opportunity. I want to thank the
witnesses for their time being here, as well as their
preparation, which I am sure, especially based on your very
professional testimony, all five of you. I know there was a lot
of time spent in that preparation, so thank you for that.
I come from the Central Coast of California, otherwise
known as the salad bowl of the world. A lot of fresh fruits and
vegetables, and of course, that means that we don't rely on
machines for our harvesting and our produce. We rely on people,
and therefore, we have the same issues that you do as well. And
I do not have much dairy. I admit that. I have one dairy farm,
Skoke Dairy Farms out there in Salinas area. But like I said,
we have the same issues. There is no doubt about it, especially
when it comes to immigration, and especially when it comes to
trade. Fortunately, I am on the Agriculture Committee; I am on
the Ways and Means Committee, so I get to delve into both those
topics.
But obviously, being from the Central Coast and being a
grandson of immigrants, immigration is very important to us.
And Mr. McMahon, I really appreciate the list of, I guess,
areas that you went through in regards to what an ideal worker
program would look like.
But I guess I have to also ask you about one other thing
that I didn't hear from you. Now, I don't want any of you to
answer this, but I am sure you know many dairy farmers that
have many employees that probably are undocumented, okay. Yet,
those same employees probably worked for those employers for a
very, very long time. And as an original author of the Blue
Card Bill, as it is known as, it provides basically a way for
those employees who have worked in ag and who will continue to
work in ag to get legal, permanent residence.
So, Mr. McMahon, I have to ask you about that aspect of the
worker program. People who have been in agriculture who want to
stay in agriculture. What about providing them with legal
permanent residence as well?
Mr. McMahon. Thanks for the question, Congressman.
Two different occasions I went down to Mexico and stayed at
the village where my crew is from, and was able to experience
the changes in their lives down there as a result of their
working for me. And I can tell you that over the years, because
we started January 1, 2000, with our Mexican workers, that it
is, I would dare say, 75 to 80 percent of them don't want to
stay here. I have a PowerPoint presentation I have done all
over the Northeast about my experiences going down there,
seeing the homes they have built, seeing the money they have
invested in their own businesses, seeing the investments they
have made in their own schools to make their lives better down
there.
When you hear about how they all want to stay here forever,
I have a few that do, and that after so many years of being
here, perhaps they should be allowed to move to a green card or
something like that. I have no issue with that.
Mr. Panetta. Okay. Basically you mentioned like 6 years or
something was the number you threw out there.
Mr. McMahon. Right.
Mr. Panetta. And that is a full-time employee working all
those years. Wouldn't you be in agreement with maybe providing
them with that sort of opportunity to have legal permanent
residence, if you had some people who were staying here and
continued to be here? As you know, those are the best kind of
employees.
Mr. McMahon. Oh, absolutely. I have a couple of guys I
would nail their feet to the ground if I could.
Mr. Panetta. Exactly, exactly. And one of those nails would
be an opportunity for legal permanent residency.
Mr. McMahon. Absolutely.
Mr. Panetta. Great. Thank you very much.
In regards to the USMCA, obviously, that for agriculture it
keeps it the same for the most part. I know it definitely
benefits many aspects of dairy.
But let's say for some reason, you are seeing the
challenges that we are facing right now in Congress with the
USMCA. Let's say for some reason we don't get an agreement on
that. There are some in the Administration that have mentioned
basically withdrawing from NAFTA.
Mr. Mikhalevsky, would you choose to withdraw from NAFTA if
we didn't get USMCA?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. Andrei is a lot easier for all of you. It
is a tough last name.
Mr. Panetta. Mikhalevsky?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. It is like make a left turn. Mikhalevsky
if you run it all together.
Mr. Panetta. Got it.
Mr. Mikhalevsky. To be perfectly honest, I mean, this is my
opinion, maybe not of my own company. Withdrawing from NAFTA
would be disastrous for dairy. Dairy was in a unique position.
I understand there are a lot of other industries and a lot of
other things involved with USMCA. But when it comes specific to
dairy, without Mexico, we will have a precipitous drop in milk
prices in the United States and our dairy farmers will have
more dairy farms go out of business. It is not even a
possibility; it is a reality, I believe, and most of the other
members of the panel would agree with that.
Mr. Panetta. Understood. Thank you, and thanks to all of
you, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I want to thank Congressman Panetta,
especially for bringing up that last question. It was one that
I wanted to follow up, and Andrei, I think that it is important
to underline that frankly, walking away from NAFTA or USMCA,
whatever we want to call it, would be a disaster in so many
different ways. It counts for 16 percent of America's trade
between Mexico and Canada, which combined accounts for more
trade than the next eight countries we trade with, besides
being our neighbors and our friends.
With that said, we have the gentleman from Nebraska, Mr.
Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. I appreciate the Chairman and I
appreciate being on this Committee. Thank you for sharing your
perspectives.
I was raised on a beef farm, so I appreciate learning your
perspective, because dairy is such an important part of our
nation, and it also is a very important part of Nebraska's
economy as well.
I would say that one of the top issues for Nebraska is
passing the USMCA, and every change that was made to USMCA was
made to our nation's advantage to include dairy. We need to get
that passed.
I appreciate Mr. Mikhalevsky for your strong support, but I
want to see if the other panelists here agree. USMCA, should it
be a top priority for this Congress to pass?
Ms. Frericks. Without a doubt, Congressman.
Mr. Bacon. Without a doubt.
Mr. McMahon. Absolutely.
Ms. Frericks. The forecasts we have seen are that trade is
down for the first 2 months of the year, or at least January as
the reports have shown, that is not the kind of news we want to
see. And trade volumes might be holding, but with the tariffs
in place, we are not turning those trades into dollars that we
can pass back to farmers.
Mr. Bacon. Well, I appreciate your feedback. This should be
the number one priority for Congress is passing USMCA. It is
important for our economy. It is important for the entire
Midwest, for beef, dairy, corn, soybeans, you name it. We have
to get this done.
In fact, I was looking at some stats. About $50,000 for the
average farmer in Nebraska comes from our trade with Canada and
Mexico. That is a huge part of someone's income, so we have to
get this done.
Change of topics on you. When you talk to small businesses,
medical care is the top one of two issues that they face, the
cost of buying policies on their own on the market. Is this the
case also for dairy farmers, dairy producers? And whoever would
like to answer.
Mr. McMahon. We are talking healthcare, Congressman?
Mr. Bacon. Right, the cost of buying your premium on the
market, or policy. Excuse me.
Mr. McMahon. Well, thank God I turned 65 2 years ago,
because life got a lot better when that happened, thanks to
Medicare. But yes, my wife is still youthful and just for her
policy alone, it is like $1,200 a month. It is incredible.
Healthcare is huge, and unfortunately, there are a lot of dairy
farmers that would give that up to continue to keep their
business going. And that is a sad issue as well.
Mr. Bacon. And does that policy have a high deductible,
too? I imagine it does.
Mr. McMahon. No, actually it is not that bad.
Mr. Bacon. Okay, good.
Mr. McMahon. But it is expensive.
Mr. Bacon. Anyone else?
Ms. Frericks. I will. We are individually employed and so
we have been purchasing our health insurance on the individual
marketplace, and the last years as the price climbed for our
company dropped individuals from their offerings. Our health
insurance had doubled in those last couple of years. It was a
significant part of our family living expenditure, and you
maybe don't want to hear this, but the exchange programs
offered through the new healthcare program actually benefitted
our family.
Mr. Bacon. Okay, thank you. Yes, sir?
Mr. Smith. I have the good fortune to have a wife that
works at a business that provides us healthcare, but I do
believe and hear from dairy farmers that the burden of
healthcare costs are very incredibly burdensome on them. I
think that is significant in the factor also.
Mr. Bacon. And my understanding for small businesses, it is
one of the top two issues. We got to find a way to lower costs
for those on the market.
One last question. I worked hard in this Committee to pass
a foot-and-mouth disease vaccine bank. We normally associate
that with beef and pork, but is this also important to our
dairy industry?
Mr. Smith. My personal opinion is that it is important. Any
disease, whether it is relevant to dairy or parallels dairy,
there is importance to the food supply chain and also to the
credibility of consumers also.
Mr. Bacon. We want to work hard to sustain funding for the
foot-and-mouth disease vaccine bank, because we don't want to
cut off our trade, at least in the beef realm, for 5 years. I
would assume it would have the same impact if it went into the
dairy industry as well.
But with that, I will yield back the balance of my time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. We thank the gentleman from Nebraska, and our
next Member is my colleague and good friend, again from the
Central Coast. We have a lot of the Central Coast represented
on this Committee, which is very good. Congressman Carbajal?
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
all the witnesses here today for taking time from your
schedules to be here.
I just wanted to associate myself with Representative
Panetta's comments and statements earlier. My father first came
to this country as part of the Bracero Program, the guestworker
program, and after it ended, he immigrated all our family. As a
matter of fact, I was 5 years old when I came to this country.
And so, I am very familiar with the labor side of agriculture.
And I would say, Mr. McMahon, you are right about what a
guestworker program would look like and the type of workforce
perhaps that the dairy industry is experiencing. Perhaps many
of those workers would want to return to their countries.
As part of the broader ag, many families are here already
working in ag, and many families would not want to return back
after so many years of living here. What I am hearing from the
ag interest in my district is a guestworker program would be
the icing on the cake, because first, we need to legalize and
provide the existing workforce to be able to continue and be
here, and a guestworker program would be an added program that
would complete and sustain the type of labor that is needed by
agriculture. But I would imagine the dairy industry is slightly
different.
For Mr. Mikhalevsky, my question is as I met with farmers
in my district, they emphasized the need to expand the Asian
markets, in particular, Japan. U.S. competitors are gaining new
access to the Japanese markets, leaving the U.S. behind.
Similar to specialty crops experts in my district, Japan is a
significant market that still maintains extraordinarily high
tariffs and unreasonable sanitary and phytosanitary standards
for dairy exports. Gaining positive access would no doubt be a
big win for California agriculture industry, including dairies.
You mentioned in your testimony that in addition to an
accelerated phase-in of tariff reductions, non-tariff barriers
must also be addressed in a free trade agreement with Japan.
Mr. Mikhalevsky, did I say that right?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. Perfect.
Mr. Carbajal. All right. Can you please describe what these
barriers are, and what your overall goals are for the U.S.
negotiations with Japan?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. Sure. I thank you for the question.
The Japanese market is an interesting market. It is
probably the highest value market of any dairy importing
country in the world. They charge basically the highest prices
and sell to the consumers at their highest prices. It is done
through a tender process when you go in, the tender process. It
is a very, very difficult process to get in. Most counties,
like Australia, New Zealand, have had either preferential
treatment or a long history of being involved.
When we stepped away from TPP, we lost any of the gains
that were made, albeit they were minimal, but there were gains
with TRQs to go in. Since then, the EU has put together a joint
program with Japan. We are getting beat out by the New
Zealanders. We are getting beat out by the EU. At this point, a
favorable agreement would have us on a level playing field. Our
dairy farmers can compete with anyone in the world. Just give
us a level playing field. And I would say, to some extent,
sometimes there are barriers put up that you may not fully
realize, and some of those are how you label products. We can
label a product here called butter, and someone else can call
it mid-fat cream cheese, and it gets into the market with a
much lower tariff, what they call tariff busters. And so, we
need not only a comprehensive look at the sanitary,
phytosanitary standards, tariffs, TRQs, but also an adherence
to what I consider proper discipline around products and
importing.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman from the Central Coast
for your focus, and both the issue of Japan and the labor issue
are things this Subcommittee is going to have to continue to
work on.
Our, I believe, last Member who is here for questioning is
the gentleman from Kansas, Congressman Marshall.
Mr. Marshall. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. The fastest-
growing dairy herd in the country is in Kansas, so we are very
proud of our dairies. Also I am very proud of the co-ops we
have across Kansas. DFA, Land O'Lakes, CHS are several co-ops
that my producers really brag on them and say they have made a
big impact.
My first question for Ms. Frericks is how is the co-op you
are part of, which would be Land O'Lakes, is that right? How
has it helped you weather these last 3 or 4 years of the storm?
Ms. Frericks. First, thank you for the question,
Congressman. I believe that the decisions our cooperative made
several years go to more carefully manage our milk supply and
our customers' contracts, so we commonly refer to it as our
base program, has helped our co-op pay some of the highest
prices, at least in the State of Minnesota, by the numbers I
have seen. And so, if each co-op in the country perhaps would
more carefully manage their incoming supply and their customer
contracts, we could see price improvement all around.
But, that is the number one thing that our co-op has done
for us is provided a higher pay price. But co-ops look at
members as family members beyond just the economics, but
supporting every other part of our lives, from our healthcare
to our mental health to business management skills and risk
management opportunities, to nutrition for our cattle and so
on. There are a number of programs that our co-op, and I know
other co-ops offer to members to improve both business and
life.
Mr. Marshall. Great. Andrei, maybe to you the same
question. What have you been doing to help the farmers, the
producers weather this storm, and what do you think you see
your co-op doing in the future to help us through this next
year or so?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. There are a number of things we do. To
build on the comments that were just made about Land O'Lakes,
we have what we call a Capacity Allocation Program. You
mentioned Dairy Farmers of America, they have a base program.
Most of the large co-ops have a way to manage the supply of
product coming in to the processing capacity, or the ability to
sell milk. It is not quite a supply management program, but it
does put on some constraints.
The second thing we do is we do a lot of advocacy for our
farmers, both on a state level where we have water regulations,
air regulations, and at the Federal level, similar to me being
here today advocating for trade. We think that is helpful to
our farmers.
We also have a member benefits program. Healthcare was
mentioned earlier. We have put together a custom program for
the dairy farmers in the State of California with Western
Growers to put together a healthcare program to try and make--
--
Mr. Marshall. In addition to healthcare plan?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. Yes, it is a combined group where we have
designed a special program for our dairy farmers. Most of the
large co-ops you mentioned, Dairy Farmers of America as well as
Land O'Lakes, have a member benefit. When you join the larger
co-ops, you will have access to discount pricing for supplies,
for feed, for on farm necessities and that. That is kind of
just a broad spectrum of some of the things.
Mr. Marshall. Right. Let's go back to USMCA real quickly. I
want to know specifically how USMCA would impact your
producers, and we will start with Andrei. Why is it important
to California dairies? Why is USMCA specifically important for
you all?
Mr. Mikhalevsky. Well, first of all, 60 percent of all the
milk powder we make goes outside the country, and Mexico is our
largest market. If I don't have my largest market for my milk
powder, I will have a whole bunch of warehouses full of milk
powder and low prices.
Mr. Marshall. There you go. Mike, you are from New York, is
that right? Why is USMCA important to New York dairy?
Mr. McMahon. USMCA is vitally important. The next county to
the west of ours, 28 large producers got together and built a
$100 million powder plant out of their own money, and they had
this great market called Canada until they came up with their
Class VII milk, and so, that being addressed is certainly going
to help them out. I mean, USMCA has to be passed.
Mr. Marshall. And Dr. Brown, Missouri dairy, why is it
important to Missouri dairy?
Dr. Brown. Again, it gives us an opportunity for product to
move outside the United States, and in a period where U.S. milk
supplies are growing, it is important to make sure that we have
those opportunities.
Mr. Marshall. And Mr. Smith, Pennsylvania dairy farmers,
why is USMCA important?
Mr. Smith. Absolutely important. We have gotten into the
discussion about regional milk markets and things like that,
but milk flows across the country, and what is good for the
dairymen in California with trade is good for the dairymen in
Pennsylvania with trade also.
Mr. Marshall. All right. Ms. Frericks, you get to clean it
up. Why is it important to your personal dairy?
Ms. Frericks. I will echo Mr. Smith's comments, that what
is good for one state in the nation is good for all of us. We
no longer have regional dairy supplies. We have a national
dairy supply. We are talking about a global dairy supply. And
so, unfettered trade is what this business needs to succeed.
Mr. Marshall. Okay, thank you so much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. All right. Before we close, I want to thank
all of the witnesses. You have done an excellent job this
morning in terms of your testimony. More importantly, the
questions that you answered showed a level of consensus in
terms of the needs of America's dairy industry, and the fact
that there was a large amount of consensus among the five of
you that kind of regionally represent the breadth and width of
America's dairy industry is important. And so, I want you to
know that we look forward to continuing to work with you.
Before we adjourn, I want to defer to the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, who is standing in, in lieu of the Ranking
Member. Congressman Thompson, do you have any final comments
you would like to make?
Mr. Thompson. Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, thank you
for this hearing and your leadership, and thank you to all the
witnesses for being here. We talked a lot about the dairy
industry, individual dairy farm families, which is extremely
important, but it is also about the success of rural America.
We have seen what the difficulties over the past 8, 9 years
with the dairy industry, how that has negatively impacted the
rural economy.
Mr. Chairman, I know we are all looking forward to working
with you and your leadership so that we can do everything we
can to make sure that at the end of the day, our dairy farm
families wind up with more money in their pockets. And quite
frankly, that will help us have a robust rural economy.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Well, thank you for the kind words, and I do
look forward to continuing to work on a bipartisan basis. The
overwhelming majority of issues that we will be dealing with on
this Subcommittee, and really, the full Committee, as Chairman
Peterson and Ranking Member Conaway have indicated, are
bipartisan and there is no reason why we shouldn't be working
together on behalf of the American people and American
agriculture. And today's hearing really focused on the needs of
America's dairy industry as it relates to implementing the new
dairy title that we passed last year that we think is a much
better approach to dealing with the cyclical nature of the
pricing that we deal with. But the points that were made here
as it relates to trade, the all-important efforts on trade, as
well as labor, are efforts and issues that this Subcommittee
will continue to work with.
And let me just say, this is just the first of what I
believe will be at least one to two subcommittee hearings a
month, and we hope to try to have an opportunity to take the
Subcommittee out to various parts of the country, and also work
with Members who want to hold local regional workshops in which
the livestock industry can participate in, not only dairy, but
poultry, beef, cattle and pork, as well as focusing on these
trade issues, because that is part of the overview and
responsibility of the Subcommittee.
With that said, again, I thank the five witnesses. You were
all stars. You did a terrific job. And under the Rules of the
Committee, the record of today's hearing will remain open for
10 calendar days to receive additional material, supplementary
written responses from the witnesses to any questions posed by
a Member, and this hearing of the Subcommittee on Livestock and
Foreign Agriculture at this time is now adjourned.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:08 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Submitted Statement by Hon. Angie Craig, a Representative in Congress
from Minnesota; on Behalf of Roger Johnson, President, National
Farmers Union
Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Rouzer, and Members of the
Subcommittee,
Thank you for holding a hearing to examine the current state of the
dairy economy. National Farmers Union (NFU) represents roughly 200,000
family farmers, ranchers and rural members. NFU serves to protect and
enhance the economic well-being and quality of life for family farmers
and ranchers and rural communities across the country.
While the current slump in the farm economy has impacted much of
American agriculture, no sector has been as hard hit as the dairy
sector. Most dairy farmers have been paid below the cost of production
for over 4 consecutive years. With mounting debt and no significant
price rebound in sight, thousands have been left with no choice but to
close their doors. Due to the severe and chronic challenge of
oversupply, we urge the Committee to examine long term solutions that
would ensure a profitable and sustainable environment for dairy
farmers.
Trends in the Dairy Sector
According to the United States Department of Agriculture, the
number of licensed dairy farms decreased by nearly 17,500 or about 34
percent from 2009 to 2018.\1\ As dairy farmers exit the business at
alarming rates, their production is being replaced by new, large-scale
dairy operations. The U.S. dairy herd increased by nearly 200,000 cows
from 2009 to 2018, while the average number of cows per operation
increased by over 50%.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ United States Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural
Statistics Service. Milk Production, March 2019; United States
Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service.
Milk Production, February 2010.
\2\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As the industry consolidates and milk production increases, family
dairy farms increasingly find themselves at a disadvantage. In 2017,
the average national value of production was $.05 less than total
operating costs.\3\ Small farms suffered the greatest average net
losses per hundredweight, while farms with over 2,000 cows averaged the
greatest net profit.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research
Service. Milk Cost of Production by Size of Operation. October 2018.
\4\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The 2017 Census of Agriculture further illustrates the trend of
consolidation in the dairy sector. While the number of dairy farms
decreased by over 10,000 since the 2012 Census of Agriculture, the
number of farms with 2,500 or more cows increased by 149.\5\
Furthermore, operations with more than 2,500 cows accounted for 35.3
percent of the total value of milk production in 2017, a 5.8 percent
increase from the 2012 Census.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ United States Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural
Statistics Service. (2019) 2017 Census of Agriculture; United States
Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service.
(2014) 2012 Census of Agriculture.
\6\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dairy Together Campaign
In response to the unprecedented challenges facing family dairy
farmers, Wisconsin Farmers Union (WFU) launched the Dairy Together
campaign in 2018. The goal of the campaign is to build grassroots
support for a supply management plan that would ensure dairy farmers
can receive a fair price from the markets.\7\ At a series of meetings,
WFU has presented an analysis of three supply management programs that
were introduced prior to the 2014 Farm Bill.\8\ WFU and other farm
groups have also discussed the Canadian dairy supply management system,
a two-tiered pricing model, and short-term emergency programs to offset
market losses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Wisconsin Farmers Union (2018). Dairy Together. Retrieved from:
https://www.dairytogether.com/.
\8\ Nicholson, C., & Stephenson, M. (2019). Analyses of Selected
Dairy Programs Proposed to Reduce Variability in Milk Prices and Farm
Income. Retrieved from: https://dairymarkets.org/PubPod/Podcast/Misc/
SupplyManagement/WFU_Report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Overall, Wisconsin Farmers Union, along with other Farmers Union
divisions and farm groups, have hosted 22 meetings in eight states,
reaching over 1,000 participants.
National Farmers Union Policy
National Farmers Union recognizes the improvements made in the 2018
Farm Bill to better support our dairy farmers. The Dairy Margin
Coverage (DMC) program is an improvement from its predecessor, the
Margin Protection Program. The opportunity to cover the same production
under both the DMC and the Livestock Gross Margin gives dairy producers
another option to strengthen the support they receive. However, the
farm bill does not address the ongoing challenge with oversupply.
National Farmers Union has long been a supporter of dairy supply
management.\9\ At NFU's 117th Annual Convention, our members passed a
Special Order of Business reinforcing our support for a comprehensive
dairy supply management plan.\10\ The proposal adopted by the delegate
body supports a plan that would establish fair prices, manage milk
inventories, and manage imports and exports. (See Appendix)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ National Farmers Union. (2019) Policy of the National Farmers
Union. Retrieved from: https://nfu.org/policy/.
\10\ National Farmers Union. (2019) Family Farming and Dairy, 2019
Special Order of Business. Retrieved from: https://
1yd7z7koz052nb8r33cfxyw5-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/
2019/03/Dairy-SOB-030519.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion
Thank you for the opportunity to submit a statement for the record
on the state of the dairy economy. We look forward to working with you
to identify both short-term and long-term solutions to promote the
economic viability of family dairies, including mechanisms to
meaningfully address oversupply.
Sincerely,
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Roger Johnson,
President.
appendix
Family Farming and Dairy 2019 Special Order Of Business
The number of dairy farmers in the United States has dropped by
more than 30 percent over the last 10 years, and the rate of closures
across the country continues to accelerate today.
The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) projects the
nationwide average price paid to dairy farmers will total $15.80 per
hundredweight (cwt), while average cost of production is $22.70 per
cwt. Dairy farmers nationwide are paid 30 percent below average
production costs and have been paid prices well below production costs
for more than 4 years leading to unprecedented financial challenges for
dairy farm families.
The recently passed farm bill fails to address the challenges dairy
farmers face today primarily because it lacks an inventory management
component that is vital to establish fair milk prices. We urge Congress
to pass a three-point plan:
Establish fair prices.
Manage milk inventories.
Provide import/export dairy policy to restore and protect
profitability to dairy farmers across the United States.
NFU calls on Congress to pass legislation that includes:
1.
The establishment of an incentives-based inventory management
program to manage milk inventories based on market demand
and pricing stability.
2.
Establish a farmer-led plan to establish fair milk prices that
are based on the dairy farmers cost of production and
retail prices for dairy products.
3.
Effective dairy trade policy that manages both imports and
exports to ensure that U.S. dairy farmers are paid a fair
price from the market.
4.
Each FMMO region of the country establishes a dairy board made up
of dairy farmers that establish prices with processor
involvement.
5.
Prices are determined by farmers on a region-by-region basis
based on cost of production and other cost indices.
6.
Using processors forecast demand for milk for dairy products,
each region will produce enough milk to meet processors
needs.
7.
Milk requested for use in export by processors would be included
in regional dairy supply demand. Imports are subject to
USDA market review to assure that they do not undercut the
dairy farmer-led inventory management plan.
8.
Changes in forecast demand for dairy products will allow for
increased production for those dairies that choose to grow
based on market demand and allow for new dairy operations.
9.
New growth production is issued equally, with a program for
beginning farmers.
10.
Dairies can buy and sell existing production based on the value
set on the open market, but new production is only issued
by regional boards based on demand increases.
11.
This would be a farmer driven program with mandatory enrollment
of all dairies including organic.
12.
Organic market inventory would use similar system to set organic
prices and manage inventory to meet processor and consumer
demand.
______
Submitted Questions
Questions Submitted by Hon. Jahana Hayes, a Representative in Congress
from Connecticut
Response from Michael P. McMahon, Owner and Operator, EZ Acres, Homer,
NY
Question. We frequently hear that unemployment is down. However,
Mr. McMahon, in your testimony, you mentioned that it has become very
difficult to hire locally. That's a problem. How do you recruit your
employees and how long does it typically take you to fill an open
position? What affect does that have on your revenue?
Answer. To the Honorable Jahana Hayes,
Thank you for your interest in my testimony before the House
Subcommittee, below are my answers to your questions:
1.
As to recruiting, in the past we have used our local newspaper
and a statewide weekly farm publication with a very
extensive distribution called Country Folks. Over the years
we used to advertise in the surrounding metropolitan areas
such as Syracuse, Binghamton and Ithaca, but never received
a single applicant from the cities. We continue to
advertise locally but with the advent of social media we
now utilize that as well.
2.
The last couple of times we have had an opening it has taken
about a month to fill the position. In fact, right now our
Youngstock manager (person responsible for raising our
calves and heifers) is wanting to return to Mexico so we
are actively seeking a local person to replace this
position. I have been advertising (both by paper and social
media) at Morrisville, Cobleskill and Alfred Agricultural
colleges since the first of March as well as locally and
regionally, and have only had one person apply and that
person never showed up for a follow up interview. This
position starts in the mid $30,000 range and includes a
very nice three bedroom furnished house with all utilities
paid for, health insurance, paid vacations, sick and
personal days and gasoline for their personal vehicle. The
entire package is worth in the mid $50,000-$60,000 per
year. Four years ago we had to replace our ``feeder''
position and with a similar compensation package to the one
above, and after five weeks we had two applicants, one of
which had just been released from prison for manslaughter.
Fortunately the other applicant worked out until he became
addicted to opiods, and now my son, one of the managing
partners, is doing that job.
3.
As you can imagine, when management has to assume more labor due
to a lack of people, other things get let go which
management should be attending to. This along with training
and constant searching demands a great deal of management's
time and effort. It can be a little difficult to quantify
the revenue impact but there clearly is one. Cows have to
be milked and crops have to be planted and harvested and
when you can't fill a position the owners have to step up
to make sure these things get done. The answer for our
industry of course has been to hire migrant workers and
since there is no legal way for dairy to bring in these
workers we are all left at risk.
Once again, Congressman Hayes thank you for your questions and
please feel free to reach out to me if I can be of further assistance.
Mike McMahon, EZ Acres LLC.
Response from Scott Brown, Ph.D., Director of Strategic Partnerships,
College of Agriculture, Food, and Natural Resources, University
of Missouri; Associate Extension Professor, Agricultural and
Applied Economics, University of Missouri
Question 1. The government-sponsored risk management tools
available to dairy farmers have changed significantly in the last year
given the new farm bill and new RMA insurance options. Dr. Brown, given
your work as an extension professor, how can we make sure farmers know
about the options available to them? What groups should have a role in
that process?
Answer. A broad group of dairy industry stakeholders must engage
with dairy producers to inform and educate about the new risk
management tools that are available today. That group ranges from land-
grant universities to commodity organizations. The message must stay
focused on the risk management components these programs offer and not
just a discussion of maximizing program payments.
Land-grant universities through their extension programming must
take the lead in the program education efforts. This has been a
traditional role taken on by extension for decades. Extension faculty
can provide an unbiased assessment of the risk management tools
available to dairy producers. Land-grant universities continue to find
less flexible budgets that sometimes result in fewer resources
available to work on some of these policy education issues.
Government agencies implementing these new risk management tools
must also educate dairy producers on the specifics of how the different
tools work. The U.S. Department of Agriculture must provide educational
opportunities for dairy producers. In Missouri, the University of
Missouri and the Missouri Farm Services Agency (FSA) work as a team in
providing education on these programs. Missouri FSA educates on the
specifics of the programs and the University of Missouri educates on
how producers can use the programs.
Commodity organizations such as the National Farmers Union and
American Farm Bureau Federation can also provide educational
opportunities for their memberships on these newer dairy programs.
Dairy specific commodity organizations like the National Milk Producers
Federation can also provide an additional outlet to educate their
membership either directly or through their cooperative members.
Question 2. The dairy industry is extremely important to me. In my
home State of Connecticut, the dairy industry provides nearly 3,000
jobs, and has an economic impact of over $900 million. Dr. Brown, you
outlined concerns that continued growth in U.S. milk supplies over the
last few years has contributed to the current trend of low prices.
We've seen how politically difficult it has been to do anything to
stabilize the market in Congress. What can industry do to strengthen
the market and correct this trend?
Answer. Rapid and significant change in the dairy industry over the
last few years has been largely responsible for the longer than usual
period of low milk prices the dairy industry has faced. Aggregate milk
supplies have remained stubbornly robust as technology adoption and
apparent economies of scale have grown larger dairies, outweighing the
loss of other dairies across the country. Markets will continue to
adjust until milk prices rise to levels that can more adequately
provide a return to dairy farmers and allow them in stay in business
long term.
Milk price volatility has been a staple of the industry over much
of the 1990s and 2000s. However, the last few years have been absent of
any quick increase in milk prices, reminding the industry that there is
not a necessarily repeating cycle to milk prices that result in high
price periods. Producers have continued to produce, thinking that
higher milk prices would occur, but in fact this milk supply growth has
prevented higher milk prices.
Growing demand for milk and dairy products is the key to a more
economically robust dairy industry. The development of new dairy
products that meet the demand of today's U.S. dairy consumers remain
important to long term dairy markets. The industry has seen the effects
of weak demand for products like fluid milk. New dairy products that
stimulate new demand are vital.
International markets for U.S. dairy products are also important to
the industry and there must be a sharp focus on growing these markets,
as they represent a larger consumer base with income growth profiles
that will support increased consumption of dairy products.
[all]