- PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE: AN ASSESSMENT OF EMERGING CYBER THREATS
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE: AN ASSESSMENT OF EMERGING CYBER THREATS
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION, AND INNOVATION
of the
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
OCTOBER 22, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-44
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
40-460 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Peter T. King, New York
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
John Katko, New York
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Mark Walker, North Carolina
J. Luis Correa, California
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Xochitl Torres Small, New Mexico
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Max Rose, New York
Mark Green, Tennessee
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Van Taylor, Texas
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan
John Joyce, Pennsylvania
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri
Dan Crenshaw, Texas
Al Green, Texas
Michael Guest, Mississippi
Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Dina Titus, Nevada
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Chris Vieson, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND
INNOVATION
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
John Katko, New York, Ranking
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Member
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Van Taylor, Texas
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan
John Joyce, Pennsylvania
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex
Mike Rogers, Alabama (ex officio)
officio)
Moira Bergin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Sarah Moxley, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Statements
The Honorable Cedric L. Richmond, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Louisiana, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................
1
Prepared Statement.............................................
2
The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................
3
Prepared Statement.............................................
4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
5
Prepared Statement.............................................
6
Witnesses
Mr. Ken Durbin, CISSP, Senior Strategist, Symantec Corporation:
Oral Statement.................................................
8
Prepared Statement.............................................
9
Mr. Robert K. Knake, Senior Research Scientist, Global Resilience
Institute, Northeastern University, Senior Fellow, The Council
on Foreign Relations:
Oral Statement.................................................
14
Prepared Statement.............................................
15
Ms. Niloofar Razi Howe, Senior Fellow, Cybersecurity Initiative,
New America:
Oral Statement.................................................
20
Prepared Statement.............................................
22
Mr. Ben Buchanan, PhD, Senior Faculty Fellow, Center for Security
and Emerging Technology, Mortara Center, Assistant Teaching
Professor, Georgetown University:
Oral Statement.................................................
28
Prepared Statement.............................................
30
PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE: AN ASSESSMENT OF EMERGING CYBER THREATS
----------
Tuesday, October 22, 2019
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection,
and Innovation,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:11 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Cedric L. Richmond
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Richmond, Jackson Lee, Langevin,
Rice, Slotkin, Thompson; Katko, Walker, and Taylor.
Also present: Representative Joyce.
Mr. Richmond. The Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation will come to order.
The subcommittee is meeting today to receive testimony on
preparing for the future, an assessment of emerging cyber
threats.
Mr. Katko. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent that our
colleague from Pennsylvania, Mr. Joyce, be able to fully
participate in today's hearing.
Mr. Richmond. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
Good afternoon. I want to welcome the witnesses to today's
hearing on how we seek to balance the benefits of technical
innovation with the security vulnerabilities that it may bring.
The rapid proliferation of new technology is changing the
world. Advancements in artificial intelligence, AI, and quantum
computing will equip us with new tools to defend ourselves and
break down barriers to new research that could improve the way
we live and save lives.
Unfortunately, one man's tool is another man's weapon.
Sophisticated nation-state actors like Russia, China, Iran, and
North Korea have already weaponized new technologies to disrupt
our democracy, compromise our National security, and undermine
our economy. As technology improves, so will their ability to
use it against us.
I am particularly concerned about the impact of new
technologies on our elections. In the lead-up to the 2016
Presidential election, Russia mounted an unprecedented
influence and disinformation campaign. They use bots to
automatically tweet divisive messages from fake accounts. As we
move into the heart of the 2020 election cycle, we must be
prepared for our adversaries to use AI-generated deepfakes to
create a false history, sow discord, and inject skepticism into
our National elections.
To start, on-line platforms must learn to identify
deepfakes and publish policies about how they will handle them.
At the same time, we need to educate the public to ensure that
they are informed consumers of information.
More broadly, ensuring that emerging technologies are
developed and deployed responsibly requires U.S. leadership,
and I am concerned that we are not demonstrating that now. For
years the Federal Government has cut research and development
dollars to meet budget caps, and I am worried that countries
like China are outpacing our investment. Our failure to put
money into R&D may cost us not only our strategic advantage as
the world's leader in technology, but the global influence that
stems from it.
What is most alarming, however, is the lack of attention
that this administration is giving to this important National
security issue. Despite the fact that our intelligence agencies
have confirmed that nation-state actors are utilizing their
emerging technology for their strategic advantage, the
administration annually slashes R&D funding under the false
premise that the private sector will make up the difference.
Maintaining U.S. leadership in this space will require
direction, coordination, and money from the Federal Government.
Before I close, I want to address a final issue that is
causing concern in my district and others like it: How AI and
automation will affect the work force. Automation has already
decreased availability of jobs in the labor market, and I worry
about the National and economic security consequences that
could result if we do not adequately plan for this transition.
I look forward to our witnesses' thoughts on this important
issue today.
The success of our Nation and economic security rests on
whether the Federal Government can effectively partner with its
allies, State and local partners, and the private sector to
develop policies that both incentivize investment in emerging
technology, and manage the risk associated with it when it
falls into the hands of our adversaries.
I look forward to understanding how this committee can
assist in the development of safe, secure, and responsible
technologies.
[The statement of Chairman Richmond follows:]
Statement of Chairman Cedric Richmond
October 22, 2019
The rapid proliferation of new technology is changing the world.
Advancements in artificial intelligence (AI) and quantum computing will
equip us with new tools to defend ourselves and break down barriers to
new research that could improve the way we live and save lives.
Unfortunately, one man's tool is another man's weapon. Sophisticated
nation-state actors like Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea have
already weaponized new technologies to disrupt our democracy,
compromise our National security, and undermine our economy. As
technology improves, so will their ability to use it against us.
I am particularly concerned about the impact of new technologies on
our elections. In the lead-up to the 2016 Presidential election, Russia
mounted an unprecedented influence and disinformation campaign that
used bots to automatically tweet divisive messages from fake accounts.
As we move into the heart of the 2020 election cycle, we must be
prepared for our adversaries to use AI-generated ``deepfakes'' to
create a false history, sow discord, and inject skepticism into our
National elections. To start, on-line platforms must learn to identify
``deepfakes'' and publish policies about how they will handle them. At
the same time, we need to educate the public to ensure that they are
informed consumers of information. More broadly, ensuring that emerging
technologies are developed and deployed responsibly requires U.S.
leadership, and I am concerned that we are not demonstrating that now.
For years, the Federal Government has cut research and development
dollars to meet budget caps, and I am worried that countries like China
are outpacing our investment. Our failure to put money into R&D may
cost us not only our strategic advantage as the world's leader in
technology development, but the global influence that stems from it.
What is most alarming, however, is the lack of attention that this
administration is giving to this important National security issue.
Despite the fact that our intelligence agencies have confirmed that
nation-state actors are utilizing the emerging technology for their
strategic advantage, the administration annually slashes R&D funding
under the false promise that the private sector will make up the
difference. Maintaining U.S. leadership in this space will require
direction, coordination, and money from the Federal Government. Before
I close, I want to address a final issue that is causing concern in my
district and others like it: How AI and automation will affect the
workforce. Automation has already decreased the availability of jobs in
the labor market, and I worry about the National and economic security
consequences that could result if we do not adequately plan for this
transition. I look forward to our witness' thoughts on this important
issue today.
The success of our National and economic security rests on whether
the Federal Government can effectively partner with its allies, State
and local partners, and the private sector to develop policies that
both incentivize investment in emerging technology and manage the risks
associated with it when it falls into the hands of our adversaries. I
look forward to understanding how this committee can assist in the
development of safe, secure, and responsible technologies.
Mr. Richmond. I will now recognize the Ranking Member of
the subcommittee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Katko, for
an opening statement.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
having me here today, and thank you for the witnesses. I
appreciate you coming today.
During my time as a Federal prosecutor over 2 decades I saw
first-hand how criminals evolved and adapted to changes. As I
have learned about the cyber landscape as Ranking Member of
this subcommittee, I have been amazed at the number and
diversity of the cyber threats we face today. These threats are
always evolving and adapting to new obstacles, new protections,
new tactics, and new technologies.
All levels of government, Federal, State and local, as well
as our allies around the globe, the private sector, academia,
and nonprofits must work together in order to protect against
emerging cyber threats.
Today's technologies have a number of vulnerabilities that
must be protected from bad actors. In the first 6 months of
this year more than 4 million records have been exposed due to
data breaches. Ransomware attacks have doubled in 2019 in my
district. Syracuse School District, for example, and the
Onondaga County Library System both suffered ransomware attacks
from unknown threat actors in the last month.
More citizens than ever are falling victim to phishing
attacks and malware. Cyber crime made up 61 percent of the
attacks that cybersecurity firm CrowdStrike saw between January
and June of this year. These are just the attacks and
statistics that we are aware of. Many experts believe incidents
to be vastly under-reported.
These threats are persistent, complex, and on the rise.
Cybersecurity must constantly evolve in order to provide
protection. As evidenced by the number of incidents this year
alone, this is a difficult endeavor that cannot be done without
help. As I heard from my constituents in my district, companies
and local government entities need assistance and guidance to
identify, protect against, and recover from certain current
cyber threats.
These are just the threats we see with our current
technology. Our cyber landscape is becoming increasingly
sophisticated, and new innovations are being introduced every
day. These advances have put cybersecurity out of reach for
even more small, medium, and large businesses, as well as State
and local governments who simply cannot afford it.
It is estimated that 22 million internet of things devices
will be on-line by 2025. 5G deployment is just around the
corner. Artificial intelligence and machine learning, while
making impacts today, are projected to have even more of an
enormous effect on our lives in the years ahead. Quantum
computing, which is a huge concern, is on the horizon. These
emerging technologies will undoubtedly present new and evolving
cyber threats. While we are staying vigilant and working to
protect against current hazards, we must also be preparing for
our future ones.
Our first step is to better understand these new threats,
and this hearing is a very good start.
I am also working to educate my colleagues on the
challenges and opportunities of the internet of things. I am
the co-chair of the Internet of Things Caucus, and have spent
time learning from Syracuse University about the quantum
research they are working on in partnership with the Air Force
Research Lab. I will do more to seek out opportunities to
improve our cybersecurity against current and emerging threats.
I want to thank the Chairman for holding this important
hearing today, and to our witnesses here to help us understand
the emerging threat landscape.
In closing, I would like to note that I view the cyber
advancements much differently than I view other products in our
commodity market. A lot of products, like in the automobile
arena, they consider the safety aspects along with emerging
technology in the cars. They are--they don't always do that
with cyber technology, and we are constantly playing catch up.
That is why it is really important that the Chairman and myself
and others on this committee work diligently to get the
information we need to try and catch up to the advancements in
technology, which always seem a couple of steps ahead.
[The statement of Ranking Member Katko follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member John Katko
Oct. 22, 2019
During my time as a Federal prosecutor, I saw first-hand how
criminals evolved and adapted to changes. As I have learned about the
cyber landscape as Ranking Member of this subcommittee, I have been
amazed at the number and diversity of the cyber threats we face. These
threats are always evolving and adapting to new obstacles, new
protections, new tactics, and new technologies. All levels of
Government--Federal, State, and local, as well as, our allies around
the globe--the private sector, academia, and non-profits must work
together in order to protect against emerging cyber threats.
Today's technologies have a number of vulnerabilities that must be
protected from bad actors. In the first 6 months of this year, more
than 4 million records have been exposed due to data breaches.
Ransomware attacks have doubled in 2019--in my district, Syracuse City
School District and the Onondaga County Library System both suffered
ransomware attacks from unknown threat actors last month. More citizens
than ever are falling victim to phishing attacks and malware. Cyber
crime made up 61 percent of the attacks that cybersecurity firm,
Crowdstrike, saw between January and June of this year. These are just
the attacks and statistics that we are aware of; many experts believe
incidents to be under-reported.
These threats are persistent, complex and on the rise, and
cybersecurity must constantly evolve in order to provide protection. As
evidenced by the number of incidents in this year alone, this is a
difficult endeavor that cannot be done without help. As I heard from
constituents in my district, companies and the local government
entities need assistance and guidance to identify, protect against, and
recover from current cyber threats.
And these are just the threats we see with our current technology.
Our cyber landscape is becoming increasingly sophisticated and new
innovations are being introduced every day. These advances could put
cybersecurity out of reach for even more small, medium, and large
businesses as well as State and local governments.
It is estimated that 22 million internet of things devices will be
on-line by 2025. 5G deployment is just around the corner. Artificial
intelligence and machine learning, while making impacts today, is
projected to have even more of an enormous effect on our lives in the
years ahead. Quantum computing is on the horizon.
These emerging technologies will undoubtedly present new and
evolving cyber threats. While we are staying vigilant and working to
protect against current hazards, we must also be preparing for future
ones. Our first step is to better understand these new threats and this
hearing is a good start. I am also working to educate my colleagues on
the challenges and opportunities of the internet of things and the co-
chair of the IOT Caucus and have spent time learning from Syracuse
University about the quantum research they are working on in
partnership with the Air Force Research Lab. And I will do more to seek
out opportunities to improve our cybersecurity against current and
emerging threats.
I thank the Chairman for holding this important hearing today and
to our witnesses here to help us understand the emerging threat
landscape. I look forward to our discussion and yield back.
Mr. Katko. So with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Richmond. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
the Chairman of the full committee, the gentleman from
Mississippi, Mr. Thompson, for an opening statement.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. Good afternoon. I would
like to thank Chairman Richmond for holding today's hearing on
emerging cyber threats.
I have served on the Homeland Security Committee since its
inception. Over that period of time I have watched the tactics
our adversaries use against us evolve, and the threat landscape
grow.
As new network devices and information technologies enter
the marketplace, many become so mesmerized by their potential
for good that we fail to appreciate and plan for the security
consequences. Although I am encouraged that we are having more
conversations about the nexus between technology and security
today, there is still much to be done. So I commend Chairman
Richmond for holding today's hearing.
When this committee was established a decade-and-a-half ago
we focused our efforts on defending against physical attacks
committed by terrorists who would readily claim responsibility.
Now we are faced with cyber threats from state and non-state
actors who use cyber tools to carry out attacks in secret, blur
attribution, and complicate our ability to impose consequences.
As technology continues to evolve, so too will the tools of
our adversaries. Last December DHS, DoD, the State Department,
and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence
identified internet of things devices, artificial intelligence,
and quantum technology as emerging dual-use technologies that
pose a threat to our National security.
A month later, then-director of national intelligence, Dan
Coats, warned that our adversaries and strategic competitors
will increasingly use cyber capabilities, including cyber
espionage, attacks, and influence to seek political, economic,
and military advantage over the United States and its allies
and partners.
Unfortunately, much of what DNI warned us about is, in
fact, already happening. We know that Russia has relied on the
cyber capabilities to carry out influence campaigns designed to
divide Americans and swing elections. Efforts to manipulate
Americans on social media platforms are wide-spread, but
technologically simple.
I worry about influence campaigns of the future, where
Russia uses AI to create deepfakes that make it nearly
impossible to discern fact from fiction. We know that China has
engaged in intelligence gathering and economic espionage, and
has successfully breached OPM, Navy contractors, and non-
governmental entities, from hotels to research institutions. We
also know that China is investing heavily in developing quantum
computing capabilities, which could undermine the security
value of encryption within the next decade.
Over the past year the Department of Justice has
indicated--indicted 2 Iranians for their role in the ransomware
attack against the city of Atlanta. Microsoft recently revealed
that Iran had attempted to breach a Presidential campaign.
According to the U.N. Security Council, North Korea has used
its cyber capabilities to evade sanctions, stealing $670
million in various foreign and cryptocurrencies between 2015
and 2018.
The momentum Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea have
demonstrated related to their use of cyber tools shows no sign
of slowing. We must prepare ourselves to harness the security,
economic, and health care benefits of emerging technologies
like AI and quantum computing will yield, while defending
ourselves against adversaries who will use technology against
us.
But the Government cannot do it alone. The private sector
is a critical partner in this effort. I am eager to hear from
our witnesses how the Federal Government can ensure the
responsible deployment of emerging technologies.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
October 22, 2019
I'd like to thank Chairman Richmond for holding today's hearing on
emerging cyber threats. I have served on the Homeland Security
Committee since its inception. Over that period of time, I have watched
the tactics our adversaries use against us evolve and the threat
landscape grow. As new networked devices and information technologies
entered the market place, many became so mesmerized by their potential
for good that we failed to appreciate and plan for the security
consequences. Although I am encouraged that we are having more
conversations about the nexus between technology and security today,
there is still much to be done. So I commend Chairman Richmond for
holding today's hearing. When this committee was established a decade-
and-a-half ago, we once focused our efforts on defending against
physical attacks committed by terrorists who would readily claim
responsibility. Now, we are faced with cyber threats from state and
non-state actors who use cyber tools to carry out attacks in secret,
blur attribution, and complicate our ability to impose consequences. As
technology continues to evolve, so too will the tools of our
adversaries.
Last December, DHS, DoD, the State Department, and the Office of
the Director of National Intelligence identified internet of things
(IOT) devices, artificial intelligence (AI), and quantum technologies
as emerging, dual-use technologies that pose a threat to our National
security. A month later, then-director of national intelligence Dan
Coats warned that our ``adversaries and strategic competitors will
increasingly use cyber capabilities--including cyber espionage, attack,
and influence--to seek political, economic, and military advantage over
the United States and its allies and partners.'' Unfortunately, much of
what DNI's warning about is in fact already happening.
We know that Russia has relied on its cyber capabilities to carry
out influence campaigns designed to divide Americans and swing
elections. Its efforts to manipulate Americans on social media
platforms were wide-spread, but technologically simple. I worry about
the influence campaign of the future, where Russia uses AI to create
``deepfakes'' that make it nearly impossible to discern fact from
fiction. We know that China has engaged in intelligence-gathering and
economic espionage, and has successfully breached OPM, navy
contractors, and non-government entities from hotels to research
institutions. We also know that China is investing heavily in
developing quantum computing capabilities, which could undermine the
security value of encryption within the next decade.
Over the past year, the Department of Justice has indicted 2
Iranians for their role in the ransomware attack against the city of
Atlanta, and Microsoft recently revealed that Iran had attempted to
breach a Presidential campaign. And according to the U.N. Security
Council, North Korea has used its cyber capabilities to evade
sanctions, stealing $670 million in various foreign and crypto-
currencies between 2015 and 2018. The momentum Russia, China, Iran, and
North Korea have demonstrated related to their use of cyber tools show
no signs of slowing. We must prepare ourselves to harness the security,
economic, and health care benefits of emerging technologies like AI and
quantum computing will yield while defending ourselves against
adversaries who would use technology against us. But the Government
cannot do it alone. The private sector is a critical partner in this
effort. I am eager to hear from our witnesses how the Federal
Government can ensure the responsible deployment of emerging
technologies.
Mr. Thompson. With that I thank the witnesses for being
here today, and I look forward to the testimony, and yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to welcome
our panel of witnesses.
First I am pleased to welcome Mr. Ken Durbin, senior
strategist for global government affairs at Symantec, where he
has provided solutions to the public sector for over 30 years.
Next we have Mr. Robert Knake, who is a senior fellow at
the Council of Foreign Relations and a senior research
scientist at Northwestern University's Global Resilience
Institute. Mr. Knake served as director for cybersecurity
policy at the National Security Council from 2011 to 2015.
Next Ms.--Niloofar, is that right?--Razi--which is the easy
part, Howe is a fellow at New America's Cyber Security
Initiative. Ms. Howe has been an investor, executive, and
entrepreneur in the technology industry for the past 25 years,
with a focus on cybersecurity for the past 10. Most recently
Ms. Howe served as chief strategy officer and senior vice
president of strategy and operations at RSA, a global
cybersecurity company.
Finally, Dr. Ben Buchanan is a senior faculty fellow at
Georgetown's Center for Security and Emerging Technology. He
has a--he has written journal articles and peer-reviewed papers
on artificial intelligence, attributing cyber attacks,
deterrence in cyber operations, cryptography, election
cybersecurity, and the spread of malicious code between nations
and non-state actors.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statements will be
inserted into the record.
I now ask each witness to summarize his or her statement
for 5 minutes, beginning with Mr. Durbin.
STATEMENT OF KEN DURBIN, CISSP, SENIOR STRATEGIST, SYMANTEC
CORPORATION
Mr. Durbin. Chairman Richmond, Chairman Thompson, Ranking
Member Katko, thank you for the opportunity to testify.
Assessing emerging threats is important, but we can't
forget about traditional threats that have been re-purposed; I
will address both in my testimony. I will start with a couple
key findings from our 2019 Internet Security Threat Report.
Email has been a traditional threat vector cyber criminals
constantly re-purpose. The latest exploit is the use of
Microsoft Office attachments to deliver malicious payloads.
Forty-eight percent of malicious email attachments were, in
fact, Microsoft Office documents.
Attacks on endpoints from the web continue to grow. We saw
a 56 percent increase in web attacks in 2018. By the end of
2018 Symantec blocked more than 1.3 million unique web attacks
on endpoints every day.
As this committee well knows, supply chain attacks remain a
persistent and serious threat. There was a 78 percent increase
in supply chain attacks which exploit third-party services and
software to compromise a target.
Deepfakes, on the other hand, are an emerging threat.
Deepfake are audios or videos created by artificial
intelligence systems and used to make the public believe they
are authentic. Deepfakes are new, and not typically viewed as a
threat to enterprise security. Fake videos, photos, or audio
recordings represent a serious risk to the enterprise, since,
to create convincing deepfakes, you simply need the internet, a
gaming PC, and the right software. A deepfake of a CEO
announcing a layoff or used to order an employee to transfer
funds or intellectual property could hurt their reputation and
their stock price. Until we can identify or block deepfakes,
organizations will be best served implementing rapid response
plans that can be executed as soon as a deepfake is identified.
Twitter bots have emerged as a threat hiding in plain
sight. Symantec analyzed content released by Twitter originally
posted on their service by the Russian-based Internet Research
Agency. The IRA content was used as part of a Twitter bot
campaign directed against the 2016 U.S. elections. The
operation was carefully planned, with accounts often registered
months before they were used. The data set consisted of 3,836
Twitter accounts and nearly 10 million tweets. They attracted
almost 6.4 million followers and they, in turn, followed 3.2
million accounts. A core group of 123 main accounts was used to
push out new content, while a larger pool of auxiliary accounts
amplify messages pushed out by the main accounts. One main
account only tweeted 10,794 times, but was retweeted over 6
million times.
Targeted ransomware has been re-purposed to focus on the
enterprise. During 2018 attacks against organizations rose by
12 percent, but represented 81 percent of all infections that
year. State and local governments were hit hard. The city of
Atlanta was attacked and chose not to pay the ransom. Clean-up
is expected to exceed $10 million. The Colorado Department of
Transportation spent $1.5 million to clean up after their
attack. Two Florida cities took another direction and paid the
ransom, which totaled $1 million between them.
Targeted attacks have tools to infect a large number of
computers simultaneously, maximizing the number of assets to
improve the chances the victim will pay the ransom.
Mobile is an example of a kind of self-inflicted threat.
Mobile devices are susceptible to unwanted cyber threats and
threats we allow via app permissions. We looked at apps on both
the Google and Android platforms and found both requested
personal information and access to similar device functions.
Many of these requests were reasonable, but many were excessive
and questionable.
We looked at a flashlight app which has over 10 million
installs that wanted access to the user's location, contacts,
and permission to make calls. It is difficult to imagine why a
flashlight app needs your contacts, call your friends, or know
your exact location. Users are opening themselves up to
potential threats, since they grant permission without
understanding what the app developer will do with that data.
Finally, stalkerware is a type of malware that is secretly
loaded on an unsuspecting victim computing device, giving
almost total control of the device to an ex-spouse, ex-
boyfriend, or other stalker, who would then know the victim's
exact location, be able to read their emails and texts, and
even turn on their microphone or camera.
So why is stalkerware commercially available? Publishers of
stalkerware typically advertise their product as parental
monitoring software to keep kids safe. This can certainly be
true when it is used appropriately by a responsible parent.
However, the features built into some of these apps give more
control than parents would need, which make them ripe for
abuse.
In closing, emerging threats that try to influence beliefs
or drive behavior need to be assessed along with the re-purpose
traditional threats. The focus of this committee is vital for
our Nation to understand these threats and ensure resources are
allocated to defend against them.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I would be
happy to take any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Durbin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ken Durbin
October 22, 2019
Chairman Richmond, Ranking Member Katko, my name is Ken Durbin,
CISSP, and I am a senior strategist for Symantec Global Government
Affairs and Cybersecurity. I have been providing solutions to the
public sector for over 30 years. My focus on compliance and risk
management (CRM) and its application in both the public and private
sector has allowed me to gain insights into the challenge of balancing
compliance with the implementation of Cybersecurity Solutions.
Additionally, I focus on the standards, mandates, and best practices
from NIST, OMB, DHS, etc. and their application to CRM. I spend a
significant amount of my time on the NIST Cybersecurity Framework
(CSF)\1\ and the emerging privacy framework, the DHS Continuous
Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) Program and the EU Global Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF): Provides guidance to
private companies on how best to prevent, detect, and respond to cyber
attacks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Symantec Corporation is the world's leading cybersecurity company,
allowing organizations, governments, and people to secure their most
important data wherever it lives. Organizations across the world look
to Symantec for strategic, integrated solutions to defend against
sophisticated attacks across endpoints, cloud, and infrastructure.
Likewise, a global community of more than 50 million people and
families rely on Symantec's Norton and LifeLock product suites to help
protect their digital lives at home and across their devices. Symantec
operates one of the world's largest civilian cyber intelligence
networks, allowing it to see and protect against the most advanced
threats. In my testimony I will discuss the current Threat Landscape,
to include:
Key findings from the 2019 Symantec Internet Security Threat
Report (ISTR);
Mobile security privacy;
Deepfakes risk to the enterprise;
Twitterbots in the 2016 election;
Targeted ransomware; and
Stalkerware.
the threat landscape
A review of the current threat landscape shows there are
challenging new attacks and threats that need to be addressed. However,
it also shows that it would not be wise to ignore the traditional
threats we have been dealing with for years. Bad actors are finding new
ways to attack using well-established attack vectors. At the same time
new technologies and campaigns are emerging to exert influence and
drive behavior. I'll address both traditional and emerging threats in
the following sections.
The Internet Security Threat Report
The Internet Security Threat Report (ISTR)\2\ analyzes data from
Symantec's Global Intelligence Network, the largest civilian threat
intelligence network in the world, which records events from 123
million attack sensors worldwide, blocks 142 million threats daily, and
monitors threat activities in more than 157 countries. The analysis
provides insight into a wide variety of threats and identifies trends
that help inform the public with the goal of helping them avoid risk.
Highlights from the ISTR include:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.symantec.com/security-center/threat-report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One out of 10 URLS are malicious. That is up from one in 16
in 2017. Clicking on a malicious URL continues to be a widely-
used attack vector by attackers.
There was a 56 percent increase in web attacks over 2017. By
the end of 2018, we blocked more than 1.3 million unique web
attacks on endpoint machines every day.
On average, 4,800 websites are compromised with formjacking
software each month.
Formjacking is the use of malicious JavaScript code to steal
payment card details and other information from payment forms
on the checkout web pages of eCommerce sites. We blocked 3.7
million formjacking attempts on endpoint devices in 2018.
Supply chain attacks increased 78 percent. Supply chain
attacks, which exploit third-party services and software to
compromise a final target, take many forms, including hijacking
software updates and injecting malicious code into legitimate
software.
Forty-eight percent of malicious email attachments were MS
Office documents, up from just 5 percent in 2017. Cyber crime
groups continued to use macros in Office files as their
preferred method to propagate malicious payloads in 2018, but
also experimented with malicious XML files and Office files
with Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) payloads.
The number of attack groups using destructive malware rose
25 percent. Destructive malware is designed to inflict physical
damage to an organizations network or facility. While still a
niche area, the use of destructive malware continued to grow.
Eight percent of groups were known to use destructive tools, up
from 6 percent at the end of 2017.
Mobile Security
The average smartphone user these days has between 60 and 90 apps
on their device, and most of them request some sort of information
about the user and the device. They may want to know your name, your
email address, or your real-world address. But because smartphones are
so powerful, they can also get quite a bit more than that, such as your
exact location. Some apps will even request access to the device's
camera or microphone despite having no legitimate need to use them.
In order to find out what kind of data your apps may be looking
for, we analyzed the top 100 free apps as listed on the Google Play
Store and Apple App Store on May 3, 2018.\3\ For each we looked at 2
main things: How much personal information was the user sharing with
the app and which smartphone permissions the app accessed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.symantec.com/blogs/threat-intelligence/mobile-
privacy-apps.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Email addresses are the most common piece of personally
identifiable information (PII) apps were accessing, as 48 percent of
the iOS and 44 percent of the Android apps did so. Username was next,
which was accessed by 33 percent of iOS and 30 percent of Android apps,
followed by phone numbers, which were accessed by 12 percent of iOS and
9 percent of Android apps. Finally, 4 percent of iOS and 5 percent of
Android apps accessed the user's physical address.
It is often reasonable and necessary to grant apps permission to
access various features on a smartphone. For example, if you want to
take a picture using an app, the app will need permission to use your
device's camera. However, not all permissions are the same. We took a
closer look at permissions that could provide access to data or
resources that involve the user's private information or could
potentially affect the user's stored data or the operation of other
apps.
Camera access was the most requested permission, with 46 percent of
Android and 25 percent of iOS apps seeking it. That was followed by
location tracking, which was sought by 45 percent of Android and 25
percent of iOS apps. Twenty-five percent of Android apps requested
permission to record audio, while 9 percent of iOS apps did so. Last,
15 percent of Android apps sought permission to read SMS messages and
10 percent sought access to phone call logs. Neither of these
permissions are available in iOS.
Apps have permissions because the user granted them by hitting an
``I Agree'' button--usually without considering if certain permissions
make sense, and often without pausing to consider the request at all.
For example: The Android flashlight app ``Brightest Flashlight LED--
Super Bright Torch'', which has 10 million installs, asks for
permissions including precise user location, access to user's contacts,
and permission to directly call phone numbers. It is hard to imagine
why a flashlight app has a legitimate need to copy all of your
contacts, call all of your friends, or know exactly where you are
located. Consumers should pause before the agree to permissions--and
app developers should be very clear about what permissions their app
needs and why it needs them.
Deepfakes
``Deepfakes'' are audio or video tracks created or altered by
artificial intelligence (AI) systems and used to make the public
believe they are authentic. Most of the popular examples of deepfakes
show politicians or actors saying or doing things designed to embarrass
or harm reputations. As a result, deepfakes are not typically viewed as
a threat to Enterprise security.
This is short-sighted. Enterprises do need to pay attention to
deepfakes; fake content like videos, photos, audio recordings or emails
represent a serious risk to individuals as well as the organization.
The technology behind deepfakes has advanced to the point decisions
might be made based on a deepfake, or decisions not made because an
authentic video is thought to be a deepfake. Deepfakes are particularly
dangerous because there is such a low barrier of entry and because they
are difficult to detect. Until recently, altering videos was expensive
and required significant resources, specialized equipment, and money.
Today, if someone has access to the internet, a gaming PC and the right
software they can produce convincing deepfakes. Specialized
applications have reduced creating deepfakes to a point-and-click
exercise, reducing the need for advanced skills.
Deepfakes are created using a process based on Generative
Adversarial Networks (GAN). Essentially, a GAN consists of 2 machine-
learning networks that work in an on-going feedback loop where 1
network creates the deepfake and the second one tests the output. The
networks pass the deepfake back and forth making alterations to make it
as realistic as possible. Since the GAN is ``learning'' throughout the
process, the deepfake becomes harder to spot with the naked eye.
Given the low barrier of entry and that they are difficult to
detect, Enterprises need to understand the risks deepfakes pose to
their organization. For example: A deepfake of a CEO announcing a
massive layoff could cause their stock price to sink. A deepfake could
be used to order an employee to wire funds, or transfer intellectual
property out of the company. Until a proven method to identify or block
deepfakes is developed organizations will be best served educating
employees about the danger of deepfakes and implementing rapid response
plans that can be executed as soon as a deepfake is identified.
Twitterbots
In October 2018, Twitter released a massive dataset of content
posted on its service by the Internet Research Agency (IRA) beginning
in May 2014. The IRA is the Russian company behind the social media
propaganda campaign directed against the 2016 U.S. elections. Symantec
conducted an in-depth analysis of the dataset to learn more about how
the campaign operated.
The dataset consisted of 3,836 Twitter accounts and nearly 10
million tweets. These accounts amassed almost 6.4 million followers and
followed 3.2 million accounts. The sheer volume of data was enormous,
more than 275 GB.
Our research \4\ led to a number of interesting findings:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.symantec.com/blogs/threat-intelligence/twitterbots-
propaganda-disinformation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. The operation was carefully planned, with accounts often
registered months before they were used. The average time
between account creation and first tweet was 177 days. The
average length of time an account remained active was 429 days.
2. A core group of main accounts was used to push out new content.
These were often ``fake news'' outlets masquerading as regional
news outlets or pretending to be political organizations.
3. A much larger pool of auxiliary accounts was used to amplify
messages pushed out by the main accounts. These accounts
usually pretended to be individuals.
4. Some operatives may have been making money on the side by using
monetized URL shorteners to create links. If they did monetize
the URLs one account in particular could have generated almost
$1 million.
We divided the accounts into two main categories; main accounts and
auxiliary accounts. Each category had different characteristics and
played a different role. We identified 123 main accounts, each having
at least 10,000 followers. Main accounts tended to not be followers of
other accounts. They were primarily used to publish new tweets.
We identified 3,713 auxiliary accounts, each having less than
10,000 followers. Auxiliary accounts tended to be followers of
thousands of other accounts. Their main purpose was to retweet messages
from other accounts. Since auxiliary accounts were used to amplify
targeted messages it makes sense they were the larger category.
A particularly effective account in the dataset was called TEN--
GOP. Created in November 2015, the account masqueraded as a group of
Republicans in Tennessee. It appears to have been manually operated. In
less than 2 years TEN--GOP managed to rack up nearly 150,000 followers.
Despite only tweeting 10,794 times, the account garnered over 6 million
retweets. Only a small fraction (1,850) of those retweets came from
other accounts within the dataset. In other words, almost all of its
retweets came from accounts outside the dataset, meaning many could
have been real Twitter users.
The Twitterbot campaign is often referred to as the work of trolls,
but the release of the dataset makes it obvious that it was far more
than that--it was highly professional. It was planned months in advance
and the operators had the resources to create and manage a vast
disinformation network. And aside from the sheer volume of tweets
generated over a period of years, its orchestrators developed a
streamlined operation that automated the publication of new content and
leveraged a network of auxiliary accounts to amplify its impact.
Targeted Ransomware
Ransomware continues to be one of the most dangerous cyber threats
facing any organization. The threat has changed significantly over the
past 2 years, as criminals are increasingly targeting enterprises.
During 2018, while the overall number of ransomware infections was down
20 percent, attacks against organizations (as opposed to against
individuals) rose by 12 percent. Alarmingly, Enterprises accounted for
81 percent of all ransomware infections in 2018. Targeted attacks have
been particularly hard on State and local government organizations. In
March 2018 the city of Atlanta was attacked and ransomware encrypted
servers that made over a third of the 424 city-wide services
inaccessible. The clean-up costs for the attack are expected to run to
over $10 million. The Colorado Department of Transportation spent $1.5
million to clean up after they were attacked. Two Florida cities that
were attacked took another route--they paid the ransom, which totaled
$1 million between them.
The number of targeted ransomware attacks has multiplied as new
groups move into this sector. Although targeted ransomware attacks
account for a small percentage of overall ransomware attacks, they
present a far greater risk as a successful targeted ransomware attack
can cripple an ill-prepared organization. These attacks also typically
involve much higher ransom demands, ranging from $50,000 to over $1
million.
Targeted attacks can result in hundreds of computers encrypted,
backups destroyed, and business-critical data removed from the
organization. Targeted attacks can shut down an organization, leading
to loss of business, reputational damage, and multimillion-dollar
clean-up bills. The number of organizations affected by targeted
ransomware attacks has grown sharply over the past 2\1/2\ years. As
recently as January 2017, Symantec observed just 2 organizations a
month being attacked. However, recent months have seen that figure grow
to above 50 organizations a month.
The SamSam ransomware group was the original targeted ransomware
threat, but was joined in 2018 by another highly-active targeted actor
called Ryuk. In 2019 several additional groups were linked to a series
of highly disruptive attacks in the United States and Europe. Current
trends indicate that targeted ransomware is attracting a high degree of
interest among cyber criminals, with new groups appearing at an
accelerating pace, motivated no doubt by the success of some recent
attacks. RobbinHood is another new family, first appearing in May 2019.
It was reportedly used in the attack against the U.S. city of Baltimore
that shut down several services, including municipal employees' emails,
phone lines, and on-line bill payments.
A group known as GoGalocker has used a new breed of targeted
ransomware that appeared in early 2019. Traditional ransomware
attackers cast a wide net using spam campaigns to improve their chances
of finding a victim. GoGalocker selects targets and digs in deep. The
attackers behind GoGalocker appear to be highly skilled, capable of
breaking into the victim's network and deploying a wide array of tools
in order to map the network, harvest credentials, elevate privileges,
and turn off security software before deploying the ransomware. This
process permits the attackers to identify and access a large number of
computers in order to later simultaneously infect them with the
ransomware. By maximizing the number of assets, the attacker
compromises the better the chances are the victim will pay the ransom.
Stalkerware
Stalkerware is a type of malware that is secretly loaded on an
unsuspecting victim computing device giving almost total control of the
device to a bad actor. The bad actor--who can be an ex-spouse, ex-
boyfriend, or other stalker--would then know the victims exact
location, be able to read their emails and texts, and even turn on
their microphone or camera. Due to the control Stalkerware gives a bad
actor, it is classified as a type of malware--malicious software
designed to gain access to or damage your computer, often without your
knowledge.
Stalkerware can affect PCs, Macs, and iOS or Android devices.
Although Windows operating systems may be more susceptible to attacks,
attackers are becoming better at infiltrating Apple's operating systems
as well. Stalkerware typically infects a device when the victim accepts
a prompt or pop-up without reading it first, downloads software from an
unreliable source, opens email attachments from unknown senders, or
pirate media such as movies, music, or games
So why is Stalkerware available in app stores? Publishers of
Stalkerware typically advertise their product as parental monitoring
software to keep kids safe, and this can certainly be true when it is
used appropriately by a responsible parent. However, any software
surreptitiously loaded onto a device, no matter how well-meaning is
malicious. Additionally, the features built into some of these apps
give more total control of a device than parents would need and make it
ripe for abuse.
conclusion
New threats are emerging every year--but that does not mean
existing threats have gone away. We need to be vigilant in our defense
against the traditional threats we have battled for years, while
understanding emerging threats and planning defenses accordingly.
Emails have been a persistent attack vector, yet attackers are finding
new ways use the service against us. Ransomware is not new but the
attacks are becoming more targeted and disruptive. Mobile security is a
threat we allow by granting excessive permissions. Finally, deepfakes
and twitterbots teach us that cyber can be utilized to influence and
force actions from a distance. The focus of the Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation Committee is vital for our
Nation to understand the current threat landscape and ensure resources
are allocated to determine how to defend against them. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify before this committee, and I would be happy
to take any questions you may have.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Durbin. Thank you for your
testimony.
I now recognize Mr. Knake to summarize his statement for 5
minutes.
STATEMENT OF ROBERT K. KNAKE, SENIOR RESEARCH SCIENTIST, GLOBAL
RESILIENCE INSTITUTE, NORTHEASTERN UNIVERSITY, SENIOR FELLOW,
THE COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS
Mr. Knake. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to break down my
remarks into 3 categories.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to break down my
comments into 3 categories, what I will call the good, the bad,
and the ugly.
The good is that I think we are actually making progress in
cybersecurity. Ten years ago, when I wrote my first book on
cyber warfare, it was a dire prognosis for the patient. We
concluded in that that the attacker had an overwhelming
advantage, and that private companies could not possibly
protect themselves from Russian, Chinese, or other state-based
adversaries.
I think the last 10 years have showed us that, in fact,
some companies are able to manage the risk from even the most
sophisticated adversaries, and they are able to do it day in
and day out. In the last decade we have seen the development,
not just of new technology, but new doctrine and new strategies
and new tactics for defense.
Most notably, I will call out the kill chain. Right? This
is the basic concept that an adversary doesn't simply need to
compromise a single host, they need to go through a series--
anywhere from 7 to 22 steps, depending on how you count--to
achieve their objective. So, from that perspective, a defender
only needs to detect them at one, and block them at one of
those stages.
This kind of thinking has allowed us to reverse the notion
that the offense has an overwhelming advantage in this space.
We now have tooling around that. Technology like endpoint
detection and response, end-point protection program that can
automatically identify malware. These technologies have really
helped us turn a corner for the most sophisticated of cyber
defense programs. That is the good news.
What we need to do now, of course, is create the incentives
and the structures and the Government enablement to drive these
innovations down into the wider markets so that school
districts and local governments and mom-and-pop businesses are
able to achieve this level of cybersecurity.
The bad news is, of course, the technology landscape, as
you all know, is rapidly changing. This may mean that, by the
time we get in place these secure systems, these secure
concepts that will help protect the state of play today, the
technical terrain is going to have changed.
We have talked about IOT, we have talked about AI, and we
have talked about quantum. Those, I think, are the 3 big
changes out there. I would add, with IOT, 5G. Ubiquitous high-
speed connectivity is going to enable so many millions of
devices to be connected.
What we have seen so far is that, for IOT, it is not really
so much a new technology as a trend toward cheaper computers
and ubiquitous connectivity that is enabling us to put
computers everywhere. What we are not doing is learning the
lessons from the past 20 years of enterprise security and
applying those lessons into the IOT space.
For artificial intelligence and quantum, the only thing I
can say is we have got to make sure that this is a race between
the United States of America and the Chinese, not a race
between Silicon Valley and the Chinese. The capability that
Silicon Valley is bring to this fight is immensely important,
but they are acting in their commercial interests, as they
should as private businesses. We need to ensure that we have
the funding there.
So finally, I would say the ugly of it is Government
intervention in this space. We have got to make sure that
Government is helping to align market interests in favor of
security. That is going to require doing things that we haven't
wanted to do in this space, like regulate, in part because we
believe that the technology is moving too fast for Government
regulation to keep up.
I think, though, that there is an answer here, and I think
it is fairly simple. Instead of Government setting requirements
that we know adversaries will target to get around, our goal
needs to be to require outcomes. We can do this through
insurance. We can do this through other financial incentives.
But we have models for this in other spaces that we can apply,
so that the goal should not be to meet a list of Government
requirements for what security looks like, but to achieve an
objective that we know current technology can meet, and that
the market can reinforce companies meeting that objective.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Knake follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert K. Knake
Tuesday, October 22, 2019
introduction
Thank you Chairman Richmond, Ranking Member Katko, and Members of
the committee for the opportunity to testify on this important matter.
While other witnesses will focus on how the capabilities of specific
threat actors may change and evolve, I would like to focus my remarks
on how the technology landscape may change in the next 5 years and what
that may mean for emerging cyber threats. Before I begin, let me be
clear that the views I represent here are my own and do not represent
my employers or any supporters of my work.
Looking back over the past decade, there are reasons to be hopeful
for a secure cyber future. When my co-author Richard Clarke and I wrote
Cyber War: The Next Threat to National Security and What to Do About It
a decade ago, we predicted a dire future in cyber space. Early trends
then indicated to us that our adversaries would develop sophisticated
cyber offensive capabilities and would use these capabilities to
undermine our dominance of conventional military domains. We predicted
correctly that North Korea would emerge, somewhat surprisingly, as a
capable adversary in the cyber domain and highlighted China's on-going
campaign of economic espionage on behalf of its National champion
companies. We of course failed to predict many of the key events that
are top of mind today like Russia's use of the internet to interfere in
elections and sow dissent; however, in my view, our greatest error was
our failure to see the technology trends that have allowed the
defensive community to be able to manage the threat posed by even the
most determined nation-state adversaries.
In Cyber War, we concluded that private companies could not defend
themselves against determined adversaries because cyber space as a
domain favors the attacker. Conventional wisdom at the time was that an
attacker had all the advantages. An attacker only needed to find one
vulnerable system to succeed whereas the Chief Information Security
Officer (CISO) at a large enterprise had to defend thousands or
hundreds of thousands of systems. This asymmetry was often captured as
the idea that ``the attacker only needs to compromise one vulnerable
system; the defender needs to be perfect.''
The good news is that technology trends and new doctrine for
cybersecurity have dramatically changed the terrain of cyber space.
Companies at the leading edge of cybersecurity have been able to manage
the threat from even the most sophisticated actors. If these trends
continue and if policy is put into place to correctly align incentives,
it is possible that in 5 years we may view cybersecurity broadly as a
manageable problem. The bad news is that emerging technologies may once
again favor the attacker, erasing the defensive gains of the past
decade. In my remarks below, I will review the ``good news'' of the
last decade and how these trends can be accelerated and adoption of
better cybersecurity practices encouraged by Congress. I then will
discuss the ``bad news'' of how emerging technology trends like
artificial intelligence, the internet of things and 5G, and quantum
computing could favor the offense. I then provide some thoughts for how
Congress can promote wider adoption of cybersecurity practices that are
on the cutting edge today and shape the future of technology so that
defenders are not left at a disadvantage tomorrow. Finally, I conclude
with a brief review of the projects I am working on today that may help
us build a more resilient cyber future.
the good news: cybersecurity is possible
There is an old joke in cybersecurity, attributed to Dmitri
Alperovitch, now the Chief Technology Officer (CTO) of the
cybersecurity firm Crowdstrike. The joke, retold in many formulations,
is always along the lines of ``there are two types of companies: Those
that have been hacked and know it and those that have been hacked and
don't know it.'' That may have been true a decade ago, but today there
are three types of companies: Those that have been hacked and know it,
those that have been hacked and don't know it, and those that are
actively and successfully managing the risk.
In The Fifth Domain, Clarke and I conclude that the greatest
advance in cybersecurity over the last decade was not a technology but
a white paper. In ``Intelligence-Driven Security'' a group of
researchers and practitioners at Lockheed Martin presented the
processes they had developed for detecting and disrupting adversary
activity along the ``Cyber Kill Chain''. Published in 2011, the paper
showed how defenders could take the advantage away from adversaries by
breaking down the process by which an adversary attempted to achieve an
objective on a network and building a security program around each of
those steps. Unlike in conventional thinking on cybersecurity where a
network compromise is considered a failure, the Kill Chain methodology
sees that as only one step in the chain. Before an adversary can
exploit an initial host on a network, they must engage in
reconnaissance of the target, weaponize what they have learned into a
package capable of compromising the target and deliver it. After they
have achieved the initial exploitation, they then need to gain
administrative rights, move laterally across the network to find their
target, and then carry out out their intended action. That action might
be to exfiltrate data off the network or to destroy operational
systems. Whatever their goal, it is not simply to compromise a single
system.
The concept of the kill chain has evolved and expanded since first
published. MITRE Corporation has developed the ATT&CK Matrix to further
breakdown the steps that happen after initial compromise into 22
discrete steps. However you break down the attackers progression, the
key takeaway should be that detecting and stopping them is possible.
Whether the adversary needs to go through 7 steps or 22, they have to
successfully avoid detection at each stage; defenders only need to
detect them at any one stage. Once the adversary is on the defender's
system, the defender should have the advantage. Gaining that advantage
requires knowing the topology of your system better than the adversary
and being able to detect anomalous behavior within it. This ability to
detect and respond rapidly is what Crowdstrike and other companies have
specialized in. Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) has been the
technical capability that has enabled ``threat hunting'' along the kill
chain to occur at scale within enterprises. Managed Detection and
Response companies are rapidly bringing these capabilities to the
middle market.
Beyond detection and response, newer technologies have the
potential to remove large swaths of risk. When properly deployed and
managed with security in mind, cloud computing, containerization, and
software defined networking, to name just three emerging technologies,
can provide real advantages to defenders. Virtualization can allow new
computing environments to be spun up and down for a specific purpose so
rapidly that gaining a foothold in one of these new environments does
an adversary no good because the environment itself does not persist.
These technologies can also allow for deception campaigns on a massive
scale to create new opportunities for detection and to increase the
work factor of adversaries.
All this adds up to the potential to make our country, our
companies, and ourselves resilient to cyber attacks. Through the
adoption of secure-by-default technologies we should be able to make it
so that almost all attacks ``bounce off'' and that we can ``bounce
back'' when attacks do succeed. From a policy perspective, what is
needed now are the incentives and requirements to promote the adoption
of these techniques and the technologies beyond the small handful of
companies that are deploying them in a holistic way today. And of
course, this transition needs to occur at a faster rate than
adversaries can adopt new technologies that defeat them.
the bad news: technology changes could erase these gains
Just as we may be turning a corner on security, the technology
landscape may change in ways that are not evolutionary but
revolutionary. By that I mean that the technology coming on-line is not
about the continuation of current trends or even the acceleration of
trends but whole new classes of technology. Artificial intelligence,
quantum computing, and 5G and the internet of things may not
intrinsically favor attackers over defenders but the offense is likely
to adopt technologies that can give them an advantage faster than
defenders and their targets are likely to adopt new technologies in
ways that open up new swaths of vulnerabilities. I would like to now
discuss three such technologies: (1) Artificial intelligence; (2) 5G
and the internet of things; and (3) quantum computing.
Artificial Intelligence
Arguably, artificial intelligence up until now has been a
technology that has favored the defense. Many of the gains discussed
above in the last decade are due to artificial intelligence
applications within cybersecurity. For instance, the ability of
advanced endpoint protection programs to identify never before seen
malware using machine learning has made the work of adversaries much
more difficult. The bad news is that as the state-of-the-art in
artificial intelligence advances, attackers are likely to use it in
ways that will upend the basis of today's security architectures.
Deepfakes have made headlines recently in the political world. For
public figures who have thousands of hours of voice and video
recordings available on-line, artificial intelligence can now be used
to piece together snippets of them talking to literally put words in
their mouths. Deepfakes are likely to come into play heavily in the
2020 election and defenses against them are lagging. Use of AI for
deepfake detection made news over the summer but in this arms race,
adversaries look to have an advantage, tweaking their tools and testing
against deepfake detection technology until they can defeat it.
Initially, deepfakes required large libraries of voice and video
but as the technology improves, the amount of source data required is
rapidly coming down. That will mean that many of the fundamental
controls we have in place today to combat cyber crime may no longer be
trusted. The cybersecurity community has worked hard to educate
companies about the dangers of wire transfer fraud--to train finance
departments to be suspicious of emails from the CEO ordering them to
wire funds on an emergency basis, for instance. But what if, instead of
compromising the email system, adversaries compromise voice and video
systems, and your boss in her natural speaking voice that you hear
everyday, calls you to confirm that she does in fact need you to wire
those funds right now? The ability to create deepfakes from smaller and
smaller sets of source material will make that scenario possible for
many companies in a short period of time. That will mean that the
ultimate root of trust--believing what we see and hear--can no longer
be trusted.
5G and the Internet of Things
Internet of things (IOT) technology is rapidly being distributed
within critical infrastructure and in homes and businesses in ways that
appear to ignore the security lessons we learned over the last 20 years
within enterprise systems. Coding practices are poor in the space,
firmware is difficult to update, and systems are widely exposed to the
public internet. What's more, with the advent of 5G, massive,
ubiquitous wireless connectivity will mean that many of these devices
will be directly connected to the public internet with no defense-in-
depth built around them. Within the consumer market, we have seen a
troubling trend of ``set and forget'' connected devices that, after
being setup, are not monitored for security and do not receive updates
to their software after problems are discovered. Unfortunately, this
trend does not appear to be confined to the home IOT market. The same
problem is occurring even within industrial control systems.
Quantum Computing
Far more than these other two technological shifts, quantum
computing is likely to up-end computer security because it will up-end
computing. A calculation that might take a classical computer several
centuries to complete could be done by a quantum computer in the blink
of an eye. Experimental systems today are showing a lot of promised
toward achieving this kind of capability. Google may already have
achieved what is known as ``Quantum Supremacy'', using a quantum
computer to complete a mathematical equation faster than a conventional
system could.
Quantum computing has the potential to be extremely disruptive to
security, allowing encryption protocols to be defeated; whether quantum
resistant encryption will be deployed ubiquitously and will prove to
defeat quantum computing is an open question. The combination of
artificial intelligence technology with quantum computing open some
scary possibilities. More than anything else, Government needs to
ensure that the United States is a leader, not a follower, in the
development of quantum computing.
the ugly: government intervention in necessary
For most of the last 20 years, U.S. Government policy across
administrations has largely been about getting out of the way and
hoping that markets would solve cybersecurity problems on their own.
Where Government has intervened, intervention has been uneven and light
touch. Today, I believe we are starting to recognize that markets alone
will not solve our cybersecurity dilemma. I think it is fair to
conclude that the industries that are doing the best at actively
managing risk in cyber space are also actively regulated: Financial
services and the defense industrial base. Many of the approaches to
security that are working today were pioneered in these sectors.
Driving these innovations to other markets will require creating the
right set of incentives and requirements. I have been pleased to see
that more so than in any previous administration, the current
leadership of the Department of Homeland Security has recognized that
regulation, smartly and carefully implemented, is necessary to drive
the level of security required for our Nation. The Department's
cybersecurity strategy is explicit on this point. In the IOT space, DHS
should lead efforts to regulate the security of IOT devices in the
sectors that it regulates including chemicals, pipelines, and the
maritime industry.
I believe that the Internet of Things Cybersecurity Improvement Act
would be a good first step toward improving IOT security. The act would
set standards that sellers of IOT technology to the Federal Government
would need to meet as well as establish disclosure requirements when
manufacturers discover vulnerabilities. The approach uses Government's
massive purchasing power to improve security more broadly. Companies
that develop technologies on a ``build once, sell everywhere'' model
will likely meet the Government's requirement for all their commercial
offerings rather than just for those sold to Government. These
requirements, once set, could then be adopted to regulate the use of
IOT in critical infrastructure sectors.
Fundamentally, however, I believe that setting requirements is
insufficient. We need to make device makers responsible for the full
life cycle of security by making them liable for harm caused by their
devices. I recognize that this notion is a radical departure from how
we have approached liability within the information technology realm
thus far but now that these devices are making their way into National
security systems and life safety systems, I think it is critical that
we create incentive structures that truly value security. In the next
section, I discuss one effort we have undertaken at the Global
Resilience Institute to create a model for liability for cybersecurity.
Beyond IOT, the leadership of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA) has made election security the agencies No. 1
priority. CISA will need to build on its current efforts to counter-
election interference to play a role in combating the proliferation of
deepfakes in the political realm and for enterprise security. Crucial
to this effort will be building strong, operational partnerships with
social media companies that go well beyond today's arm length
interactions. Steps must be taken to breakdown the reluctance by
Facebook, Google, Twitter, and other social media companies to truly
partner with Government on this problem.
For quantum computing and artificial intelligence, Government's
role should be less about managing the cybersecurity implications and
more focused on ensuring that the United States competes and wins in
these technologies. I tend to be skeptical of analogies to arms races
or calls for Apollo Programs or Manhattan projects, but on the basic
science in these fields, those kinds of approaches are warranted. Both
China and Russia have made gaining an advantage in AI a National
priority. China has also done that on quantum. I believe our market-
based approach to technology development comes with real advantages but
in the development of these core capabilities, I worry that a race that
is the Chinese State vs. Silicon Valley is one that Silicon Valley will
lose. We need a National effort to ensure that U.S. technology
leadership continues into the next decade.
Each of these lines of effort will take at least half a decade to
produce meaningful results--thus it is crucial that the efforts begin
now.
what we are doing at gri
The challenges we face are large, but they are not insurmountable.
While much work remains to be done, let me take this opportunity to
highlight four efforts under way at the Global Resilience Institute
that may contribute to improving our National cyber resilience over the
next 5 years.
Creating a National Transportation Safety Board for Cyber Incidents
Resilience is a concept that we have talked a lot about in the
field of cybersecurity but it's a far better-developed idea in other
fields like emergency management and psychology. One of the key
components of resilience I have taken away from studying the concept in
these other fields is the importance of adapting following a bad
outcome. Learning from disasters or even from so-called ``near misses''
is critical to the development of resilience. To this end, as far back
as 1991 practitioners in the field have suggested that Government
should develop the equivalent of a National Transportation Safety Board
(NTSB) for cybersecurity incidents, a ``Cyber NTSB''. Given that this
idea was first suggested 3 decades ago but has yet to reach fruition,
we are planning a workshop, sponsored by the National Science
Foundation, to develop a prototype process for how such an organization
would operate. We plan to hold the workshop in the spring of 2020.
Building a High Assurance Network for Collaborative Defense
Critical to building resilience is creating a model for
Collaborative Defense. The ``partnership'' that has been the central
tenet of our National cybersecurity policy for 2 decades needs to
evolve to real-time, operational collaboration. In order for that to
happen, we need collaboration platforms where the members of this
partnership can trust each other. Government needs to be able to trust
that the intelligence it shares will be protected and only shared
appropriately and securely. But private companies need the same degree
of assurance when they share with Government and with each other.
Today, the platforms on which we collaborate, internet-connected,
general purpose computers, are not trustworthy. Moreover, we often do
not know whether we can trust our partners that are using those
computers.
When I testified before this committee 2 years ago, I discussed
early thinking about how to develop such a network. Today I am pleased
to say that, working with our partners at the Advanced Cybersecurity
Center and with a generous grant from a private foundation, we have
developed a prototype network. This network takes advantage of the
trends in computing that have dramatically lowered cost: Inexpensive
computing at endpoints and cloud computing to provide immense computing
power for analytics and other services. For about $300 a year, we can
provide a high assurance endpoint that can only be accessed by
specified users to connect to a secured, private network for threat
collaboration. This model provides the basis for addressing the issue
of trust in the users and trust in the systems by replicating at far
lower costs many of the design criteria of the Classified networks used
by Government today.
In my view, the model we have developed should be adopted by the
Department of Homeland Security to create what we have dubbed CInet for
Critical Infrastructure Network. Using existing authorities, the
Secretary of Homeland Security should establish a new safeguarding
standard for Confidential information, the existing level below Secret
in the classification schema. The standard should be built around the
prototype we have developed which eliminates the most common paths to
compromise (spear-phishing, credential compromise, and watering hole
attacks) and prevents end-users from unintentionally releasing
information through a series of technical controls. Having vetted the
concept with a handful of critical infrastructure companies, we believe
that this model could fit into the current operating models within
critical infrastructure security operating sectors. We also believe
that by harnessing current best practices in the private sector for
continuous monitoring of insider threats, the Secretary could also
promulgate a different standard for granting of clearances at the
Confidential level that would be better, faster, and cheaper. Then
would come the hard part of convincing the intelligence community to
target collection to provide relevant threat intelligence to
participating companies and to downgrade it to the Confidential level.
Designing a Darknet for the Electric Grid
Many of the same technology trends that could provide attackers an
advantage over the next 5 years can also be harnessed to increase
security for critical infrastructure. Advances like software defined
network (SDN), increased mobile bandwidth with 5G, and artificial
intelligence can enable far higher degrees of assurance for critical
infrastructure than can be attained today. This is the idea behind our
Darknet project to create a separate network for the electric grid
using ``dark'' or unlit fiber optic cables. GRI initially began work on
this concept with a grant from a private foundation and is now
partnering on it with Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Developing an Insurance Regime that Promotes Better Security
Cyber insurance was supposed to help drive down risk. In theory,
the insurance sector, in exchange for providing insurance coverage,
would require companies to prove that the risk they underwrote was
being managed. In practice, as the recent spate of ransomware attacks
on city governments has demonstrated, cyber insurance is simply
transferring the risk and enriching the criminal groups behind the
attacks. Yet, in other sectors, insurance markets have proved
remarkable mechanisms for encouraging risk reduction. Dr. Stephen E.
Flynn, the director of Northeastern's Global Resilience Institute, and
I have been developing a model for insurance that would promote risk
reduction rather than just risk transference. Dr. Flynn, a retired
Coast Guard officer, has posited that the regime put in place under the
Oil Pollution Act of 1990 after the Exxon. Valdez oil spill could be
ported over for data security. In other words, we should treat data
spills like oil spills. Under that regime, ships entering U.S. waters
must provide proof in the form of a Certificate of Financial
Responsibility that their owners or their guarantors in the insurance
industry have the financial resources to cover the cost of cleaning up
an oil spill should containment on their vessel fail. Notionally,
owners of data could be required to take out insurance policies to
cover the full societal cost should they fail to protect the data that
they hold. In this thinking, Congress could establish a dollar figure
per record and then require holders of personal data to obtain
insurance to cover those loses. From there, market mechanisms would
take over to determine how to price risk. This model could also be
adapted for critical infrastructure. For instance, if natural gas
pipeline owners had to obtain private insurance to cover the costs of a
disruption to service caused by malicious cyber activity, markets would
likely require a far higher degree of assurance than would be required
through a standard regulatory model. In the coming months, we will
engage the insurance industry on further developing this concept.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Knake.
We will now recognize Ms. Howe to--five minutes to
summarize your statement.
STATEMENT OF NILOOFAR RAZI HOWE, SENIOR FELLOW, CYBERSECURITY
INITIATIVE, NEW AMERICA
Ms. Howe. Chairman Richmond, Chairman Thompson, Ranking
Member Katko, distinguished committee Members, thank you so
much for inviting me to speak today about emerging cyber
threats. My name is Niloofar Razi Howe, and for over 2 decades
I have worked in the technology sector, including
cybersecurity, as an investor, as an entrepreneur, and as an
executive.
When I first started working in technology we had a Utopian
vision for the internet, and cybersecurity was a dark art that
lived in its own silo. But as the internet has matured, and
every aspect of our lives has become operationalized in this
domain, the threat it represents has grown in kind and in
effect.
From IP theft, to cyber crime, to espionage, hostile social
manipulations, radicalization, and cyber war, the activity and
malfeasance that takes place affects all of society. It affects
all of our businesses, not just critical infrastructure. It
affects our Government's ability to provide services. Most
importantly, it affects all of us, the people. This same
adversary that is infiltrating our defense industrial base is
stealing intellectual property from our companies, probing our
infrastructure, and manipulating individuals. As Dan Geer
famously said, ``Every sociopath is now your next door
neighbor.''
There are no more silos. The problem is only getting bigger
as we embrace new waves of technology, innovations such as
cloud computing, autonomous vehicle, small low-orbit satellites
with advanced sensor platforms, the internet of things, drones,
distributed ledger technology, augmented and virtual reality.
On the horizon we see the emergence of 5G and microsensor
proliferation, autonomous weapons for private and military use,
quantum computing, AI, and synthetic biology, to just name a
few.
People and businesses will not wait for security laws and
regulation to catch up before they embrace these technologies.
They don't have a choice. The internet of things, which has the
potential to change industries at their core and create over
$11 trillion of economic gain, has security issues that are
well understood. But these issues will not slow adoption down.
Oddly, there is too much at stake to wait for security.
For the first time in human history, the accelerating pace
of technology innovation is outstripping our ability as human
beings to adapt and adjust our policies in a time line that is
relevant. Our adversaries have repeatedly shown that they can
move faster than we do. They adapt and exploit technology while
we grapple with its implications, emerging social norms, the
uneven distribution of authorities and capabilities, and a
political process that does not function at the speed of
innovation.
While we study the problem, our adversaries have
infiltrated our systems, exploited an already polarized
society, and undermined the very foundation of our democracy,
the belief that there is such a thing as objective truth--
because where there is no objective truth, the biggest liar
wins.
We need a coordinated and collaborative whole-of-society
approach to rise to the challenge of these emboldened
adversaries that we are out of position to deal with. It is
time for the United States to set a bold cyber agenda capable
of restoring trust globally, trust in our technology, trust in
our systems, trust in our infrastructure, and, through that,
trust in our political system, our political process, and our
leaders.
To be effective our Government will have to do this in
partnership across the Government and with private sector, and
remove any barriers that prevent Government agencies that have
relevant information from sharing that information and the
context that goes with it with the entities that are most
affected. This collaboration must extend to our cities, which
are overwhelmed and under-resourced. Their vulnerabilities are
a homeland security issue, especially as we look at our
election infrastructure and ransomware.
To have trust in our systems and infrastructure we must
commit to regaining our innovation edge, and never again lose
our seat at the standard-setting table. As we look to the next
waves of technology, especially AI and quantum, falling behind
is not about National pride. It is about National security. We
must have a strong and consistent cyber deterrence policy,
something only the Government can deliver on. Even the
strongest walls will eventually succumb to a capable and
determined adversary if there is no deterrence.
Technology companies that are co-conspirators with our
adversaries, that facilitate communications and propaganda
networks enabling destructive and chaotic social manipulation
must be regulated. To build resilience in society to social
manipulation efforts, funding and incentivizing media literacy
programs that teach the difference between fact, opinion,
misdirection, and lies, as well as research into deepfakes must
become a Homeland Security priority.
Finally, our cybersecurity work force lacks diversity,
lagging the technology sector by a significant margin. As we
build programs to skill and re-skill individuals to address the
massive skill shortage, we must put in place the right
incentives for diversity. We need new perspectives and a new
mental model for how we approach this threat. Our adversaries
are agile, creative, and persistent. Our technology landscape
is ever-shifting and our tax surface ever-expanding. Preparing
for the future requires a new organizational and operating
model focused on persistent cooperation and collaboration at
cyber speed.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Howe follows:]
Prepared Statement of Niloofar Razi Howe
October 22, 2019
Chairman Richmond, Ranking Member Katko, distinguished committee
Members, thank you for inviting me to testify on cybersecurity and
emerging technologies. I am a senior fellow in the Cybersecurity
Initiative at New America, a DC-based non-partisan think tank, and have
spent close to 3 decades in the technology sector, the last 15 years
focused on innovation in the National security and cybersecurity
sectors. I have been a venture capitalist, an entrepreneur, and a
corporate executive in the cybersecurity industry. I am also a member
of a number of corporate and Government advisory boards.
overview: where we stand today
We must rethink our approach to cybersecurity and cyber defense.
We are at an inflection point as enormous technological and
societal shifts are converging to reshape the National security
landscape and the underpinnings of our democracy. The world is changing
dramatically with the speed, scope, and scale of nothing we have ever
experienced. New, highly-advanced technology is being adopted at a
blinding pace as we digitize business, economic, defense, and social
infrastructures. We are embracing cloud computing, autonomous vehicles,
small low-orbit satellites with advanced sensor platforms, the internet
of things (IOT), drones, distributed ledger technology, augmented and
virtual reality. On the horizon we see the emergence of 5G and
microsensor proliferation, autonomous weapons (for both military and
private use), quantum computing, artificial intelligence, and synthetic
biology, to name a few. It's an exciting time, but there are
consequences. Over time almost everything that we have experienced in
the physical world--prosperity, democracy, corruption, and warfare--
will happen digitally but with a speed and severity that we are just
starting to comprehend. This isn't about technology alone or something
that takes place in a dark corner of the internet somewhere. It's
happening every moment in our offices, our cars, our family rooms, and
in our children's pockets. Every device is a supercomputer, every
application an attack vector, and with the internet, ``every sociopath
is now your next door neighbor.'' This is a defining moment for our
society as we face emboldened groups of adversaries with complex
motivations creating new social, political, and economic challenges
that we are out of position to deal with and almost out of time.
Good cyber hygiene is no longer sufficient as the path forward in
the face of increasing sophistication and the volume of threats our
society faces. In cyber space, we are certainly in conflict, and many
believe we are at war every day. Our adversaries are committed, well-
coordinated, persistent, and agile and they are growing in number,
especially as we continue to digitize the world, including some of the
world's most fragile societies. They are focused on using digital
tactics to exploit weaknesses in our technology infrastructures and in
our human nature. They are penetrating the seams that exist in society,
sometimes for greed, sometimes for power, and sometimes for their
National security imperatives.
For decades, our Nation has played a critical global leadership
role, providing vision, diplomacy, and stability to further our
interests and our allies' interests, and this role is core to the trust
and partnership required for a stable society and effective governance
at home and around the world. We must do this in the digital world as
well. To move us to a world of trustworthy systems and a resilient
society, we must reclaim our technology innovation edge and set the
standards for our digital infrastructure, which increasingly underpins
every aspect of our existence. We must work together--individuals,
businesses, innovators, technologists, educators, policy makers, and
our Government and military leaders--to define this new world order in
cyber space, or at least mitigate the risks that compound with every
moment.
And we must move fast.
It took centuries for Gutenberg's invention, the printing press, to
fundamentally change society by transforming information sharing and
communication. The internet has transformed society on a fundamentally
different, faster time line. Today, time is not on our side. Our
starting point is a society that is polarized, a political system that
is under attack, and a way of life that feels remarkably uncertain and
fragile to many Americans. The accelerating pace of technology
innovation for the first time in human history is outstripping our
ability as humans to adapt, adjust our policies on a time line that is
meaningful, and avoid the inevitable widening of the income divide in
society that this acceleration will drive. Automation will diminish the
importance of labor over time adding to income disparity between the
highest earners and the low-wage labor force, reinforcing a belief for
many in our society that the future will not be better for them or
their children. In fact, an Oxford University study estimates that 47
percent of total U.S. employment is at risk with automation. It is
these seams in society that our adversaries are exploiting. They are
using cyber space to undermine the very foundation of our democracy.
The amplification of polarization as a result of the structure of our
technology platforms as well as exploitation of those platforms by our
adversaries to sow discord and chaos in society has undermined the
effectiveness, stability, and consistency of our Government leaders and
policy makers to address these pressing problems and to find common
ground to rally around as a society with shared values and a shared
vision for the future. Not surprisingly, people's faith and trust in
their leaders--government, business, and religious leaders--continues
to decline, especially and most alarmingly, among our youth.
We must also move fast because our people and our businesses will
not wait for our policy makers to catch up or security to be designed
in before they embrace new waves of technology innovation that can
bring with them new disruptions to society. IOT, powered by 5G
networks, will be embraced by businesses to take advantages of the $11
trillion of economic gain waiting to be captured. Many of these devices
are inexpensive and rely on slim profit margins and with little to no
regulation or liability they generally lack even the most basic
security features we have come to expect in our connected devices. The
result is that most IOT devices have known vulnerabilities, and they
have already become a key component of adversary attack tactics such as
botnets. IOT devices are proliferating in every corner of society from
business-to-business applications in manufacturing, agriculture, health
care, and transportation to consumer applications such as home
automation. As a result, the vulnerabilities of these systems will also
proliferate into every aspect of our corporate and personal lives.
The growing market in low-orbit satellites, which gets little
airtime from security and privacy experts, threatens to form the most
ubiquitous surveillance platform ever built with no meaningful
regulation to control what they are used for or by whom. These
platforms can now be easily tasked by individuals at low cost with few
limits, regulatory or technical, on what they can be tasked to track or
what information they can obtain and sell. The privacy debate, which is
a critical corollary to any discussion about cybersecurity, needs to
take into account the implications of the 4,000 satellites that are
being launched into orbit.
The consequences of the digitization of fragile societies without
thought to security ramifications poses a credible security risk both
to those societies and possibly to the broader interconnected world.
While over half of the world's population is on-line, many of the
people who are now being brought on-line live in some of the world's
most chaotic geographies. As these populations get connected via the
internet, with few norms to truly govern their behavior or those who
seek to destabilize and manipulate them, we must be prepared for new
forms of malfeasance and exploitation.
As more money pours into artificial intelligence from governments
and technology firms, the ramifications are poised to be immense and by
definition beyond what the human brain can comprehend. We can expect
every industry and every aspect of society to be impacted by AI. What
this impact will be exactly is yet to be fully understood and must be
carefully researched and studied at every stage of development.
Our adversaries have repeatedly shown in the past that they can
move faster than we do in the United States. We have witnessed how
quickly they can adapt and exploit technology while we grapple with
emerging technologies, emerging social norms, and a political process
that does not function at cyber speed. While we have been studying the
problem of cybersecurity, cyber criminals have innovated and adapted.
Cyber crime is now an industry, often protected by the governments of
the geographies in which the cyber criminals operate, and has quickly
grown to be the most lucrative form of crime, overshadowing the global
illegal drug trade. The Hacker-Industrial Complex--networks of cyber
criminal who crowdsource their tools and share their services--
continues to operate with little fear of prosecution or retribution.
Just in the past few years, ransomware, which started out as a
troublesome cyber crime issue for petty criminals to extract value from
locking down access to data, has grown to represent a National and
homeland security issue threatening the very ability of our Government
to provide services to its citizens. This past year multiple
jurisdictions in the United States were hit with ransomware attacks
that crippled municipal services for prolonged periods of time. If this
was a testing ground for a new attack vector, these incidents proved
the vulnerability of our under-resourced State and local municipalities
to ransomware attacks and the potentially disastrous effect on the
communities they serve.
Our adversaries over the past 3 years have developed a better
understanding of, and therefore improved their use of, social
manipulation through the internet. The growth and reliance on social
media in the United States has enabled our adversaries, especially
Russia and China, to engage in state on individual activities
(manipulation) exploit vulnerabilities in our society, amplify
polarization, radicalize our youth, and undermine any sense of
objective truth in society. By definition, polarized societies are
ineffective at governance as there is no common ground to build
consensus to enact bipartisan policies, laws, and regulations that
benefit all of society. As our ability to govern erodes, so does
people's faith in the government leaders and their political system. A
recent Pew Research study found that Republicans and Democrats are more
divided along ideological lines--and partisan antipathy is deeper and
more extensive--than at any point in the last 2 decades. The ``middle''
has literally disappeared.
Underpinning all of these issues is the fact that human beings have
a flawed operating system (OS) that relies on outdated mental models
and cognitive biases that perhaps were useful when we lived in caves,
surviving attacks from the wild, but do little to help us in the age of
technology acceleration or protect us against our increasingly
vulnerable digital existence. This flawed human OS sits at the
intersection of our networks and devices and continues to be the weak
link in our security programs and architecture. For example, 91 percent
of all cyber attacks start with a phishing email, which still drives a
better response rate than most marketing programs. This flawed human OS
is also responsible for developing the policies, laws, and regulations
to protect our people and our businesses from harm. The pace at which
we have historically developed societal and Government solutions,
adapted to new technologies, and built consensus with respect to our
most pressing problems is too slow for the age of technology
acceleration. It is time to change our perspective and mental model
with respect to the time lines we must operate on, the agility with
which we take action, and the collaborative model we employ. Our
adversaries have.
where we need to go
It is critical to put in place the right policies to address our
most existential threats in real time. It is time for the United States
to set a bold cyber agenda capable of restoring trust globally trust in
our technology, trust in our systems, trust in our infrastructure, and
through that trust in our political system, our political process, and
our leaders. To be effective, our Government will have to do this in
partnership across the Government and with the private sector. There is
no time for silos or provincialism as we turn into solving an
existential crisis for our homeland, for the people, and for the world.
A bold new cyber agenda should include the following elements:
1. Speed and transparency.--The U.S. Government must remove any
barriers that prevent Government agencies that have threat and
adversary information from sharing that information real-time
and with context with the entities that are most affected.
Sustained and real-time cooperation and collaboration between
all relevant Government agencies and the private sector is the
only way to rebuild trust and have a real impact on our
adversaries. We now have multiple agencies with unique
capabilities to help the private sector, including the
Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection Agency (CISA), United States Cyber
Command, the National Security Agency (NSA), the Federal Bureau
of Investigation (FBI), and sector-specific agencies such as
United States Treasury and Department and Energy (DOE) to name
a few. Each plays a unique role in the Nation's cybersecurity
mission, but only if they are working together and without
barriers and provincial turf wars, can we actually change the
landscape of cybersecurity for the country. The Russia Small
Group, with a clear mandate to protect the 2018 elections, was
a tremendous example of what happens when we bring the full
power of multiple Government agencies to solve a problem, hand-
in-hand with the private sector. We need to rethink our U.S.
Government operating model to empower consistent and real-time
coordination and collaboration. Many of the authorities for
securing our systems were written long before there was a
commercial internet. We need take a holistic look at these
authorities through the lens of how we can most effectively
defend the Nation, our enterprises, and our people, with the
goal of enabling effective real-time consistent collaboration
and coordination.
2. A relentless focus on unique value drivers and outcomes.--
a. Government's unique role.--Government must do what only the
Government can do--deter malfeasance in cyber space,
especially by nation-state adversaries, by using our tools
of National power against those adversaries who are harming
us. The private sector cannot defend itself alone against
nation-state adversaries and criminals who are agile,
persistent, and creative. Even the strongest walls will
eventually succumb to a capable well-funded adversary if
there is no deterrence. This is uniquely the Government's
role. Peter Singer, a senior fellow at New America, wrote
last year about the collapse of cyber deterrence: ``Less
generously, these trends have created the opposite of
deterrence: Incentives. The failure to clearly respond has
taught not just Russia, but any other would-be attacker,
that such operations are relatively no pain on the cost
side, and all gain on the benefits side. Until this
calculus is altered, the United States should expect to see
not just Russia continue to target its citizens and
institutions but also other nations and non-state groups
looking for similar gains.'' Strong deterrence is the
cornerstone of any security framework and the U.S.
Government must take up this challenge in a decisive way,
with a consistent policy and framework for imposing cost on
those who do us harm.
b. Private sector's unique expertise.--The private sector has
developed deep technical expertise in certain domains and
the U.S. Government must leverage the private sector better
and not duplicate effort in areas where private-sector
capabilities now surpass Government capabilities. In the
threat intelligence market, while U.S. intelligence
agencies can bring the full power of their capabilities to
bear on a selected basis producing unique insights into
foreign adversaries, the private sector has advanced
capabilities across a broad group of actors (foreign and
domestic), including insight into attacker behavior,
tactics techniques and procedures (TTPs), and campaigns.
Coordinating intelligence between private and public sector
to understand adversary behavior and create a coordinated
response to defend and defeat the adversary is critical. As
we build and invest in Government capabilities, we must be
careful not to duplicate or compete with private-sector
capabilities.
3. Resilience to ransomware.--Ransomware is no longer just a cyber
crime issue. Ransomware at the State and municipal level is a
National security and homeland security issue. The single
purpose of Government is to provide services (including
protection) to its citizens. Ransomware at scale keeps that
from happening as we saw in Baltimore, Atlanta, and the State
of Texas. A ransomware attack during an election would have
devastating affect not just on the election itself, but on
people's trust in Government and the validity of our political
process. State and municipal administrations need Federal help
in the form of standards, grants, developing response plans,
and tax incentives to invest in infrastructure that can be
resilient to ransomware attacks and making Government systems
resilient to ransomware attacks should be a high priority for
Congress. It will take a coordinated effort across the whole of
Government, but especially DHS CISA, NIST, FBI, and NSA's
Cybersecurity Directorate, working hand-in-hand with State and
local agencies, to make progress against this real threat and
to stay ahead of the adversary.
4. Support secure smart cities.--As a corollary to the ransomware
issue, Congress should provide more support to sub-Federal
entities to collaborate on smart city modernization projects.
Our cities do not have the expertise to defend themselves on
their own nor the resources to do it. As our cities become
smarter, they must do so with security in mind or these
modernizations could unwittingly enable disruption of the
Government's core function of providing services and security
to its citizens, and given the criticality of municipal
services, actually lead to loss of life. As Natasha Cohen and
Brian Nussbaum write in their New America report Smart is not
Enough, ``Despite increasing concern from the information
security community, it is far from clear that even the smartest
of U.S. cities are in a position to deal with the full range of
new risks that the technology may bring. The required
financial, social, security, operational, legal, and policy
innovations needed for smart cities to deliver on their
aforementioned promises do not appear to be moving at the pace
of innovation of the technology.''
5. Commit to regaining our innovation edge.--Government funding of
innovation so that the United States can regain its edge in
next generation technologies will be critical to ensuring that
those technologies and the infrastructure that supports them is
secure by design. While venture capitalists invest over $5
billion per year conservatively in cybersecurity companies and
technologies, with a myriad of Innovation competitions such as
the RSA Conference Innovation Sandbox and Launchpad
Competitions held each year during the RSA Conference, which
now boasts close to 45,000 attendees each year, private-sector
investment is focused on building businesses based on proven
technologies and established market demand. That is not where
the funding gap exists. The United States must significantly
increase (to the tune of multiple of current Federal R&D
budgets) its funding in basic and applied research in the areas
identified by the U.S. intelligence community such as
artificial intelligence, 5G, and quantum computing in order to
meet its declared National technology priorities. It is time
for the Government to fund a bold innovation agenda that will
carry us forward to 2030 and beyond, and commit to regaining
our innovation edge in these critical next generation
technologies.
6. Fund media literacy programs.--We live in a polarized,
hyperconnected world of impatient digital citizens who are
being continuously and creatively targeted with misinformation.
Developing and funding a media literacy program that teaches
individuals how to discern the difference between fact,
opinion, misdirection and lies, is critical to a well-
functioning society and should be a homeland security priority.
IREX, a global development and education organization,
developed a Learn to Discern education program for the
Ukrainian Ministry of Education to combat Russian
disinformation campaigns. Their program integrated information
consumption skills into existing secondary school curricula and
teacher training programs at pre- and in-service teacher
training institutes. Working with the non-profit community as
well as the private sector, the U.S. Government should fund the
development of similar programs and curricula in the United
States for our elementary, middle, and high-school students as
well as for teacher training. With a broad media literacy
campaign, we can build resilience to state-sponsored
disinformation campaigns, help individuals recognize divisive
narratives and hate speech, and improve our youth's ability to
navigate increasingly polluted on-line spaces in a safe and
responsible way. As we do this, we must pay close attention to
misinformation innovations such as deepfakes, which present a
unique challenge, and fund research aimed at identifying and
mitigating the threat they pose to the very concept of
objective truth.
7. Commit to building a diverse workforce in cybersecurity.--The
Government is in a unique position to contribute and commit to
purposefully reducing the skills shortage in the cybersecurity
industry. While there are some great programs in place,
including DHS's CyberPatriot competition, CyberCorps
Scholarship for Service initiative, and the April 2019
Executive Order focused on reskilling and upskilling Federal
employees, more needs to be done to recruit individuals from
outside our typical skill sets (IT, law enforcement, and
military) with a clear mandate of solving the diversity gap in
the industry. The cybersecurity workforce today significantly
lags behind the broader technology industry in terms of
diversity and to solve our skills shortage we need all of
society to be inspired by the mission to reclaim cyber space
for good. Elizebeth Friedman, one of the most prolific
codebreakers in U.S. history had no background or training in
mathematics or linguistics and yet was able to break any code
in any language during and after World War II. We need to
inspire a new generation of Elizebeth Friedmans to consider a
career in cyber. There are a number of good examples of
reskilling efforts in both the public and private sector. The
U.K. Cyber Retraining Academy is an effort by the U.K.
government in partnership with the SANS Institute to reskill
individuals with high natural aptitude, but no formal cyber
background, to enroll in an intensive 10-week program preparing
them for a career in cybersecurity. Google launched Google IT
Support Professional Certification under its Grow with Google
initiative through Coursera, offering a way for anyone from any
educational background to get a start in the IT field where the
average starting salary for IT support is $52,000 per year. The
Homeland Security Act of 2002 envisioned the creation of a
National Emergency Tech Guard program, a corps of volunteers
whose training is funded by the Government and who can be
deployed during periods of crisis to restore critical systems
and services to their communities. Policy makers should
support, fund, expand, and incentivize similar initiatives with
a mandate of driving diversity in the industry. This commitment
would not only help solve the industry's skills shortage,
bolster our resilience during times of crisis, but would help
address the ``digital divide'' of the haves and the have nots
in our society. As we look to the future we will have to
ultimately commit to completely rebuilding our digital
infrastructure, cities, and nations to face the digital and
social challenges of 2030 and beyond. Investment in building
the talent base in the right way to tackle this challenge is a
necessity for success.
8. Judicious implementation of regulation.--Regulation must be
pursued in a focused and purposeful manner with a willingness
to adjust and adapt as we evolve, as technology evolves and as
our adversaries evolve. With those guiding principles, we
should enact regulation targeted at very specific areas where
we can have measurable impact.
a. Setting minimum Security Standards for IOT is critical.--
Congress should enact basic regulation with respect to IOT.
The U.S. Government can help protect the 5G ecosystem of
billions of connected devices by setting basic security
standards, requiring features such as auto update, and
importantly providing the right incentives, including tax
incentives for vendors to implement these standards and
corporations (including critical infrastructure) to deploy
secure products and the financial headroom and reason to
make changes.
b. It is time to enact regulations on big data and social
platforms.--The aim is not to regulate ``Big Tech'' but
rather those technology platforms that facilitate
communications and propaganda networks, exploit human
weakness for profit, are addictive by design, reward
virality, not veracity, thereby enabling destructive and
chaotic social manipulation by our adversaries, without
providing clear benefits to their users that outweighs
these costs. These social platforms have demonstrated an
unwillingness to self-regulate or put the interests of
their consumers or society at large ahead of their profit
motivation. The scope of harm they have caused society
includes not only the amplification of polarization, but
also psychological harm as the amount of stress, anxiety,
and depression caused by their platforms is on the rise in
society and especially with our youth. They are out of
time.
conclusion
All of the recommendations outlined above are intended to support
empowering a society that is resilient to the unintended consequences
of technology innovation and the inevitable exploitation and use of
those technologies by adversaries to gain some form of advantage. This
may only be a starting point of a long journey. If our ultimate goal is
defending our Nation by defeating our adversaries in cyber space rather
than accommodating them, then, in addition to establishing acceptable
norms of behavior, developing and committing to a consistent policy of
engagement, escalation and deterrence, we must have a working model for
successful public-private collaboration and engagement. Defeating our
adversaries presupposes our ability to harness the vast technical
expertise and resources as well as the unique authorities of the
Federal Government, the vast technical expertise and agility of the
private sector, a collaborative intelligence gathering and sharing
framework, and coordinated response planning. It presupposes a society
where trust exists between the private sector and the public sector,
where transparency and fact-based substantive conversation, discussion,
and communication are the norm.
We have a long way to go, time is not on our side, but we have not
yet run out of time.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Ms. Howe, for your testimony.
I now recognize Dr. Buchanan to summarize his opening
statement for 5 minutes. Thank you.
STATEMENT OF BEN BUCHANAN, PH D, SENIOR FACULTY FELLOW, CENTER
FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY, MORTARA CENTER, ASSISTANT
TEACHING PROFESSOR, GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY
Mr. Buchanan. Thank you, Chairman Richmond, Chairman
Thompson, and Ranking Member Katko, for holding this important
hearing and for inviting me to testify.
My name is Ben Buchanan. I am an assistant teaching
professor at the School of Foreign Service, and the senior
faculty fellow at the Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, both at Georgetown University. I am also a global
fellow at the Woodrow Wilson Center for Scholars, where I teach
introductory classes on artificial intelligence and
cybersecurity for Congressional staff. My research specialty is
examining how cybersecurity and AI shape international
security. In this vein I co-authored recently a paper entitled,
``Machine Learning for Policymakers.''
I will confine my opening remarks to the impact of AI on
cybersecurity, since I think it is the emerging technology
poised to have the most significant effect in this area. While
there is an enormous amount of hype and debate around AI in
general, the intersection of AI and cybersecurity is
understudied and underappreciated. At least 3 dimensions of
this problem deserve our analysis.
First and most significant is the cybersecurity of AI
systems themselves. AI systems are just as likely to be
susceptible to the kinds of software vulnerabilities that are
present in other kinds of computer code. As we have seen for
decades, hackers can exploit these vulnerabilities for their
own ends. There is no reason to think that hackers will not try
to do the same to AI systems, and there is no reason to think
that they will not, at times, succeed. This possibility is
particularly worrying, given the high stakes of some AI
applications. This is not a reason to avoid using AI, but
vigilance is imperative in order to improve cyber and National
security.
Yet to stop our analysis at just the traditional kinds of
software vulnerabilities is to miss a great deal of the
cybersecurity risk that AI systems pose. The neural network
architecture that underpins a lot of modern AI is immensely
powerful, but presents new classes of cybersecurity risk that
we are only beginning to uncover and understand. We call this
field adversarial learning.
Using adversarial learning hackers can cause neural
networks to make bizarre errors, causing systems that rely on
those networks to fail or reveal confidential information. This
is a field that requires a great deal more attention. A tiny
fraction of the research in AI today goes to studying AI
security and the risks of adversarial learning.
Our second area of analysis is that AI can change
traditional offensive cyber attacks against regular computer
systems. Modern hackers in many cases do not need AI to achieve
their ends. That said, I think it is noteworthy that some of
the most potent cyber attacks we have seen, including last
decade's Stuxnet, the 2006 black--2016 blackout in Ukraine, and
the 2017 attack now is NotPetya, which caused $10 billion in
damage, feature some forms of automation within them.
I can imagine a world in which future cyber operations will
use more sophisticated automated capabilities to achieve
particular tasks such as vulnerability discovery, target
selection, command and control, and attack execution. Mr. Knake
mentioned the kill chain earlier, and suffice it to say that I
think almost every aspect of the kill chain could be
transformed by more powerful automated capabilities.
I suspect that such automation could offer significant
upsides to sophisticated hackers faced with complex targets and
complex missions. In some respects, the possible upside to
automation in attack is higher in the area of cyber operations
than in physical warfare, since whether a plane is operated by
a human or a machine, the laws of physics still apply. But it
is likely that automated cyber capabilities, if sophisticated
enough, could operate much faster than their human-directed
counterparts. I stress, however, we have not seen this come to
fruition yet.
This leads to the third area of analysis, the possibility
that AI might help on cyber defense. This idea is also the
subject of a lot of hype and a lot of investment. There seems
to be discreet ways in which AI can indeed help secure computer
systems, both in discovering vulnerabilities before hackers do,
and also in detecting the presence of malicious code.
However, we must be careful not to let the hype outrun the
reality on this front. In evaluating cybersecurity advances in
this area, we should compare them to the baseline of
technologies we already use, many of which already involve
automation, and understand how, if at all, automation in our
modern paradigm of machine learning actually improves our
defenses. I do believe that AI-enabled tools are likely to be a
fundamental part of modern and future cyber offense and
defense. The scale, size, and speed of cyber operations will
make this inevitable. It is imperative that we keep up with
changing times.
That said, we must not forget that cyber operations, no
matter how sophisticated, are still fundamentally human
operations. For as much as we will talk about technology today,
we must remember that the people in our organizations,
including Government, are key to addressing these threats.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Buchanan follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ben Buchanan
Thank you, Chairman Richmond and Ranking Member Katko, for holding
this important hearing and for inviting me to testify.
My name is Ben Buchanan. I am an assistant teaching professor at
the School of Foreign Service and a senior faculty fellow at the Center
for Security and Emerging Technology, both at Georgetown University. I
am also a global fellow at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for
Scholars, where I teach introductory classes on artificial intelligence
and cybersecurity for Congressional staff. My research specialty is
examining how cybersecurity and AI shape international security.--I co-
authored a paper entitled ``Machine Learning for Policymakers.''\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Buchanan, Ben and Taylor Miller. ``Machine Learning for
Policymakers.'' Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
(2017), https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/files/
publication/MachineLearningforPolicymakers.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I will confine my opening remarks to the impact of artificial
intelligence on cybersecurity, since I think it is the emerging
technology poised to have the most significant effect in this area.
While there is an enormous amount of hype and debate around AI in
general, the intersection of AI and cybersecurity is understudied and
underappreciated.
At least 3 dimensions of this problem deserve analysis:
First and most significant is the cybersecurity of AI systems
themselves. AI systems are just as likely to be susceptible to the
kinds of software vulnerabilities that are present in other kinds of
computer code. As we have seen for decades, hackers can exploit these
vulnerabilities for their own ends. There is no reason to think that
hackers will not try to do the same to AI systems, and there is no
reason to think that they will not at times succeed. This possibility
is particularly worrying given the high stakes of some AI applications;
it is not a reason to avoid using AI, but vigilance is imperative to
preserve cybersecurity.
But to stop our analysis at just the traditional kinds of software
vulnerabilities is to miss a great deal of the cybersecurity risk that
AI systems pose. The neural network architecture that underpins a lot
of modern AI is immensely powerful but presents a new class of
cybersecurity risks that we are only beginning to uncover. We call this
field adversarial learning.
Using adversarial learning, hackers can cause neural networks to
make bizarre errors, causing systems that rely on those networks to
fail or to reveal confidential information. This is a field that
requires a great deal more attention.
Second, AI can also change traditional offensive cyber attacks
against regular computer systems. Modern hackers in many cases do not
need artificial intelligence to achieve their ends. That said, I think
it is noteworthy that some of the most potent cyber attacks we have
seen--including Stuxnet, the 2016 blackout in Ukraine, and the 2017
attack known as NotPetya that caused at least $10 billion in damage--
feature some forms of automated propagation and attack capability. I
can imagine a world in which future cyber operations will use more
sophisticated automated capabilities to achieve particular tasks, such
as vulnerability discovery, target selection, command and control, and
attack execution.
I suspect that such automation could offer significant upsides to
sophisticated hackers faced with complex targets. In some respects, the
possible upside to automation is higher in this area than in physical
warfare; whether a plane is operated by a person or a human, the laws
of physics still apply, but it is likely that automated cyber
capabilities--if sophisticated enough--could operate much faster than
their human-directed counterparts. I stress, however, that we have not
seen this come to fruition yet.
This leads to the third area of analysis: The possibility that AI
might help on cyber defense. This idea is also the subject of a lot of
hype and a lot of venture capital investment. There seem to be discrete
ways in which AI can indeed help secure computer systems, both in
discovering vulnerabilities before hackers do and also in detecting the
presence of malicious code. However, we must be careful not to let the
hype outrun the reality on this front. In evaluating cybersecurity
advances in this area, we should be careful to compare them to the
baseline of technologies we already use--many of which already involve
automation--and understand how, if at all, artificial intelligence
improves our defenses.
I do believe that AI-enabled tools are likely to be a fundamental
part of modern and future cyber defense; the scale, size, and speed of
cyber operations will make this inevitable, and it is imperative that
we develop these tools. That said, we must not forget that cyber
operations, no matter how sophisticated, are still fundamentally human
operations. For as much as we will talk about technology today, we must
remember that the people in our organizations are key to addressing
these threats.
I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you. Thank you for your testimony. I
will now recognize myself for 5 minutes to ask questions.
Let me just start with some of the things that you all
talked about. Mr. Knake, you mentioned that there are examples
where governments set the objectives or goals. Can you give me
some of those, and your train of thought on how governments
should do it, or what the goals should be?
Mr. Knake. Yes, Mr. Chairman. The analogy that I like to
use in this space is how we handle oil spills.
We all remember the Exxon Valdez oil spill in 1989. In
1990, Congress passed bipartisan legislation, the Oil Pollution
Act. What that act said was that, if you are going to bring oil
into U.S. waters, you need to have insurance that would cover
the full cost of cleaning up a loss of containment from that
vessel. So the important thing that that act did is, it didn't
say, ``Here are the requirements for safety of your vessels,
here is what you must do,'' it said you will own the cost. The
polluter will pay.
Well, I think we can adapt that model very easily to areas
like data spills. Treat data spills like oil spills. If you
want to hold 140 million records of U.S. citizen data, then you
probably should have to have an insurance bond that would pay
out on the order of--back of the envelope math would suggest
about a $1,000 per record. That would require the insurance
industry to be able to measure risk in a way that they cannot
measure today, and to measure security in a way they cannot
measure today.
But I am quite confident that, from that point on, markets
would be able to adopt new strategies to be able to price that
risk and enforce it, so they wouldn't have to pay out that kind
of insurance payment.
Mr. Richmond. Part of my thinking--and you mentioned
Atlanta in your testimony, and other places--part of my
concern--and I will pick a fictional place so that I don't
offend any community, but let's think of Mayberry, North
Carolina, where Barney Fife was the sheriff's deputy.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Richmond. It is made up.
So how do we ensure that they are up with the times in
terms of protecting their data, and their cyber hygiene, and
all of those things? How do we get them to where they need to
be?
Mr. Knake. This is a very unpopular opinion, Mr. Chairman.
The first thing I would do is I would ban ransomware payments.
What we are doing at this point is handing hundreds of
millions of dollars over to our adversaries. They are taking
that money. They are spending some of it on Lamborghinis and
leather jackets. The rest of the money they are reinvesting to
up their capabilities. They are growing more sophisticated.
They are building larger teams. They started out doing
ransomware against individuals. They are now doing hospital
systems and local governments. It is only a matter of time
before they do the power grid. So from that perspective, we
have got to stop funding them.
Mr. Richmond. Let me stop asking you questions.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Richmond. Ms. Howe, you mentioned autonomous weapons.
What is out there when you speak of that?
Ms. Howe. Today the technology exists to have completely
autonomous weapons. They are available, both for the military
and also for private use, where you can set up sniper rifles to
take down targets from great distances with very little human
intervention. That exists out there, and when they are
networked it creates an interesting dilemma, from a security
perspective.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you. Mr. Durbin, you mentioned stalker
apps, or stalker--tell me how they--how it will get on a
Member's phone or one of the panelists' phone.
Mr. Durbin. Stalkerware is considered malicious software.
Like most threats and malicious software packages, there are--
there is no difference in how they would end up on a device.
So, like a phishing exercise, where you get an email and
you are asked to click on a link that could execute a program
to load it in, or even--you could do it via text. If since
stalkerware in--sometimes involves somebody that the stalker
knows, if they have physical access to the phone, then they
would be able to, obviously, grab it and loaded it on. So it is
like typical threats. You can be tricked into having that, the
software load.
Mr. Richmond. OK. I would imagine that you all sell
software to detect it.
Mr. Durbin. Yes, we do.
Mr. Richmond. OK. With that I will recognize the Ranking
Member of the subcommittee, Mr. Katko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Howe, during your
testimony--well, all of you talked about the various threats
that are out there, and I really, truly believe we are
constantly playing catch-up, and that is a concern.
But Ms. Howe, you mentioned that we need to study--we,
being the Government--need to set a bold cyber agenda. Could
you just drill down a little more and tell me what you envision
would be good for us to do?
Ms. Howe. Well, certainly, sir. Thank you for the question.
From the outset, I think the Government--there are things
only the Government can do that would have a tremendous impact
on the threat landscape.
Having a consistent cyber deterrence policy that imposes
costs on the adversary is a great starting point. It is unfair
to expect companies to be able to defend themselves against
nation-state adversaries who are committed. We have done that
in the past. We certainly wouldn't do that in the kinetic
world, but we are doing that in the cyber world, where we
expect companies to defend themselves.
We also have to--some of the authorities that were written
for defending our most critical systems were written before
there was a commercial internet. As we take a holistic look and
see what is happening in the dynamics of the market, we have to
be willing to re-examine how we operate as a Government, the
authorities and capabilities mismatch that we all talk about,
and how we organize and how we collaborate at cyber speed.
Mr. Katko. All right, thank you very much.
Mr. Buchanan. You talked about a human element factor. You
know, one common theme that I believe in is that, with emerging
technologies and threats the way they are, the human element
remains critical to the functionality of the attacks. So how do
we make the human element of attacks less effective with
emergent technologies? Or can we?
Mr. Buchanan. Well, I think, again, as much as we talk
about technology, it is important to recognize that, both on
offense and defense, there are humans involved. One of the
things I worry about quite a bit, as someone who teaches
students who often go into Government, is the capacity to
educate future policy makers and policy advisers to have
Government-hiring authorities to bring people into Government
so they can serve in this mission set on offense and on
defense.
As you can imagine, relating to compensation and other
factors, often times many of these individuals go to the
private sector and don't end up in Government working on these
important missions.
Mr. Katko. Thank you. Here is a question for everyone here.
Mr. Durbin, we can start with you. It is about quantum
computing. In my home town, Syracuse, New York, they have a
robust quantum computing research operation under way. But it
is, of course, not the only one in the country. I am vitally
concerned about quantum computing in that--one of you said that
if China gets it, basically, we are in big trouble. It should
be something that we prioritize better than we are right now.
I just want to, should we--just--it is a softball question,
but it is--I want to hear what your answers are.
Should we be making more of a concerted effort to develop
our quantum capabilities on the Government level, given how
much of an advantage fully-functional quantum computing can
provide?
Mr. Durbin. Yes, it is a serious threat. It is coming. The
time frames are very debatable, but the time to come up with
defenses are now, not when somebody does have the first
functional working quantum computer.
The algorithms that are used right--or the encryption
rhythms for protecting data right now will not be sufficient
with quantum, so we need to come up with the new problem that
is hard for a quantum computer to solve.
I am encouraged with the attention that NIST has been
giving this topic, and so I encourage them to keep going with
the research that they are doing.
But yes, it is coming, and focus needs to be brought to
bear.
Mr. Katko. Yes, it seems to me that there is a bit--it is a
bit diffused, the projects, and there is not, like, a
centralization, if you will, of the--their overall goal. I
mean, I view this as a modern-day moonshot, because if we--if
the Chinese get it before us, then we really--our encryption
data is--or our encryption capabilities are going to be
severely hampered. We are already vulnerable, as it is.
So Mr.--as you say, Knake--is that how you say it, or
Knake? Yes. Well, what can we do, as a Government, from a
prioritization standpoint?
To me, it seems to me that we need to do more to make this
a high priority within Government. It is not something that
people can see and feel like the moonshot, if you will. But it
is something that is critically important to us, going forward.
How do we get the Government to prioritize this more?
Mr. Knake. So I think the way that I would approach this
problem is to say that we need to focus on it with the same
energy and, really, the same level of resources as we would
maybe a Manhattan project or a moonshot, but we need to harness
the capabilities within our private sector. So instead of
having one large Manhattan Project out in the Southwest desert,
in this case we need to have dozens, if not hundreds, of
companies working on various aspects of it. There are models
for how we have done this in the past. I would call on SpaceX
as a good example of a commercial-supported endeavor.
But I think the key here is more research going to more
teams to compete globally, and hope that one of those teams
that is going to win is going to be a U.S.-based team. I think
we can't really put all our eggs either in the hope that
Silicon Valley is going to solve this problem for us, or that a
Government research team singly funded and focused is going to
beat the Chinese, who I view as the major adversary in this
space.
Mr. Katko. Thank you all. I wish I had more time to ask you
a ton of questions, but I have to--I am out of time. I yield
back.
Mr. Richmond. The gentleman yields back. The Chairman of
the full committee, Mr. Thompson, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Richmond. As I heard
the witnesses' testimony today, I became very suspect of
something I can't do without. But the challenge for this
committee and Members of Congress is how do we not overreact to
a problem, so that Government, all of a sudden, is stifling
innovation and a lot of other things with regulation.
So--and one of the reasons hearings like this are held is
to try to get the benefit of the talent that is out here,
especially in the private sector. Some of us believe that there
is a role for Government, but it is to encourage the
development of the technologies and things that we need, while
understanding that it is really the private sector and its
talents that ultimately will get us to where we need to be.
So--but a couple of things I heard. One is right now we are
kind-of reacting to the problem, rather than getting ahead of
it. Can you suggest a way forward for us to wait until the next
attack occurs, in anticipation of whatever that is, that we
could do, as Members of Congress, to get us to that point?
Mr. Durbin, if you can, get us started with some idea.
Mr. Durbin. It is tempting to react to the buzz word, what
people are talking about in the press, like the deepfakes. I
encourage that we also have to keep our eye on the threats that
have been plaguing us for a long time.
Email, for example, still tends to be the No. 1 threat
vector out there that attackers use to do their malicious
things. As soon as a bad guy figures out a way to utilize
email, then companies like ourselves, we counter it. Then they
come up with a new clever way. So we can always be prepared for
what is coming by focusing on what is tried and true, and what
we know that the adversaries aren't going to back away from.
Ransomware. Today I talked about targeted ransomware. This
is the first time since we have been tracking it where the
shift has moved to the enterprise versus the individual. Why
are they doing that? They are doing that because, when you
target somebody and you really understand their network, you
can get in there, get in there deep, compromise as many assets
as possible, launch it at the same time, and it puts pressure
on that company: ``We better pay the ransom, because we are
tied up.''
So solving ransomware will help you to solve the next
iteration, the next usage of it, and it is a way to kind-of
stay ahead of the curve.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Knake.
Mr. Knake. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would focus on 3
brief ideas.
No. 1, I think we need to have a much higher degree of
disclosure of cyber incidents. We really don't have a clear
picture of how badly we are owned by Chinese or Russian or
other adversaries. Companies tend to try and avoid disclosing
publicly what has happened. So, on the one hand, we have the
number that General Alexander has put out, which I believe to
be accurate, of possibly as high as $400 billion in loss from
economic espionage by the Chinese, but we have very few cases
where we actually know of public incidents where that loss has
happened. That puts investors at a disadvantage, it puts
stakeholders at a disadvantage, and it keeps markets from
inflicting pain on companies that don't have good security.
With that, I would highly recommend the idea of creating
one or more National Transportation Safety Board-like
mechanisms to dig in and understand why these incidents happen
once they are disclosed, so those lessons learned can get
pushed out to the broader ecosystem.
Finally, I think this is all about creating collaboration,
defensive collaboration with Government and with the private
sector. Today we don't have the system that we need to be able
to do that to trust the end-users and to trust the systems over
which information is shared. So that is why I have advocated
for extending Classified connectivity out to critical
infrastructure companies beyond the defense industrial base. I
think that is essential.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Ms. Howe.
Ms. Howe. Chairman Thompson, you are exactly right that the
attack surface is ever-shifting, the landscape moves on us, and
the most important thing we can do is put in place a
collaborative process that can be as agile as the threat
landscape and as our adversaries are.
We have had great examples of this. The Russia Small Group,
which was--had a very specific goal of protecting the 2018
midterm elections, did their job. They did it. It was Cyber
Command, NSA, FBI, DHS, working together with private sector.
The Enduring Security framework was another example of this
collaboration working.
If we could systematize that kind of collaboration so that,
no matter how our adversary adapts, no matter how our
technology evolves, we can be as agile as they are--I don't
think we can predict with precision how these attacks will take
place in the future, but if we organize the right way, we can
make a difference.
The other thing I would put out there is today we want to
have resilience and protect ourselves. The boldest thing we can
do is to decide to defeat the adversary in cyber space, and to
organize to actually defeat the adversary. That is something we
are absolutely capable of doing. It takes a lot of resolve to
do. But again, working society, Government, hand-in-hand with
trust between the two, we can accomplish that.
Mr. Thompson. Dr. Buchanan.
Mr. Buchanan. Just in terms of concrete ideas, I think we
need to do a lot more study of the cybersecurity
vulnerabilities of emerging systems, ideally, before we employ
them. This is something we, in many cases, did not do with old
cyber systems. The good news, I think, is that the Government
does have some capacity to do this that we could use as a
foundation. I am thinking in particular of NIST, National
Institute of Standards and Technology, which has very small
effort, but a promising one, to study weaknesses in artificial
intelligence systems.
It seems to me that would be something that is ripe for
expansion, where we could study the problems that many in the
private sector, because of market interests, are not studying,
but that will be quite impactful for broader society if they
were to be targeted by adversaries.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. I ask the Chair--I have
some follow-up questions we will submit to the witnesses in
writing along this line. But I thank you very much.
Mr. Richmond. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
North Carolina, Mr. Walker, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Buchanan, I would like to stay with you, if I could,
please. In August, President Trump announced a rule restricting
Government agencies from doing business with the Chinese
telecommunications company Huawei due to National security
threats. What was our exposure to Huawei when the decision was
reached?
Mr. Buchanan. Congressman, I don't know that I am in a
position to judge U.S. Government's exposure to Huawei.
I would imagine that what would concern me most would be
exposure in Classified networks, and I am in no position to
have visibility into that.
Mr. Walker. So you don't necessarily have anything that is
confirmed, but you do have some concerns. Is that fair to say,
without having to get into detail?
Mr. Buchanan. Sure. I think it is fair to say that
telecommunications systems provide enormous access to the
information and broader networks of which they are a part. In
general, I worry about that as a significant threat, and----
Mr. Walker. Yes. Not everybody on the panel--technology
still is an issue for, I am realizing, but that is a different
story.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Walker. What has changed in the agency's contract
acquisition since the ban, such as the type of contract signed,
or how contractors are chosen?
Mr. Buchanan. Again, I am not sure I have visibility into
the contracting processes.
Mr. Walker. OK, all right. So maybe my final question for
you, then, may be the same thing. Are there alternatives to the
covered ban telecom companies such as Huawei routers and other
companies' data networks, or have agencies been struggling to
fill their tasks because of the ban? Can you address that?
Mr. Buchanan. Yes. Speaking generally, there is--there are
other players in the telecommunications market. I think it is a
smaller market than we would like. Huawei has a price
advantage, why they are attractive, but they are not the only
supplier in the world.
Mr. Walker. OK. Do you see that changing in the foreseeable
future, as far as these smaller companies having a little bit
more access, or a little bit more stronger foothold?
Mr. Buchanan. I think it is fair to say that I worry
generally about competition in this space, because there are
not that many players.
Mr. Walker. OK.
Mr. Buchanan. Yes. So, in general, I think there is reason
why we would want more competition than we have right now, and
particularly we might want more U.S. companies involved than is
currently the case.
Mr. Walker. Thanks. I appreciate you going there.
Mr.--I believe it is Knake, is that correct? In your
testimony you mentioned that in a race--and this struck me a
little bit--in a race between Silicon Valley and China, I
believe you said Silicon Valley would lose in respect to these
emerging technologies. Is that correct? I am going to come back
with a question. I just want to make sure I heard that correct.
Right? Is that fair?
Mr. Knake. Yes, I think it is fair.
Mr. Walker. All right. There is no question that Huawei, in
circumventing--is circumventing the U.S. export ban and
experiencing success in becoming self-sufficient.
So my question is this. If China becomes totally self-
reliant in these technologies, such as the production of their
own advanced chips, what impact do you think that is going to
have on the U.S. economy 5, 10, 50 years down the road?
Mr. Knake. So I am in a minority within the international
relations community on this topic. But what I think is going to
happen is we are largely going to see a split of the internet
into 1, 2, or 3 parts, and with it a split of the underlying
technologies, so that we are unlikely to see a situation
barring massive political change in China, in which U.S.
companies are able to compete there for that market.
Therefore, I don't think we are going to continue to allow
China to compete in our market. So I think we are going to have
very different technology development and very different paths.
Mr. Walker. Well, you just--you answered the second
question, as far as, if there have--if they have the largest
R&D funding in the sector, how would we expect companies in the
United States to compete with the Chinese government-backed
company from dominating the telecom market? You just answered
that. It looks like it is going to be two independent sectors
here.
Mr. Knake. Yes, sir. I would say that I think that there is
a--it is almost a dirty word within policy communities in
Washington, but it is time that we re-look at the concept of
industrial policy.
How are we going to assure that 6G, however we decide to
define that, is something that the United States can compete
in, and isn't going to fall behind these other actors?
Choices were made by leading telecommunications firms in
the United States not to compete in this space. That clearly
was not in our National security interest. So we have got to
find ways to make sure they choose to compete in the next
generation.
Mr. Walker. A lot of my questions, a lot of the focus in
the media and National security is on Huawei, but there are
other companies that should cause major concern, as well, for
the U.S. National security. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Knake. Absolutely.
Mr. Walker. Especially in the emerging technologies.
In my closing few seconds, what should be done, in your
opinion, to prevent these companies from posing a security
risk, specifically, obviously, in our country?
Mr. Knake. So I think one of the things that we need to
look at, which is, again, a very unpopular opinion, is can we
maintain global supply chains, or do we need to have trusted
supply chains by trusting companies that are either
manufactured in the United States or by our allies?
Can we trust chips and devices and components that are
manufactured abroad for critical systems?
Mr. Walker. Thank you for your testimony. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Richmond. The gentleman from North Carolina yields
back. The gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr. Langevin, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
[Pause.]
Mr. Langevin. Is that better? OK. Here we go.
I just want to thank our panel of witnesses for your
testimony today, and your contributions to raising our National
security awareness, and providing steps forward to how we
better protect the country in cyber.
Mr. Knake, I would--first of all, I am not going to get
into this question, but on the issue of--be able to discuss
industrial policy, I couldn't agree with you more. We need to
make sure that we can do that, and take the politics out of it,
and really focus on the issue at hand. So I agree on that
point.
So this is a question, and it actually--one other point I
want to make is how I completely would agree with you on what
you talked about in terms of critical thinking. You know, this
issue of our adversaries using our values and our commitment of
free speech and using these social media platforms as weapons
against us and undermining our democracy is something that I
have worried about for a long time.
Being able to think critically when you talk about media
and issues that are raised, if the public can't do that, we are
already losing. We need to build that resilience into our
democracy, and that starts with our kids, and teaching civics
in class, and also doing things like critical thinking.
But this question is for all witnesses, and I would like to
start with Mr. Knake. In your collective testimony you all
focused on--significant attention on new tactics and techniques
to achieve malign cyber goals. You do not, though, to a large
extent focus on threat actors.
So do you believe that the cyber threat actor environment
is likely to remain largely static in the coming years, with
major challenges coming from China, Russia, North Korea, and
Iran, and lesser problems from organized crime and other non-
state actors? Or are we likely to see major shifts?
Mr. Knake. Thank you, Congressman. I would say that, from a
nation-state perspective, the threats are largely determined by
the geopolitics and the ability for any nation-state to rapidly
acquire offensive cyber capability. It means that any of our
adversaries are likely to confront us in cyber space if they
deem it in their interests.
You touched on organized crime. I think we are at the point
where organized crime in cyber space really represents a
danger, and a National security danger, a National security
threat. The capabilities are only growing. Their interests in
generating financial revenue are moving them out of purely the
cyber realm and into the physical realm. So we have hybrid
threats emerging from these criminal groups. They are operating
out of safe havens. I think that they are, like the drug
cartels in the 1990's, ever much a National security threat as
certain nation-states.
Mr. Langevin. How about in terms of mitigating our risk?
How much would you focus on responding to threat actors vice
(sic) technological steps that we can take to protect ourselves
from emerging threats?
Mr. Knake. What I have advocated is that there is a limited
amount we can do to threat actors.
I certainly agree with Ms. Howe that we want to engage them
everywhere we can and in every way that we can. But really, our
National strategy needs to be about building resilience. We
need to be able to have most attacks bounce off of our
infrastructure, and we need to be able to bounce back rapidly,
should those protections fail. That kind of strategy, I think,
is really in our National interest. That is where we want to
focus on incentives and aligning technology around those
incentives.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Durbin, in your written
testimony you make reference to something that we have been
focusing a great deal on right now, and that is risk posed to
ever-expanding supply chains, and the various accesses that
they provide to networks. Can you expound upon the growth that
you have seen in this type of threat?
To our other witnesses, do you believe that intrusions
through the supply chain will continue to rise in the future?
Given that malicious actors often use software update
mechanisms when attacking through supply chain, are you
concerned that an uptick in supply chain attacks could actually
undermine faith in this important hygiene measure?
Mr. Durbin. So the supply chain is attractive because, if
your main target has a sufficient enough cybersecurity budget,
and has taken the--done the due diligence to protect
themselves, instead of spending your resources trying to
penetrate them, let's go down the supply chain and look for
someone who is less diligent, attack there, and try to feed the
attack back upstream into the main target. So that is always
going to be an attractive vector that we are going to have to
stay diligent with.
I think the--using the supply chain and compromising
software download sites and software patching sites is also
going to be very attractive, because you are able to reach a
large number of people, and you are doing it in a way where the
victim thinks that they are interacting with a trusted site. So
you are not going to be as cognizant, or you are not could be
as concerned or suspicious. So it can be a very powerful threat
vector.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. I know my time has expired. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Richmond. The gentleman from Rhode Island yields back.
The gentleman, Mr. Taylor, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Taylor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate this
hearing.
In 2017 I carried the cybersecurity package for the State
of Texas, for the Texas legislature. In that package the
attorney general of Texas asked for a limited defense of
prosecution in the event that he wanted to take down a human
trafficking website. So he would take down a human trafficking
gang. The website with the victims' pictures would still be
left on the internet. He wanted the ability to conduct a
denial-of-service attack against that site to take it down and
to eliminate that site on the internet.
So that takes me to my question, my line of questioning,
which is around offensive operations against cyber predators.
Right?
So we have got people out there that are conducting cyber
attacks in the United States, whether it is denial-of-service,
whether it is ransomware, et cetera. This is thorny legal
ground.
But I was just wondering, since we have some really smart
people in the room, what are your thoughts on conducting
offensive operations against those that are actually conducting
attacks on us when--retaliating, in effect, doing a ransomware
attack on people that are doing ransomware attacks on us? I
will let you go in order.
Mr. Durbin, do you want to----
Mr. Durbin. So there are a few issues.
First is attribution. The attacker can hide who they really
are. So it may appear as that they are coming from a hospital
overseas, and then you are going to go attack this hospital
that was innocent. If you do identify the correct attacker, and
you attack them, you risk escalation, because they may come
back at us again.
But I think one thing that we often overlook, traditional
warfare, if you throw a hand grenade at somebody, it blows up.
They can't pick it up and throw it back at you. If we launch an
attack, we are basically giving them that software that they
can re-engineer and use against us, or use against others.
I think there is a way to use a deterrence, maybe the
threat of it, or to demonstrate what we could do. But I think
hack attacks, or attack-backs are delicate.
Mr. Taylor. Mr. Knake.
Mr. Knake. Thank you, Congressman. I would say that I am
all in favor of Cyber Command taking a more active role in
defense of private industry and State and local government. I
think that the idea of other entities than Cyber Command
carrying out that offensive operation is scary and could put us
into situations that we don't want to be in.
But I do think, if we had the kind of capability where, for
instance, a critical infrastructure company that was involved
in a threat from a overseas actor was able to communicate that
in real time with high assurance, with trust among the parties
over a Classified network, that then Cyber Command could
essentially be tipped off to that activity and target to shut
it down.
So we really just need tighter collaboration, rather than
kind-of a go-it-alone approach by private companies. I think
that is possible.
Mr. Taylor. While I have got you, just one quick thing. You
said you want to see greater clarity in cyber attacks. The
problem that we have grappled with on this subcommittee is
that, if we tell people where the attacks are, or what the
effect--we are basically saying, hey, there is a vulnerability
here.
So, I mean, I appreciate the desire for transparency. I am
for that. But then--but in this particular instance, if I give
you transparency, I am basically telling you where you can
attack me.
Do you want to just quickly respond on that, and I will go
back to the offensive question here with Ms. Howe?
Mr. Knake. Yes, I think there is two pieces to it. I think,
No. 1, the adversary has already exploited the vulnerability if
they have created the incident. So, from that point of view,
you are not going to be sharing information, assuming that you
have patched that specific vulnerability and built protections
around that specific threat. So I think that that can be
addressed.
I also think that, if we can build the kind of
collaborative defense that we have been talking about, and the
trust between partners, you don't necessarily need to share
that information publicly or with the world. That disclosure
could be made with partner, private-sector companies, and
agencies.
Mr. Taylor. Ms. Howe, going back to the offensive
question----
Ms. Howe. I often tell my children I have escalation
dominance so they should never take me on.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Howe. I think, when it comes to offensive cyber
operations, you have to make sure you have escalation
dominance, which means it is only the purview of the U.S.
Government to conduct offensive cyber activity.
I agree with Mr. Knake, that we have seen Cyber Command do
that effectively. We need to have a very consistent policy of
engagement if we are going to engage in offensive cyber. If we
do, it essentially becomes part of the cyber deterrence policy.
When it comes to attribution, I would say our Government is
the best in the world at attribution. We haven't gotten it
wrong. In fact, even last week, the NSA put out an advisory
showing that the Russians were using Iranian tools and
infrastructure, and hiding as Iranians when they were
conducting their attacks.
So this is one place where the U.S. Government is
fantastic, knows what it is doing, and we have got the
capabilities to launch offensive cyber the right way.
We have to have the policies, and we need to be able to
communicate them. I do not think this is something the private
sector should do.
Mr. Taylor. All right. I see my time has expired. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Richmond. The gentleman from Texas has yielded. I now
recognize the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms. Underwood.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you, Chairman Richmond. Last week
Members of this committee traveled to my district, the Illinois
14th district, to hold a hearing examining what steps the State
of Illinois has taken, in coordination with the Federal
Government, to prepare for the 2020 election.
In Illinois foreign adversaries were able to exploit a
vulnerability in our State's voter database to access the
records of 76,000 Illinoisans. Since then Illinois has used
Federal and State dollars to increase its cybersecurity posture
by executing the Cyber Navigator Program. This model continues
to be a valuable tool for election officials around the State
who now have access to a sure internet system, and highly-
trained cybersecurity personnel.
We know that social media is an important source of
information in communities like mine. A majority of Americans
check social media at least once daily. So, Mr. Durbin, what
advice can you offer to social media users about how to
recognize the difference between a post from our neighbor and a
post from a bot campaign?
Mr. Durbin. That is a challenging ask. The people that are
coming up with these posts, that are trying to deceive you,
they are very good at them.
So I think the platforms themselves are going to have to be
involved in looking at the metadata of where these posts are
coming from to help identify is this really a person, or is
this a bot. But if it is not from somebody that you--you don't
know, or that you are just hearing from, and it is on something
that is topical, that could be--or topical to the election,
that would be a flag for me.
Ms. Underwood. What we often see is that, you know, people
are in groups, and that they don't--they are not friends with
the people in the group. So it just pops up on their feed.
So if I am a mom in the 14th, what should I be looking for?
Right? Because I don't have access to that metadata.
Mr. Durbin. Again, I think if it is from someone that you
don't know, and it seems awfully topical, it is a pretty good
coincidence that around this election we are--which is--this is
a hot topic for us--I am getting some--a social post from
somebody I don't know, that would be, certainly, a red flag for
me.
Ms. Underwood. OK. But if they--``they,'' being the social
media users--want to report a potential bot campaign, do social
media companies currently have a timely and effective way for
people to do that?
Mr. Durbin. I don't know for sure what processes the social
media companies have in place.
Ms. Underwood. Anybody else can--can anybody else answer
that?
Mr. Durbin. I will speak from personal experience. The only
way I was able to report a fake LinkedIn profile that had
connected with me was to tweet at LinkedIn. That was the only
way they responded. They did not respond to the abuse report I
filed.
Ms. Underwood. Interesting.
Following the 2016 election, Symantec conducted extensive
research on the use of Twitter bot campaigns to promote
disinformation leading up to and during the 2016 election. Mr.
Durbin, can you share any lessons or key findings from that
research as we prepare for the 2020 election?
Mr. Durbin. It was very well-planned. There is this
impression that it was a bunch of trolls out there that were
behind this. We found that not to be the case.
They took their time in planning. They set accounts up
months before they started using them. They were set up so
that--it was kind of a main group that was responsible for the
key content. Then there was a much larger group of the bots
that were designed to get that fake messaging out. It was very
effective with this kind of generate and amplify.
The response to one of the accounts, which was in my
testimony, only 10,000 tweets, but was retweeted over 6 million
times. That is a clear indicator that that those 6 million were
not bots. Those were actual people that were choosing to read a
message that was generated from a fake account----
Ms. Underwood. Right.
Mr. Durbin [continuing]. Believe it, and then re-tweet it
out to other people.
Ms. Underwood. Right. For years now, social media companies
have been on record saying that they are working to combat the
use of their platforms to spread disinformation, specifically
during election times. But new reports emerge every day. Just
yesterday we heard about 4 new disinformation campaigns backed
by foreign states on Facebook.
Do you believe that these companies are prepared today for
the 2020 elections, Mr. Durbin?
Mr. Durbin. They claim that they are. I believe that they
have the tools and the resources inside that they--they could
take action. Whether or not they are, I am not an expert, I am
not inside those organizations.
Ms. Underwood. OK. Thank you.
We have done a lot to secure our elections, but there is a
lot of work that needs to be done to secure our Nation's
election infrastructure. As technology continues to advance, so
must our resources and policies to combat foreign adversaries
who would seek to exploit new technologies to do us harm.
Moving forward, this is going to take a whole-of-Government
approach to preserve the integrity of our democratic
institutions.
I look forward to working with all my colleagues on this
committee and the House to address election security from all
angles. I yield back.
Mr. Richmond. The gentlelady from Illinois yields back.
I want to thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony,
and the Members for their questions.
The Members of the committee may have additional questions
for the witnesses, and we ask that you respond expeditiously in
writing to those questions.
Without objection, the committee record shall be kept open
for 10 days.
Hearing no further business, the committee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:28 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]