- ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[Senate Hearing 115-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 25, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 2:06 p.m. in room SD-430, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Lamar Alexander (chairman)
presiding.
Present: Senators Alexander, Murkowski, and Feinstein.
U.S. NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION
STATEMENT OF HON. KRISTINE SVINICKI, CHAIRMAN
ACCOMPANIED BY:
HON. JEFF BARAN, COMMISSIONER
HON. STEPHEN G. BURNS, COMMISSIONER
opening statement of senator lamar alexander
Senator Alexander. The Subcommittee on Energy and Water
Development, please come to order.
Today's hearing will review the Administration's fiscal
year 2019 budget request for the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
Commission. This is the third of the Subcommittee's three
budget hearings this year.
Over the past 2 weeks we've heard from the Department of
Energy, the Army Corps of Engineers and the Bureau of
Reclamation about their funding requests.
Senator Feinstein and I will each have an opening
statement. I'll then recognize each Senator for up to 5 minutes
for an opening statement, alternating between the majority and
minority, in the order in which they arrive.
We'll then turn to Chairman Svinicki to present testimony
on behalf of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
At the conclusion of the Chairman's testimony, I will then
recognize Senators for 5 minutes of questions each.
Senator Feinstein has to be at another Committee meeting at
3:30, so we will adjourn by then, so that we stay on schedule.
First, I would like to thank our witnesses for being here
today and also Senator Feinstein, who is a joy to work with on
the appropriations process.
I'm very pleased with the fiscal year 2018 Energy and Water
Appropriations bill, which highlighted our priorities. That
bill provided a record level of funding for the Office of
Science and the Corps of Engineers, supported supercomputing,
maintained the Nation's nuclear weapons stockpile, and cut
wasteful spending. I look forward to working with Senator
Feinstein on another strong bill this year.
Our witnesses today include Kristine Svinicki, Chairman of
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; Commissioner Jeff Baran;
Commissioner Stephen Burns.
Commissioner Baran's term will be up June 30, at which
point the Commission will have only two members and will lose
its quorum.
President Trump has re-nominated Commissioner Baran and has
also nominated David Wright and Annie Caputo to serve in the
two open positions on the Commission.
The Yucca Mountain controversy has been the most
significant delay in confirming these nominees, but I hope they
can all be confirmed so that the Commission does not lose a
quorum. While Chairman Svinicki and Commissioner Burns are
capable and reasonable leaders, the Commission functions best
when it is at full strength.
fiscal year 2019 budget request
We're here today to review the 2019 budget request.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission's job is very important.
It oversees our 99 nuclear reactors, which provide 20 percent
of our Nation's electricity and more than half of our carbon
free electricity.
Nuclear power is our best source of inexpensive, carbon-
free, baseload power, and is important for our national
security and competitiveness.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission's budget request this
fiscal year is $971 million, about $35 million more than
Congress provided last year. The increased request includes
$47.7 million for the Yucca Mountain licensing process.
It's important to understand that $815 million of the
Commission's budget comes from fees paid by utilities and other
facilities that are licensed to possess and use nuclear
materials.
It's become increasingly difficult for the nuclear industry
to compete with other sources of electricity. One of the
concerns is the amount of regulatory fees charged by the
Commission.
So, over the last 4 fiscal years, we have worked with the
Commission to reduce its overall budget by about $100 million,
which represents about a 10 percent reduction, to more closely
reflect its actual workload while maintaining its gold standard
of safety.
These savings are important because they lower the fees
utilities must pay, and these savings can be passed on to
customers.
These reductions have not been arbitrary. They represent
the type of oversight we are supposed to do.
To ensure nuclear power will continue to play a significant
role in our electricity generation, my focus will be on one,
licensing small reactors and advanced reactors.
Two, safely extending licenses for existing reactors.
Three, licensing facilities for used nuclear fuel and
solving the nuclear waste stalemate.
And four, accident tolerant fuel.
nuclear waste
Senator Feinstein and I have worked on the nuclear waste
stalemate for years.
This year's budget request includes $47 million to restart
the licensing process for Yucca Mountain. This is the next step
the Department must follow to determine whether it can begin
construction of Yucca Mountain.
I strongly believe that Yucca Mountain can and should be
part of the solution to the nuclear waste stalemate. Federal
law designates Yucca Mountain as the Nation's repository for
used nuclear fuel, and the Commission's own scientists have
told us that we can safely store nuclear waste there for up to
one million years.
But even if we had Yucca Mountain open today, we would
still need to look for another permanent repository. We have
more than enough used fuel to fill Yucca Mountain to its legal
capacity.
The quickest, and probably the least expensive, way for the
Federal Government to start to meet its used nuclear fuel
obligations is for the Department of Energy to contract with a
private storage facility for used nuclear fuel.
I understand that two private companies have submitted
applications for consolidated storage facilities, one in Texas,
one in New Mexico. I'll be asking some questions about that
today.
I want to make sure that the Commission has the resources
it needs in fiscal year 2019 to review the applications for
consolidated storage because we have to start working together
to solve the stalemate, if we want a strong nuclear industry.
Senator Feinstein and I, along with the leaders of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, have a bill to
implement the recommendations of the Blue Ribbon Commission on
America's Nuclear Future, which include using temporary private
storage facilities, and we're working to reintroduce that
legislation this year.
safely extending licenses for existing reactors
Instead of building more windmills, which produce 17
percent of our carbon-free electricity, or solar farms, which
produce four percent, the best way to make sure the U.S has a
reliable source of inexpensive, efficient, carbon-free
electricity is to extend the licenses of our existing reactors,
which produce 60 percent of our carbon-free electricity, when
it is safe to do so.
Most of our 99 reactors have already extended their
operating licenses from 40 to 60 years, although some have
decided to close prematurely for economic reasons. Some
utilities are beginning the process to extend their license
from 60 to 80 years.
Recently, the Turkey Point nuclear plant in Florida was the
first to apply to the Commission to extend its license for an
additional 20 years, what we call ``subsequent license
renewal.''
The Commission has spent the past several years developing
the framework to review these types of license renewals and to
make sure they can operate safely.
I want to make sure that the Commission has the resources
it needs to review Turkey Point's application.
licensing new reactors
In addition to our existing reactors, the Commission also
needs to be ready to review applications for new reactors,
particularly small modular reactors and advanced reactors.
These new technologies represent the future of nuclear power.
In fiscal year 2017, we provided enough funding to complete
the Small Modular Reactor Licensing Technical Support program
at the Department of Energy.
NuScale, which was one of the technologies selected in that
program, filed an application for design certification of a
small reactor in 2016.
A utility group has been working with NuScale and Idaho
National Lab to build and demonstrate a small reactor in Idaho.
The Tennessee Valley Authority has also submitted an
application to the Commission for a permit to build and
demonstrate a small modular reactor at the Clinch River site.
These applications to build and demonstrate small modular
reactors are an important step, and we need to make sure the
Commission has the resources it needs to review the application
and that it's ready to review applications for advanced
reactors.
The fiscal year 2018 Omnibus included $10 million for the
Commission to prepare to review advanced reactor designs, and I
understand the current budget request includes $10.3 million
for fiscal year 2019.
I'd like to know what the Commission plans to do with the
funding Congress provided for an advanced reactor so that we
can make sure the development stays on track.
accident tolerant fuel
And finally, accident tolerant fuel.
In 2012 after Fukushima, Congress authorized a program to
improve safety in the event of accidents in reactors or spent
fuel pools.
As a result, several companies have been developing
accident tolerant fuels in collaboration with National
Laboratories. These fuels seem to represent a significant step
forward in safety as well as cost savings.
The National Laboratories have modeling and simulation
tools that can validate the use of these new fuels. For
example, Oak Ridge has used its high-performance computing
capability to develop the Consortium for Advanced Simulation of
Light Water Reactors.
I'd like to understand how the Commission is leveraging
those tools in its licensing process.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Lamar Alexander
First, I would like to thank our witnesses for being here today,
and also Senator Feinstein, with whom I have the pleasure to work again
this year to draft the Energy and Water Appropriations bill.
I am very pleased with the fiscal year 2018 Energy and Water
Appropriations bill, which highlighted my priorities. That bill
provided a record level of funding for the Office of Science and the
Corps of Engineers, supported supercomputing, maintained the Nation's
nuclear weapons stockpile, and cut wasteful spending. I look forward to
working with Senator Feinstein on another strong bill this year.
Our witnesses today include Kristine Svinicki, Chairman of the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission; Commissioner Jeff Baran; and
Commissioner Stephen Burns.
Commissioner Baran's term will be up on June 30, at which point the
Commission will have only two members and will lose its quorum.
President Trump has re-nominated Commissioner Baran and has also
nominated David Wright and Annie Caputo to serve in the 2 open
positions on the Commission.
The Yucca Mountain controversy has been the most significant delay
in confirming these nominees, but I hope they can all be confirmed so
that the Commission does not lose a quorum. While Chairman Svinicki and
Commissioner Burns are capable and reasonable leaders, the Commission
functions best when it is at full strength.
We're here today to review the administration's fiscal year 2019
budget request for the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the
independent Federal agency responsible for regulating the safety of our
Nation's commercial nuclear power plants and other civilian uses of
nuclear material.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission's job is very important. It
oversees our 99 nuclear power reactors, which provide 20 percent of our
Nation's electricity and more than half of our carbon- free
electricity.
Nuclear power is our best source of inexpensive, carbon-free,
baseload power, and is important for our national security and
competitiveness.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission's budget request this fiscal year
is $971 million, which is about $35 million more than Congress provided
last year. The increased request includes $47.7 million for the Yucca
Mountain licensing process.
It is important to understand that $815 million of the Commission's
budget comes from fees paid by utilities and other facilities that are
licensed to possess and use nuclear materials.
It has become increasingly difficult for the nuclear industry to
compete with other sources of electricity, and one of the concerns was
the amount of regulatory fees charged by the Commission.
So over the last four fiscal years, we have worked with the
Commission to reduce its overall budget by about $100 million, which
represents about a 10-percent reduction, to more closely reflect its
actual workload while maintaining its gold standard of safety.
These savings are important because they lower the fees utilities
must pay the Commission, and these savings can be passed on to
utilities' customers.
These reductions have not been arbitrary and represent the type of
oversight that we are supposed to do. Our subcommittee has only reduced
the Commission's budget in areas that the Commission has identified as
unnecessary to its important safety mission.
To ensure nuclear power will continue to play a significant role in
our Nation's electricity generation, I'd like to focus my questions on
four main areas: Licensing small modular and advanced reactors; safely
extending licenses for existing reactors; licensing facilities for used
nuclear fuel and solving the nuclear waste stalemate; and Accident
Tolerant Fuel.
Senator Feinstein and I have been working on solving the nuclear
waste stalemate for years, and I'd like to take the opportunity to
compliment Senator Feinstein on her leadership and her insistence that
we find a solution to this problem.
This year's budget request for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
includes $47.7 million to restart the licensing process for the Yucca
Mountain repository. This is the next step the Department of Energy
must follow to determine whether it can begin construction of Yucca
Mountain.
I strongly believe that Yucca Mountain can and should be part of
the solution to the nuclear waste stalemate. Federal law designates
Yucca Mountain as the Nation's repository for used nuclear fuel, and
the Commission's own scientists have told us that we can safely store
nuclear waste there for up to one million years.
But even if we had Yucca Mountain open today, we would still need
to look for another permanent repository. We have more than enough used
fuel to fill Yucca Mountain to its legal capacity.
The quickest, and probably the least expensive, way for the Federal
Government to start to meet its used nuclear fuel obligations is for
the Department of Energy to contract with a private storage facility
for used nuclear fuel.
I understand that two private companies have submitted applications
to the NRC for consolidated storage facilities, one in Texas and one in
New Mexico. I'll be asking some questions about that today.
I want to make sure that the Commission has all the resources it
needs in fiscal year 2019 to review the applications for consolidated
storage facilities because we have to start working together to solve
the nuclear waste stalemate if we want a strong nuclear industry.
Senator Feinstein and I, along with the leaders of the Committee on
Energy and Natural Resources, have a bill to implement the
recommendations of the Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear
Future, which include using temporary private storage facilities, and
we're working to reintroduce the legislation this year.
Instead of building more windmills, which only produce 17 percent
of our carbon-free electricity, or solar farms, which only produce 4
percent of our carbon-free electricity, the best way to make sure the
United States has a reliable source of inexpensive, efficient, carbon-
free electricity is to extend the licenses of our existing nuclear
reactors--which produce 60 percent of our carbon-free electricity--if
it is safe to do so.
Most of our 99 reactors have already extended their operating
licenses from 40 to 60 years (although many have decided to close
prematurely for economic reasons) and some utilities are beginning the
process to extend their licenses from 60 to 80 years.
Recently, the Turkey Point nuclear plant in Florida was the first
to apply to the Commission to extend its license for an additional 20
years--what you call ``subsequent license renewal.''
The Commission has spent the past several years developing the
framework to review these types of license renewal applications to make
sure the reactors can continue to operate safely.
I want to make sure that the Commission has the resources it needs
to review Turkey Point's application and any other applications it
expects to receive in fiscal year 2019.
In addition to our existing reactors, the Commission also needs to
be ready to review applications for new reactors, particularly small
modular reactors and advanced reactors. These new technologies
represent the future of nuclear power.
In fiscal year 2017, we provided enough funding to complete the
Small Modular Reactor Licensing Technical Support program at the
Department of Energy.
NuScale, which was one of the technologies selected in that
program, filed an application for design certification of a small
modular reactor with the Commission in December of 2016.
A utility group has been working with NuScale and Idaho National
Laboratory to build and demonstrate a small modular reactor in Idaho.
TVA has also submitted an application to the Commission for a
permit to build and demonstrate a small modular reactor at the Clinch
River site in Tennessee.
The applications to build and demonstrate small modular reactors is
an important step, and we need to make sure the Commission has the
resources it needs to review the applications.
I also want to make sure the Commission is ready to review
applications for advanced reactors.
The fiscal year 2018 Omnibus included $10 million for the
Commission to prepare to review advanced reactor designs, and I
understand the current budget request includes $10.3 million for fiscal
year 2019.
I'd like to know what the Commission plans to do with the funding
Congress provided for advanced reactors so that we can make sure the
development of advanced reactors stays on track.
In 2012, after Fukushima, Congress authorized a program to improve
safety in the event of accidents in reactors or spent fuel pools.
As a result, several companies have been developing accident
tolerant fuels in collaboration with the National Laboratories. These
fuels seem to represent a significant step forward in safety as well as
cost savings for the industry.
The National Laboratories have modeling and simulation tools that
can validate the use of these new fuels. For example, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory has used its high performance computing capability
to develop the Consortium for Advanced Simulation of Light Water
Reactors (CASL).
I'd like to understand how the Commission is leveraging those tools
in its licensing process, so I'll be asking questions about that today.
I look forward to working with the Commission as we begin putting
together our Energy and Water Appropriations bill for fiscal year 2019,
and also with Senator Feinstein, who I will now recognize for her
opening statement.
Senator Alexander. I look forward to working with the
Commission as we begin putting together our Energy and Water
Appropriation bills for 2019, and also with Senator Feinstein,
who I now recognize for her opening statement.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR DIANNE FEINSTEIN
Senator Feinstein. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman for
those excellent remarks.
And as you know, I very much value this relationship and
you've been a great Chairman and I've been so happy to be able
to work with you.
I'm going to speak in a slightly different direction. It
bears on the NRC's (Nuclear Regulatory Commission) fiscal year
2018 budget request and it also bears on the fact that we have
tried now for some 6 years to get past a nuclear waste policy
act which would enable the money harbored by the Federal
Government to be spent for proper nuclear development. This may
well signal where we are today because 10 years ago this
Subcommittee was preparing for the renaissance of nuclear power
in the United States. And today, we find ourselves in a very
different position.
There are now 19 shut down reactors in the country, with
six of those in the last 5 years. According to the NEI (Nuclear
Energy Institute), there are 12 more reactors slated for shut
down between now and 2024. So, it appears that the industry is
in serious decline. Last year, Bloomberg reported that more
than half of U.S. nuclear plants are losing money. The reason
for this decline are numerous and they're well documented. Low
natural gas prices are making large investments in nuclear
uneconomical. Intransigence among the industry of the nuclear
waste issue, letting it undermine what little political support
remains locally and nationally. High up-front costs for
construction of new nuclear plants that put utility balance
sheets at risk. Increased efficiency and modest economic growth
have severely dampened demand for large sources of generation.
Finally, a robust and flexible grid, along with advances in
storage technology that better integrate renewables and make
large baseload sources obsolete.
Some companies remain in denial. Southern Company continues
to pursue construction of two new reactors in Georgia. They
made this decision despite more than three billion in cost over
runs, 5 years of delay and the bankruptcy of their contractor.
Some are angry about nuclear energy's decline. I'm thinking of
those communities who have lost the economic benefits of
operating reactors, but still have to host the spent fuel
storage. Who can blame them? There are now 80 thousand metric
tons of spent fuel stored at 77 reactor sites in 33 States with
the vast majority of this still stored in deep storage pools.
In California alone, there's over three thousand metric tons or
over seven thousand, seven thousand, highly radioactive rods
stored close to the Pacific Ocean with high population centers
around them.
Mr. Chairman, you and I have worked for 6 years to move
this waste away from reactor sites. We have been hamstrung by
the lack of support from the industry and the politics of Yucca
Mountain. You have my promise to keep pushing on this issue
until we find a solution.
States like New York, Illinois and Connecticut are in the
bargaining phase. They all passed legislation that compensates
nuclear plant operators for their zero-carbon emissions
electricity. These laws have kept nine reactors running, but
they are being challenged in court and their future is
uncertain.
Some companies are suffering from depression. First Energy
which operates four reactors in Pennsylvania and Ohio declared
bankruptcy a few weeks ago in part due to the operating costs
of their nuclear fleet relative to market prices for
electricity. Similarly, Entergy is seeking to prematurely shut
down their reactors in Michigan, New York and Massachusetts,
basically exiting the business in deregulated electricity
markets.
This, I believe, currently and accurately states the
present situation. William Von Hoene, Senior Vice President of
Exelon, which owns the largest fleet of nuclear reactors in the
United States, has said this and I quote. ``We're not going to
build more nuclear plants. Nuclear is the future transition to
a world which the new plants won't be built because they won't
be required.'' He further called nuclear a, ``bridge to a
different of kind of carbon free world.'' I substantially agree
with this and that's the path I see us pursuing in California
where San Onofre shut down in 2013 and Diablo Canyon will shut
down in 2025.
PG & E says it can make up for the lost power through
upgrades to the grid, energy efficiency and increased renewable
generation. Already, California generates enough solar power to
export some of its electricity to other States. I think this is
truly the right direction.
The acceptance phase of this lets us focus on how to
maintain the safety of the existing fleet through new
materials, control systems and advanced fuels. We can support
the existing fleet as a bridge to a cleaner energy and more
resilient grid without adopting the fantasy that new reactors
are going to start springing up anytime soon. If there is an
acceptance phase, it also lets us explore new nuclear
technologies that potentially address the challenges in the
existing nuclear fleet with lower up-front costs, less nuclear
waste and increased accident tolerance.
Mr. Chairman, I know you support small, modular reactors
and advanced reactor technologies. I'd like to be in the same
place, actually, but I need the industry to be much more
constructive on the issue of waste and more realistic on their
prospects for the future. The nuclear industry that survives
may look very different in the decades to come. It may, be
smaller and more focused on NIST (National Institute of
Standards and Technology) applications such as cogeneration, a
process heat for industry and power for remote locations or big
data centers. But to get here, we have to accept reality and
ensure a smooth transition. And as we make this transition, it
is imperative that the NRC maintains its diligent regulation of
the industry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Senator Feinstein.
We are joined by the Chairman of the Energy Committee,
Senator Murkowski, who is welcome to have an opening statement,
if she would like?
Senator Murkowski. Mr. Chairman, I don't have an opening
statement.
I do have a few quick questions afterwards.
But I want to comment on what Senator Feinstein has said
and the effort to focus on the waste aspect of it. Something
that as the appropriators, the two of you, have helped to
advance this discussion and myself, Senator Cantwell, as well
as other Ranking Members on the Energy Committee, know that I
stand ready and willing to continue this collaborative effort.
I agree, Senator Feinstein. We have to acknowledge that
this is yet unfinished.
I too, want to move towards that next generation of nuclear
energy capacity. And I'm very excited about some of the
prospects with small and advanced nuclears and nuclear
production.
But I do recognize the concerns that you have raised and
just express my ongoing willingness to address the issues on
the back end.
Senator Feinstein. Thank you very much.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you.
Senator Feinstein. It means a great deal, thank you.
Senator Alexander. Thanks, Senator Murkowski.
LETTER FROM SENATOR HELLER
Senator Heller sent us a letter in opposition to funding
the Yucca Mountain licensing.
Without objection, we will include his letter in the
record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Alexander. I'll now recognize Chairman Svinicki to
provide her testimony on behalf of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.
Chairman Svinicki, welcome.
SUMMARY STATEMENT OF HON. KRISTINE SVINICKI
Ms. Svinicki. Thank you very much.
Good afternoon, Chairman Alexander and Ranking Member
Feinstein and also, Senator Murkowski.
My colleagues and I appreciate the opportunity to appear
before you to discuss the U.S. NRC's fiscal year 2019 budget
request.
We have submitted a full testimony on behalf of the
Commission. I will briefly summarize.
The funding we are requesting for fiscal year 2019 provides
the resources necessary to accomplish our mission to license
and regulate the civilian use of radioactive materials to
ensure adequate protection of public health and safety and to
promote the common defense and security.
The NRC's fiscal year 2019 budget request, including
resources for the NRC's Office of the Inspector General, is
$970.7 million.
The fiscal year 2019 request represents an overall increase
of $48.7 million, including an increase of 61 full-time
equivalent employees compared with the fiscal year 2018 enacted
budget.
This requested increase in resources is largely
attributable to proposed activities related to the license
application for the Yucca Mountain Deep Geologic Repository for
spent nuclear fuel and other high level radioactive waste.
Additional funding is also requested for further
development of the regulatory infrastructure necessary to
review advanced nuclear reactor technologies and advanced
accident tolerant fuel types.
The NRC proposes to recover $815.4 million of the requested
budget from fees assessed to NRC's licensees. This will result
in a net appropriation of $155.3 million with $47.7 million to
be derived from the Nuclear Waste Fund.
The fiscal 2019 request for our largest single budget line,
the Nuclear Reactor Safety Program, is $474.8 million
reflecting an overall funding increase of $25.8 million and a
decrease of 123 full-time equivalents when compared to the
fiscal year 2018 annualized CR (Continuing Resolution) budget.
This budget line includes activities related to the
licensing of advanced nuclear reactor technologies. We have
received the first application for certification of a small
modular reactor from NuScale and the agency is also reviewing
an early site permit application from the Tennessee Valley
Authority for two or more, small reactor modules at the Clinch
River site in Tennessee.
We anticipate starting additional SMR (small modular
reactor) pre-application reviews in fiscal year 2019 and
beginning one or more advanced reactor application reviews in
the next 2 to 4 years.
The fiscal 2019 budget request for the agency's Nuclear
Materials and Waste Safety programs is $183.7 million
reflecting an increase of $46.8 million, including an increase
of 82 full-time equivalent employees.
This increase is due to resources requested for the high-
level waste program, as previously mentioned. Also under this
budget line is the NRC's review of an application by Holtec to
construct and operate a consolidated interim storage facility
for spent fuel from commercial nuclear power reactors which
would, if approved, be constructed in Lea County, New Mexico.
In summary, the NRC's budget request reflects our
continuing efforts to achieve additional efficiencies while
carrying out our core safety and security mission and also
preparing for future work.
On behalf of the Commission, I thank you for your
consistent support of our very important missions and the
opportunity to appear before you. Our Commission is pleased to
answer your questions.
Thank you again.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Kristine L. Svinicki
Good afternoon Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Feinstein, and
distinguished members of the Subcommittee. My colleagues and I
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you to discuss the U.S
Nuclear Regulatory Commission's (NRC) fiscal year 2019 budget request.
The NRC is an independent Federal agency established to regulate
commercial nuclear power plants; research and test reactors; nuclear
fuel cycle facilities; and radioactive materials used in medicine,
academia, and for industrial purposes. The agency also regulates the
transport, storage, and disposal of radioactive materials and waste and
the export and import of radioactive materials.
The agency's statutory mission is to license and regulate the
civilian use of radioactive materials in the United States, to ensure
adequate protection of public health and safety, and to promote the
common defense and security. The fiscal year 2019 budget request
reflects the agency's continued commitment to improving effectiveness,
efficiency, and accountability, including increasing the use of risk
information in regulatory decisionmaking.
The NRC's fiscal year 2019 budget request, including resources for
the NRC's Office of Inspector General (OIG), is $970.7 million. The
fiscal year 2019 request represents an overall increase of $48.7
million, including an increase of 61 full-time equivalent employees
(FTE) compared with the fiscal year 2018 enacted budget. This requested
increase in resources is largely tied to the proposed activities
related to the license application (construction permit) for the Yucca
Mountain deep geologic repository for spent nuclear fuel and other
high-level radioactive waste and for further development of the
regulatory infrastructure necessary to review advanced nuclear reactor
technologies.
In fiscal year 2019, the NRC proposes to recover $815.4 million of
the requested fiscal year 2019 budget from fees assessed to NRC
licensees. This will result in a net appropriation of $155.3 million,
with $47.7 million to be derived from the Nuclear Waste Fund, which is
an increase of $23.7 million in net appropriations compared with the
fiscal year 2018 enacted budget. The requested increase is primarily
the result of activities related to Yucca Mountain licensing, which are
not fee-billable and must be recovered from the Nuclear Waste Fund, and
the development of capabilities and tools for the review of advanced
nuclear reactor technologies. We are still in the process of assessing
the impacts of the enacted budget on individual program areas, so the
budget comparisons in the remainder of this testimony will be to the
fiscal year 2018 annualized continuing resolution.
Before discussing the specifics of the NRC's fiscal year 2019
budget request, I'll discuss several key issues being addressed by the
Commission.
Yucca Mountain
The NRC continues to provide monthly updates to Congress on its
activities in response to the decision issued by the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in In re Aiken County,
focusing on our efforts to spend most effectively the limited remaining
unobligated carryover funds appropriated from the Nuclear Waste Fund to
continue with the licensing processes for Yucca Mountain. As part of
those efforts the agency has completed the remaining four volumes of
its safety evaluation report and a supplement to the Department of
Energy's Environmental Impact Statement.
In February of this year, the Licensing Support Network Advisory
Review Panel (LSNARP) conducted a public meeting with stakeholders,
including the State of Nevada, in order to provide information to and
gather input from advisory panel members and the public regarding a
suitable replacement or possible reconstitution of the Licensing
Support Network (LSN). The LSN was originally established by the NRC to
provide access via the Internet to documents associated with Yucca
Mountain licensing proceedings and activities. LSNARP members and
members of the public were provided an opportunity to submit additional
written comments regarding matters discussed at the meeting by the end
of March. After all of the comments have been reviewed, the NRC staff
will provide the Commission options for reconstituting the LSN or
developing a suitable replacement system for accessing the related
documents should the Yucca Mountain licensing adjudication resume in
the future.
Efficiency and Effectiveness
Several years ago, the NRC initiated a strategic initiative to
``right size'' the agency and its budget. This work has resulted in
reductions in the NRC's budget and staff. From 2014 to the proposed
fiscal year 2019 request, excluding high level waste activities, we
have reduced our budget by 13 percent from $1.1 billion to $970.7
million. The number of FTE has been reduced from around 3,800 to about
3,250. The NRC identified 150 agency-wide activities to discontinue or
perform with fewer resources. Of these, 149 tasks have been completed
and the remaining task is on schedule. The agency's current efforts to
improve efficiency, effectiveness, and accountability go beyond
previous efforts and the fiscal year 2019 budget reflects additional
opportunities to transform agency processes and increase the use of
risk information in regulatory decision-making.
The NRC's ability to innovate will facilitate our long-term success
in ensuring the safe and secure use of nuclear materials in the 21st
century. In January of this year, the agency's Executive Director for
Operations established an NRC Transformation Team to identify potential
transformative changes to the NRC's regulatory framework, culture, and
infrastructure. This team has been engaging a variety of sources both
internal and external to the NRC, including the nuclear industry, non-
governmental organizations, public organizations, private companies,
and Federal agencies such as the Department of Transportation and the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Ultimately, the team
will recommend specific areas for transformative initiatives for
Commission consideration.
New Small Modular Reactors and Advanced Reactors
We received the first application for certification of a small
modular reactor (SMR) from NuScale at the beginning of 2017. The agency
also is reviewing an early site permit application from the Tennessee
Valley Authority for two or more SMR modules at the Clinch River site
in Roane County, Tennessee. We anticipate starting additional SMR pre-
application reviews in fiscal year 2019 and beginning one or more
advanced reactor application reviews in the next 2 to 4 years.
Congressional Budget Justification Improvements
Improvements in the fiscal year 2019 Congressional Budget
Justification include increasing transparency by including a statement
regarding how the budgeted resources impact fees in each programmatic
business line. In addition, the NRC's Congressional Budget
Justification includes the Annual Performance Plan, which provides the
performance goals as well as performance indicators and criteria
associated with the goals and objectives established in the agency's
strategic plan.
Fiscal Year 2019 Budget Request
I would now like to highlight specific elements of the fiscal year
2019 budget request.
nuclear reactor safety
The NRC's Nuclear Reactor Safety Program encompasses licensing and
oversight of civilian nuclear power, research and test reactors, and
medical isotope production facilities in a manner that adequately
protects public health and safety. This program also provides
reasonable assurance of the security of facilities and protection
against radiological sabotage. This program contributes to the NRC's
safety and security strategic goals through the activities of the
Operating Reactors and New Reactors Business Lines that regulate
existing and new nuclear reactors to ensure their safe and secure
operation.
Overall resources requested in the fiscal year 2019 budget for
Nuclear Reactor Safety are $474.8 million, including 1,925 FTE. This
represents an overall funding increase of $25.8 million, yet includes a
decrease of 123 FTE, when compared with the fiscal year 2018 annualized
continuing resolution (CR). The increase in the Operating Reactors
Business Line is largely a result of research activities funded with
authorized prior year unobligated carryover in fiscal year 2017 and
reflects a change to the fund source. In addition, salaries and
benefits increased in fiscal year 2018. This budget also includes $10.3
million for the continued development of a regulatory infrastructure
for advanced nuclear reactor technologies. The budget request reflects
ongoing work on the agency plan to merge the Office of Nuclear Reactor
Regulation and the Office of New Reactors by 2020.
Operating Reactors
The Operating Reactors Business Line portion of the Nuclear Reactor
Safety Program encompasses the regulation of 99 operating civilian
nuclear power reactors and 31 research and test reactors. The NRC is
requesting $375.6 million for operating reactors, including 1,531 FTE,
which represents an overall funding increase of $21.8 million from the
fiscal year 2018 annualized CR. The increase in resources is largely a
result of research activities funded using authorized prior year
unobligated carryover in fiscal year 2017. In addition, resources
increase to support the following activities: (1) potassium iodide
replenishment for nine States; (2) continued development of accident-
tolerant fuel (ATF) licensing framework; (3) review of one new
subsequent license renewal (SLR) application (Surry nuclear power plant
in Surry, Virginia) and the continuing review of two SLR applications
(Peach Bottom in Delta, PA and Turkey Point in Homestead, FL); (4)
increased risk-informed licensing activities and license amendment
requests, work related to the risk-informed steering committee, and
knowledge management and training to support increasing the staff's
capabilities to use risk information in decision- making; (5) research
activities on safety and security of digital systems, materials
degradation, cable aging, and concrete degradation; (6) increased
workload to consolidate high-performance computing services and
migration to the cloud; and (7) increased workload to enhance the
Replacement Reactor Program System (R-RPS) to support new reactor
inspection/licensing and regulatory changes and functionality currently
provided by various new reactor systems.
These increases are partially offset by decreases resulting from
(1) a reduction in Fukushima Near-Term Task Force ``Tier 1'' work
related to the agency's Mitigating Strategies Order, reevaluations of
flooding and seismic hazards, and the Hardened Vents Order, as well as
the completion of ``Tier 2'' and ``Tier 3'' work; (2) a reduction in
license renewal inspections; (3) a reduction in force-on-force
inspections due to additional plants entering decommissioning; (4) the
closure of the Fort Calhoun Station near Omaha, NE; (5) the re-
baselining of agency resources; and (6) a reduced workload to implement
the R-RPS and maintain legacy RPS (to be decommissioned in fiscal year
2018).
New Reactors
The New Reactors Business Line portion of the Nuclear Reactor
Safety Program is responsible for licensing and overseeing the design,
siting, and construction of new nuclear power reactors, including SMRs
and advanced reactors. The new reactors activities ensure that new
civilian nuclear power reactor facilities are developed in a manner
that protects the health, safety, and security of the public in an
efficient manner.
The fiscal year 2019 budget request for new reactors is $99.1
million, including 394 FTE, a funding increase of $3.9 million, yet
includes a decrease of 61 FTE, when compared with the fiscal year 2018
annualized CR.
The NRC continues to interact with vendors about prospective SMRs
and advanced reactor applications. Additionally, we will continue to
refine our regulatory processes as we prepare to review these potential
applications.
During fiscal year 2019, we will continue to review reactor design
certification applications for NuScale (SMR) and U.S. APWR (a large
light water reactor); conduct licensing reviews for Blue Castle
Holdings, Inc. and Utah Associated Municipal Power Systems, and conduct
an early site permit review for the Tennessee Valley Authority's Clinch
River Nuclear Site. Additional resources will be allocated to support
the potential application review and construction oversight for two
reactors at the Bellefonte Nuclear Station near Scottsboro, AL. The NRC
also will continue conducting inspections at the two reactors under
construction at Vogtle Electric Generating Plant in Waynesboro, GA.
nuclear materials and waste safety
The Nuclear Materials and Waste Safety Program is responsible for
licensing, regulating, and overseeing nuclear materials in a manner
that adequately protects the public health and safety. Through this
program, the NRC regulates uranium processing and fuel facilities,
research and pilot facilities, and other nuclear materials licensees
such as medical, industrial, research, and academic uses. Additionally,
through this program, the NRC regulates spent fuel storage, spent fuel
and material transportation and packaging, decontamination and
decommissioning of facilities, and low-level and high-level radioactive
waste activities. The fiscal year 2019 budget request for this program
is $183.7 million, including 650 FTE. This funding level represents an
overall funding increase of $46.8 million, including an increase of 82
FTE, when compared with the fiscal year 2018 annualized CR budget. This
increase is due to $47.7 million, including 124 FTE, for work on the
license application (construction permit) for the proposed Yucca
Mountain deep geologic repository for spent nuclear fuel and other
high-level radioactive waste that was not included in the fiscal year
2018 annualized CR.
Fuel Facilities
The Fuel Facilities Business Line portion of the Nuclear Materials
and Waste Safety Program is responsible for ensuring that fuel cycle
facilities are licensed and operated in a manner that adequately
protects public health and safety and promotes the common defense and
security. The fiscal year 2019 budget request for fuel facilities is
$25.2 million, including 107 FTE, which represents a funding increase
of $0.5 million, and a decrease of 6 FTE, when compared with the fiscal
year 2018 annualized CR.
Nuclear Materials Users
The Nuclear Materials Users Business Line portion of the Nuclear
Materials and Waste Safety Program supports the licensing and oversight
necessary to ensure the safe and secure processing and handling of
nuclear materials. The fiscal year 2019 budget request for nuclear
materials activities is $60.6 million, including 215 FTE, a funding
decrease of $2.9 million and a decrease of 23 FTE compared with the
fiscal year 2018 annualized CR.
Spent Fuel Storage and Transportation
The Spent Fuel Storage and Transportation Business Line portion of
the Nuclear Materials and Waste Safety Program supports the safe and
secure storage of spent fuel and the safe and secure transport of
radioactive materials. These activities include licensing, oversight,
rulemaking, international activities, research, and generic homeland
security.
The fiscal year 2019 budget request for spent fuel and
transportation is $24.8 million, including 100 FTE, a funding increase
of $2.5 million and a decrease of 2 FTE when compared with the fiscal
year 2018 annualized CR. Resources increase primarily under the
Licensing Product Line to support safety, security, emergency
preparedness, and environmental reviews for two concurrent applications
for a consolidated interim storage facility; the effort to update/
consolidate the standard review plan; anticipated legal activities; and
to support Independent Spent Fuel Storage Installation license
renewals.
In February, the NRC formally docketed an application by Holtec,
Inc. to construct and operate a consolidated interim storage facility
for spent fuel from commercial nuclear power reactors in Lea County,
New Mexico. Holtec seeks to store up to 8,680 metric tons of uranium in
commercial spent fuel at the site in underground storage systems for a
40-year license term.
The other application for a consolidated interim storage facility
was submitted by Waste Control Specialists (WSC) to build and operate a
facility near Andrews, Texas. That application was docketed for review
in January 2017, but the review was suspended in April 2017 at the
applicant's request. Recently, WCS announced its intent to request that
the NRC staff resume its review.
Decommissioning and Low-Level Waste
The Decommissioning and Low-Level Waste (LLW) Business Line portion
of the Nuclear Materials and Waste Safety Program supports licensing
and oversight associated with the safe and secure operation of uranium
recovery facilities, decommissioning of nuclear facilities, and
disposition of low-level radioactive waste from all civilian sources.
The fiscal year 2019 budget request for decommissioning and LLW is
$25.4 million, including 104 FTE, an overall funding decrease of $1.0
million and a decrease of 11.0 FTE when compared with the fiscal year
2018 annualized CR.
The fiscal year 2019 budget request provides funding for a number
of major activities to include oversight of the national LLW management
program and monitoring of the Department of Energy's waste-incidental-
to-reprocessing determinations and related disposal actions at the
Savannah River Site and the Idaho National Laboratory. Other noteworthy
LLW activities include decommissioning activities for two research
reactors and 20 power reactors.
Under the Licensing Product Line, fewer resources are needed
because of the expected decline in workload resulting from Wyoming's
anticipated transition to Agreement State status in late calendar year
2018. When this agreement is approved and implemented, the NRC will
discontinue its regulatory authority over certain uranium and thorium
milling activities and transfer regulatory authority and related
licenses to the State of Wyoming. Currently, approximately 70 percent
of NRC-licensed uranium recovery facilities are located in the State of
Wyoming. Additionally, resources decrease to reflect the expected
workload decline with the non-military radium program. These decreases
are partially offset by increases to support various rulemaking
activities, including the Greater-Than-Class-C and Transuranic Waste
rulemakings.
High-Level Waste
The High-Level Waste Business Line portion of the Nuclear Materials
and Waste Safety Program supports the NRC's activities for the proposed
Yucca Mountain deep geologic repository for the disposal of spent
nuclear fuel and other high-level radioactive waste using
appropriations from the Nuclear Waste Fund. The fiscal year 2019 budget
request for high-level waste is $47.7 million, including 124 FTE.
fiscal year 2019 resources would include support to the adjudicatory
proceeding; infrastructure activities for information technology
capabilities; rulemakings associated with the geologic repository
operations area; and related support activities such as acquisitions,
recruitment, and staffing.
Corporate Support
The NRC's corporate support involves centrally managed activities
that include acquisitions, administrative services, financial
management, human resource management, information technology and
information management, training, outreach, and policy support. The
fiscal year 2019 resources requested for corporate support constitute
31 percent of the agency's total budget and reflect an overall increase
of $1.5 million, yet include a decrease of 108 FTE, when compared with
the fiscal year 2018 annualized CR. The fiscal year 2019 budget request
supports the NRC's continued efforts to modernize IT to increase
productivity and security, improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
administrative services, develop a workforce for the 21st century,
focus on the highest-value work, and improve customer service.
Resources increase in fiscal year 2019 primarily as a result of
investments in IT and an increase in salaries and benefits in fiscal
year 2018.
Office of Inspector General
The NRC's OIG is a statutory entity whose mission is to
independently and objectively audit and investigate programs and
operations to promote effectiveness and efficiency, and to prevent and
detect fraud, waste, and abuse. The fiscal year 2019 budget request for
the NRC OIG is $12.6 million, which includes approximately $11 million
in salaries and benefits to support 63 FTE, and $1.6 million in program
support. These resources will support Inspector General auditing and
investigation functions for both the NRC ($11.5 million) and the
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board ($1.1 million).
Fiscal year 2018 Proposed Fee Rule
I would like to turn to some key elements of the fees for fiscal
year 2018. The NRC adjusts its licensing, inspection, special project,
and annual fees charged to its applicants and licensees each year.
These adjustments are necessary to implement the requirements of the
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990. The Act requires the NRC to
recover approximately 90 percent of its annual budget through fees.
Certain items like the Nuclear Waste Fund, generic homeland security
activities, waste incidental to reprocessing, advanced reactor
regulatory infrastructure development, international activities, and
Inspector General services to the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety
Board are excluded from the fee-recoverable portion of the budget.
The NRC proposed to collect $826.7 million in fees in the proposed
fiscal year 2018 Fee Rule. However, based on the recently enacted
appropriations bills, the NRC now anticipates needing to collect
approximately $790.3 million in fees for fiscal year 2018.
The fees are collected by two primary methods. Licensees are
charged an annual fee or directly billed for services including license
amendments, license renewals, and inspections. In setting the fees each
year, the NRC uses the most recent four quarters of licensee activity
and additional information from licensees regarding plans to conduct
significant work to project the expected amount of work that will be
directly billed during the fiscal year. The remaining portion of the
fee-recoverable budget is collected through annual fees assessed to
each licensee.
The public comment period for the proposed fiscal year 2018 Fee
Rule ended on February 26, 2018. The agency has received input from a
number of industry stakeholders expressing concerns with increasing
fees, particularly in areas where the number of licensees are declining
(e.g., uranium recovery, fuel facilities, and operating reactors). We
are mindful of the impact on fees, particularly as the number of
licensees declines within a fee category. Our goal is to ensure that
our fees are equitable, fair, and transparent. We monitor such declines
and seek to mitigate the impact on the remaining facilities, where
possible. We are also committed to continuing to examine and adapt our
fee structure within the bounds of our authority to do so in response
to a changing industry.
closing
In closing, safety and security have always been the main focus of
the NRC. This budget request reflects our continuing efforts to achieve
additional efficiencies while maintaining reasonable assurance of
adequate protection of public health and safety and the security of our
Nation.
Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Feinstein, and distinguished
Members of the Subcommittee, this concludes my written testimony. On
behalf of the Commission, I thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you. Thank you also for your support of the vital mission of the
NRC. We would be pleased to respond to your questions.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Chairman Svinicki. Without
objection, we'll include your full written statement as part of
the record as well as the written statements of Commissioner
Burns and Commission Baran.
[The statements follow:]
Prepared Statement of Commissioner Jeff Baran
Chairman Alexander and Ranking Member Feinstein, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. It's great to be here with my colleagues
to discuss NRC's fiscal year 2019 budget request and the work of the
Commission.
Chairman Svinicki provided an overview of NRC's budget request. I
want to briefly highlight a few related efforts underway at NRC.
I'll start with Project Aim, our multi-year effort to take a hard
look at what work the agency is doing and how we're doing that work.
The goals have been to become more efficient and agile and to prepare
for the future. The results of Project Aim and our very limited
external hiring have been dramatic. In just 2 years, NRC's workforce
has declined by more than 12 percent. The agency started the current
fiscal year with around 3,200 employees. That's about the same staffing
level as in 2006, before NRC started to ramp up for the anticipated
wave of new reactor applications. When Project Aim got underway in
2015, the NRC staff envisioned that it would take until 2020 to match
the agency's resources to its workload. But NRC was able to make
progress much more quickly on getting to the right staffing level for
our current and expected workload.
Going forward, we need to internalize an enduring focus on
efficiency. For the agency's long-term health, we also need a stable
pipeline of new talent through external hiring and an emphasis on
maintaining the NRC staff's core technical capabilities and safety
inspection activities.
In addition, the NRC staff has launched a transformation initiative
to identify any steps the agency should take to improve its approach to
reviewing new technologies, such as advanced reactors, accident
tolerant fuel, and digital instrumentation and controls. I think that's
a good focus for the transformation team and appreciate that the team
is doing a lot of outreach to stakeholders. I look forward to hearing
their thoughts and recommendations.
There are many other important efforts underway at NRC, including
the implementation of post-Fukushima safety enhancements, the power
reactor decommissioning rulemaking, the review of the first small
modular reactor design application, and oversight of construction at
the Vogtle site.
We're happy to discuss these and any other issues of interest.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
Senator Alexander. We'll now begin the round of questions.
And I'm going to defer to Senator Murkowski for the first
questions.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Svinicki, thank you for your leadership on the
Committee. Commissioners, thank you for being here.
LICENSING SMALL MODULAR AND ADVANCED REACTORS
You mention the NuScale application with SMRs. As I
mentioned, we look to these new developments as real
opportunities.
I'm also very excited by the prospect of micro reactors
that could provide low-cost electricity to some of our very
rural, remote villages, also some of our resource projects that
are not connected to anything that are lacking access to energy
generation, but also military installations, again, in remote
areas in Alaska.
There is, at least one developer that I know of, Oklo,
who's been working with the NRC already.
As you are anticipating eventually receiving license
applications from advanced micro reactor companies, how is the
Regulatory Commission working to prepare for new advanced
reactor licensing, that whole process moving forward, and do
you anticipate the license requirements different for these
advanced reactors that are just different in terms of their
safety?
How will you handle these new entrants to this application
process?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, thank you for the question.
Just yesterday, our Commission had a public session where
we met with representatives of a number of advanced reactor
technology companies. And something that I was struck by is it
is a tremendous diversity of technologies, of fuel types and as
a regulator that's been regulating power reactors that, in
general, are fairly similar to each other, getting in place our
regulatory preparedness is something that we have to go about
with a lot of care and discipline.
One of the ways that we do that is to stay engaged in deep
communications with the technology development community, also
with our colleagues in the U.S. Department of Energy and the
national laboratories and other research institutions like EPRI
(Electric Power Research Institute), that are participating in
creating the fundamental knowledge base that will move forward,
not only the development of the reactor designs themselves, but
the kind of foundational knowledge base that we will need, as
the safety regulator, to reach the kind of independent, safety
conclusions that we have to reach.
Senator Murkowski. So you also need to focus on your own
workforce there at the Commission to ensure that you're going
to be in a position to regulate, but recognizing that there is
a, there's a variety here that you're looking at and it is not
just, I don't want to call them cookie cutter, but a more
routine application process from what you have historically
seen before the Commission.
Ms. Svinicki. And what that represents, Senator, is such a
diversity of materials, of again, we just need to understand a
lot of the physical properties, the way these materials will be
utilized, the temperature and pressure conditions to which
these materials will be subject.
So, again, I think that engaging with a broader scientific
community. For example, Oak Ridge recently provided a training
session to U.S. NRC experts and it was across a whole diversity
of scientific expertise. We allowed a fairly broad group of NRC
staff to sign up, including attorneys and others. You know,
there'll be legal policy issues that will be posed by some of
these new reactor types.
So, that was helpful.
We picked molten salt reactor technologies and I'm sure
that was disappointing to advanced reactor developers who don't
have molten salt reactors.
But it's hard for us until someone really emerges from the
pack. You mentioned Oklo. They've been out to see us a lot and
I think that they are moving far along in their pre-application
engagement with the regulator.
But someone else could emerge from the pack and then be the
first to submit a design for review.
So, we're trying to stay very agile about it and just
again, be showing up and communicating with developers and
getting a good sense of their plans.
Senator Murkowski. Let me ask you about this process to
commercialization.
I've been concerned about the loss of global leadership in
the nuclear space and I know the world still considers the NRC
to be the gold standard for nuclear regulation and I think,
rightfully so.
But I'm in the camp that says, it's important to be
accelerating our efforts, leveraging the Federal Government's
R&D programs, the partnerships that we have with industry, to
really move forward with these advanced reactors, getting them
to market.
Now, I'm afraid that if we don't step it up, if we don't
hustle, we could miss the massive global export market and I
think, vacate the seat that we have currently for regulatory
and non-proliferation conversations.
So, you mentioned or I mentioned that the commercialization
process, the fact that we've got some bottlenecks there. Do you
have concerns about that specifically, the lack of proper
advanced reactor fuel supplies and a lack of fast neutron
research capabilities? Do you look at this as being a
bottleneck to commercialization that concerns you?
Ms. Svinicki. Those specific issues did arise in the public
meeting of our Commission yesterday, the high assay, low
enriched uranium fuel where we had DOE (Department of Energy)
representatives at our meeting. Candidly, I think that they are
in the position for the U.S. Government to bring forward
solutions to make those materials available to the technology
development community.
And then the testing facilities, we've heard, even with
accident tolerant fuels that in some cases if a certain reactor
in Norway is not available, Russia would be the only remaining
facility that could provide the irradiation services to the
technology community.
So, I think that there are clearly government wide policy
issues and bottlenecks to address there.
Senator Murkowski. Look forward to working with you on some
of these.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the opportunity to
ask the questions.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Senator Murkowski.
Senator Feinstein.
DECOMMISSIONING SAN ONOFRE NUCLEAR GENERATING STATION
Senator Feinstein. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman.
I would just like formally to thank the Chair of the Energy
Committee for her cooperation and I really hope we can get
something passed to get all of these nuclear waste sites put
into some permanent facilities.
I'm watching the decommissioning process at San Onofre
closely and I understand they're moving ahead with expanding
their dry spent fuel storage area and their plans include
demolishing the reactor buildings on an expedited timeframe,
concluding work in 2027.
I also understand that the NRC has issued all necessary
approvals and the utilities have selected contractors so
physical dismantlement could begin soon.
Can you confirm that the NRC will continue to inspect the
site and oversee the decommissioning program to ensure safety?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes, Senator.
Senator Feinstein. Thank you.
What are the biggest risks, in your view, to completing the
decommissioning process in a safe and timely manner?
Ms. Svinicki. I'm not aware of any specific concerns at San
Onofre, but in general the complexities of this type of
decommissioning work are that it can sometimes be a fairly
small footprint for the facility and you're trying to have some
buildings come down, you may have workers doing work in a
contiguous area.
And so, I do think there are a number of occupational
safety issues that you have to be very, very disciplined about
and then that can also mean there is potential for radiological
exposures to workers. Again, often those are managed within
occupational limits, but you have to take great care about such
matters.
DIABLO CANYON POWER PLANT
Senator Feinstein. Let me turn, if I may, to Diablo Canyon.
As part of its response to Fukushima, it's my understanding
the NRC asked all nuclear plants for information regarding
seismic and flooding hazards. This analysis is particularly
important here because the plant sits on the California coast
within a mile of a fault line in the ocean and PG & E submitted
data in 2016.
What's the status of that risk analysis for the plant and
what makes the NRC confident that there are no safety concerns
in the interim?
Ms. Svinicki. Thank you, Senator.
Yes, all plants were required to do a reanalysis of their
seismic hazard. And as you've indicated, Diablo submitted that
analysis in 2016.
For plants that were subject to the probability of larger
seismic events such as Diablo Canyon, there is additional work
that they have to do if they, again, have a probability of
having a larger seismic event. They have to do a more in-depth
analysis.
But we did conduct a review of their preliminary analysis
and I believe that they are on track to submit their deeper
hazard analysis for seismic matters, I think, mid this year.
I can provide that for the record, if I'm not remembering
the right date.
But for the interim period, based on the preliminary
analysis, we did an assessment that assured us that should they
encounter a large seismic event, the safety systems would
perform as intended, given the nature of the seismic event they
could have.
Senator Feinstein. Thank you very much.
And if you'd make those records part of our record, I'd
appreciate it very much.
[The information follows:]
Pacific Gas & Electric Company (PG&E) submitted its Seismic Hazard
and Screening Report (SHSR) for Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant,
Units 1 and 2 (DCPP) in 2015. The NRC staff issued its assessment of
the SHSR in 2016 that confirmed that DCPP screened-in for a seismic
probabilistic risk assessment (SPRA), which will include a high-
frequency confirmation, and a spent fuel pool (SFP) evaluation. In its
SHSR, PG&E demonstrated seismic margins supportive of continued plant
operation at DCPP while these additional evaluations were conducted.
PG&E submitted the SFP evaluation for DCPP in December 2017. The
submittal evaluation demonstrates that the SFP has significant
structural margin when compared to the reevaluated seismic hazard. The
NRC staff is currently performing its technical review of this
evaluation and plans to issue an assessment by July 2018.
PG&E submitted the SPRA results report for DCPP on April 24, 2018.
The NRC staff has begun its review of the report and is expected to
complete it in the beginning of 2019.
The NRC remains confident that U.S. nuclear plants, including DCPP,
are safe in spite of the increase in seismic hazard at some sites. This
is based largely on the large seismic safety margins that exist for
U.S. nuclear plants, along with interim actions and additional
engineering analyses that were completed for sites where the
reevaluated hazard exceeds the facility's design basis.
The NRC staff considered several factors during the interim
evaluation of continued safe operation at DCPP while the longer term
analyses were being performed. These factors included an analysis of
the seismic margin at DCPP, the plant's enhanced ability to mitigate
the effects of external hazards by complying with post-Fukushima NRC
orders, and the low likelihood of the occurrence of a seismic event of
the magnitude of the reevaluated seismic hazard. The NRC's letter to
DCPP, dated October 23, 2017, provides additional details regarding
these factors for continued safe operation.
PG&E submitted the SPRA results report for DCPP on April 24, 2018.
This report is publicly available in the NRC's Agencywide Documents
Access and Management System (ADAMS) at Accession No. ML18120A201:
Seismic Probabilistic Risk Assessment for the Diablo Canyon Power
Plant, Units 1 & 2--Response to NRC Request for Information Pursuant to
10 CFR 50.54(f) Regarding Recommendation 2.1: Seismic of the Near-Term
Task Force Review of Insights from the Fukushima Dai-Ichi Accident. The
NRC staff has begun its review of the report and is expected to
complete it in the beginning of 2019.
CONTINUED STORAGE OF SPENT NUCLEAR FUEL
Senator Feinstein. In August of 2014, the NRC issued a rule
on the environmental effects of continued spent fuel storage at
nuclear plants.
You found that spent fuel could be safely stored
indefinitely at reactor sites.
Essentially, it seems that the NRC is saying that a
permanent repository or efforts to construct are not necessary.
So, here's the question.
How can the NRC be confident about the safety of waste, hot
waste, stored a hundred or a thousand years from now at 77
reactor sites across 33 States?
Ms. Svinicki. Thank you for the opportunity to clarify that
point.
As you indicate, the Commission was concerned that it would
create a view that we were concluding that permanent disposal
was not necessary or even that consolidated storage was not
desirable.
We took some pains in our statement of considerations in
the Federal register to clarify that that was not the case. We
were not concluding that there was any policy that made it
desirable to leave fuel at sites, but of course, it's a very
voluminous document and not everyone reads the policy
disclaimers that we put in there.
So, I appreciate the opportunity to clarify that we did not
intend to indicate that. It was more a statement that our
authorities are such that if extraordinary measures were
necessary, including repackaging fuel or revisiting it every,
you know, on a decadal basis and having to come back and
repackage it, we would have the authority to do that.
But it's nothing to do with that as a preferable policy.
Senator Feinstein. Okay, thank you. My time is up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Senator Feinstein.
CONSOLIDATED INTERIM STORAGE OF SPENT NUCLEAR FUEL
Ms. Svinicki, want to talk about the two applications from
private companies, continuing Senator Feinstein's interest and
mine in the nuclear waste stalemate.
The applications from West Texas--so you have applications
from West Texas and New Mexico, is that right?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes, we do.
Senator Alexander. I understand that these can be licensed
under the Commission's existing regulations. Is that right?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes, they've been submitted under, what we
call, 10 Code of Federal Regulations, part 72. It's an existing
part of our regulations.
Senator Alexander. And last year you told this Committee
the review process could take up to 3 years. Does that still
seem accurate?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes, that is still an estimate. However, that
would not include if there is a hearing requested and parties
achieve standing and challenge portions of the application. In
order to conduct that licensing board adjudicatory proceeding,
there could be some time that would fall outside of a 3-year
window depending on the complexity of the challenges mounted
legally to the application.
Senator Alexander. When does the 3-year period start? Has
it already started with those two applications?
Ms. Svinicki. It has started for Holtec. For the project in
Texas, what we call WCS, the applicant requested that we
suspend our activities related to that application.
So, that does pend before us, but it hangs in a state of
suspension.
The Holtec review is active and the 3 years begins upon the
docketing of the application which has occurred for Holtec.
Senator Alexander. Was that suspension due to a
reorganization of ownership?
Ms. Svinicki. It was, yes.
And I will say that there's been or is ongoing an
acquisition of that company and the new owner has communicated
in the trade press and I believe to us, informally, that they
will be requesting restart of the review of the Texas project.
However, we've not received any indication from them that
they--they've indicated that they will be requesting restart,
but they have not yet requested it.
Senator Alexander. But you don't have a formal request?
Ms. Svinicki. We do not.
Senator Alexander. What will the cost of those application
reviews be, those two reviews?
Ms. Svinicki. Our costs and billing costs, I'm not certain.
I know that we had provided estimates to the applicants,
but I have forgotten what they are. If I could provide that
figure for the record.
[The information follows:]
As indicated in its acceptance letters to both Waste Control
Specialists and Holtec regarding review of their Consolidated Interim
Storage Facility (CISF) license applications, the NRC estimates
(assuming a high quality CISF application) that the associated safety,
security, and environmental reviews could be completed in approximately
3 years at an estimated cost of $7.5 million in review fees, including
contractor costs, for each application.
Senator Alexander. Well, you could, I guess what I'm more
interested in is does the Commission believe it has sufficient
resources to review the applications and has enough funding
been requested in this year's budget request for the reviews?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes, we have funding under the enacted levels
that the Congress provided for the current fiscal year for two.
So, I think we were providing a budget wedge for the
presumption of the second project.
And in fiscal year 2019, we are requesting the funding for
two, the review of two projects.
Senator Alexander. Do you believe that it would be possible
to place used nuclear fuel in a private consolidated storage
site more quickly than in Yucca Mountain?
Ms. Svinicki. Just reflecting on the timeframes again, if
it took approximately 3 years from the docketing versus the
completion of the Yucca Mountain licensing proceeding and then
making some estimate for the time to construct a consolidated
interim storage facility, I do have to acknowledge that it
would either be very close or the consolidated interim storage
facility is likely to come, I think, under those scenarios
would be likely to be available sooner.
Senator Alexander. Now after you complete the, if you were
to complete the review and approve the private proposal, the
next step would be construction. Is that right?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes.
Senator Alexander. And construction might take how long? Is
there a rough guess about that?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, if I were to consider it analogous to
the types of cask storage that exist at reactor sites that is
not a protracted construction.
There is a very, very substantial concrete pad. It's not
just like a superficial pad. It is an engineered pad.
But there's a lot of industry experience with constructing
those pads and then the storage technology, of course, is in
use all across the country right now.
Senator Alexander. So, is that a matter of many years or a
few years or 1 year?
Ms. Svinicki. I don't know that my estimate is terribly
sophisticated, but I don't think it would have to be years
because again, the facility, in theory, if approved, could
begin to receive. They can pour the engineered pad in sections.
So, you could even have a phased beginning of operations.
They wouldn't need to have the totality of it built in order to
begin to receive spent fuel.
Senator Alexander. What does the facility look like? Is it
above ground? Is it underground?
Ms. Svinicki. I am not certain of the dry storage
technology referenced in the two applications.
But of course, there are the two varieties. For example, at
San Onofre it is a dry storage technology that has some part of
it subsurface to protect it against external events or
terrorist attack, things like that.
And then there is dry storage technology that the entirety
of the cask sits above the ground surface.
Senator Alexander. So, it could be either.
Ms. Svinicki. Could be either.
Senator Alexander. Yes, but it's a permanent dry storage of
casks that are on concrete pads either above or below the
ground. Is that basically it?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes, yes, so again, by that description. It's
obvious----
Senator Alexander. That's not such a com----
Ms. Svinicki. That doesn't need to take years and years to
do that, no.
Senator Alexander. Yes. Okay.
Senator Feinstein, do you have other questions?
Senator Feinstein. Just one addition.
So, all this is above ground on a concrete pad and how long
is that supposed to last?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, we license it in increments of 40
years.
So, the license issued is for both construction and
operation of the facility. It's a one-step license and it's
licensed in increments of 40-year duration. It gets rereviewed.
Senator Feinstein. I must have misunderstood you because I
can't believe this is taking a dry cask, putting it on a cement
block and maybe building the cement up around it somewhat and
that's it.
Is that right?
Ms. Svinicki. That's the fundamental technology of dry
storage.
Senator Feinstein. And that's forever?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, it would be licensed. The license
duration is 40 years.
Mr. Baran. Right, it's not forever. That is temporary
storage, not permanent disposal.
Senator Feinstein. For how, you know----
Senator Alexander. These are interim storage sites.
Senator Feinstein. Yes, for how long? Interim?
I mean, that's a nice word to use unless it has a meaning,
it's meaningless.
Mr. Baran. As the Chairman mentioned, there would be, the
applicant would be seeking the license for a certain period of
time. It would be very similar to the onsite dry cask storage
that exists right now around the country at the reactors.
Senator Feinstein. Yes.
Mr. Baran. If you looked at it, it would be a much larger
version of that.
Senator Feinstein. But it was which I think there is reason
to question too.
I mean, we're going to just fill up everything with storage
facilities above ground?
I mean, this is where the whole issue becomes very
problematic and particularly we've got two big reactors, two
1100 megawatt reactors, closing down.
No, I guess we have four.
And you know, that's a lot of waste. The last time I looked
there were 3,300 rods in pools at one facility.
So, I am really worried. And I think we have grown up
without really worrying very much about the risks, but I worry
about it greatly.
But thank you very much, I appreciate that. I appreciate
what you do and I know it's probably, at times, unrewarding,
but thank you anyway.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Senator Feinstein.
The idea would be that it would be temporary at these
private facilities and they'd be moved out of California,
Senator Feinstein. So, there's that advantage, until the
permanent repository is set.
SAFELY EXTENDING LICENSES FOR EXISTING REACTORS
I have one other question moving to extending the licenses
of operating reactors at a time when there's a great deal of
interest.
The French President, the President of the French Republic
was here today and spoke about climate change.
The largest source of carbon-free electricity in the United
States is nuclear power, not just the largest, but 60 percent
of it all.
Senator Whitehouse, who is perhaps as ardent an advocate
for dealing with climate change as any Senator, has joined me
in statements that say it makes no sense if you care about
climate change to close nuclear plants that are producing
carbon-free electricity.
So, one way to continue the source of carbon-free
electricity in a reliable way, of course, is extending the
licenses of operating reactors where that can be done safely.
And you've received an application from the Turkey Point
Nuclear Plant in Florida which would be, as I understand it,
the first application to go from 60 to 80 years. Is that right?
Ms. Svinicki. That's correct and that's for two units,
Turkey Point Three and Four.
Senator Alexander. And each of those are 1100 megawatts,
something like that or about that size?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes, they're large, light water reactors,
yes.
Senator Alexander. How long would you expect the review of
the Turkey Point application to take?
Ms. Svinicki. Just this week we completed our review of the
completeness of the application and we indicated to the
applicant that we are docketing and accepting that application
for review.
We will be providing a written estimate of the schedule to
the applicant, I believe, next week, but I understand it to be
an 18-month milestone schedule that we've set.
Senator Alexander. Do you have sufficient funds in your end
in the budget request to review the applications?
Ms. Svinicki. We do have current year funds and we do
anticipate receipt of additional applications in fiscal year
2019 and we have requested funding to support those reviews as
well.
Senator Alexander. Chairman Svinicki, that's all the
questions I have.
I wonder if you or the other Commissioners have any other
comment you'd like to make before I conclude the hearing?
ADVANCED REACTOR REGULATION FUNDING
Ms. Svinicki. Well, I'm tempted to grab the opportunity to
just have, be excused from the hearing, but I would note that
our Commission is grateful for the funding that Congress has
provided in the advanced reactor area off of the fee base
because it's our observation that it is causing the advanced
reactor community to engage more fully with the NRC because
they do not have to be charged under the fee recovery for those
activities.
I think that early regulatory engagement between the NRC
and developers can help build a good common understand of the
technology development that they're undertaking.
And so, I appreciate that the Congress has provided that
off fee base funding. That makes a big difference versus
getting it in our fee base.
Senator Alexander. Either of the other Commissioners?
Mr. Burns. I would agree with what the Chairman said on
that and one of the things that we've spoken in response to, I
think your earlier question or perhaps Senator Murkowski's
earlier questions.
This has also allowed us to focus on infrastructure type
improvements and enhancements that our staff is working on and
engaged with the various stakeholders, you know, potential
vendors, designers in the industry.
And in terms of developing what needs to be changed in
terms of licensing framework, et cetera and that helps us move
that along.
And as the Chairman said, without over concern in terms of
the fee base and doing that kind of work.
Mr. Baran. Mr. Chair.
Senator Alexander. Mr. Baran.
Mr. Baran. And I would just add, as we get to a point, if
it looks like we're actually going to receive an advanced
reactor application in 2019 or 2020 and the budget request does
include funds to begin a review in fiscal year 2019, if one
comes in, we're going to need to strike a balance between
continuing that work on the overall technology neutral
framework for advanced reactors and getting prepared for that
specific technology that's actually coming through the door so
that we can do an efficient and effective review of that
particular application.
Senator Alexander. Well, my own view is I'm concerned for
our country about the closing of so many reactors for a variety
of reasons. It seems counterintuitive at a time when we need
reliable electricity that's carbon free that the largest source
of it would be diminishing for whatever reason.
One way to deal with that is to put a special emphasis on
small reactors and advanced reactors. And as you use the word
agile, I applaud that, as you poke around in your discussions
with the various people developing technologies, you may be
surprised by something. Something may turn up that you don't
expect and lead you toward a different conclusion.
And I think it's in our national interest for you to be
agile in this pioneering stage of advanced reactors and modular
reactors.
And I would like to do whatever we can here in the Congress
to create an environment where those can succeed.
I know that in the small reactors you have a willingness
both in Idaho and with TVA (Tennessee Valley Authority), Oak
Ridge, to move ahead and it's important to have players who are
willing to move ahead, willing to spend the money, willing to
invest the time and the effort and take the risk.
And then with advanced reactors, there's just a lot of
experimenting going on right now. People are coming up with new
ideas and they see the value of nuclear energy. And I think
we'd be wise as a county to do that.
So, I hope that you will, I know safety is always paramount
and will continue to be, but I think an agility is not always a
characteristic of a government agency. But I think agility is a
really good characteristic of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
right now as it looks at small reactors and especially advanced
reactors. And we'll continue to be interested in that.
NUCLEAR WASTE STALEMATE
And also, we have to break this nuclear waste stalemate at
some point. And it's not your fault we have it. It's Congress'
fault for being stuck on the fight between Yucca Mountain and
the temporary storage sites, but if Congress should resolve
that, we'd like to be in a position to move ahead as rapidly as
we can.
And I therefore think your deliberative and speedy review,
in a safe way always, of the applications for the two private
sites is very important so that when we come to some conclusion
about what we're going to do long term, you will be ready to
say, okay, now we're ready to move ahead in that direction and
we won't have to wait 3, 4, 5, 6 years in order to do it.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
The hearing record will remain open for 10 days. Members
may submit additional information or questions for the record
within that time, if they would like.
The Subcommittee requests all responses to questions for
the record be provided within 30 days of receipt.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Department for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Question Submitted by Senator Patty Murray
Question. Chairman Svinicki, I continue to closely follow the
Department of the Navy's plans to decommission the USS Enterprise. In a
February 22, 2017 written response to me and my colleagues you
referenced an ongoing discussion between the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission (NRC) and Naval Reactors regarding the ``technical
parameters of a potential reimbursable agreement with Naval Reactors''
and ``whether such an approach could be applied to specific activities
associated with naval decommissioning.'' Please provide an update on
these discussions between the NRC and Naval Reactors?
Answer. The NRC and Naval Reactors continue to have discussions
regarding the Navy's plans to decommission the USS Enterprise,
including the technical parameters of a potential reimbursable
agreement.
In addition, we entered into discussions with Naval Reactors
regarding a separate potential reimbursable agreement to support the
Navy's plans for decommissioning of the Surface Ship Support Barge.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Tom Udall
Question. Senator Heinrich and I sent you a letter on April 23rd
requesting additional public meetings regarding Holtec International's
permit application in New Mexico.
The NRC has proposed four public meetings on this issue, one in
Rockville, Maryland, two in Lea and Eddy counties near the proposed
site for interim storage, and one in Roswell, New Mexico.
Constituents in our state, the fifth largest in size in the nation,
range from Native American tribes concentrated in the north to dairy
farmers in the southeast, to tourism-related businesses across New
Mexico, all desiring equal access to NRC public scoping sessions.
The drive time to Carlsbad from Farmington, in the state's
northwest corner, takes seven hours. And hotel availability and prices
there make staying overnight a very limited option.
From Albuquerque and Santa Fe to Carlsbad, the drive time is nearly
four and one-half hours--longer than the drive from New York City to
Washington, D.C.
From Las Cruces, the second largest city in the state, the drive to
Carlsbad takes nearly three and a half hours.
Citizens from all over New Mexico have views that should be taken
into account during a public scoping period.
Will the Commission schedule additional meetings beyond the
immediate area around the site to take into account the views of other
New Mexicans?
Answer. Yes. The NRC staff has conducted two additional scoping
meetings?on May 21, 2018, in the Gallup Downtown Conference Center, and
on May 22, 2018, at the Crown Plaza Hotel in Albuquerque. NRC staff
conducted an open house session prior to each meeting where members of
the public could view informational posters on the proposed project and
ask questions of the NRC staff. Following the open house, NRC staff
made a presentation about the review process, while the majority of
both meetings was devoted to allowing members of the public to make
statements regarding the proposed facility. Comments received at the
meetings will be used by the staff to define the scope of its
environmental review. Spanish-speaking staff were available at each of
the meetings to assist with translation as needed. Both meetings were
well attended and the NRC staff extended the time of the meetings to
ensure that all members of the public were given an opportunity to
speak. Further, the NRC staff has extended the deadline for submitting
comments to July 30, 2018, to allow additional time for interested
stakeholders to submit written comments.
Question. What lessons did the NRC learn from the interim storage
licensing process in Utah, where the NRC granted a license many years
ago but the State of Utah has effectively barred the project from
moving forward?
Answer. The NRC staff learned a number of lessons from the Private
Fuel Storage application review. These lessons learned have been
incorporated into updated guidance documents that will be used by the
staff in conducting its review activities for the Holtec application.
Some examples include the following: the importance of holding public
meetings near the site early in the process; providing the public with
an explanation of the licensing and hearing process in addition to the
environmental review process; and encouraging future applicants to
consider the importance of taking the time to develop a complete, high-
quality application.
An NRC-licensed facility may need other Federal, State or local
permits for a variety of matters outside of NRC's safety and security
jurisdiction. As a result, those approvals (and any associated
conditions) may factor into whether a licensee is ultimately able or
willing to construct and operate a facility.
Question. I've long believed in the importance of a consent-based
siting process for both consolidated interim storage and permanent
disposal of spent nuclear fuel and high-level waste. Without a
permanent repository, a consent-based process is especially critical
because interim storage could very well become a de facto permanent
facility.
With respect to NRC's evaluation of the two pending applications
for interim storage, how will the commission assure there is consent at
all levels for the facility, including state, local and affected Indian
Tribes?
Answer. The NRC has an established regulatory framework for the
licensing of the two proposed interim storage facilities. This
regulatory framework is distinct from the consent-based siting process
recommended in the report by the ``Blue Ribbon Commission on America's
Nuclear Future.'' The NRC's licensing framework is prescribed by the
authorities and requirements established in the Atomic Energy Act and
the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, as well as the National Environmental
Policy Act (NEPA) and the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA).
The NRC's regulatory framework and the associated implementing
procedures are guided by the NRC's principles of good regulation, which
encourage independence, openness, efficiency, clarity, and reliability.
The licensing process involves outreach to State, local, and Tribal
entities as part of the development of an environmental impact
statement (EIS) in accordance with the NEPA and assist the NRC in
fulfilling its obligations under the NHPA. The NRC values these
interactions and routinely gains valuable insights that substantively
inform the NRC staff's review and resultant documents, such as the EIS.
Question. The Holtec Environmental Report states on page 155: ``DOE
would be responsible for transporting SNF from existing commercial
nuclear power reactor storage facilities to the [Holtec] CIS
Facility.''
Since the Nuclear Waste Policy Act gives DOE authority for
transportation to a repository, but not to a private consolidated
storage site, are you aware of any authority for DOE to do what Holtec
states?
Answer. Although the NRC is not aware of any current DOE authority,
questions regarding DOE's authority are best addressed by DOE.
The NRC has just recently docketed and is in the early stages of
reviewing the Holtec ISFSI application. Therefore, the NRC staff is
still assessing the details of the application, including those related
to transportation.
CONCLUSION OF HEARINGS
Senator Alexander. Thank you for being here today.
The Subcommittee will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:59 p.m., Wednesday, April 25, the hearings
were concluded, and the subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene
subject to the call of the Chair.]